Media Release

Senator the Hon Kay Patterson Minister for Health and Ageing

May 4, 2003

AUSTRALIA JOINS THE FIGHT AGAINST SARS

Australian researchers will be encouraged to join international efforts in developing a fast and reliable test for Severe  Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS).

The Federal Minister for Health and Ageing, Senator Kay Patterson, said the National Health and Medical Research  Council would spend up to $100,000 on urgent research to produce and evaluate tests to reliably distinguish between  SARS and other viral diseases with ‘flu-like symptoms’.

"It is fortunate that so far there have been no definite cases of SARS found in Australia," Senator Patterson said.

"However, it is a potential major public health problem, so a rapid and reliable test is a must.

"The recent importation of live SARS virus to the National High Security Quarantine Laboratory will ensure that  Australian researchers have the chance to join efforts worldwide to develop a test for this new and deadly disease," said  Senator Patterson.

Live SARS virus was imported into Australia on 24 April 2003 for research purposes and is being kept at the National  High Security Quarantine Laboratory, the most secure laboratory in the country. Scientists there have used the live  virus to produce a non-infectious version that will help develop more specific molecular tests for SARS. The non-infectious material has been distributed to laboratories in the public health laboratory network.

"The NHMRC believes Australian researchers, who are amongst the best in the world, would most effectively tackle  this challenge by creating a consortium, and we will help focus those efforts by funding the research consortium,"  Senator Patterson added.

The Chair of the NHMRC’s Urgent Research Working Group, Professor Judith Black, said that while three antibody  tests and one molecular test had been developed overseas, their application was limited.

"Antibodies to the disease cannot be detected until 10 days after its onset. While molecular tests have the potential for  rapid results, to be really useful they need to be very specific," said Professor Black.

Senator Patterson said that the successful consortium would be able to work on live SARS coronavirus, but only within  the National High Security Quarantine Laboratory. However, non-infectious material could be provided for scientists  working outside that facility.

"The successful consortium will need to develop national protocols for culturing the SARS coronavirus; develop  validated national protocols for the detection of the virus using molecular techniques and serology; and develop other  relevant diagnostic tests if appropriate, and as a matter of urgency," Senator Patterson said.

Further information: Randal Markey, Media Adviser, (02) 6277 7220 or Anna Manzoney, Communications  Manager, NHMRC, (02) 6289 9137/0422 008 512

