



THE HON SUSSAN LEY MP   MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MINISTER FOR AGED CARE  MINISTER FOR SPORT



THE HON BARNABY JOYCE MP   MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND WATER RESOURCES



MEDIA RELEASE

9 January 2016

Holiday travel perfect time to talk biosecurity

The  busy  holiday  travel  season  is  the  perfect  time  to  talk  about  the  importance  of  protecting  Australia  against   communicable diseases entering the country, Minister for Health, Sussan Ley, said today.

Ms  Ley  and  Minister  for  Agriculture and Water  Resources, Barnaby  Joyce, today  launched  public  consultation  on   subordinate  legislation  supporting  the  new  Biosecurity  Act  2015,  due  to  come  into  effect  in  June  2016,  relating   specifically to human health.

“With  borders  as  large,  vast  and  busy  as  Australia’s,  it’s  important  we  are  vigilant  in  protecting  our  population   against the spread of pests and diseases that risk harming human health,” Ms Ley said.

“This  is  never  more  evident  than  during  the  Christmas-New  Year  period,  when  over  3  million  people  will  arrive  in  Australia by air and sea throughout December and January.

“Over the past few years, the world has seen a rise in emerging diseases of serious health concern. This has been  particularly highlighted by the recent outbreaks of diseases such as Ebola virus disease and Middle East respiratory  syndrome coronavirus.

“Australia has worked hard to prevent these diseases from emerging, establishing or spreading and this legislation  will ensure our level of preparedness is enhanced.

“This is about putting in place sensible regulation striking the balance between ensuring Australia remains open for  business without putting our longer-term health and prosperity at risk.”

Ms  Ley  said  regulatory  measures  included a  requirement  that  operators  of  aircraft  and  vessels  provided contact  information  to  be  used  for  public  health  follow  up,  such  as  contact  tracing,  should  a  passenger  be  found  to  be   infectious with a communicable disease whilst travelling.

The  regulations  also  require  that  incoming  aircraft  must  undertake  disinsection  measures  to  prevent  the   introduction of exotic vectors (pests) that may carry serious communicable diseases, such as yellow fever, and that  are not natively found in Australia.  Requirements for imposing human biosecurity control orders are also included.

The Minister for Agriculture and Water Resources, Barnaby Joyce, encouraged all interested parties to have a say on  the draft regulation for the First Points of Entry.

“The First Points of Entry regulation sets out the requirements for ports and landing places to be the first point of  entry for people and goods into Australia to allow for better management of the biosecurity risks when people and  goods arrive in the country,” Mr Joyce said.   MEDIA CONTACT: Troy Bilsborough 0427 063 150

2





“It also outlines the circumstances under which the first point of entry status can be changed or cancelled.

“This  regulation  establishes  biosecurity  release  zones  to  reduce  regulation  at  international  mail  centres  and   passenger terminals—making the system more flexible and efficient while managing biosecurity risk.

“We want to hear from port operators, shipping operators, international airlines and importers, in particular.

“The government wants to continue to engage in meaningful consultation over our new biosecurity legislation—all  comments received will be considered in drafting the final regulations.”

The new Biosecurity Act 2015 replaces the Quarantine Act 1908 to provide a modern regulatory framework for the  Australian  Government  to  manage  the risks  of  pests  and  diseases  entering  Australia  and  causing  harm  to  human,   animal, and plant health, the environment and the economy.

The Biosecurity Act 2015 will be co-administered by the Departments of Health and Agriculture & Water Resources.

Consultation on draft legislation is open for a period of 60 days. For more information on the exposure drafts and  the consultation process, please visit http://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/ohp-human-health-provisions-biosecurity-bill.htm



ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT:   Troy Bilsborough, 0427 063 150 (Minister Ley)  Gerard McManus, 0477 391 580 (Minister Joyce)





MEDIA CONTACT: Troy Bilsborough 0427 063 150

