

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d

E m e r g e n c y  M a n a g e m e n t   D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











MEDIA RELEASE



MEDIA RELEASE

Monday 5th October 2020

Plant industries unite to thwart exotic pests threat

A $15 million project led by the Grains Research and Development Corporation (GRDC) is  expected to boost national capacity for the early and accurate detection of exotic plant  pests.

Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management, David Littleproud said $4.6  million of the project was funded by the Australian Government’s Rural R&D for Profit  program, which funds R&D projects that deliver tangible productivity and profitability  benefits for primary producers.

“Australia is lucky to be free from many of the world’s most damaging plant pests,” Minister  Littleproud said.

“Exotic plant pests are capable of damaging our natural environment, destroying our food  production and agriculture industries, and some could change our way of life.

“Australia has a strict biosecurity system which helps protect us from exotic plant pests,  however R&D projects like this where industry and governments are working in  partnership, maximise our discovery of new and innovative ways to detect and manage  exotic pests and diseases.

“This project will deliver practical and accessible results for farmers.”

GRDC Senior Manager Biosecurity and Regulation, Ken Young, said the innovative project  would focus on building industry capacity, enhancing diagnostic tools and testing  biosecurity preparedness - all critical elements for the protection of Australia’s plant  production industries.

“With 2020 being the International Year of Plant Health and COVID-19 dominating our  headlines, it is a timely reminder that effective diagnostic tools and capacity are crucial to a  strong biosecurity system and essential to maintaining Australia’s unique agricultural  status,” Dr Young said.

“This is a cross-industry Australia-wide project concentrating on high priority exotic pests  that threaten production, trade and market access.

“The project has three main parts: improving the early detection of pests through  increasing diagnostic capacity; enhancing the sensitivity of diagnostic tools to create fast  and accurate diagnosis; along with testing industry and government response readiness.

Page 2

Media release from David Littleproud - Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management



MEDIA RELEASE



“Early and accurate diagnosis enables a rapid response to threats that can have  devastating impacts on production and our access to domestic and international markets.”

Dr Young said the project also aimed to develop national diagnostic protocols, improved  diagnostic tools and methodologies, along with establishing reference collections to  support diagnostic functions.

“The project’s overarching objective is to create maximum value to plant industries through  better partnerships in diagnostic decision-making for biosecurity response efforts,” he said.

“Ultimately it will mean that Australian plant industries are better prepared for an  emergency situation, where every day counts when it comes to early and accurate  detection to maximise our chance of pest eradication and minimise business disruption  and potential crop and financial losses.”

The project includes research partnerships with agricultural departments from each state  and the Northern Territory, along with the CSIRO, cesar, AusVeg Limited, AgriFutures  Australia and Plant Health Australia, as well as two New Zealand collaborators, Bio-Protection Research Centre and the New Zealand Institute for Plant and Food Research  Limited.

The project is funded by the Australian Government, GRDC, Cotton Research and  Development Corporation, Hort Innovation Australia, Wine Australia, Sugar Research  Australia, Forest and Wood Products Australia.

Overseeing the project is GRDC Rural R&D for Profit Project Manager, K’trie Coster, who  said contribution from all seven plant-based research and development corporations, as  well as state and territory agricultural departments, meant the project was truly  collaborative and reflected the critical importance of biosecurity to Australian agriculture.

“This combined approach will ensure we boost the diagnostics capability and effectiveness  for the ongoing protection of our plant production industries against exotic incursions,” she  said.

Media Contact: 0455 448 985

