Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.







The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health

Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Public Service and Cabinet

TRANSCRIPT

18 March 2020



INTERVIEW WITH ALLISON LANGDON AND KARL STEFANOVIC  THE TODAY SHOW

E&OE…

Topics: Coronavirus update; 97,000 new testing kits; Self-isolating; Vaccinations.

KARL STEFANOVIC:  Well the world is racing to stop the spread of the deadly coronavirus but in Australia, the number of  people infected continues to rise with more than 400 confirmed cases across the nation.

ALLISON LANGDON:   With Aussies now pushing for harsher measures to be imposed in order to contain its spread.  Joining us now is Federal Health Minister Greg Hunt and Education Minister Dan Tehan to give us  the latest updates.

First we’ll go to you Minister Hunt.

GREG HUNT:  Good morning.

ALLISON LANGDON:  Look, there’s a wildly held belief that the number of cases is far higher than the 450 or so that are  confirmed.

We know that there are not enough tests, they’re taking five days to come back. It’s getting away  from us, isn't it?

GREG HUNT:  Well, with respect, as all of the figures come in, they’re provided.

Importantly, we’ve now had 81,000 tests for about a 0.5 per cent positive rate and we’ve just  secured an additional 97,000 test kits, the first half of which arrived in the country late last night  and will be distributed today.





Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



And so what we’re doing is making sure that we actually have one of the highest testing rates in the  world, but we want to make sure that it’s focussed on those people who are most likely, as you can  see, 99.95 per cent of tests have shown to be negative.

So the key thing is, if you’ve travelled overseas, if you’ve been in contact with somebody who has  been diagnosed and you have symptoms, that’s the group that we want to focus on.

But 81,000 tests completed is one of the highest rates in the world, and an additional 97,000 test kits  secured and the first half arriving in Australia overnight.

KARL STEFANOVIC:  Eighty-one thousand tests in a country of 25 million. You can't even get a test right now, Minister,  you know that and if you can, you have to show a set of symptoms or show a threshold which  varies, according to different doctors.

You don't get the results for at least five days and in the meantime, this thing can spread like wild  fire. I mean that’s the the reality, isn't it, of where we are?

GREG HUNT:  Well the situation is that in all the world, few countries have conducted more tests than Australia  and most significantly, it is a challenging situation, not just for Australia but for the whole of the  world.

But because we were able to prepare, because we had the capacity to implement those tests, that’s  an extraordinary number so far but there’s more to come and we’ll continue to do it.

But we are focusing, understandably, on those most at risk and as you see, a half per cent positive  rate or confirmation rate, and a 99.5 per cent negative rate confirming that people don't have the  condition.

And so it’s absolutely appropriate to be focusing on those that are most at need and most likely and  what we are doing is aiming to protect the vulnerable.

We know that this affects the elderly more than others, we know that this affect people who might  have significant respiratory conditions more than others, and as a country, being our best selves,  focusing on those most at need is absolutely the right thing to do to save live and protect lives.

ALLISON LANGDON:  But if we’re going to protect the vulnerable, isn't the only way for us all to self-isolate now?

We had a leading immunologist on the show a little while ago and they said that we need to be  following the lead of Taiwan, of Hong Kong and Singapore.

It’s the only way, isn't it?

GREG HUNT:  Well I think Singapore has taken quite a different approach to what you’ve outlined there.

They’re continuing with schools; they have significant activity around the country; they are testing  very widely.



Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



And it’s important to understand that Australia has been able to delay the onset quite dramatically  compared with many other countries, having had our first case in January, we’ve been able to slow  this.

And there are many people who are rightly concerned and doing the right thing in terms of their  hygiene, but also in terms of making sure that we are taking care of the elderly.

So we’re taking the decisions for Australia based on the best medical advice, not just, I think, in  Australia but in the world.

Our virologists, our epidemiologists, the chief health officers have met for the last two days and  provided advice to this once in a century National Cabinet, which the Prime Minister has formed  with the premiers, which met late into the night last night, and they’ll have additional measures very  shortly today which they’ll be announcing.

KARL STEFANOVIC:  The ultimate way to protect everyone here or the majority of people is what this immunologist said  and that’s to break the cycle and that’s to self-isolate.

That’s really- if we want to stop the curve and stop the increase, it is to self-isolate. What’s stopping  us, what is stopping us from doing that and stopping that curve?

GREG HUNT:   Well, there are different approaches in the world and that view that’s been put is not the view of the  Australian experts, the Communicable Diseases Network of Australia, probably the finest group of  communicable disease experts in the world, nor the chief health officers.

What we are very focussed on is making sure that we have continuity of supplies, that we have the  continuity of our health workers.

There are some proposals which would take 30 per cent of health workers out of the system which  would be a very, very undesirable (inaudible) risk safety.

KARL STEFANOVIC:  Greg, really, really quickly, how far is a vaccine are we?

GREG HUNT:  So I spoke yesterday with both the University of Queensland and the Doherty Institute.

Progress is being made.

We still think that a vaccine is in the 12 to 18 months range but it may be earlier.

The other thing that’s exceptionally important is breakthrough research, which those two  universities are doing, the Doherty and the University of Queensland, with regards to treatment.

This is the thing which is extremely prospective, being able to minimise the effects, particularly on  the elderly, particularly on the vulnerable, and that is something which gives me real and enormous  hope for Australians and for people around the world.

In the end we’ll get through this. It’s going to be something like nothing we’ve ever seen before, but  together if we take care of our vulnerable, take care of our elderly we will get through this.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



KARL STEFANOVIC:  Good on you Greg, thanks for your time today. Appreciate it.

-ENDS-

