No images? Click here







Media Release  | For immediate release: Friday 21 August 2020

COVID-19 crisis in Brisbane’s youth prison highlights urgent  need for government action

With reports today of nearly 130 young people - some as young as 13 - being locked in their  cells indefinitely due to the threat of COVID-19, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander, legal and  human rights organisations are calling on the Palaszczuk Government to reduce the number of  children locked away in Queensland prisons rather than isolating and harming them.

Youth prisons are hot spots for the transmission of COVID-19. Like cruise ships or nursing  homes, they are closed, crowded environments where large numbers of people touch the same  surfaces, share facilities and cannot physically distance from one another. Once the virus enters  a youth prison, it risks spreading like wildfire.

The threat posed by COVID-19 to children and young people in prison extends beyond  contracting the virus, and includes any punitive steps taken in response.

Restrictive measures, such as lockdowns in the form of solitary confinement, can have life-long  impacts for children and young people and should not form part of a public health response to  COVID-19. International human rights law strictly prohibits the use of solitary confinement on  children given that it can have severe, long-term and irreversible effects on a child’s health and  wellbeing.

In Queensland, a staggering 87 per cent of children locked up are on remand, not having been  sentenced for an offence. It is unacceptable that 61 per cent of children under youth justice  supervision in Queensland are Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children. This over-incarceration - due to colonisation, systemic racism and entrenched socioeconomic  disadvantage - coupled with the high risks of COVID-19 to First Nations people, means that they  will be disproportionately impacted by an outbreak of COVID-19 in prisons.

The Queensland Government must take urgent steps to reduce the number of children and  young people detained in its youth prisons by opting for release wherever possible. This could  be done by:

1. Granting bail, and fast tracking bail applications, for children and young people on remand,

who are yet to be found guilty of any criminal offending, so they can return home to their  country and communities; and  2. Granting parole or leaves of absence to children and young people, so that they can be with,  and be supported by, their families and community during this ongoing public health

emergency.

The Queensland Government must also ensure that independent inspection bodies and  organisations that monitor the treatment of children and young people in prison have access to  all youth prisons, including any children or young people who may be in isolation.

Cheryl Axleby, Co-Chair, Change the Record and the National Aboriginal and Torres Strait  Islander Legal Services:

“As has been Australia’s shame for many decades, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples  are grossly overrepresented in both the adult and youth criminal justice systems. Prisons are  extremely high-risk environments when it comes to disease transmission, exposing our people to  unacceptable danger.”

“Locking children up for days on end is no solution to COVID-19 and poses an unacceptable risk  to the mental health and wellbeing of our kids. They shouldn’t be punished by being trapped in  their cells without access to family, education or support - they should be protected from this  potentially deadly disease.”

“We call on governments to act immediately and follow the lead of many countries around the  world, who have taken a public health response to COVID-19 and released low-risk and high  vulnerability prisoners from prisons and youth detention centres to keep people safe both in  prisons and in our community.”

Monique Hurley, Senior Lawyer, the Human Rights Law Centre:

“Everybody deserves to be safe during a pandemic. Evidence from around the world is clear -  once COVID-19 enters a youth prison, it could spread like wildfire. Children and young people  should be with, and be supported by, their families and community during this ongoing public  health emergency, not locked in their cells for hours and hours on end.”

“Lockdowns - which are often code for solitary confinement - harms children. It is an archaic way  of treating people. Solitary confinement can inflict long term and irreversible harm on people,  especially kids. The Queensland Government should not subject any human being to this type of  cruelty, especially when safer alternatives - like reducing the number of children and young  people in prisons - are available.”

Media contact:

Michelle Bennett, Communications Director, Human Rights Law Centre, 0419 100 519

