BILL SHORTEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT SERVICES

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE

SCHEME

MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RADIO NATIONAL

MONDAY, 26 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Centrelink jobs slashed; Taxpayer rorting at ABC and ASIC; Melbourne

lockdown; Badgerys Creek deal.



FRAN KELLY, HOST: Revelations of taxpayer funded extravagance at Australia Post and

the corporate regulator ASIC have focussed attention on the cultural failings inside

government-owned enterprises. The Cartier watches for several executives and the big

payments to cover tax accountants and relocation expenses contrasts with the fate of more

than 400 Centrelink workers who'll be sacked this week. The call centre staff will hit the

jobless queue without any redundancy payments. Bill Shorten is the Shadow Minister for

Government Services. Bill Shorten, welcome back to Breakfast.



BILL SHORTEN, MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG: Good morning, Fran.



KELLY: Before we get to those issues, I wonder, as a Victorian, could I ask you about

Melbourne?  I know you're in Canberra at the moment, but you and your family have lived

through much of the Melbourne lockdown. Everyone's hope for a major step out of

lockdown were dashed yesterday. How much longer then Andrews put off the decision to

open up, in your view?



SHORTEN: Well, I can understand why many Melburnians were disappointed. I mean, I

can tell you firsthand that it has been a very long haul. You know, many businesses

probably would have hoped with some indications that we would get more restrictions lifted

yesterday. Sunday is normally the day where we get the good news. So I'm sympathetic,

but I have to say for that, in terms of smashing the number of cases and getting it down

since July, Melbourne has been successful. Dan Andrews has been able to do that. I'm

quietly confident that a further loosening of these restrictions could be announced in the

next couple of days or even by the end of the day. And I thought your previous guest,

Professor Blakely, was also headed in that same direction.



KELLY: What's your view? Is the Premier being too cautious? Is this, quote, paralysis in

decision making, as the former Victorian Health Minister Jenny Mikakos tweeted

yesterday?



SHORTEN: Well, I think the last thing that Melburnians need are armchair generals here. It

has been very difficult, I think, and I listened to what Premier Andrews had to say

yesterday. They needed to get these thousand extra test results back out of the northern

suburbs of Melbourne. They've got that and thankfully, there were no further cases linked

as I understand from the media reporting that I've read. And it is really difficult. These are

line ball judgements. But I saw an interesting, and I don't often quote social media, but that

England and France had on one day the same number of cases as Victoria, but we've

headed downwards and they’re now at  15,000 cases a day. So I don't know. It is really

difficult for small business. I'm at the federal level, and I noticed Mr Morrison, Mr

Frydenberg seemed to sort of pile in here. But at the start of this, Mr Morrison made a

strategic decision to not hold the metaphorical hose, as he said during the bushfires. He

said it was up to Premiers. There are things which I know the federal level of government

could do rather than the Sunday night quarterbacking and commenting on what's

happened.



KELLY: But just on that, I mean, we also now know from Treasury that the economic cost

of the restrictions in Melbourne is enormous. Twelve hundred jobs a day are being lost in

Victoria. Apparently, direct financial support from the Commonwealth is approaching 75

billion dollars. Does that give the federal government licence to have a say?



SHORTEN: Sure. But, you know, I've been in Melbourne since July the first, I came up to

parliament in just the last 20 days to do my quarantine. I've seen what's happened. It is

bad. But I have to say that it's not as if when you're Prime Minister of Australia, you're a

helpless bystander yelling out on the beach. I mean, you know, this is how about we do

some simple things like tell people if JobKeeper is going to keep going? I met with local

travel agents. How about we help the travel agency sector, which is affected not just in

Melbourne but around Australia? How about when you're going to give out tax relief to

businesses that you don't just offer them to registered companies, but to sole traders and

to partnerships?



KELLY: Can I go to the revelations of the largesse at Australia Post and ASIC, the

Australian Securities and Investment Commission, what do you think, have some of our

corporate leaders lost their sense of perspective or or or are these things blown out of

proportion or do they just seem worse at a time when so many people are doing it tough?



SHORTEN: There's a big difference between running a private sector company and

running a taxpayer funded organisation. What may be acceptable in the private sector and

the special arrangements doesn't seem to comprehend that there's a taxpayer attached to

every dollar which is spent by government. And so, therefore, I think you do have to govern

to a different set of standards in your business administration. But I mean, you know, the

ASIC stuff, for example, getting 100,000 dollars of your tax affairs paid for. First of all, no

other public servants, to the best of my knowledge, get these arrangements. I mean, we

wouldn't have even known about it, though, except for the National Audit Office and Mr

Morrison's cutting funding to the watchdogs. This is a government who doesn't seem to

know what their own people are doing. It's got special arrangements for the very senior

officers as opposed to all other public servants. I mean, I've got 600 Services Australia or

Centrelink staff, some of whom have worked for them for two years, are all getting the

bullet, so to speak, from their job. And they're not getting their tax paid or getting a watch

on the way out. I mean, again, this is about government accountability. And it seems to me

that the Morrison Government's forgotten that for every dollar that gets wasted, there's a

taxpayer attached to it.



KELLY: This isn't government accountability. This is the accountability of these

organisations, is it?



SHORTEN: But Australia Post is still run by the government.



KELLY: Yes. And the Auditor-General has exposed this.



SHORTEN: Well, thank goodness. And now the government is cutting the auditor general's

funding. But what this gets me to is what's gone on with - I mean, I understand Mr Morrison

wanted to move very quickly on Christine Holgate for the watches. But there's 30 million

dollars wasted at Badgery's Creek in the sort of outrageous land deal. And I can't help but

think that the Morrison government has got a deeper problem than even just these two

individuals. What they want to do is look tough on some matters, but that's almost like a

magician's trick to make you look over there and not look at the, I think, deeper issues

even of what's happening at Badgerys Creek, for instance.



KELLY: Do you think the Prime Minister's response to Christine Holgate's revelations

about the watches was unwarranted?



SHORTEN: No, but what I do think is that his lack of response on Badgery's Creek is

inexplicable. I mean, this is red hot. How is it that the New South Wales government can

pay three million dollars for a block of land at Badgerys Creek and yet Mr Morrison's team

pays 30 million dollars? I mean, to be honest, you wonder you can't help but wonder a little

bit that if Mrs Holgate’s error of judgement had been before Badgery's Creek, whether or

not they would have come down with the same ton of bricks. I can't help to think she's

paying for two mistakes. One is what you raised at the start of this interview, which is can

you translate the private sector into the government sector and taxpayer money? But I

can't help but wonder if she's also getting the double jeopardy of, he can look tough on Mrs

Holgate, to sort of distract attention from his inexplicable inaction on Badgery's Creek. And

why don't we have a National Integrity Commission?



KELLY: Well I was just going to ask you about that. Because it's 1001 days, to be exact,

since you were, when you were leader, you committed Labor to setting up a federal anti-corruption body if you'd won last year's election. If we did have a Commonwealth Integrity

Commission now, would Australia Post or ASIC be referred for investigation? I mean, this

is not corruption, is it, in that sense? What do you think?



SHORTEN: Well, I guess we need to know more facts, I'm not sure. You know, I don’t

want to say that everything every mistake the government makes you just put into the

corruption basket. But I tell you what would have gone there would have been this land

deal at Leppington.  I think this sports rorts would have gone there. So, you know, it was

1001 days since I said, let's do it at the National Press Club. Malcolm Turnbull said that he



would do something in 2018. Mr Morrison, actually, when he managed to roll Mr Turnbull,

said in December of 2018 he would do something. And I actually think it was a failure of

politics and a failure of the government to say the only reason they haven't done anything

in the last 12 months is because of bushfires or because of the coronavirus. I mean, a lot's

been going on. I think that's insulting to bushfire victims and to everyone who's put up with

the virus, to say that this government is a single tasker and they can only do one thing at a

time. They've sat on this for a thousand days and now we've seen the land deals. I actually

think they would have done themselves a favour if they'd set the corruption commission.

Maybe they wouldn't have paid that money for the land.



KELLY: Bill Shorten, thank you very much for joining us.



SHORTEN: Lovely to chat. Thank you.



KELLY: Bill Shorten is the Shadow Minister for the NDIS and Government Services.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM HOULIHAN 0438 366 400



