

The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health

The Hon. Mark Coulton MP

Minister for Regional Health, Regional Communications and Local Government

MEDIA RELEASE  13 September 2020

Celebrating nurses who put their heart into our health  Australian nurses, and the immense contribution they make to the health of our nation, are being  recognised this week as Nursing in the Community Week kicks off.

Minister for Health, Greg Hunt said as the nation and the world continue to navigate the  COVID-19 health emergency, Australia’s nurses are at the forefront of health care.

“There are more than 124,500 nurses working in community health care including more than  40,000 working outside our cities,” Minister Hunt said.

“These highly trained and skilled nurses are working in GP practices, outpatient services,  correctional facilities, Aboriginal health services, the Australian defence forces, schools and  hospices.”

Nursing in the Community Week is this year raising awareness about how nurses can support  people to stay safe at home.

Regional Health Minister, Mark Coulton said nurses are the lifeblood of rural communities,  responding to complex health needs away from major hospitals in rural, regional and remote  Australia.

“We are seeing highly skilled Nurse Practitioners work autonomously across health services,  where they are often the only provider of health care in the region,” Minister Coulton said.

“Thank you to all nurses who continuously put their heart and soul into caring for regional and  rural communities, especially this year as we face the challenges of COVID-19.”

“Our investment in community nursing includes more than $13 million over three years to  CRANAplus to provide remote health professionals, including community nurses, with access  to training, professional services and mental health support.

The Government has also provided the Australian Primary Health Care Nurses Association with  $8 million over four years to deliver the Nursing in Primary Health Care Program.

This program is helping to build the capacity of the primary health care nursing workforce by  improving employment opportunities and the recruitment and retention of nurses in primary  health care.

Media contact: Steph Nicholls 0417 314 920

