

THE HON JOSH FRYDENBERG MP  Treasurer

THE HON CHRISTIAN PORTER  Attorney General, Minister for Industrial Relations

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

Media contact: Leanne Jones — Office of the Hon Josh Frydenberg MP — 02 6277 7340  Kevin Donnellan — Office of the Hon Christian Porter — 0408 491 956  The Hon Josh Frydenberg MP | Treasurer | MELBOURNE





1 September 2020



GOVERNMENT PASSES LEGISLATION THROUGH THE PARLIAMENT  TO EXTEND JOBKEEPER PAYMENT

The Morrison Government is continuing to provide unprecedented levels of support to households  and businesses through the COVID-19 pandemic after legislation passed the Parliament today allowing  the extension of JobKeeper by six months to 28 March 2021.

As part of our plan to keep businesses in business and Australians in jobs, the JobKeeper payment has  provided cash flow support to more than 900,000 businesses and income support to around 3.5 million  workers to date.

This extension will provide further support to significantly impacted businesses so more Australians  can retain their jobs and continue to earn an income.

The passage of the JobKeeper legislation will also see an extension to the vital workplace flexibility that  has been available for businesses receiving JobKeeper payments.  Similar flexibility will also be  provided to legacy JobKeeper businesses where their turnover remains between 10-30 per cent down.

As the economy reopens the payment will be tapered in the December and March quarters to  encourage businesses to adjust to the new environment, supporting a gradual transition to economic  recovery, while ensuring those businesses who most need support continue to receive it.

A two-tiered payment will also be introduced from 28 September 2020, to better align the payment  with the incomes of employees before the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.

The Morrison Government has provided an unprecedented level of economic support totalling  $314 billion to cushion the blow for Australians during COVID-19.

The JobKeeper payment will continue to remain open to new participants that meet the eligibility  requirements.

Eligible businesses can apply for the extended payment online via ato.gov.au

Ends.

