AMANDA RISHWORTH MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION AND

DEVELOPMENT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR YOUTH

MEMBER FOR KINGSTON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS AM AGENDA

MONDAY, 3 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Melbourne lockdown; JobKeeper and early educators; borders; AFL

grand final.



ANNELISE NIELSEN, HOST: We’re joined by Liberal MP Julian Simmonds and Labor’s

Shadow Early Childhood Education Minister Amanda Rishworth. Thank you both for your

time.



Julian Simmonds we’ll start with you first, all the way up in sunny Queensland you’re the

envy of many at the moment. Do you think that this is the right approach in Victoria?

They’re splitting up these announcements over two days, a lot of people have spent the

last 24 hours wondering if they will have a job by the end of the day.



JULIAN SIMMONDS, LIBERAL MEMBER FOR RYAN: Well certainly I think businesses

need certainty as soon as possible. But we are all willing Victoria on, every single one of us

in every single State. We want Victorians to get through this health crisis, so we can get

our entire nation back up and running and the economy back up and running, and get

people back into jobs. And while Victorians are doing that, the Federal Government will be

offering them every assistance we possibly can - ADF personnel, JobKeeper payments,

JobSeeker payments, cash flow assistance for businesses, whatever is required to assist

them. And the rest of Australia we’ll be working on getting the back to work, back into jobs

and to get out economy firing again.



NIELSEN: Amanda Rishworth this has been a particular focus of yours as Shadow Early

Childhood Education Minister. You want to see greater support for the child care sector, it’s

already been shut down in Victoria in the CBD and the centre of Melbourne, you can’t take

your children to child care anymore. Would you like to see more targeted support for that

industry again?



AMANDA RISHWORTH, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION

AND DEVELOPMENT: Well what happened was the Government ripped away JobKeeper

from early educators from 20 July, they said the job was done. So I would like to see some

targeted support to make sure those early educators get the security other workers have in

this country in the form of JobKeeper. We know many children who went to child care

during the first lockdown will not be able to go this time around, so what we need from the

Government is swift action. They can’t wait like they did last time weeks and weeks for

targeted action.



The Government needs to admit they made a mistake, they called it too early to rip

JobKeeper away from early educators, and re-instate that support for those workers, and

to ensure the viability of the sector so that there is child care available in Melbourne and

Victoria once this latest lockdown is able to be lifted.



NIELSEN: Julian Simmonds do you think that’s fair that the Government pulled support too

soon?



SIMMONDS: I don’t think it’s fair Annelise and frankly at a time of such great uncertainty

for Victorians and when we’re still trying to get our heads around what this lockdown

means for them, Amanda’s political point scoring is a pretty cheap shot I think. The only

thing that’s happened as part of this child care package is we had the child care sector

come to us as a Federal -



NIELSEN: Seems like we’ve lost Julian Simmonds’ connection there, so this is going to be

I think a chat with just me and Amanda Rishworth maybe. Amanda are you still there?



RISHWORTH: I am.



NIELSEN: Okay you’re going to get a pretty clear run until we get Julian Simmonds back.

Just on his point there’s still ongoing JobKeeper support for those who’ve lost their jobs in

this time. Is this not something where the child care sector just needs to take the hit like

every other industry in Australia?



RISHWORTH: Well no other industry in Australia has had JobKeeper stopped. For early

educators that was stopped on 20 July, for every other worker in Australia they are getting

JobKeeper until September and then will be able to re-assess and continue that. What the

Government was saying is that the job was done, JobKeeper had done its job and I had

made the point on a regular basis that the pandemic was not over and it was just too soon.



It’s not political point scoring as Julian tried to point out, I’m standing up for educators and

families who need their voices heard. It’s not the Opposition’s job to just pat the

Government on the back and say everything is fine when it’s not. There are deep concerns

about the viability of the child care sector and I’m urging the Government to act now, not

wait weeks like they did in the first round.



NIELSEN: It’s not necessarily fair to say every other worker has access to JobKeeper, you

do still have a pretty strict requirement of a downturn in revenue for any company before

they can access JobKeeper. Plenty of Australians have had to go onto JobSeeker during

this time. So why should child care educators get special treatment?



RISHWORTH: Well even if they can prove that they have had a downturn, they can’t

access JobKeeper. They are the only category of worker where if the centre can show the

downturn, they still can’t access JobKeeper. I think when we look at the scenario in

Melbourne, it’s very fragile and we are going to have many children not allowed to go to

child care. In fact the orders, and we will learn a bit more today, will be unless you’re an

essential worker or a vulnerable child, you cannot turn up to child care. So there will be a

lot of children for the first time removed from child care and kinder, which is going to put a

big strain on the viability particularly of small centres and stand alone centres. So they

need some certainty from the Government right now about what their plan is to support

them.



NIELSEN: The other discussion today is the border battle, we’ve seen WA looking pretty

vindicated, you can see Mark McGowan with the Federal Government withdrawing its

support for Clive Palmer’s High Court case. But that doesn’t mean he won’t necessarily be

successful, and if it is unconstitutional why should States be allowed to do it?



RISHWORTH: Firstly I think the Prime Minister has done the right thing to pull out of this,

but the question is why did he get involved in the first place? Why did he team up with

Clive Palmer to try and argue a case against the medical advice and against the WA

Premier? It seems whether it was the Queensland Premier, where Julian was very happy

to argue very strongly against the borders being shut, or the Western Australia Premier,

we’ve got Federal Members pitching against these Premiers. They seem very happy to

pick a fight with Labor Premiers and to play politics with this.



I think Mark McGowan should be able to do what he needs to do, to follow the health

advice. And the Prime Minister really needs to explain that only a few days ago he was

cheering this case on, putting Commonwealth resources into this case to try and go

against the Western Australia Premier, and has now pulled out. We’ll see what the Court

decides, I don’t want to pre-empt any Court decision, but it seems ludicrous that the

Commonwealth was jumping onto this and deciding to play political games fighting the

Western Australia Premier.



NIELSEN: I think we have Julian Simmonds back online, I’m sure there’s many people

across the country sympathetic to connection issues these days. Julian Simmonds you

with us?



SIMMONDS: I am with you Annelise, thanks for bearing with me. Hopefully I’ll last a little

bit longer this time.



NIELSEN: It’s COVID life isn’t it. Julian Simmonds we’re just talking about the WA border

battle, Amanda Rishworth saying the Government shouldn’t be wasting federal resources

on supporting this kind of case. Do you think that the Federal Government should have

stayed out of it?



SIMMONDS: I think the point we’re trying to make, and we are still happy to make this

point outside of the Court process, is opening borders is so important to get Australians

back to work, to getting out economy firing again and keeping people in jobs. That’s our

number one focus, so all we want to see, while we respect and accept it is a State

Premier’s right to close their borders, we really want to see them do it through a process of

consultation, consultation with the National Cabinet. That is why Scott Morrison put it in

place, so that we can have those discussions and the Federal Government can help them

manage keeping people in jobs and the economic crisis Australia is facing as well.



NIELSEN: And just to finish off we’ve had an op ed piece penned by Christopher Pyne

about the AFL grand final, saying this is the time we should be looking at moving it away

from Melbourne. I can’t think of a worse way to kick Victorians in the pants while they’re

down, to take the footy grand final away from them. Now Amanda Rishworth do you think it

should be taken off Victoria?



RISHWORTH: Look I’m not a medical expert and I’m not going to profess any advice, but

the point I would make is the Adelaide Oval is a beautiful oval, and I would love to see two

South Australian teams playing the grand final. But that is unlikely to happen based on the

current results, the Crows aren’t doing so well.



NIELSEN: I’m not footy fanatic, I know it’s not massive up in Queensland, but Julian

Simmonds do you think now is not the right time to be having this conversation with

Victoria?



SIMMONDS: It’s pretty massive Annelise, our Lions are a pretty big chance to be in the

finals against Port Adelaide actually, so if those are the two teams that end up being in

there Amanda maybe we should take on a bit of a wager. I saw this column from

Christopher Pyne, and I was going to say first of all if you haven’t yet got his book, a bit of

a shameless plug go and read it, I read it I thought it was fantastic, go and buy it.



I don’t think it is a kick in the pants for Victoria, I think the fact that from a mental health

perspective we want sport to continue, from an economic perspective national sport is

such a big driver. And while we are willing and wishing Victorians on as they get through

the health crisis as part of the lockdown, I think we want life to continue and the economy

to open up in as much of the rest of the country as we can. And if that means playing

national sporting events in Queensland then I’m very much in favour of that.



NIELSEN: I hope no Victorians are hurt too much by this, they’ve got enough on their plate

I think leave the grand final with them. But again I’m no sports fanatic. We’re going to have

to leave it there, Amanda Rishworth and Julian Simmonds thank you both for your time.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JEMMA SLEVEC 0405 752 923



