RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  4CA CAIRNS WITH MURRAY JONES  WEDNESDAY, 23 DECEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Cairns; China; Support of our ADF in 2020; The Footy Season; Christmas.

MURRAY JONES, HOST: Richard Marles is the Deputy Labor Leader and Shadow Minister for  Defence, he joins me this morning. 35 degrees compared to where you are. What do you reckon  about being here in this part of the world, Richard?

RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: I would love to  be an Murray. So I can report from Geelong, the skies are overcast. I feel like it's about 12 degrees  here. I am wearing a jumper. And I'm kind of shivering. It's ridiculous, on the 23rd of December. I  wish I was there.

JONES: And I actually had a caller that was listening to us online from Geelong, about half an hour  ago. And he was saying exactly the same thing. But I don't know, I think this 35 degrees is going to  be a bit of a challenge today. But tell me about your connection to Cairns. You have got quite a close  connection to our city.

MARLES: Well, Cairns is a city that is very close to my heart and a place that I love. My wife and I,  when we got married, we eloped to Cairns. And so we both- we were very keen to get married. We  weren't sure we wanted to have the big wedding. And we couldn't really get our minds around that.  And so we hit on the idea of eloping. And I love Cairns, and Rachel, I think had been once, so she  was happy to do it. And so we were married in the Cairns Botanical Garden-

JONES: Woah.

MARLES: With a celebrant. And we were talking to the celebrant about, you know, like, do we need  to organise witnesses, you've got to have- and she was saying, no don't worry about it, I will sort out  the witnesses. And so, I say, okay, no worries. So we turn up to the botanical gardens and it's just  her. And she's kind of got a card table which unfolds and puts a nice white cloth on it. You know, a  little ceremony, I’m like where are the witness? She disappears, you know, into the sort of the trees,  in the bush, in the Botanical Gardens, and then pops out with two random joggers who we had never  met before and we have never seen since, who you know, are now in our wedding photos. They  were the witnesses for our nuptials. So, there you go.

JONES: That's incredible. I wonder if they've ever put two and two together and realised that, that  was the man, the Deputy Opposition Leader in Australia. I guess things have changed a bit since

then. That's an incredible story. Well look, for you, and I believe the four kids, we've always got a  spot for you and of course, of course, the boss as well. So looking forward to seeing you back up  here at some stage.

MARLES: Yeah, I hope to get up there soon.

JONES: Let's talk about some stuff. It's been a bit of a challenging year. And I guess one of the  things, well there's two, two main things that I’m really keen to talk to you about, particularly with  respect to your portfolio is Shadow Minister for Defence. But let's just talk a little bit more about the  China issue. There's been a lot of talk about, you know, bans and people boycotting Chinese  products and all that type of thing. It seems like at the end of the day, that's basically going to be a  mozzie bite to most of the Chinese. And unfortunately, it's likely to do us more harm than good. But  you know, they banned our coal, we get a lot of things that I guess, are really concerning the  Australian economy, but most importantly, those relationships. Moving forward into 2021, you know,  what do you see as the best way of dealing with what is potentially quite a serious issue for  Australia?

MARLES: I just think we need to take a deep breath here, Murray and try and reset this. I mean, the  China relationship is one that governments of both persuasions, since the early 1970s, has been  working on. It's been a really important relationship in terms of the trade that we do with China. And  it is our largest trading partner and by some way, both governments of both persuasions worked on  the China Free Trade Agreement, for example, and our economy has been benefited enormously  from it. Now, you know, China, under President Xi does create challenges- President Xi is seeking to  shape the world around him, in a way that China probably never has before. And I don't really say  that with judgement- it is great power doing what great powers do. But it does create challenges for  us. And it's really important that we do stick up for our national interests. So in places like the South  China Sea, it matters that the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea applies there. And most of our  trade goes through that body of water. It's important that we're sticking up for human rights and the  Uyghur community, for example, in the west of China, there's been significant human rights issues  there. And it's important, we talk about that. But I think it is possible to do all of those things and to  make sure that we are talking about our national interests, that we stay true to our values as a  nation, while maintaining a relationship with China- as complex as it is- which involves the trade that  we've built up over the years. And the reason why I say I think it's possible is because if you look at  a country like Japan, which is right next door to China, which has all the issues I've described and  more, they have territorial disputes with China, they're still managing to trade with them. So I think,  somehow we've got to get this back to a more even keel. Because at the end of the day, there are  hundreds of 1000s of Australian jobs tied up in this. And, you know, I think it's really important that  we're doing- that the government does something to put this back on track and express to the  Australian people what the plan is.

JONES: How far can we dig our heels in? You know, we understand it's a communist country, you  know, we don't have democratically elected leaders, whereas the bulk of the world, as you know, in  the international scene, that's kind of the badge of honour. How far can we dig our heels in about  that particular issue? Because I mean, there's good reason for us to have, I guess, some, you know,  philosophical issues with the way that they go about things.

MARLES: And, of course, I think the principal point that we need to be making is, is around human  rights. And we need to speak out when we see human rights violations anywhere in the world. That's  really the way the international system has worked after the Second World War, and the Holocaust,

and kind of what came out of that was people said, never again, are we going to, you know, turn a  blind eye or not look beyond the nation's borders, in terms of calling out violations of human rights,  and the way in which the world has worked since then, and that's what we've done. And in doing it,  you know, we submit ourselves to judgement. So we judge others, but we expect to be judged as  well. So it's not about preaching, it's about every nation holding themselves up to account. And as  part of that process, you know, as I said, before, I think there are real issues around the treatment of  Uyghurs in the western part of China. And it's very important that we speak about that, I think we can  do that. And we and we must, and we must also speak up for our national interest to be that  diverges from Chinese action and the South China Sea is the most obvious example, there were  really, you know, there is an asserting of control over that body of water, which does seem to be at  variance with the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea. And that's where it's really important that  we are speaking to our national interest there. But I think if we do that, in a way, which is clear,  where we are very respectful and clear to China, about why we say what we say and how we're  saying it, like all of that can be done and all of that can be managed in the context of also having a  productive trading relationship. Certainly other countries around the world do exactly that. But  somehow, you know, we've got ourselves to a place where, you know, I don't think that diplomacy  between the government- that our government has managed this, you know, has been, what it  should have been. We don't have any significant relationships, which exists between members of the  Australian Government and senior members of the Chinese Government, that's really a real  difference to what existed at any point, since the recognition of the PRC back in the early 1970s. So  there's no ballast, there is no personal ballast which allows this stuff to be worked through. And I  think there has at times been the kind of the silence on the part of our government. And fringe  dwellers, if I can put it that way on the part of- within the government, have been, you know, saying a  lot of things which are right out there, which don't go to any of the issues that I've spoken about now.  And of course, causes offences. And so, you know, it's the gratuitousness, I guess, that we need to  make sure that we are avoiding, and that we are very clear in what we speak to. That there is a very  clear sense of principles that we speak about. And that we do the diplomacy well. And that's what we  need to do to get this back on track. And it's really important that we do because at the end of the  day, where this ends up is hundreds of 1000s of Australian jobs.

JONES: Okay, let's move on to your portfolio is the Shadow Minister for Defence; you know, is there  any significant change with respect to strategy and the way that we go about things that's really  going to be called upon to occur during 2021? Do you feel?

MARLES: Well, I do, I think, I think we are experiencing the most challenging set of strategic  circumstances really, since the Second World War. And a lot of it’s to do with what we just talked  about; China, seeking to shape the world around it in a way that it's never done before, it does  present a whole lot of challenges for us. This year, the Defence Department did a defence strategic  update. It gets into the weeds and a bit sort of policy wonky here, but there had been really since the  Vietnam War a sense that we would always be given about a ten year warning, if anybody meant to  do us any harm. And that update this year for the first time said that we are now within that ten year  window that we don't have a warning anymore. That's a really significant observation to make. I think  it's the correct observation to make and I think it means we need to rethink a whole lot of our, the  way in which we engage in our defence, the posture of our defence forces and I think importantly,  how quickly we get some of these key defence assets that we are currently procuring. So, you know,  an example of that is that, we're getting a new submarine that's a real, probably the most important  platform that we have. But the new one, the first the new ones, we're getting 12, is not scheduled to  come through until 2035. So if we're making an observation that we're within the ten year window,  right now, that feels like it's just way too down, way too far down the track. So I think all of those

issues need a big rethink. I think it's an important observation that's been made this year. But it’s  now the follow through; okay, having said that, what does that mean? What do we now need to do to  put ourselves in a better position to make sure that we can defend ourselves and I think we're going  to be thinking a lot about that in 2021.

JONES: It has been a tough year for the ADF. But at the same time, you know, they've done a lot to  assist in some of the issues, bushfires, COVID-19. So, I guess our best wishes from a tough year, to  all the people in the ADF, Richard.

MARLES: Absolutely. And, I mean, like they do a fantastic job. I've been privileged enough in my  role to see the ADF deployed overseas, and their work in places like Iraq and Afghanistan, and they  do us proud there, but in 2020, they really did us proud at home. And when you look at what  happened during the bush fire season, and then the response to COVID-19, literally 1000s of people  in uniform have been, well, they’ve been heroes in a different way. And I've been really providing a  service to our nation that perhaps I wouldn't have expected but has been so profoundly important.  And as we go into this summer, and we look at the possibilities of cyclones and the like and other  weather events going forward. You know, they’ll bracing to make sure that they are ready to give us  assistance if it's needed over the coming months.

JONES: And I think a lot of people will certainly keep them in mind during this Christmas period as  well.

MARLES: Totally right.

JONES: I was about to go through your full title, but I think for some people it gets a bit confusing. I  might just call you, Albo's right hand man. But I was just thinking too, at the end of the day, you  know, he is such a mad Rabbitohs fan. You're a Cats fan? How can you guys communicate about  anything? That must be tough?

MARLES: Well, no. They are different codes, you're right. The benefit is that our teams never play to  each other. So we don't have to worry about that. But what we do have in common is the ridiculous  passion of supporting a football team and being beholden to a whole story which you have no control  over. Which this year, it felt like it had real hope for both of us as the Rabbitohs made it deep into the  finals. And of course the Cats got into the Grand Final of the AFL. But the last game that both teams  played this year was a loss. And so the one thing that Anthony and I have in common right now is  we're both pretty bitter, you know, we're not over it yet.

JONES: Hopefully there's not too much bitterness during 2021. It has been great to talk to you this  morning. Richard Marles is the Deputy Opposition Leader and Shadow Minister for Defence. Have a  fantastic Christmas. And we're looking forward to seeing you in the family back here in the tropical  north in the not too distant future, Richard.

MARLES: Well, thanks, Murray. You have a great Christmas and the same to all your listeners.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363

