

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY  DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RN BREAKFAST WITH FRAN KELLY  TUESDAY, 18 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Scott Morrison’s lie arriving cruise ships would be “directly under the  command of the Australian Border Force”; NSW Special Inquiry into the Ruby Princess;  Senate Covid Committee hearings into the Ruby Princess today.

FRAN KELLY, HOST: Well, Federal officials will face a parliamentary grilling today over  the Ruby Princess scandal. That's despite a New South Wales Special Commission of  Inquiry already blaming the COVID-19 debacle on the health authorities in that state.  Yesterday, the New South Wales Premier Gladys Berejiklian said "sorry" for the  monumental mistakes that were made with the cruise ship that led to 28 deaths and more  than 1000 infections across the country and overseas.

GLADYS BEREJIKLIAN (GRAB): I want to apologise unreservedly that to anybody who is  continuing to suffer, or has suffered unimaginable loss, because of mistakes that were  made within our health agencies.

KELLY: That's Gladys Berejiklian admitting responsibility for the biggest COVID cluster  during the first wave of this deadly pandemic. Both Border Force and the Federal  Agriculture Department, which had officials on board the ship, will face questions today  from the Senate's COVID Committee. Kristina Keneally is the Shadow Minister for Home  Affairs and a member of that committee; she joins us from Parliament House this morning.  Kristina Keneally, welcome to breakfast.

KRISTINA KENEALLY, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE AND SHADOW  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Good morning Fran and good morning to your listeners.

KELLY: The New South Wales Commission of Inquiry identified a litany of quote,  "inexcusable and inexplicable errors" with the Ruby Princess, but all the blame was  sheeted home to New South Wales Health. The Australian Border Force was absolved of  any responsibility. Is it time to drop the pursuit of Border Force and of the Home Affairs  Minister Peter Dutton?

KENEALLY: Fran, what Commissioner Walker's report lays bare is that the Prime Minister  Scott Morrison... well, let's call a spade a shovel here, flat out lied when he announced on

the 15th of March, that arriving cruise ships would be under “bespoke arrangements” under  the “direct command” of the Australian Border Force. Four days later the Ruby Princess  arrived and what Commissioner Walker's report lays bare that the Australian Border Force  had absolutely no power to stop that ship. Despite the Prime Minister's grand  announcements just four days earlier, Australian Border Force were unable to stop  passengers from disembarking from the ship and were unable to stop the ship from even  arriving.

Now Fran, this is so typical of Scott Morrison. I mean he might be the Prime Minister of Oz,  but he's more like the Wizard of Oz. He's standing up making these big announcements  but when you pull back the curtain, you realise it's all just smoke and mirrors there's  nothing much of substance there.

KELLY: But, just to that comment from the Prime Minister, I mean he did announce on the  15th as you say cruise ships would be directly under the bespoke command of Border  Force, but if Border Force had taken that command, wouldn't they still have been listening  to the health experts, the New South Wales Health expert panel that was designating Ruby  Princess low risk of COVID contagion. I mean the ship still would have been allowed to  dock wouldn't it?

KENEALLY: Fran, I think it's useful for listeners to understand and Commissioner Walker's  report lays this bear as well, how those - this spaghetti bowl - these complex  arrangements at our borders operates. New South Wales Health has a role and, yes, they  stuffed up. And Gladys Berejiklian is absolutely right to apologise. New South Wales  Health role is in a pre-arrival report that comes in the days leading up to the ship's arrival.  When the ship arrives, the only people that can grant “pratique”, that is permission, for  people to disembark the ship are Federal Officials. Federal Officials from the Department  of Agriculture. And what we will be questioning those Federal Officials about today is why  they did not do a Human Health Inspection report, why they did not do a Traveller with  Illness Checklist. These are things they are required to do, not only by Department of  Agriculture policy, but indeed by the National Protocol to manage coronavirus aboard  cruise ships.

KELLY: That is true, so you'll be asking the Department of Agriculture that, but that doesn't  include Border Force. I mean I'm just wondering, are you saying the Border Force under  the new arrangements announced by the Prime Minister four days before the Ruby  Princess docked should have been making its own health assessments?

KENEALLY: What should have been done, is that the Prime Minister having made a grand  announcement that Australian Border Force would be in quote, "direct command" of  Australian cruise ships, he should have put in place arrangements to make that possible.  What we now know is that the Prime Minister did nothing of this sort. In fact, he seems to  have sold the Australian Border Force up the river, making them publicly in charge but  giving them no authority or ability to do anything about an arriving cruise ship. Let's be  clear here Fran, we are in the middle of a global pandemic - a highly contagious disease.  We already knew from the Diamond Princess, a month earlier how contagious this disease  COVID-19 was aboard cruise ships. What does the Prime Minister do? He gives "direct  command" or so he says to the one agency in government, Australian Border Force, that  apparently has no ability to do anything about human health. I mean that is the exposure  here that the Prime Minister now needs to explain. Why did he stand up and make this  grand announcement and then he did absolutely nothing to give Australian Border Force -  the agency supposedly tasked with managing our borders - the power to do anything

about a health crisis at our borders?

KELLY: Okay, so by doing accepting that, no, just let me ask you on that, and you're  accepting then the finding from Commissioner Bret Walker, that it wasn't Border Force that  stuffed up here. I mean Bret Walker said, "neither the ABF nor their offices played any part  in the mishap and the relative relevant legislative revisions make it crystal clear that Border  Force despite its portentous title has no relevant responsibility for the processes by which  passengers were permitted to disembark." So you agree, this was not a Border Force stuff  up?

KENEALLY: Fran, I think that sentence from Commissioner Walker, says it all. The  “portentous title” Australian Border Force - the portentous announcement by Scott  Morrison on the 15th of March that Australian Border Force would have direct command is  really just that, portentous - there's no substance to it. And that is exactly a great  description of how this Prime Minister Scott Morrison is operated during this coronavirus  pandemic. He made a big announcement on the 15th of March, there was no substance to  it. Now there are questions that Border Force has to answer and we will be putting those to  Border Force today.

KELLY: What are they?

KENEALLY: Well, I'm not going to preview all of my questions here on your program,  Fran, but I will make this point, you know the Australian Border Force were onboard the  ship that morning. So were Federal Department of Agriculture officials. We still do not  know, even after all of the time of Commissioner Walker's report, who actually lifted the  rope off the gangplank and said that people could come on down and leave the cruise  ship. Quite frankly, we know that Agriculture Officials gave permission at 7:37am, but  people started leaving the ship much earlier between 6:30 and 7:00, and even after  Commissioner Walker's inquiry we still don't know who specifically gave that permission  and what basis they gave it. Now, Fran we don't know that partly because the Prime  Minister and the Morrison Government threatened to go to the High Court to take legal  proceedings to stop a legal summons from Commissioner Walker to get Federal Officials  to appear. Part of the reason Commissioner Walker's report is unable to answer some of  those key questions is because Scott Morrison refused to allow Federal Officials to appear  and give evidence, even though he promised back in April, that he would cooperate fully  with this with this Special Commission of Inquiry.

KELLY: You mentioned the fact that the Federal Agriculture Department and it is  Agriculture that is in charge of this from a Federal level did not administer something called  a Traveller with Illness Checklist, while she was on board, the official didn't do that. How  big a problem was that? And, will he be able to get the answers to that you believe from  the people who are fronting up to your committee today, which include the Border Force  Commissioner Michael Outram and the Secretary of the Agriculture Department Andrew  Metcalfe. Are you happy with that representation?

KENEALLY: What I'm very pleased that we've got Federal Officials fronting up in front of  the COVID Committee. The COVID Committee instituted by the Australian Labor Party to  provide a level of oversight, while the Parliament has not been sitting during this pandemic  due to the decisions taken by Scott Morrison to cancel Parliament. But, let me just go to  this issue of how significant is the Traveller with Illness Checklist. These Human Health  Inspections, these Traveller with Illness Checklist is part of the National Protocol to  manage coronavirus aboard cruise ships. It's designed specifically for Federal Agriculture



Officials on board vessels to carry out in order to determine if anything has changed from  the state health department's last pre-arrival report, and when the vessel docks. It is  specifically designed to catch the very circumstances that were happening on board that  were happening on board the Ruby Princess.  We now know from Commissioner Walker's  report that the ship's doctor was so overwhelmed with sick passengers, she didn't have  time to upload them all onto the ship's medical log and onto the, the pre-arrival system.  The reason for Agriculture Officials are there, the reason they are tasked under the  protocol to do this checklist, is to catch that very circumstance. They failed to do it.

KELLY: Can I just ask...

KENEALLY: You have to ask, if they had done it, what different course of - what different  actions - would they have taken, and how would the course of this disease in Australia  been so different?

KELLY: So just finally, given the problems and the mistakes made by New South Wales  Health, the mistake you just went through there made by the Department of Agriculture  Official. Should it in fact be Border Force that has more responsibility for people  disembarking from cruise ships? Is that a change that has been made or should be made?

KENEALLY: I'm left wondering why Agriculture are involved at all. We had evidence from  Agriculture, last time they appeared that they are just a “little more than a post box”, was  the words of the Department Secretary Andrew Metcalfe. We have a spaghetti bowl of  arrangements at our borders. We've got two Liberal Governments - New South Wales and  Commonwealth - and between them they could not stop the one boat that mattered, the  Ruby Princess. Such a mess is the human security, biosecurity management at our  borders. Now, we need to get that simplified, we need to get it straight lined. Commissioner  Walker's report makes clear there is overlapping and confusing set of responsibilities, and  it is now up to this Commonwealth Government to make clear how they're going to  manage our borders. You know we've got a Prime Minister with a big trophy of a boat to  himself in his office saying, "I stopped the boats". Well his Government didn't stop the one  boat that mattered. His Government needs to make clear what are they going to do to fix  that because you just can't trust the Liberals with our borders anymore.

KELLY: Kristina Keneally, thanks for joining us.

KENEALLY: Thank you.

KELLY: Kristina Keneally is Deputy Labor Leader in the Senate, and Shadow Minister for  Home Affairs Immigration and Citizenship.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110









