

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RN DRIVE   WEDNESDAY, 22 JANUARY 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; Bridget McKenzie’s Sports Rorts.

BEN KINGHT, HOST: Chris Bowen, welcome to RN Drive.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks Ben. Good to be with you.

KNIGHT: We are very very cautious about overstating the risk here. There have been a  number of times when we've been warned of you know one of those international  pandemics breaking out, hasn't quite happened although there have been, there have  been some scares. What do we need to know about this one? Where does it fit into that?

BOWEN: Well thanks Ben. This is a serious issue. But you're right we do need to keep it in  perspective and none of us who are public commentators should be alarmist. This is a very  serious issue and it's rapidly evolving. It's changing fast. But I think what Australians can  have confidence in is the ability of our medical officers, our Chief Medical Officer at the  Federal level; Professor Brendan Murphy and his State and Territory counterparts who are  very actively involved in managing this and putting in place the necessary precautions and  are actively interacting with their international colleagues at the World Health Organization  I have full confidence in the Chief Medical Officer and I think Australians can have too so  I'm certainly not criticizing any actions that have been taken so far.

I think the actions that have been taken so far are sound and I would support further  actions. I was briefed today on the steps that have been taken and what might be  necessary. But you're right, there have been 400 cases around the world. 40 of those Ben  are regarded as serious at the moment. We would think 12 are critical so we should expect  this to get worse and we should expect it to evolve rapidly and we should expect further  action to be necessary by Governments around the world.

KNIGHT: Perhaps just take us through what are the powers that are available to  Governments to deal with this? I mean in New South Wales it's been declared a notifiable  condition under the Public Health Act. What does that mean and what can Governments  do?

BOWEN: Well there are obligations under GPs, to GPs or any medical professional under  those circumstances to inform relevant authorities when they see symptoms. I mean this  happens at several levels. It has not yet been declared a public health emergency by the

World Health Organisation. That would provide them with certain avenues and  opportunities. But what has happened so far is that the Commonwealth Government is  working closely with the New South Wales Government in particular because there are  three direct flights from Wuhan which is the epicentre of this crisis, this Chinese city, three  direct flights from Wuhan into Sydney. There are biomedical officers on duty for every,  each one of those arrivals. They're actively interacting with people who get off that plane.  They're looking for people who might have symptoms.

Every flight into Australia as I understand it is receiving information because as you'd  understand Ben and your listeners would understand in a globalized world it’s not just  direct flights from Bhutan. I mean you can take any number of steps before you get to  Australia or any other country. Show there's been active information provided to people  arriving into Australia to look out for symptoms. One of the problems is, one of the  challenges for health professionals is that this takes a long time to incubate. Now you  might arrive with it but you don't exhibit any symptoms so you know on the face of it you  can understand people saying “oh we should be checking everybody on arrival or checking  temperatures”. But realistically one, that's a huge logistical challenge and two, it's not going  to pick up people who may have the condition already and might be incubating inside  them.

So the best thing we could do is provide information to people to know what to look out for.  If you start to exhibit any flu like or cold like symptoms, that’s a pretty broad range, to get to  your doctor maybe more urgently than you otherwise would be. If you'd been overseas or if  you've been to China, obviously if you’d been to Wuhan in particular and to get yourself  checked out and it's just that's really the best thing at the moment. The situation as I said is  rapidly evolving which is expected to get worse before we expect it to get better. But we  can have confidence that what can sensibly be done at the moment is being done.

KNIGHT: So as you say, you know someone goes along to their GP if in New South Wales  it's been designated as a notifiable condition that I presume means that the GP is required  to notify the authorities?

BOWEN: That is my understanding yes.

KNIGHT: Under the Act they have the power to put people into isolation which is what we  saw happen with the man in Brisbane earlier this week?

BOWEN: He appears to now be clear as you say but he has been under quarantine, that's  sensible. That’s a sensible precaution in his case.

KNIGHT: Why wouldn’t other states also declare that then?

BOWEN: Oh look that's a matter for the states. I imagine that they're all weighing up their  various options and will have made the necessary declarations of course. I think Sydney  you know particularly a focus because that's where the direct flights come in. We have had  the incident in Brisbane but he does appear to be clear or it certainly seems to indicate that  at this stage. But every state and territory I am sure is taking the relevant advice and taking  the steps necessary and every GP I'm sure has been advised on what to look out for and  GPs have a broader obligation to their health departments and they will have been actively  engaged with on that.

KNIGHT: You're listening to RN Drive, I’m talking with the Federal Opposition Health

spokesman Chris Bowen who had a briefing this afternoon from the nation's Chief Medical  Officer Brendan Murphy. Chris Bowen, given that the source of this virus appears to be a  seafood market and that is animal to human contact, what does that mean for food  imports? Did that come up?

BOWEN: Again one of the challenges for all the authorities not just the Australian  authorities but all international authorities is this is fast moving. I think the focus at the  moment it has now been established that it can be can be spread human to human. That  wasn't clear to begin with. That is now pretty much established and there are 14 health  care workers for example who have been caring for people with the virus who have now  been diagnosed with it. So that's a particular focus and we have pretty strong rules around  food safety anyway. As a matter of course and of course I would expect and trust that  these are being revised as necessary in light of the latest scientific advice. As I said at the  beginning Ben I stress - I'll have my criticisms of the federal Government and we'll  probably get to a couple in this interview but I'm not going to criticise public servants who  are doing their best with changing information and if I see an area where I think things will  be improved then of course I will say so. But at this point I'm satisfied and confident in the  steps that are being taken.

KNIGHT: Well you've made the perfect segue way actually to the Sports Grants. We will  have a brief chat about that. I mean obviously you've got your criticisms of the  Government, no doubt they'll be raised in the Parliament when it resumes I think the week  after next and when that happens we're obviously going to expect that this is going to be  an issue in Question Time. But I mean really what is-- what will be the focus of the  Opposition? Are you looking for a Ministerial resignation or are you looking for a change in  the system so that this doesn't happen?

BOWEN: Well it should really be both.

KNIGHT: Well tell me what Labor would be doing to make sure that there is a system  where Ministers don't override the decision…

BOWEN: Well the first thing is Ben that the Minister should go. That’s the first thing  because this is a Minister who has abused the process. Now of course there's always a  role for Ministerial - every Minister has some degree of discretion but with discretion goes  accountability and transparency and there has been none in this instance. And this all  came about because of a Labor referral to the Auditor-General. You might remember the  rather large cheque that Georgina Downer presented to a club in the electorate for which  she was running, she wasn't even the member. That's what raised our attention to this.  That this could be a rort and of course it has proven to be a rort and a Minister has  welcomed it.

And I think the reason, I think the reason she is still in place amongst others is that I think it  was probably a rort organised across the Government including the Prime Minister's office  and therefore the Prime Minister is reluctant to see her go because that would implicate his  own office. There is some indication of that being the case. But look there's precedent in  this. I accept it's a long time ago and I've seen this on my side of politics but when Ros  Kelly was in a similar situation she paid the price of her political career for this. There is  very little difference between the two instances and Ministerial accountability, really frankly  these days means nothing. There have been Ministers who have gone for much much less  than this over the years on both sides because when you are a Minister of the Crown and  you swear that oath there does come a particularly onerous responsibility and Ministers



have had to pay the price for things which even they haven't done but have been done by  the Department or paperwork problems going back in the day.

But here is a Minister who has overseen an abuse of power, an abuse of $100 million of  taxpayers money for political purposes and if she survives this, then Ministerial standards  mean nothing. Mean nothing. I mean I don't know what you'd need to do to be dismissed.

KNIGHT: But isn't it more practical and sure I have no doubt that you'll be continuing to call  for the Minister's resignation and I've no doubt she'll continue to defend her position. But  isn't it more practical to say okay if this has now happened a number of times not just in the  sports portfolio but that a better result for the Australian community would be to change the  system so that there is that firewall and so that there is no way that politicians can get their  hands on the decisions made by bureaucrats and technocrats and this can't happen  again?

BOWEN: Well every program will always be different and there will always be a degree of  transparency and Ministerial discretion from time to time and nobody suggesting that that  should be removed. But what people are suggesting is it should be properly administered  and it clearly has not been in this instance and Ben you know we haven't had an instance  of this you know since the Ros Kelly affair which was now a long time ago of this nature  where the Opposition has called for the resignation of a Minister as a result.

We don’t call for resignations lightly. I mean you know there's been plenty of instances  where Ministers have done the wrong thing and Anthony Albanese or one of our team or  myself been asked “Should this Minister resign?” and we haven't called for a Ministerial  resignation. We have in this instance and it’s not done lightly because it is an open and  shut case, an open and shut case. Now Scott Morrison has proven reluctant to dismiss  Ministers in the case of maladministration or gross negligence. He just doesn't like doing it.  But it actually goes to the Prime Minister's responsibility. He is in charge of Ministerial  ethics. I think I saw a Liberal backbencher today saying this is all a matter for the National  Party. Well it's not, it's a matter for the Prime Minister.

I don't care what party she is in. I don't care what the internal ramifications for the Coalition  might be or for the National Party leadership. Ministerial standards are meant to mean  something. When you take that oath before the Governor-General you sign up for those  responsibilities. This Minister has fallen short and if the standards of Ministerial  accountability mean anything, mean anything in 2020 she must go before Parliament  resumes. She should have gone today. And while I don't reveal Labor Party’s Question  Time tactics I think you are reasonable to suggest that the Labor Party will continue to  pursue this through all the mechanisms that are available and if the Prime Minister thinks  he can arrogantly and smugly shrug this off like he does most things, as being in some sort  of Canberra bubble he is very sadly mistaken.

KNIGHT: We'll leave it there. Chris Bowen thanks for talking to RN Drive today.

BOWEN: Always a pleasure.

ENDS  MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512





