

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  FIVEAA BREAKFAST WITH DAVID PENBERTHY AND WILL GOODINGS  TUESDAY, 18 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Opposition during the coronavirus pandemic; aged care crisis;  superannuation; Victorian coronavirus outbreak; paid pandemic leave; corporations  paying for Australian news content.

HOST: We start the hour with the Federal Labor Leader, Anthony Albanese. Albo, good  morning to you.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Good  morning.

HOST: Good to have you back, Albo. It's been a while. It's been a crazy five months.  What's life like in opposition during a pandemic?

ALBANESE: Look, it's tough. It's tough for all Australians, I think. But it's not politics as  usual, of course. People want the country to succeed because they know that a spread of  infection could impact their own health and they want also to minimise the impact on the  economy. So, it hasn't been politics as usual, but we've been doing our best to be  constructive, by being supportive of the Government where we can, but also pointing out  weaknesses in areas like aged care, which has seen some devastating impacts. And we  have been pointing out problems that are there with superannuation. There are reports  today that 30,000 South Australians have withdrawn all of their super, that will have an  impact on their retirement incomes but also weaken the economy.

HOST: Has the Federal Government done enough heavy lifting when it comes to trying to  salvage the economy? And I guess I'm thinking in a proportion of GDP way, have they  spent enough?

ALBANESE: Well, I don't think it's a matter of the amount of the spending, it's a matter of  some of the quality of the spending and the gap that is there between what they say the  impact will be and what the impact has actually been. In areas like HomeBuilder, it hasn't  seen a dollar out the door yet. And we saw that more as a photo-op rather than as  something that was going to have a big impact. We've argued that the easiest way to  actually make a difference in terms of jobs and economic activity is to provide support for  social housing, for either new housing which is required, or to renovate existing housing.

That's something that we did when we were in Government with 20,000 new social  housing units and 80,000 repairs and fixing up what were houses that basically needed  some renovation work. That's a way to create jobs directly. It worked during the Global  Financial Crisis. And we still think that that's something the Government needs to look at.

HOST: Albo, there's obviously been a lot of criticism directed at the Andrews Government.  There's the inquiry underway into the handling of the private security guards. The Herald  Sun is reporting today that 99 per cent of cases of community infection can be traced back  to that. But one part of the Victorian landscape is the aged care situation and we've seen a  much higher number of infections in aged care facilities that are meant to be overseen and  operated by the Commonwealth than we have in state aged care. What more should  Canberra be doing on the aged care front?

ALBANESE: Look, they should be doing a lot more. They are responsible for it.  Inexplicably, it's the case that there has actually been cuts to nursing and care hours in  some nursing homes across a number of states. There aren't sufficient numbers of nursing  staff and other staff with the right skills. We have still got weaknesses in personal  protective equipment. The stories of nurses and other carers having to use just one glove  at a time because they're trying to save on the equipment is just quite frankly absurd. The  other issue, of course, is paid pandemic leave. We continue to hear reports of people who  are going to work who should not be going to work because they don't feel like they've got  any other alternative in terms of income support. And that is something that has really got  to be looked at as well.

HOST: If we did have paid pandemic leave, how would that be funded? Would that be  something where you think the Feds should just dip into their pockets and say, 'We are  going to stump up for that'?

ALBANESE: Look, some private sector organisations are doing that, and all credit to the  companies that are. But where there's a gap, then the Federal Government should have  been prepared to step in. A number of state governments are doing that, providing some  income support. The ACT Government today has announced that they are joining that  group of governments that are stepping in because the Federal Government hasn't  stepped up. Because it's a threat, of course, not just to the individual worker but that  worker then has the potential to spread the infection around and to add to the community  transmission.

HOST: Should the Federal Government press on with their promise to increase the super  rate to 12 per cent by 2025?

ALBANESE: Absolutely. The Federal Government doesn't like industry super. They just  don't like it. They never supported it, they undermine it at every opportunity, and it's been  undermined during this pandemic, during this crisis. But the fact is that there is no  evidence that superannuation actually leads to lower wages. The opposite is the case.  When it was introduced with productivity benefits, what we saw was…

HOST: The basis for that isn't in the middle of a pandemic, though, is it?

ALBANESE: Well sure. But the fact is that the Federal Government has put off the  increase twice. Twice they have gone to elections and said there won't be any change, and  twice they've broken that commitment during this term of this Coalition Government, or

since they've been elected in 2013. Now, they went to the last election saying there'd be  no changes. There shouldn't be. This is about people's retirement income. It is also about  a savings pool that is a ballast for the national economy. Without those funds in  superannuation, our economy during this pandemic would have been far worse off.

HOST: But fundamentally you don't believe that asking employers to contribute more will  have an inverse relationship with how much people get paid?

ALBANESE: No, I don't.

HOST: So, you think people can get paid more and get more super over the next four or  five years?

ALBANESE: Well, the fact is that employers have been told this is happening, this is a  legislated increase, and it is factored in. Of course, superannuation is treated in terms of  tax arrangements. It is something that we all pay for, by the way. So that when all those  funds have been withdrawn from superannuation accounts, and there's $1.6 billion of those  30,000 people in South Australia, for example, some of that we're all paying for. Because it  has got concessional tax treatment. That was the deal that was done way back in the  1980s and 90s by the Hawke and Keating Governments that made such a positive  difference to our national economy and a positive difference to people being able to retire  with some dignity.

HOST: What's your message, Albo, to every South Australian today that logs on to Google  or YouTube and sees a warning from those internet giants that Australians can expect  dramatically worse services if the Federal Government follows through with plans to make  them pay for Australian news content?

ALBANESE: That's self-interest from those corporations.

HOST: Good message. Does the draft code go far enough?

ALBANESE: I think it's a reasonable proposition. We'll have a look at all of the detail there.  But this is an ongoing issue. And I spoke about this in my, I think it was my third vision  statement back in December of last year, about the media and about the landscape that is  there. And the fact is that you're paid for presenting this content on FiveAA, the  newspapers that you read, people are paid. There's no reason why people, major  corporations that are globally based that by and large don't pay a hell of a lot of tax here in  Australia, should get free content off the back of content that's got to be produced.  Someone's going to pay for it somewhere. And the fact is that this is one of the issues that  has undermined mainstream media which is so important. We are seeing newspapers  disappearing. I'm a bit old-fashioned, I like touching the paper and actually reading it, not  just looking at it online. And these issues have to be confronted and have to be dealt with  honestly. And the corporations involved in those ads should be honest as well. They're  about defending their own interests, that's fair enough. That's what corporations will do.

HOST: Anthony Albanese, great to catch up with you again. Thanks for joining us and we'll  do it again soon.

ALBANESE: Thanks, guys.



ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053







