

Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA

MEDIA RELEASE

31 August 2020

$2 BILLION MILESTONE A SAD REMINDER OF LABOR’S  DISASTROUS POLICY

More than a decade on, Australians are still paying for Labor’s reputational and financial  decimation of the vocational education and training sector because of their failed VET FEE-HELP Scheme.

Since 2016, more than $2 billion in debts to almost 130,000 students have been recredited  because of Labor’s failed scheme. We expect these numbers to continue to grow.

This is an unfortunate reminder of Labor’s policy failure when in government. Labor have no  credibility when it comes to skills policy.

Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business, Senator the Hon Michaelia  Cash, said the Coalition Government cleaned up Labor’s mess and made sure that dodgy  providers could not prey on vulnerable students. The Coalition Government has also  bolstered the Australian Skills Quality Authority (ASQA) which acts as the cop on the beat  for unscrupulous providers.

“Labor were the architects of the policy which decimated the reputation of the VET sector,”  she said.

“VET FEE-HELP enabled dodgy providers to sign up vulnerable students often by providing  free laptops or other incentives and failing to let them know that they would incur a  substantial debt and little or no qualification.”

The Morrison Government cleaned up Labor’s policy failure and tens of thousands of  students have been cleared of wrongful debts accrued from courses that were either worthless  or never delivered.

“Our agenda and priorities are clear: skills development is a key pillar of the Government’s  JobMaker strategy, designed to set up Australia for economic recovery.”

The Morrison Government has invested an additional $3.3 billion in supporting Skills and  apprenticeships since the onset of COVID-19, bringing total Commonwealth investment to  $6.5 billion this financial year.

This includes the $2.8 billion Supporting Apprentices and Trainees wage subsidy, which is  supporting small and medium businesses affected by COVID-19 to keep their apprentices and  trainees in employment (this is in addition to apprentices and trainees who have been  supported by the Government’s JobKeeper program).

The Government has also invested $500 million for the establishment of the JobTrainer Fund,  matched dollar for dollar by State and Territory governments.

This fund is expected to provide up to 340,700 additional training places in areas of genuine  need to help upskill and retrain people looking for work, including school leavers.

MEDIA CONTACTS  Guy Creighton - Guy.Creighton@dese.gov.au - 0438 815 302  Brittany Higgins - Brittany.Higgins@dese.gov.au - 0449 171 294



