

SHADOW MINISTER FOR CITIES AND URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

SHADOW MINISTER ASSISTING FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

MEMBER FOR SCULLIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS AGENDA

MONDAY, 2 NOVEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Racial Discrimination; Chinese-Australian questioned by

senators.



KIERAN GILBERT: A new report by ANU has highlighted the prevalence of

discrimination in Australia, particularly during the COVID pandemic. A survey of

3,000 people by the ANU has revealed more than four in five Australians of

Asian heritage have experienced instances of discrimination this year, with

84.5% reporting at least one instance of discrimination between January and

October, up from 82% last year. Let's bring in Andrew Giles, the Shadow

Minister for Multicultural Affairs. Andrew, are you surprised by that very high

rate of racism there?



ANDREW GILES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS:

Kieran, sadly, I'm not surprised because this report is consistent with a number

of other reports, including one just a couple of weeks ago by the Centre for

Multicultural Youth, which had almost exactly the same figure, and that was

85%. What we've seen through the pandemic is that racism is very much like a

virus. But of course, unlike the virus, there's no vaccine for racism. That's why

it's so important that the Morrison Government joins with us, and pretty much

every organisation that has thought about it and supports a national anti-racism

strategy.



GILBERT: Some of the episodes of racism in this ANU report are quite

concerning, but it's almost casual racism, isn't it? Someone's playing cricket, a

young man, and one of the players yells out Coronavirus repeatedly.



GILES: Yeah, I mean, I thought that was a really affecting story, Kieran. I guess

it's those things that bring the experience of racism home to those of us who

haven't personally experienced it. And I think when Australians think about

these numbers, they think about these stories, I think they recognise that it's all

of our responsibility to act. I know that the vast majority of Australians abhor

racism, I think we also recognise the standard we walk past is the standard we

accept. I think it's on all of us, but particularly our national government to set

the standard clearly and say that we will adopt as a country a zero tolerance

approach to racism.



GILBERT: I've got to say the Prime Minister has been very strong in his

message about praising Australians of Chinese heritage, saying that they've led

the way in terms of the way that they manage the pandemic, initially, those that

had returned home and so on. So what more do you want to see from the

Federal Government beyond that sort of leadership?



GILES: Yeah, I think it is important to acknowledge that and I said in the

Parliament last week that the Prime Minister was right to describe the

contribution of Chinese Australians as magnificent through the pandemic and to

recognise as that community that bore the brunt of the initial wave in Australia.



But I guess there's two things, there's what the government's done, what the

Prime Minister said, and then it's what they haven't done. So often with the

Morison Government it’s the things that they haven't done that matter.



What we have seen is racism on the rise without an approach from government

to counter this, what we've seen, in particular, from the Acting Minister for

Multicultural Affairs, was a failure on his part to stand up for those three

Chinese Australians who were effectively required to take a loyalty oath when

presenting evidence before the senate last week, or the week before last,

rather. That's why I think we've got to recognise that there's something going

wrong here that requires a targeted response by government. And that requires

actively listening to the voices of those most affected because Kieran, as you

said earlier, you only have to read the stories in this report to feel that there's

something not right going on.



We've all got to work harder to make sure that that other young men, as the

cricket season begins back in my hometown of Melbourne this weekend, don't

face that kind of abuse, because who knows what fields of activity are going to

be denied to people because they're anxious about it. That was the other big

finding in this was that more than four in five Asian Australians felt anxious at

the moment.



GILBERT: Yes, it was a bit of a ham fisted approach from Senator Abetz -

that's for sure. One of those young individuals before the Senate Committee,

has been a repeated critic of the Chinese Communist Party. So that sort of

effort was a bit odd, Andrew Giles, thanks so much. We'll talk to you soon,

appreciate it.



MONDAY, 2 NOVEMBER 2020

MEDIA CONTACT: LACHLAN POULTER 0423 937 655



