CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RN BREAKFAST

WEDNESDAY, 23 DECEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Northern Beaches cluster; State border restrictions; delayed vaccine

timeline; stranded Australians; Halton quarantine review.



CATHY VAN EXTEL, HOST: Some experts say restrictions on gatherings in Sydney can't be

eased despite the announcement of just seven new cases linked to the Northern Beaches

cluster yesterday, and a record 44,000 tests conducted. The Federal Opposition's health

spokesman is Chris Bowen, welcome back to Breakfast.



CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks Cathy, good morning.



VAN EXTEL: So we had just eight cases in New South Wales yesterday. Seven linked to the

Northern Beaches cluster. Do you think that the lockdown in Sydney's Northern Beaches

should be lifted today?



BOWEN: Look that ultimately is a matter entirely for the Premier. Every Premier since this

crisis begun about this time last year, a bit later than this time last year, has had our full

support as the alternative Federal Government for the tough decisions that they've had to

make and that applies across the board. Regardless of State, regardless of politics. There'll be

plenty of free advice out there for the Premier today, all of it well intentioned, but ultimately she

needs to weigh the advice she's receiving from her Chief Health Officer and act in the best

interest of the State.



VAN EXTEL: Do you share concerns though that Christmas and New Year's Eve in such a

short period are a ticking time bomb? That they could be potentially a disaster super spreading

period?



BOWEN: Oh look it's a matter of fact that when people come together while there is still virus

out there, and we should say this has been a remarkable achievement on behalf of the people

of New South Wales, the people of the Northern Beaches, the contact tracers the health

system and everybody involved. But ultimately, the virus has not yet been eradicated. Of

course there is still risk there, and of course when people come together that risk is

heightened. But the Premier will receive advice from Chief Health Officer, and I think we need

to let that process roll out and the decisions that she takes I think will be very genuinely in the

best interests of the people of New South Wales.



VAN EXTEL: The Avalon clusters ruin many people's holiday plans across the country. The

New South Wales Premier has expressed frustration with the other States that they've

slammed shut their borders and she's asking them to consider compassionate grounds for

travel there. What's your view on this what should happen now?



BOWEN: Well similarly just as when Premier Berejiklian closed the border to Victoria quite

rightly, those decisions by the Premiers should be respected. They again are acting in the best

interest of their State, and are accountable to their States. Of course there's a cost to be paid

for it and of course they will lift those bands as soon as the medical advice tells them that they

should, I know that there will be compassionate grounds in place. Many, many thousands of

people, hundreds of thousands of people will be impacted by this, including Cathy, my own

family whose travel plans are looking very shaky. But I think everybody also understands the

situation we're in. I think those premiers are acting in accordance with their medical advice and

acting in the best interest of their own state, and that's reasonable.



VAN EXTEL: What do you think of a permit system like Victoria's where you've got different

classes of restrictions required for people from different areas of coronavirus spread?



BOWEN: Well, I mean that's a legitimate tactic or tool that Premiers and State Governments

can use. Other Premiers will be concerned that there can be freedom of movement, and that

the virus can spread relatively easily. Now the evidence is in in New South Wales thus far that

it is being contested very successfully. That's wonderful news. Not only for the people in New

South Wales, but for the rest of the country too because it means that we can return to that

situation where we were just getting back to before this outbreak. But again, there'll be different

answers for different jurisdictions and I think Premiers deserve the chance and the room to

make those decisions based on the best advice.



VAN EXTEL: Chris Bowen Labor has argued against a national hotspot framework yet the

tourism industry and today the Business Council of Australia are calling exactly for that. Isn't

this situation exactly why it's needed?



BOWEN: Well Cathy I'm not aware of any definition of a hotspot that wouldn't have included

New South Wales the Northern Beaches and Sydney, particularly the Northern Beaches.



VAN EXTEL: Well I think the point is that we've got these hodgepodge response and different

States are reacting differently, and that what we need is national consistency.



BOWEN: With respect Cathy you're not quite right to say we've argued against the national

hotspot process. What we have argued is that ultimately, as I said earlier, Premiers are

responsible and accountable to their States and no system will change that. I can't foresee a

situation where a Premier would have a view that something's in the best interest of his or her

State and not act on that view, regardless of what the Prime Minister or the National Cabinet

says. There are areas where the National Government should be showing more leadership, in

a different field. I mean look at quarantine. We've had four outbreaks in recent times, the

States are taking the heavy lifting here. Quarantine is a Commonwealth responsibility, the

Constitution is crystal clear there are areas where there's grey in terms of constitutional

responsibility, quarantine isn't one of them. The Premiers have voluntarily stepped up to run

quarantine but they have had very very little support or national leadership. We've had the

Halton review into quarantine which has been utterly ignored by the Morison government, and

really, we are going to see more pressure on quarantine, not less. We need to bring more

stranded Australians home from overseas not fewer, and the Commonwealth should be

providing more leadership here.



VAN EXTEL: Can we go to the vaccine. This latest outbreak has underscored the need for a

vaccine. Many other countries already rolling it out. the Federal Health Minister, Greg Hunt

says we're sticking to the March timetable for Australia but do we need it earlier?



BOWEN: Well I think the government should be working to get it earlier that's been our

consistent position, yes. Firstly, the most important point is we respect the independence and

authority of the TGA. Always have, always will. The TGA says they need until January to

approve the Pfizer vaccine, we utterly understand that and respect that, and we would never

second guess that. But, Cathy even if the TGA approved the Pfizer vaccine in January, under

the terms of the deal entered into by Scott Morrison, we won't get it until March, we'll only get

10 million doses, it’s a two dose vaccine so 5 million Australians will get it. One in five

Australians. We think we need to do better than that as a country Scott Morrison said we're at

the front of the queue for the vaccine that was not true then and is not true now.



VAN EXTEL: So what are you asking for? Are you asking for the government to intervene here

to push for the faster approval? The TGA says they can't do emergency authorisations?



BOWEN: No very clearly Cathy that is absolutely not what we're calling for, as I said to you we

will always respect the independence of the TGA. If the TGA says January is the time that they

will approve the Pfizer vaccine, that's perfectly fine with us. But it is not acceptable to us if the

TGA approved the Pfizer vaccine in January, if it's not being rolled out until March and then it's

a long rollout period after that and as I said, we only have 10 million doses. Now we've made

the point consistently that we need more deals. Best practice around the world is six we

currently have three. We need to spread our risk. We all hope the AstraZeneca vaccine for

example works and comes through, but that's a while off yet and it may not, we hope that it

does but it may not so we need to spread that risk. We have no direct deal with Moderna, no

direct deal with J&J, for example, and also the Pfizer vaccine will have very considerable

distribution challenges, that's a matter of fact, and we only have 10 million doses. So Scott

Morrison really needs to step up and do better when it comes to the vaccine we argue. It's not

about TGA, it is about the deals that the Federal Government has entered into, which as we

stand will only deliver 10 million doses of the Pfizer vaccine, that's 5 million Australians and we

won't get it until March, and that's when the rollout starts not when it finishes, then continues

through the rest of the year.



VAN EXTEL: Do we have the capacity to ramp up production of the COVID vaccine?



BOWEN: Well the Pfizer vaccine won't be manufactured in Australia, we don't have that

capacity. Again, and the Prime Minister has at various points said we have, we don’t. That's

just a matter of fact. We do have a good facility in CSL but they don't have the capacity to

make the Pfizer vaccine it's a different type of vaccine. They will have a contract to make the

AstraZeneca vaccine which as I said we certainly hope come through, but it might not. As we

saw with the University of Queensland through no fault of anybody, wonderful scientists doing

a great job. It was right for the Federal Government to back that, in the end it didn't pan out.

That just shows and underlines the risks in vaccine development. Well over 90% of vaccines

on development will fail. That's why we're consistently said for months and months now, that

we were late to the party in signing a deal for the vaccine, the first country to do that was in

March we didn't do it until September we were behind the 8 ball there,  and we remain behind

the eight ball. We're not getting the vaccine until March, even if it is approved in January.



VAN EXTEL: Just a final question. You mentioned stranded Australians, overseas Australians.

We heard in AM yet more pleas for assistance from Australians. Labor has been very vocal on

this issue of course it means more planes and more aircrew flying here therefore more risk.

How can that process be made more safer, should we be chartering more flights?



BOWEN: Well clearly we think the Australian passport means something or at least it should,

and at very least it should mean the right to return to your country. I mean if the passport

doesn't mean that, what does it mean? Now we have never underplayed the dangers or the

difficulties here, but Jane Halton, a former Secretary of the Department of Health and Finance

was commissioned to conduct a review of quarantine. She made six recommendations, she's

briefed the Prime Minister twice and we have seen no action. Now, would that solve all the

problems and get everybody home more quickly? Of course it wouldn’t. But would it help? Of

course it would. We need a national quarantine facility, and we need a national plan on

aircrew. I mean the Federal Government issues visas to aircrew and yet they wipe their hands

of the management of aircrew. Now we don't know how this Northern Beaches cluster actually

started, but one of the real possibilities is aircrew. Now, that does need to be examined by the

Federal Government and the State Government is doing their best in difficult circumstances

but we really need national leadership when it comes to aircrew, when it comes to quarantine

across the board and frankly Cathy, we're just not seeing it.



VAN EXTEL: Chris Bowen, thank you.



BOWEN: Merry Christmas to you and your family and to all the listeners who we've been

speaking to over the course of what has been a very difficult year Cathy.



VAN EXTEL: Absolutely and Merry Christmas to you, thanks for your time today.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ELIZA MITCHELL 0413 410 931

