



SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women



STATEMENT



PACIFIC ISLANDS FORUM FOREIGN MINISTERS’ MEETING

14 October, 2020



Today, I met virtually with regional counterparts for our annual Pacific Islands Forum  Foreign Ministers’ meeting to discuss our work together on priority issues including  regional health and economic security, our shared natural environment and the impact  of COVID19 on women and girls in the Pacific.

Forum Foreign Ministers committed to work together to continue to deliver outcomes  consistent with the Boe and Kainaki declarations for a resilient, sustainable and secure  region.

We also discussed global action on sustainable oceans management, climate change  and our important work on Pacific maritime boundaries. Australia reiterated our  commitment to continue partnering with our region in response to the shared challenge  of climate change, including through our $500 million in support for renewable energy  investment and disaster resilience support across the Pacific over five years from 2020.

We discussed the significant impact of COVID-19 on women and girls, and the  opportunities for Pacific Islands Forum members to promote improved, long-term  development outcomes for Pacific women. We agreed to continue to raise the  prominence of gender equality on the regional agenda.

Australia is committed to supporting our Blue Pacific family to access safe, effective and  affordable COVID-19 vaccines, once available. This will build on our $80 million  investment in the Gavi COVAX Facility Advance Market Commitment.

Australia is also introducing initiatives in Pacific aviation and food security to support  pandemic response efforts and economic recovery.

Australia will support regular flights on critical routes between Australia, Pacific Island  countries and Timor-Leste. It will enable the delivery of essential freight, including  COVID-19 medical supplies, and provide opportunities for people to return home and for  Pacific and Timorese workers to travel to Australia to fill rural and regional workforce  shortages.

Passenger flights are currently operating at roughly 1 per cent of last year’s volume.

Through a $9.5 million Food Security Initiative, Australia will deliver beneficial farming  and fisheries technologies, to enable more productive, sustainable and climate resilient  food systems in the Pacific. We will also provide a $10 million program to empower  Pacific communities, through new skills and knowledge, to sustainably manage their  coastal fisheries, vital for food security and nutrition.

The recommendations from today’s Forum Foreign Ministers meeting will be considered  by Forum Leaders at their virtual retreat in November. Together we will build the strong  regional humanitarian pathways necessary for strong a resilient economies and healthy  communities.



Media Contacts  David Wroe: +61 429 531 143  Melanie Ruiz: +61 427 888 392

