

THE HON ANDREW GEE MP  Minister for Decentralisation and Regional Education   Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Investment   Federal Member for Calare

MEDIA RELEASE

03 December 2020

Australia’s young historians recognised



A talented Year 10 student from Sydney has taken out Australia’s most prestigious history  award for school students at the National History Challenge awards.

The 2020 National Young Historian of the Year is Brio Dos Santos-Lee from Sydney Girls High  School.

Minister for Decentralisation and Regional Education, Andrew Gee, said this year’s competition  was fierce, with more than 7,000 entries from more than 600 schools across Australia.

“The year 2020 has been one of the most eventful in recent history, with the bushfires, drought  and COVID-19 pandemic disrupting many aspects of everyday student life,” Minister Gee said.

“I am glad to see the challenges of this year have not impacted on students’ enthusiasm for  history.

“This year’s theme of ‘Contested Histories’ brought about many topics ranging from Angus  McMillian’s legacy to the significance of historical monuments.

“Students from across Australia have researched and explored contested histories,  demonstrating a passion for exploring and understanding the past.

“This challenge has allowed aspiring young historians to broaden their understanding of people,  societies and culture, and of how we came to live in the world we do today.

“I congratulate all of the students who participated in this year’s National History Challenge.  History forms a vital part of Australia’s unique culture and I encourage you to continue pursuing  your interest in investigating the past.”



The other category National winners are as follows:

Category Name School

National Young Historian Brio Dos Santos-Lee  Sydney Girls High School (Sydney,  NSW)

Year Level 11-12 Lily Farrell Loreto College (Adelaide, SA)

Year Level 10 Brio Dos Santos-Lee

Sydney Girls High School (Sydney,  NSW)

Year Level 9 Chanhyeok Wang Telopea Park School (Canberra, ACT)

Year Level 8

Sienna Weerakody  St Mary's Anglican Girls' School (Perth,  WA)

Year Level 7

Akshaya Krishnamurthi  Presbyterian Ladies' College (Melbourne,  VIC)

Year Level 7 Jessica Bao

Presbyterian Ladies' College (Melbourne,  VIC)

Year Level 7

Ayla Chetty

Presbyterian Ladies' College (Melbourne,  VIC)

Year Level 5-6

Arlo Temple

Glenaeon Rudolf Steiner School  (Sydney, NSW)

Asia and Australia  Aaron Rucinski

Sydney Church of England Grammar  School (Sydney, NSW)

Democracy

Jemima Pinto-Menezes  Rossmoyne Senior High School (Perth,  WA)

Sport

Mim Grice

Champion Bay Senior High School  (Mount Tarcoola, WA)

Women's History

Millie Patterson

Geraldton Grammar School (Beresford,  WA)

Portrait Power

Holly Alp

Loreto College (Marryatville, SA)

Portrait Power

Lucy Hoskins

Loreto College (Marryatville, SA)

Indigenous Angus Duncan

Brisbane Grammar School (Brisbane,  QLD)

Indigenous

Tom McCarthy-James  Brisbane Grammar School (Brisbane,  QLD)

Australian Wartime  Experiences Charles Merrifield

Denmark Senior High School (Denmark,  WA)

Using Primary Sources Ella Bibby  Mount Saint Joseph Girls’ College  (Altona, VIC)

Museum Exhibit

Arlo Temple

Glenaeon Rudolf Steiner School  (Sydney, NSW)



Each State and Territory Young Historians and the Young Historian of the Year have been  announced at ceremonies around the country.

The Australian Government is providing $836,500 over 2015-16 to 2019-20 for the National  History Challenge.

For more information visit historychallenge.org.au/

Media Contact: Gabi Phipps 0400 917 405, Gabrielle.Phipps@dfat.gov.au

