

TONY BURKE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ARTS

MANAGER OF OPPOSITION BUSINESS

MEMBER FOR WATSON



LINDA BURNEY MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND SOCIAL SERVICES

MEMBER FOR BARTON



SCOTT MORRISON FAILS INSECURE WORKERS



Scott Morrison is not doing enough to support Australia’s 3.3 million casual,

contract and gig workers through the coronavirus crisis.



While Labor is supportive of the Government’s stimulus package, on this issue

it has fallen short.



All the Government did for casuals yesterday was announce that those who

can’t work because of coronavirus will be able to get quick access to a social

security payment. For many casual workers, this $40-a-day allowance will not

be enough to match their normal earnings.



That means people will continue to turn up to work - even if they’re sick or

should be self-isolating.



There are also questions about Centrelink’s ability to process these extra

claims in good time, and the additional burden the requirement for a medical

certificate will put on the health system.



Make no mistake, this inadequate support for casuals will hinder Australia’s

efforts to contain the spread of coronavirus. People must not face a financial

penalty for doing the right thing and staying at home.



The ACTU’s proposal for paid special leave is one option that could fix this

problem. If the Government has a different way of fixing the problem they

should announce it.



But it is clearly in no one’s interest to continue to have a situation where

casuals have a clear disincentive to be tested and to stay at home.



As things stand the Government is expecting the casual workforce to choose

between their health and their household bills.



Christian Porter’s comments this week show the Government just doesn’t get it.



He’s somehow delusional enough to believe casuals - many of whom are low-paid and in insecure jobs with unpredictable hours - have put aside money in

case of a global pandemic.



This is a Government completely out of touch with the reality of casual and

insecure work in this country.



Some businesses have announced they will support their casual workforce



through this crisis, and we welcome that. But other businesses cannot or will

not follow their lead, leaving many casuals insecure and uncertain about their

futures.



The last thing those people are going to do in those circumstances is spend

money and stimulate the economy.



FRIDAY, 13 MARCH 2020



MEDIA CONTACT: ADAM GARTRELL 0427 008 525





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













