

MATT THISTLETHWAITE MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR THE REPUBLIC  MEMBER FOR KINGSFORD SMITH



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS  TUESDAY, 11 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Covid blunders; Ruby Princess debacle; Aged Care  failures; Bunnings/VicForests.

TOM CONNELL, HOST: Let's go now next to my political panel this morning, Liberal MP  Tony Pasin and Labor MP Matt Thistlethwaite, perhaps just some reaction to what we  heard there, Daniel Andrews says he takes responsibility as Premier but reluctant to delve  into any detail of that?

MATT THISTLETHWAITE, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL  SERVICES: Look Tom, contrast what Dan Andrews has been doing, providing upfront and  honest evidence and accountability to the Victorian people for the decisions that his  government is making in respect of Covid-19, contrast that with what we’ve seen at the  Commonwealth level with the Ruby Princess inquiry in New South Wales. Yesterday we  saw the Prime Minister and Peter Dutton say that Commonwealth officials won’t be  participating in the Ruby Princess inquiry because it’s being run by the New South Wales  government. Now that's completely unacceptable, we all know that the Commonwealth  runs Australia's borders, their responsible for customs and for our border security, yet they  won't participate in an inquiry which has been directed at getting to the bottom of how the  Ruby Princess debacle occurred. There you've got the contrast you see Dan Andrews  fronting up to a committee despite the fact you've got all these challenges at the moment  with Covid-19 in Victoria and being open and honest and accountable for the people of  Victoria.

CONNELL: Does he have a choice about fronting up?

THISTLETHWAITE: Well the honest thing to do and the best thing to do is to front up and  to give the answers.

CONNELL: But does he have a choice?

THISTLETHWAITE: Well I don't know the rules of the Victorian Parliament, I think he's  doing the right thing and that should be what the Commonwealth Government should do.  The Commonwealth Government should do the right thing by the Australian people and  front up to the inquiry that's going on into the Ruby Princess at the moment so the

Australian people know what happened with the Ruby Princess and we can put in place  measures to make sure that these sort of things don't happen again, Tom, it's about  protecting the Australian people.

CONNELL: Okay, so on that inquiry then so the Prime Minister, Tony Pasin, said the  Government would cooperate with the inquiry, the inquiry wants to hear from an official  who granted permissions for the ship to enter port from the Federal Agriculture Department  but it's unable to. That person is being shielded from the inquiry, how is that cooperating?

TONY PASIN, MEMBER FOR BARKER: Tom, as the Prime Minister said we've given an  undertaking to cooperate and we are cooperating and we will cooperate. The only person  in Australia right now who can compare the performance of the Federal Government with  the performance of the Victorian Government and find in favour of the Victorian  Government I think is Matt which proves Matt that um if you're a fan of my footy club I'd be  really happy because I know you're one-eyed mate.

CONNELL: Well let me ask you this though, Tony Pasin, you say there's an undertaking to  cooperate is that happening? The person not appearing so far at this inquiry, the  biosecurity officer believed to have failed to complete a checklist required for travellers with  illnesses, doesn't that go to the heart of this inquiry if they can't appear because of the  Commonwealth is that cooperation?

PASIN: Well Tom, I'll just refer you again to the Prime Minister's comments, I mean he's on  a pay grade well above mine and he's indicated the Commonwealth has given an  undertaking to cooperate, is cooperating and will cooperate.

CONNELL: That's fine, an undertaking, but wouldn't cooperation mean allowing this  biosecurity officer to give evidence?

PASIN: Well Tom, I don't know the intricacies of how this operates but you know all I can  say is that I listened closely to the Prime Minister asking questions, answering questions,  on this topic uh yesterday and he made it clear that the Commonwealth is cooperating and  will continue to cooperate.

CONNELL: Matt, the argument from the Government Solicitor was that this was outside  the jurisdiction of this particular inquiry, what's your knowledge of the legal intricacies  there?

THISTLETHWAITE: Tom, look let's cut through the crap and the semantics, there's an  inquiry going on to try and get to the bottom of what occurred with the Ruby Princess  debacle. There's a person who had responsibility for checking off and making sure that  conditions were complied with before that ship docked, that person has answers that the  inquiry wants to know about and so far they've been shielded by the Prime Minister and the  Minister and the Commonwealth Government. Let's just cut through the crap and get to the  bottom of what actually happened here so that it can't happen again. It's about ensuring  that we put in place procedures and make sure these mistakes don't happen again and the  Commonwealth Government should do all they can to make sure that this bloke appears.

CONNELL: Tony Pasin, if there's a jurisdiction issue would the Federal Government have  its own inquiry to make sure those people can be heard from again to ensure this can't  happen again on the Ruby Princess?

PASIN: Tom, I'm certain that at the conclusion of this pandemic there'll be many a review  in relation to how this was handled, we're learning all the time, but to be fair I think the  focus right now is very much in the here and now and making sure we're dealing with the  issues. It's fair to say and I think it appropriate to say that we are learning lessons daily in  relation to this 1 in 100 year pandemic and these are matters we will continue to take into  consideration and keep learning from with respect.

CONNELL: We've also got an Aged Care Royal Commission going on right now, Tony, the  evidence is set to be revealed, this was indicated by a counsel assisting yesterday that  even as cases were spiking in June and this situation was ramping right up neither the  Health Department nor the regulator developed a Covid-19 plan for aged care. That  sounds like a failure doesn't it?

PASIN: Tom, I understand that assertion will be made by counsel assisting, it's highly  contestable and in fact uh the facts as I understand them was in as early as February that  then Chief Medical Officer wrote to health providers, service providers I should say, making  it clear to them that they needed to plan and prepare for this pandemic. Then in March the  Minister and then Chief Medical Officer convened a forum with service providers to talk  around priorities in terms of planning and preparedness, then again in March the  Communicable Disease Network provided guidelines with the assistance of the APHC and  those guidelines were in relation to both Covid-19 and how to ensure the pandemic was  prevented from entering aged care facilities and controlled in the case that it was. So any  suggestion that there hasn't been planning back as far as February through March I think is  something as I said is highly contestable and then you know we don't have enough time on  this program for me to run through all the elements of assistance that the Commonwealth  has provided Victoria in the most recent outbreak.

CONNELL: To put it succinctly though what you're saying is you've heard the claim, we  haven't heard the evidence on this yet this was the initial claim if you like on the initial part  of this inquiry, but you're saying from what you've heard and what you're being told within  the Government there was plenty done specifically to prepare aged care for Covid 19?

PASIN: That's right tom and done back as early as February and March on a continuum  that proceeded all the way through um the first wave of this disease.

CONNELL: Matt Thistlethwaite, what's your response to that?

THISTLETHWAITE: Well that's not right and that's the shocking revelation that came out  of the Royal Commission yesterday, Tom, and I as a local Member know that what the  Royal Commission heard as evidence yesterday is correct because when Covid-19 hit,  many of the aged care facilities in my community and across Australia closed, they closed  their doors to people coming up to relatives and friends coming in to see residents and the  reason they closed is because there wasn't a plan in place to deal with members of the  public and that's when we got inundated with requests from local constituents worried  about the welfare and concerned about their loved ones, but they weren't able to access it.  It was immediately evident that the Department and the aged care regulator didn't have a  plan in place to deal with this because they closed all of the facilities.

CONNELL: We've heard the line yesterday from counsel assisting, does Labor need to  wait and hear the evidence behind this and perhaps counter evidence before making up its  mind whether there was any plan at all on aged care?



THISTLETHWAITE: Well the counsel assisting has said to the Commission that there  wasn't a plan in place, you would think that they wouldn't make that assertion without  evidence. But nonetheless, I know with my experience with locals in my area that there  wasn't a plan in place because those facilities closed and no one could get into them. Now  the plan was eventually put in place, but it wasn't obviously wasn't there pre-Covid.

CONNELL: Just finally, Tony Pasin, Bunnings has announced the ban on Victorian  hardwood this is because of concerns that were um laid out in the court case in fact it  found that VicForests breached an agreement around logging habitats of endangered  species, so Bunnings saying that's essentially illegal, we won't be taking it on. Fair  enough?

PASIN: Well Tom uh no I say not fair enough, um Bunnings know full well that VicForrests  is appealing uh that particular decision and I think we've got here a really important issue  that relates not only to forestry, and of course as Chair of the Parliamentary Friends of  Forestry I'm very concerned about this, but speaks to manufacturing and primary  production more generally. The concern here that I have Tom is not that Bunnings is  anticipating a reduction in um in hardwood sales, but rather they'll start getting it from  somewhere else and that somewhere else initially will be less contested hardwood  plantations in New South Wales and perhaps Tasmania arguably but ultimately it'll move  sadly offshore so all those jobs and you know Bunnings stocks a gargantuan amount of  product which currently is imported from West Papua and I don't want to see the jobs of  Australian hardwood millers being shipped overseas, we've got enough problems right now  in this country and I think our singular focus should be on Aussie jobs.

CONNELL: We are out of time, so I can't get your thoughts on that Matt, but uh Tony, Matt  Thistlethwaite, we'll talk again soon, thank you.

THISTLETHWAITE: Thanks Tom.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: BEN LEESON 0404 648 275









