





THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP  MINISTER FOR POPULATION, CITIES AND URBAN  INFRASTRUCTURE

SENATOR DEAN SMITH  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA

IAN GOODENOUGH MP  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR MOORE



THE HON MARK MCGOWAN MLA  PREMIER OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA

THE HON RITA SAFFIOTI MLA  WA MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT







MEDIA RELEASE

The Hon Alan Tudge MP, Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure   WANTIRNA SOUTH, VICTORIA



13 Error! Unknown document property name.20

ANOTHER CONGESTION-BUSTING NORTHERN SUBURBS ROAD PROJECT  DELIVERED

Northern suburbs commuters will save up to seven minutes on their drive to work and home to  their families with the opening of the new $73.2 million Wanneroo Road and Ocean Reef Road  interchange.

The upgrades, which started in March 2019, have supported more than 350 local jobs over the  life of the project.

More than 75,000 motorists use the interchange daily and in 2017 it was ranked as Perth’s  13th most congested intersection.

Wanneroo Road is a crucial arterial passenger route and alternative route to the Mitchell  Freeway providing access between the Perth central business district, Joondalup and the  North West Corridor.

Premier Mark McGowan said he was pleased to see another government election commitment  delivered.

“We are continuing to deliver on our election commitments to create and support local jobs,  while slashing travel times on our roads,” the Premier said.

“This is part of the $2.3 billion major infrastructure package we negotiated with the Australian  Government in April 2017 that has seen thousands of jobs created around Perth.

“It’s projects like these that are keeping our State economy safe and strong, and moving  beyond COVID-19.”

Federal Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure Alan Tudge said crucial funding  from the Morrison Government was helping to roll out major projects in Perth and across WA.

“That includes an additional $1.1 billion for key projects in last week’s budget that will support  an estimated 6,800 direct and indirect jobs,” Mr Tudge said.

“We know that an economic boost and jobs are what hard working West Australians need right  now as we recover from the COVID-19 pandemic.”

Western Australian Transport Minister Rita Saffioti said this was part of a suite of upgrades the  McGowan Government was delivering across the northern suburbs.

“This project will help cut travel times, improve safety and traffic flow in our northern suburbs  along with other recently completed projects such as the Mitchell Freeway southbound  widening between Vincent to Cedric,” Ms Saffioti said.

“We have a huge raft of projects planned and underway across the northern suburbs including  the Yanchep Rail extension, the Wanneroo Road-Joondalup Drive interchange and the Mitchell  Freeway extension.

“We also recently announced that we will be rolling out the Smart Freeways technology across  the Mitchell Freeway southbound which is an exciting new project for commuters to look  forward to.”

Senator for Western Australia Dean Smith said as people have returned back to work and their  busy lifestyles after easing of the COVID-19 restrictions, the area is again experiencing very  high traffic volumes.

“As patron Senator for Perth’s growing northern suburbs, I’m delighted the Morrison  Government has provided 80 per cent of the funding to deliver this transformative upgrade for  local families and businesses, easing congestion and improving road safety,” Senator Smith  said.

Federal Member for Moore Ian Goodenough said some of the key features of the upgrade  include a new dual-lane, free-flowing traffic bridge over Ocean Reef Road, along with modified  local road connections at Villanova Street, Backshall Place and Woodvale Drive.

“A new access road to Wanneroo’s iconic Cockman House has been built off Woodvale Drive  as part of the project, improving safety and removing the risk for right-turn crashes,”   Mr Goodenough said.

Shared path facilities, including an underpass, have been constructed to connect with the local  path network, enabling safer access and improved amenity for cyclists and pedestrians in and  around the interchange.

Artistic elements within the project’s design provide linkage to the area, drawing inspiration  from the historic use of nearby agricultural and horticultural land.

The $73.2 million project is jointly funded by the Australian Government committing   $58.6 million and the Western Australian Government providing $14.6 million.



[ENDS]

Media Contact:  Premier McGowan - Lannie Le-Patterson 0419 698 504   Mr Tudge - Michael Bennett 0434 782 923  Ms Saffioti - Caitlin Goddard 0437 234 249  Senator Smith - Electoral Office (08) 9481 0349  Mr Goodenough - Electoral Office (08) 9300 2244













