Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Cyber Safety and the Arts, Sydney.





THE HON PAUL FLETCHER MP  Minister for Communications, Cyber Safety and the Arts

MEDIA RELEASE

19 August 2020

Kick-starting local screen production

Screen producers can now access the $50 million Temporary Interruption Fund (TIF), which opens  today to help kick-start the local film and television industry.

Minister for Communications, Cyber Safety and the Arts the Hon. Paul Fletcher MP, said TIF will  support local film and television producers to start filming again. At the moment many new  productions are in limbo because financiers will not release funds because of their concern that  production may be interrupted if a key cast or crew member falls ill due to COVID-19.

“If a production is designated by Screen Australia as eligible under TIF this will allow financiers to  release funds so production can commence,” Minister Fletcher said.

“Importantly, TIF means that local productions can get underway and cast and crew can return to  work.”

“TIF will complement the practical COVID-Safe Guidelines, which have been developed and  released by industry to support a safe return to work.”

Chief Executive Officer of Screen Australia, Graeme Mason, welcomed the certainty TIF will bring  to the Australian screen production sector.

“TIF is expected to support around 50 Australian productions and support around 11,000 jobs.  Importantly, it will also mean Australian stories are featured on screens here and internationally,” Mr  Mason said.

TIF operates alongside market based risk minimisation practices. Producers must have Film  Producers Indemnity (FPI) insurance covering named individuals from an approved insurer and  applicants will need to provide an existing certificate of currency or valid quotation. The TIF  operates as a grant program and will cover the loss to the production due to the death, injury or  illness of a named individual (capped at 10 individuals) only if that loss is not covered under the  applicant company’s film producers indemnity (FPI) policy, and solely due to the named individual  contracting COVID-19.

TIF is part of the Morrison Government’s $250 million JobMaker package to help restart the creative  economy over the next 12 months. This builds on the Government’s annual investment of around  $750 million in the creative and cultural sector.

In July, the Government announced an additional $400 million boost to the Location Incentive that  will create a pipeline of international projects, which will support Australian jobs in the screen

Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Cyber Safety and the Arts, Sydney.

industry over the next seven years.

TIF will be administered by Screen Australia. Eligibility criteria, guidelines and how to apply are  available at https://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/funding-and-support/covid-19-support/temporary-interruption-fund.

Media contact:  Rebecca Papillo | 0439 892 771 | Rebecca.Papillo@communications.gov.au

