

21 October 2020

Eureka! Covid-Depression cure found in Queensland’s gold fields   KAP Federal Member for Kennedy Bob Katter is calling for the Miner’s Right to be restored which would  allow people to fossick and prospect for gold in state forests saying it is a solution to the Covid-Depression.

The fossicking of gemstones and gold was originally allowed under the Mining Fossicking Act but was  repealed in 1994.

Mr Katter is currently touring the Queensland coal country and visited Clermont where a local fossicking  business showed him giant gold nuggets found yesterday, prompting the call for the restoration of the  pastime.

Mr Katter said, “We are in the middle of a mild holocaust - “the Covid-depression”. In the Great Depression,  the Government did nothing (what’s new?).

“We Australians went out gold fossicking which wasn’t surprising since our fathers and grandfathers came to  Australia searching for gold.

“The therapeutic value of buying a metal detector and going out, as our forefathers did, to the Clermonts,  the Curries, the Chillagoes, the Charters Towers, and Gympies, is enormous. It is a fun thing to do and I have  a good friend, who in six months, made over $200,000.”

Mr Katter said that state counterpart, Nick Dametto, Member for Hinchinbrook had fronted Parliament and  said that if the KAP get the power in October’s election, then they will move immediately for the restoration  of the land to the Australian people - not the Crown.

“With the Balance of Power in the Queensland Parliament the KAP will move for the restoration of the land  to we the Australian people - not the Crown. And that is a quote from the Magna Carta specifically,” he said.

“The Mining Right will come back into existence and state forest fossicking will be restored.

“The therapeutic value of fossicking in this Covid-Depression affecting so many people is badly needed.  So it  cures the depression from Covid and it was one of the cures of the Great Depression itself. The Government  built nothing in the Great Depression, but they at least allowed us to go out and do it for ourselves.

“But so many people in Australia won’t because they had freedoms then that we can only dream of now.

“When I first launched the KAP, I said we are the freedom and fun party. But now you are not allowed to go  into Government land with a metal detector and dig up the gold out of the ground. The chief responsible  said it took an hour in the Roma airport to process 50 passengers as they searched everybody.   “And these freedoms will only be inhibited further. Soon we will see Woolworths and Coles not allowing you  to buy things the same as before - they will not let you use cash.



“You will have to get permission from the banks (under the control of the government) to buy food,” Mr Katter  warned.

“Stand up Australia and fight the fight. Make us again a place of wonder, freedom and excitement.”

ENDS



