

THE HON ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



SENATOR DON FARRELL

SHADOW SPECIAL MINISTER OF STATE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR SPORT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM

SHADOW MINISTER ASSISTING THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

PRESS CONFERENCE

MELBOURNE

WEDNESDAY, 29 JANUARY 2020



SUBJECTS: Bushfire recovery process; Bridget McKenzie; Coronavirus; sports

rorts.



ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Thanks for

joining us. I am very pleased to be here today with the Shadow Minister assisting myself as

Leader of the Opposition, but also the Shadow Minister for Sport, Don Farrell. And I did

want to make comment about two issues today. The Shadow Cabinet has just met here in

Melbourne and we discussed two major issues. One of those was of course bushfires and

the impact that it has had over this season and the recovery. I frankly was somewhat

stunned to see Scott Morrison’s address to the National Press Club say, essentially, that

he was going to take action where action is not necessary. All that is required to roll out the

Australian Defence Force and to maximise all of the resources that are at the disposal of

the national Government is something called leadership. It doesn’t need legislation. It

requires a leader who is prepared to act. Now, we have called upon the Prime Minister to

act, each and every day for months. Including, of course, in writing to him on November

22. I will read out the first point of that. It said, ‘COAG should be discussing steps towards

a new national strategy for disaster preparedness’. It went on to speak about the Defence

Force. It went on to speak about the issues that we continue to raise. The need for

economic compensation for our volunteer firefighters and for the need for a national

approach. Day after day, week after week this Prime Minister has said that it was a matter

for the states. This is of course a nonsense. And here in Victoria, of all places, that is

known. Because when Black Saturday occurred, the Defence Force was on the ground the

very next day. Within 24 hours providing the sort of assistance that we know the Defence

Force is capable of. Making a difference to people’s lives. Making a difference in terms of

preparation and now as we are seeing the Defence Force making a major difference in

terms of recovery. I spoke to someone just over the weekend about the use of

Bushmasters that has occurred around Batlow, around that region of New South Wales,

making a difference. Clearing out property, getting people back to a reasonable state. So,

for the Prime Minister to instead of going to the National Press Club and outlining a plan for

the economy, a plan for wages, a plan to deal with climate change, a plan to deal with the

big issues that confront Australia, all we have is the Prime Minister addressing the National

Press Club with not much to say at all.



And that goes to the second issue that we have discussed this morning. Because it is one

of the reasons why this Government is so distracted. So distracted because it is all about

themselves. One of the things they do, this Government, is play politics with everything.

And we have seen that played out. We have seen it played out with the sports rorts

scandal whereby the Government is so desperate in the lead-up to the election campaign

in May 2019, threw out due process right out the window. We have had circumstances

whereby clubs have received three grants when they only needed one. We have seen

announcements made in the Prime Minister’s own electorate, months before the official

announcement was made. We have had clubs that received a 50 ranking out of 100 get

funding but clubs that received 98 out of 100 got not a cent. We have seen a complete

abuse. And what we have with Bridget McKenzie is a discredited minister who can’t say

what the basis of these decisions was. Well, the Audit Office have told us what it was. It

was politics rather than proper process. We saw taxpayers’ funds used on giant cheques

with people who weren’t even Members of Parliament with their photos on it as if they were

personal cheques from people like Georgina Downer. This is a rort. Everyone knows it is a

rort. And that is why this morning we have supported a senate inquiry into this rort. And we

will be pursuing that. And I would ask Don Farrell to outline where it will go in terms of as

our Shadow Minister but also a senior person in our senate team.



DON FARRELL, SHADOW MINISTER FOR SPORT: Thank you, Leader. As the Leader

just said, everybody except Bridget McKenzie knows that a rort has gone on here. It

started with the National Audit Office, the Auditor General he made it very clear that the

Minister breached all of her guidelines for the distribution of this $100 million grant. Over

the last week, we found out that people in her own office were warning the Minister that

what she was doing was wrong, very wrong. And of course, in the last couple of days we

have found out that Sport Australia were actually telling thee Minister that what she was

doing was wrong. Over the long weekend, I've spoken to all of the crossbenchers. They

are as angry as the Labor Party is and the Australian community is about what has gone

on here and we've got agreement that there will be a Senate Select Committee established

one day next week. And we will start the process of finding out what has gone on here and

getting to the bottom of this rather tawdry scandal that has developed over the last two

weeks. We intend to ensure that we discover exactly what has gone on here. Starting with

the original set of guidelines, working through how those guidelines were breached by the

Minister herself and how this money was distributed. And we will be reporting back at the

end of March to the Australian people about exactly what has gone on here.



ALBANESE: Thanks very much. Happy to take questions.



JOURNALIST: First on Bridget McKenzie, what measures need to be introduced so that

we won't see a repeat of this sports grants scandal?



FARRELL: Firstly, we need to know what has gone wrong here and that is what we are

going to do with this inquiry. Labor intends to ensure that this never happens again, that

the minister can't simply breached their own set of guidelines in the lead-up to an election

for political purposes. What we know from the Auditor General is that these grants

overwhelmingly went to Liberal marginal seats, National Party marginal seats and the

seats that the Government was trying to win off the independents. Can I just give you one

example, in that the seat of Mayo, Rebekha Sharkie's seat. Georgina Downer presented a

novelty check of $127,000 dollars to the bowling club in the area. When Rebekha Sharkie

went to Sport Australia and said, ‘Listen, some of the other clubs in my electorate would

like to come forward with some grant applications’, she was told by Sport Australia, ‘No,

those applications have closed’. After that occurred, a further four grants came in to Sport

Australia. And guess what? Every single one of those grant applications was approved by

the Minister McKenzie. We can’t let that happen again. We have got a Select Committee.

Let the Select Committee do its work and find out exactly what has happened here. And

then we will come back to the Parliament with a suggestion as to how we ensure this never

happens again



ALBANESE: A couple of things, also, if I could just add on the broader scale of what

needs to happen. This do-nothing Government committed in 2018 to have a National

Integrity Commission. We're still waiting on the legislation. Makes a bit more sense now for

why they don't really want one. And they don't want one with the power to independently

decide to have an investigation. We think that if the Government is at all fair dinkum, this

Government that can rush through legislation on the last sitting day of last year without a

single opportunity of a word being said about industrial relations legislation that have been

rejected in the Senate, just weeks beforehand, hasn't had the time and hasn't got around

to dealing with the National Integrity Commission. It is a scandal as well. And what we

need to do is to restore public confidence in the processes of Government. In a democracy

that's essential. And at the moment, every day that Bridget McKenzie stays as a Cabinet

Minister, it undermines faith in our democracy. Because anyone who looks at this knows

that this is just a complete rort. It's a scandal of massive proportions. The National Audit

Office report itself, independent, the Prime Minister doesn't need his former chief of staff to

do a report on this. He has one by the National Audit Office already.



JOURNALIST: Do you have any concerns over the Government's handling of the

Coronavirus?



ALBANESE: Well, we are certainly concerned about this as well. And we will cooperate

with the Government over these issues. I spoke to Qantas this morning and Qantas have,

as they always have done, being prepared to come to the party and offer aerial assistance

in order to evacuate Australians from China. It seems to me that would be a sensible thing

to do. Of course, one of the other issues is that the person in charge of biosecurity in this

country, as well, is someone called Bridget McKenzie. And she's distracted. That's one of

the reasons why this minister should go. You have a massive issue of which the minister is

directly responsible. And has the minister said anything about this? Is she involved in this?

Is she engaged with this? If she has, I haven't seen it. Because this is a Government

minister who's missing in action because she's an embarrassment to the Government.



JOURNALIST: The PM has confirmed that the Federal Government will try to evacuate

Australians. He just made that announcement recently. What do you make of that?



ALBANESE: Well, Qantas certainly have provided that offer to the Government. As a

former Aviation Minister, I know that whenever they have been called upon, it's one of the

reasons why having a national airline is important. That's a good thing. It's also important

that we put in place strict measures based upon medical advice.



JOURNALIST: They are going to be evacuated to Christmas Island. Are you okay with

Christmas Island being established as a quarantine area?



ALBANESE: Well, look, it's important that medical advice be given. I guess given that

Christmas Island is there at great cost to the taxpayer currently with four people on

Christmas Island, one of them aged four and one of them aged two, then this, of course,

Christmas Island was reopened as a media stunt for the Government at great cost some

time ago. I would take medical advice as to where the evacuations should occur to, and

what appropriate procedures are in place. I think those decisions should be made on the

basis of health advice, not on the basis of politics.



JOURNALIST: So, you don't think it is a good decision?



ALBANESE: No, I am not a health expert. I believe that the appropriate advice should be

given from the health authorities and that's what's important. Not any political interference

in the process.



JOURNALIST: Are there other measures that the Government needs to introduce to

ensure Australia is kept safe from the Coronavirus?



ALBANESE: I'm not Dr Albanese up here who is an expert on this. The Government

needs to follow all the appropriate medical advice.



JOURNALIST: Back on Bridget McKenzie, does there need to be another round of funding

for sporting clubs that missed out in light of the revelations?



ALBANESE: Well, what we have here is there shouldn't have been rorts in the first place.

We don't know currently, can I say this as well, that yesterday, the ABC reported the

colour-coded documentation, clearly outlining how the rort happened. Colour-coded based

upon marginality, based upon who the local member was and whether they were a target

seat. The Government's response to that was to launch an investigation from Richard

Colbeck into whether a public servant had given that documentation. What they should be

concerned about is the documentation itself. But no concern about that. And I would call

upon the Government to give assurances that there won't be a witch hunt of public

servants who have more integrity than this Government, including this Minister.



JOURNALIST: For Australians everywhere, their concern is that their local footy clubs,

which really deserve to be changed and have missed out, to the public, do you think for

them does there need to be another round of funding so that these community groups can

get the infrastructure that they need?



ALBANESE: What there should be is proper processes in place over those processes. We

haven't had that. The fact is that the grants themselves, the Audit Office has not found a

legal basis for the minister making these grants. So, they are all up in the air in terms of the

legality of the minister intervening. You have proper processes in place, and under this

grant was Sport Australia, an independent body, and in terms of the legislation, doesn't

provide for ministerial discretion, it provides for a very clear process to take place. Now, all

of those clubs that have missed out on funding, we don't know what they are, because the

Government has hidden that information. But I'm sure Don might like to comment on the

role of the inquiry and getting out that information.



FARRELL: Well, thank you. That's exactly what we intend to do. We believe that through

this senate inquiry process, that we'll be able to get access to the hundreds and hundreds

and hundreds of applications which Sport Australia approved which the minister threw out

and replaced with her own set of selections. We had here a program, where more than

2,000 people applied for what was going to be a very good project. They thought this was

on the level. They thought if they put in their best application, that would be approved. And

as we know, of course, the best applications were not approved. The minister rejected



those and replaced them with biased and politically motivated applications. And we'll get to

the bottom of this. And I'm pretty confident that when we call representatives from Sport

Australia, when we call representatives from the Auditor General's Office, that we will get

this information. And once we've got that information, we'll make some decisions about

what we do with all of these people who should have got the grants but didn't.



ALBANESE: Thanks very much.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053



