JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2SM MARCUS PAUL IN THE MORNING

WEDNESDAY, 5 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECT: Victoria nursing home outbreaks; Morrison Government ignoring

warning signs.



MARCUS PAUL, HOST: I want to discuss it a little bit further with Julie Collins, who's the

Shadow Minister for Ageing and Senior Australians. Good morning Julie.



JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS: Good morning

Marcus. How are you?



PAUL: Look I'm okay. I worry. I really do worry about the vulnerable in our community

including the elderly those in aged care facilities during this current pandemic Julie.



COLLINS: Yeah I think everybody is concerned about what's happening in aged care and

as we've discussed earlier Marcus the question is, is what did we learn from the terrible

happenings in New South Wales and why are we so far behind the eight ball in Victoria

trying to play catch up? With similar issues being reported such as: communication to

families, the staffing issues that were happening at particularly Newmarch House have

also been happening in Victoria where there is not enough staff to fill shifts. So we're

hearing similar reports of similar issues. And I guess the question that I have is why didn't

we do more and why weren't we prepared better for it?



PAUL: Yeah look I think it is fair to say and I know that you've gone on the record as

saying that our aged care system was broken before the COVID-19 pandemic and the

current circumstances are only putting extra stress on the system. I mean I spoke to a

loved one yesterday who's in a decent nursing home up on the Gold Coast but he said:

‘you know Marcus on the weekend there's nobody here. There's no staff.’ And there's an

article that's popped up I think in the Sydney Morning Herald in the last 24 hours where it

highlights the fact that this is you know pretty common in nursing homes around Australia

where there's next to no staff but the owners are turning up in Lamborghinis.



COLLINS: Yeah. And I think you know there is a lot of questions about transparency of

taxpayer funds that go into aged care and you've got over 20 billion dollars a year going in

to support older Australians to stay a) at home and b) in residential care. We need more

accountability about where that money is actually going and more oversight of that. But I

think the Royal Commission will deal with that Marcus and give us some really clear

direction in terms of future funding and making sure that we actually tie it to improved care

for older Australians. But I think that in the current climate there's some things the Federal

Government could do immediately. One of them is to ensure that aged care staff are

trained appropriately in terms of protection equipment and in terms of infection control. We

heard evidence yesterday in a Senate committee that only 100,000 of over 350,000 aged

care staff have actually been trained in this area. So obviously that is a really serious issue

because once an infection gets into a facility we need to do everything we can to stop it

from escalating and spreading throughout that facility and if staff haven't been trained

appropriately we clearly are in a lot of trouble. So that's something they could do quite

quickly. The Aged Care Response Centre that's now been set up in Victoria, we've called

on the Federal Government to have discussions with other State Governments so that

they're ready to stand these up in other states when we get outbreaks in aged care in other

states because we think that is likely to be inevitable. I mean we had a bit of a brush I

suppose earlier in the week with Queensland where we had a worker who was a close

contact of somebody else. Thankfully everybody in that facility is now tested negative but it

is very easy for it to get in is the point and we need to make sure that the Federal

Government is ready to stand up staff and to provide the support to the facilities as needed

in every state and territory in the country. So we'd like to see that happen across the

country as well.



PAUL: Sorry to interrupt you Julie before you get onto that last point. I just want to come

back to the aged care workers. Should the Government be doing more? I mean look I

know we're doing a lot in relation to paid pandemic leave and looking after those who are

out of work but what about those who are still in work? Essential workers like you know the

very few nurses that we do have in aged care who are some of them working their tails off.



COLLINS: Absolutely Marcus and that is actually my third point. My third point is to extend

the retention bonus which we pushed for and talked to the Government about trying to

keep staff that are currently working in aged care, to stay in aged care. So the government

has offered a retention bonus, but about 40 percent of aged care workers are not eligible

for that payment. So we've called on the Government to provide every person working in

aged care in Australia today with that bonus payment. It is two payments: $600 for in-home

carers and $800 for residential care workers and that's really I guess just saying you know

we understand this is very difficult. We understand that's a very difficult time and we

appreciate what you do.



PAUL: Well I agree. Aged care workers, nurses, those essential workers who are really

let's be honest on the front line when it comes to COVID-19 and they are caring for some

of the most vulnerable if not the most vulnerable members of our community when it

comes to the pandemic. They should be rewarded, not discouraged from staying in the

industry. I mean it takes a very caring person to be an aged care nurse and I've seen it

firsthand. They're wonderful people. But I mean I hear stories Julie day in day out and I

had a caller yesterday on the program. He said: ‘Marcus you know this wonderful nurse

that we have at dad's aged care facility. I mean she gets 10 minutes to bath, shower and

change. To bathe shower and change.’ But that's not one person, that's four people with

two and a half minutes each. I mean how on earth can you provide adequate care when

you only have roughly 10 minutes to bathe, shower and change four elderly people come

on are we kidding ourselves?



COLLINS: Absolutely not. And we have said there not enough staff in aged care. We also

don't think they're paid enough. And the Federal Government actually engaged Professor

John Pollaers to write a report about workforce and future workforce required for aged care

and what that workforce might need to look like. Professor Pollaers was last week out

criticizing the Government for a lack of action on that report. They have had that report for I

think it's around two years now and they haven't fully implemented any of the 14

recommendations. So things have been very slow unfortunately and now we're dealing

with the consequences of it. And I really hope that the Royal Commission report which is

now due in February, it was due in November, actually looks at these issues really, really



seriously and we can get some long term reform. But in the meantime there are things the

Government can do to help the current situation that we think they should be doing that.



PAUL: All right. Good to have you on the program. Julie we'll talk about this. Absolutely

we'll keep the pressure up.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119



