









SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs

THE HON GREG HUNT MP  Minister for Health

THE HON ALEX HAWKE MP  Minister for International Development and the Pacific

STATEMENT



28 July 2020

COVID-19 in Papua New Guinea



Australia is sending an AUSMAT medical team to Papua New Guinea to support our friend  and neighbour as it manages a concerning rise in COVID-19 cases in recent days.

We welcome the swift response of Prime Minister Marape and his Government, which has  introduced a number of significant restrictions and is conducting testing, case investigation  and contact tracing.

In response to PNG’s request for international assistance, made in conjunction with the  World Health Organization, Australia is sending a forward Australian Medical Assistance  Team of medical specialists and crisis response staff to Port Moresby. This forward team  will provide immediate on ground assessment to improve laboratory strengthening, case  management, infection control, triage and emergency management, and public health.

The team will follow PNG’s quarantine requirements.

The Government is planning for a further deployment in consultation with the Government  of Papua New Guinea and subject to domestic considerations and results of the on ground  assessment.

As Papua New Guinea’s largest development partner, Australia has reprioritised a portion  of our development program funding to provide a package of COVID-19 support, which  includes support for medical supplies, funding to provinces to prepare for COVID-19 and  laboratory-testing capacity.

We have helped strengthen PNG’s testing and surveillance capacity by providing over  20,000 sample collection kits, 15,000 rapid serology tests, four new Polymerase Chain  Reaction testing machines to help with diagnosis, over two million pieces of personal  protective equipment for frontline workers and nearly 3,800 GeneXpert cartridges that  allow quick testing. Over 3000 tests have also been conducted in Australia.



We have provided capacity-building and technical support, both in-country and through the  Doherty Institute in Melbourne, and are supporting NGOs and churches to carry out  information campaigns and community resilience activities.

Australia has been standing with the region during this challenging time, working in  partnership with Pacific Island countries and Timor-Leste to protect their communities from  COVID-19.  We will continue to do so.

Media Contact:  Birmingham: Benn Ayre 0428 342 325  Hunt: James Perrin 0447 534 427  Hawke: Wade Laube 0409 193 057

Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.

