SENATOR MURRAY WATT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR NORTHERN AUSTRALIA

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DISASTER AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

CHAIR OF THE SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE

AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT’S NORTHERN AUSTRALIA AGENDA

LABOR SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  MIX 104.9 DARWIN 360 WITH KATIE WOOLF  FRIDAY, 4 DECEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Northern Australia Senate inquiry interim report; recommendations to fix  Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility.

KATIE WOOLF, HOST: We do know that the Federal Government, it's being reported, must do  more to prioritise local jobs as well as fast track funding and invest in small projects to help regional  areas in Northern Australia recover post-COVID-19. That is what a new Senate inquiry report has  found now, the interim report handed down yesterday by the Senate Select Committee on the  Effectiveness of the Australian Government's Northern Australia Agenda outlined a series of  recommendations to fast track growth in the region.

And joining us on the line to talk more about this is the Shadow Minister for Northern Australia,  Senator Murray Watt, good morning.

MURRAY WATT, SHADOW MINISTER FOR NORTHERN AUSTRALA: G’day Katie, good to talk to  you again.

WOOLF: Now, Senator, I know this interim report, it was handed down obviously yesterday by the  Senate Select Committee. What has it outlined?

WATT: Well, this inquiry was basically established because the feedback that we were receiving  was that the Government's Northern Australia agenda just hasn't really delivered on expectations. It  was released about five years ago, and the NAIF - the Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility - was  established five years ago, but unfortunately neither of those things has really come through on what  the Government had promised. So what we're hoping, as a result of this Senate inquiry and the  report that we've handed down, is that we can prompt some action on the Government's behalf and  start actually delivering the kind of promises and jobs that it was held out to do, back five years ago.

WOOLF: Well and look, some people listening might be thinking 'oh, OK well Senator Murray Watt is  the Shadow Minister for Northern Australia, of course, he's going to say that'. But I mean, the  situation here is this follows on from more than a year of face-to-face hearings here in Darwin, also  in Townsville, in Mount Isa, Mackay, Nhulunbuy and plenty of other meetings which had taken place.  And it is a bipartisan inquiry, really aimed at working out how this can be done a little bit better.



WATT: That's right. I think that's an important point, that this inquiry and the report that was handed  down yesterday is a unanimous report from senators from all parties. We've got Government  senators, Opposition senators, One Nation, the Greens, and yet we've all come up with the same  recommendations and the same findings, which is that the NAIF has just been far too slow in getting  money out the door.

You're right, we did hold a hearing in Darwin and in Nhulunbuy as well. So we've had some direct  input from representatives of government, of community, of business and industry groups in the  Northern Territory. And the feedback we got from them is exactly what we've been going and getting  elsewhere, which is that people are really excited about this Northern Australia agenda. And  especially after COVID, we know that the country's struggling and Northern Australia has so much  potential to actually bring the country out of recession, but it's not going to do it on its own, it's going  to need proper investment by the Federal Government to actually get these programs working.

WOOLF: So what changes can be made? I know that some things have changed already, but what  can be changed so that we can make this more effective, so that we can get things happening  sooner rather than later?

WATT: Well, I'm really pleased that a couple of weeks ago, the Federal Minister did indicate he does  intend to make some changes to the NAIF, and that's to pick up on criticisms that the Opposition has  been making for about three years! So it's good, you know, that finally they look like they are  prepared to change. And this Senate report we brought down asks for further change.

One of the key things is to try to get the NAIF a bit more interested in some of the smaller projects  that are looking for finance, both in the Northern Territory and across the north as a whole. What  we've found is that the NAIF so far has been more interested in the large projects that are looking at  tens of millions of dollars or hundreds of millions of dollars. And while we do have those sort of  projects in the north - and, you know, Charles Darwin Uni is one of them that's managed to get a  loan approved for a large project - there's a lot of smaller projects as well, particularly in First Nations  communities that are looking for financing, can't get it from commercial banks because they haven't  necessarily been running these sort of businesses for a long time, but they'd actually create jobs.  And that's what this NAIF is supposed to be doing, is to cut through and provide finance to projects  that really do stack up financially, but the commercial banks aren't that interested in, because they  might be a bit small or they might be a bit different to things they've done in the past.

WOOLF: So Murray, where to from here? What are the next steps in terms of, you know, trying to  make these changes and ensure that this doesn't become something that, you know, just gets lost, I  suppose, and forgotten about?

WATT: Yeah and look, I think that's what we're really trying to achieve here is that, one of the things  I've said about this Government is they like to make an announcement and they don't necessarily  follow through, and the NAIF is a really good example of that. You know, they launched this five  years ago, it's got $5 billion to lend and it's only lent about $218 million - so less than five cents in  the dollar has actually gone out of the door in the five years that it's been operating.

So what we hope will happen, especially because this is a bipartisan report, is that the Government  will pick up these recommendations. And when they make changes through legislation for the NAIF  next year, they should pick these recommendations up as well. Let's make sure that this fund

actually is delivering what the Government's promised, which is projects and jobs right across the  north.

WOOLF: Well, Senator for...Well, Senator and also the Shadow Minister for Northern Australia  Murray Watt, always good to catch up with you, mate, we appreciate your time today.

WATT: No problem Katie, good to talk.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TALI ELEY 0448 078 456

+

