SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women

MEDIA RELEASE

Ambassador to ASEAN

Today I announce the appointment of Mr Will Nankervis as Australia’s new Ambassador to the  Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN).

Southeast Asia has profound strategic and economic significance for Australia. Our Strategic  Partnership with ASEAN is founded on longstanding political, economic and people-to-people  ties. The ASEAN economies offer exciting opportunities for Australian and ASEAN businesses.

As ASEAN’s first dialogue partner, Australia has long recognised and valued the central role of  a strong and cohesive ASEAN in maintaining peace, stability and prosperity in the Indo-Pacific  region.

Australia is working closely with ASEAN and ASEAN-led architecture to promote health security  and regional stability, and to chart a course for economic recovery in response to the COVID-19  pandemic. We are also continuing important cooperation on critical issues including maritime  security, countering human trafficking, promoting regional connectivity and digital  transformation, supporting disaster preparedness and combating marine debris.

Mr Nankervis is a senior career officer with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and  was most recently Assistant Secretary, Indo-Pacific Strategy and Regional Maritime Branch. He  has previously served overseas in the Australian Permanent Mission to the United Nations in  New York, and in Colombo.

Mr Nankervis holds a Bachelor of Arts/Bachelor of Science from the University of Queensland.

I thank previous Ambassador Jane Duke for her contribution to advancing Australia’s interests  in ASEAN since 2016.

Media Contact  David Wroe: 0429 531 143  Melanie Ruiz: 0427 888 392

No publication date: received by Parl Library 05/10/2020

Authorised by Senator the Hon Marise Payne, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Women,  Australia.

No publication date: received by Parl Library 05/10/2020

