

SENATOR PENNY WONG

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA

STRANDED AUSTRALIANS STILL NONE THE WISER ON  GOVERNMENT HELP

Stranded Australians are increasingly desperate for clarity from the Morrison  Government on how it is helping them get to safety.

With borders and airports closing, airlines cancelling services, and only five  days of international Qantas and Virgin flights remaining, time is running out for  Australians trying to follow the Government’s advice to come home.

In an effort to quell rising anxiety, a statement was released yesterday  afternoon by the Deputy Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister.

Any Australian reading that statement would be none the wiser as to what the  Morrison Government is doing to help them.

A vague indication in that statement that the Government will consider offering  direct support on a “case-by-case basis” is better than nothing - but for  Australians who demonstrably have no viable commercial option to return to  safety, the Government must do more.

There is no time for delay. With just five days before a further serious reduction  in commercial options, Labor again urges the Morrison Government to:

1. Follow the lead of other countries in providing direct support to bring  stranded Australians home, including subsidised and assisted  departures where commercial options are not viable.

2. Engage in active, plain-English communication with Australians  overseas, including updates on action being taken so they know they are  not on their own.

3. Expedite the processing of visas for immediate family members of  Australian citizens who are rushing to return home.





4. Properly resource our consular teams in the Department of Foreign  Affairs and Trade and visa processing teams in the Department of Home  Affairs to meet the unprecedented demands to assist Australians and  their families overseas.

The situation for around 3,000 Australians on cruise ships is especially  challenging, given the heightened risk for exposure of passengers to COVID-19. We urge the Australian Government to communicate a clear plan to help  them get to safety, including appropriate quarantine and health care.



THURSDAY, 26 MARCH 2020   MEDIA CONTACT: JOHN OLENICH 0447 270 785









