





SENATOR PENNY WONG

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY IN THE SENATE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS FIRST EDITION

WEDNESDAY, 25 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; Stranded Australians overseas.



LAURA JAYES: Let's go live to Canberra and now the Shadow Foreign

Minister, Penny Wong, joins me. Penny Wong thank you for your time. We're

waking up to a very different Australia this morning, a raft of businesses will be

closed at midnight tonight, your state has shut its border. Is this the right course

of action at this time?



PENNY WONG: We had to do everything we can in this unprecedented crisis.

We have to do everything we can. And we should be doing it now not later. So,

you know, we support the action the Government's taking on the advice of

experts. And I do want to say this to all of your viewers. We have an opportunity

to look after each other, to look after ourselves and our families, and

notwithstanding that I thought the Prime Minister's press conference was as

clear as mud, the one thing that he did say that I think is really important, which

is this: stay home unless absolutely necessary.



JAYES: What did you think could have been better clarified, do you think there

is a few incongruous rules if you like. Weddings can go ahead, but only with

five people, but personal training...?



WONG: Weddings, funerals - I mean that isn't the challenge that it was a 35

minute press conference which read like a catalogue, and I think what people

are looking for is leadership, they're looking for clear information. They're

looking for clear advice, and we've had a lot of inconsistent messages, and I

don't think that's been helpful. Now we do want to be constructive as the

opposition at this time, and our constructive suggestion to the government is

have clear and consistent information. And we have also said this: Australia

has to get off the path we're on, Laura. The numbers, increasing numbers, the

trajectory, the doubling of cases every three days - we have to get off this path

and we have to do whatever we can to get off this path. So we continue to urge

the government to act clearly, decisively. And let's not get through this and

regret that we didn't do more.



JAYES: So what are you saying - I know you're saying that we take advice

from the experts, but are you perhaps suggesting that we should go into a full

shutdown sooner rather than later because we can flatten the curve - and then

the economic recovery on the other side, might also be quicker?



WONG: I agree with - just on the latter issue, I'd agree with Chris Bowen, the

most important thing to do for the economy is to make sure we save lives. And

to save lives, we have to ensure we work together. We have said as an

opposition that we should act urgently. The Government should act urgently. If

you have to do it, do it now. And if you need to act, do it decisively and

communicate clearly and consistently to Australians. Ultimately governments

have to act on the advice of medical experts. What we do know is that the

current trajectory is one that we can't stay on.



JAYES: We thought it was unprecedented to see a “do not travel” advisory for

Australians but that is now overnight turned into a travel ban is that prudent?



WONG: Yes it is, it is prudent. Australian citizens who go overseas, obviously

have a right of return to Australia. They're Australian citizens. That is a risk we

can't take at the moment. We know that the majority of the people who have

been infected have been travellers, or most of the people being infected have

been travellers from overseas, so a ban is prudent. It is unprecedented but we

live in unprecedented times.



JAYES: We certainly do. And there are a number of Australians stranded

overseas who simply can't get home. We've seen Australians in Peru. I know of

one other personal family friend who's actually stuck in Karachi at the moment

there are just simply no flights. Do you know how many Australians are

overseas that are desperately trying to get home, and what the government is

doing about that?



WONG: Well first I would say this, the Government, Mr Morrison, needs to

follow the lead of other countries, and we need to have a plan to help bring

Australians home. We need to help those Australians who are stranded with no

commercial options, including by subsidized or assisted departure. This is what

other countries are doing, and we need to have a plan to do this too. The

second thing the government needs to do is have clear information. The lack of

information or the inconsistent information is causing greater anxiety. Now I

know that DFAT is working hard; I know this is unprecedented. This is an

overwhelming demand on people. But the Government really does need to take

follow the lead of other countries. We have Australians all over the world, many

of them cannot get home because commercial options have dried up. In terms

of numbers, I mean that's just a question for the Government. We know that

over a million Australians are overseas, not all of them will want to come home;

that includes expatriates.



JAYES: Yeah, Ryan Hamilton was one of those, he used to work for Jason

Clare actually, and he is in New York. He has coronavirus and he's staying put

in isolation, in his own apartment there, so he's just one of many Australians

who are choosing to stay put. Before I let you go, Penny Wong, we've seen

hundreds of thousands, if not near a million people try and get benefits through

Centrelink. We’ve seen the lines, we know about the long delays on the phone

lines, we know about the website crashing. The Government last night

announced there would be a one week waiver of the mutual obligation reporting

in order to receive these unemployment benefits. Should that be longer?



WONG: Well first on the website, I'd say to you I think it is unacceptable and

Australians believe it's unacceptable and, more importantly it's incredibly

distressing for people. And, you know, the government really needs to address

this urgently. It's very distressing scenes we've seen over the last couple, last

day and a half. In terms of mutual obligation. I mean, you have to question

whether that's long enough, and we have a situation where the Social Security

system needs to reflect the circumstances we're in, and needs also to reflect

the failure of the Government website, the failure of Centrelink and other

processes. So, what my question to the Government is, why not do it for

longer? We clearly know that we have to adjust these arrangements to reflect

the unprecedented crisis the nation is facing.





JAYES: And you are in good health. I know you are tested for coronavirus and

you do not have it, which is very good news I might say, but you did isolate out

of an abundance of caution. One of your colleagues, Rex Patrick, didn't have

any symptoms and actually did test positive.



WONG: I know, that's quite frightening, whereas you know I had some

symptoms for tested negative, thankfully. Can I also thank the many people

who sent me such kind messages after I announced I was isolating for that

period until the test results came back. But yes, very concerning about Rex and

you know, I hope he's okay. I hope he doesn't develop symptoms.



JAYES: I hope so too. They sound quite brutal. Penny Wong, appreciate your

time this morning.



WONG: Good to be with you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JOHN OLENICH 0447 270 785





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.



.









