

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

Senator the Hon. Linda Reynolds CSC  Minister for Defence

The Hon. Melissa Price MP  Minister for Defence Industry



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE



Sunday 11 October 2020

PRIME MINISTER OPENS NEW MILITARY VEHICLE CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE

The Morrison Government has officially opened Rheinmetall Defence Australia’s Military Vehicle Centre  of Excellence (MILVEHCOE) in Redbank, Queensland, which will see hundreds of long-term jobs created  for Queensland workers.

Prime Minister Scott Morrison says the new defence industry facility in Redbank is part of the Economic  Recovery Plan to create jobs as the nation recovers from the COVID-19 pandemic.

“We are committed to keeping Australians safe, while protecting the nation’s interests in a rapidly  changing global environment,” the Prime Minister said.

“This week’s budget has seen the Federal Government bring forward $1 billion worth of capability  projects and reservist days to support jobs, the Australian defence industry and the wider economy.”

“This Queensland centre will be where some of the most advanced armoured vehicles in the world will  be produced, by Australian workers.”

“The MILVEHCOE will create more than 450 long-term jobs and become a national asset for military  vehicles.”

The Prime Minister also congratulated Rheinmetall Defence Australia for securing work to export at  least 30 Lance Turrets from MILVEHCOE to Hungary.

“This is a significant export order, and a clear demonstration of the Government’s commitment to  supporting Australian defence industry to achieve export success,” Mr Morrison said.

“We make things in Australia. We do it well. And this is an example of how we are continuing to make  things in Australia.”

“Defence is one of six priority areas under our $1.5 billion Modern Manufacturing Strategy and is backed  by measures from Tuesday’s budget. This includes the JobMaker hiring credits to boost employment, a  $2.8 billion programme to support apprenticeship and trainee jobs through wage subsidies and tax  incentives so businesses can deduct the full cost of any eligible assets and to offset loss against previous  profits, for businesses with a turnover of under $5 billion.

Minister for Defence, Senator the Hon Linda Reynolds CSC said the vehicles from MILVEHCOE represent  a new level of capability for the Army.

“As outlined in the 2020 Force Structure Plan, the Boxer will provide enhanced mobility, firepower,  protection and situational awareness to our troops,” Minister Reynolds said.

“They will allow our Australian Defence Force personnel to rapidly deploy, achieve their missions and  importantly, return home safely.”

“I join the Prime Minister in congratulating Rheinmetall Defence Australia on securing new export  opportunities. A resilient and internationally competitive defence industry is essential to Australia’s  national security.

Minister for Defence Industry, Hon Melissa Price said MILVEHCOE represented a watershed in Defence  self-reliance, backed by a secure domestic supply chain provided by home-grown Australian businesses.

“Australian industry will play a vital role delivering and sustaining key Australian defence capabilities at  the facility,” Minister Price said.

“Rheinmetall will use suppliers across Australia to design, build, assemble, test and support the Boxer  Combat Reconnaissance Vehicles and training systems.”

“The work at this facility is terrific news for Queensland workers and defence companies across the  country.”

Rheinmetall will use the MILVEHCOE facility to build and assemble the majority of Boxer Combat  Reconnaissance Vehicles, which are being delivered to the Australian Army under the $5 billion LAND  400 Phase 2 project.

The facility will also be used to conduct integration, support and heavy grade repair for the logistics  trucks and modules being delivered under the LAND 121 Phase 3B and 5B projects.

Imagery of recent Australian Army driver training on the Boxer Combat Reconnaissance Vehicles is  available at:   - Photographs: https://images.defence.gov.au/S20202881   - Video:

https://innovatehub.sharepoint.com/:f:/s/mediahub/Et3fPukTMoVKi2agutjj1qkB3YLpgc1V3tp6j BFQH4RDNA?e=yVSiXy

[ENDS]

Media Contacts:  Prime Minister’s office: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  Minister Reynolds’ office: Nicky Hamer, +61 437 989 927  Minister Price’s office: Ben Spencer, +61 412 754 310  Defence Media: (02) 6127 1999, media@defence.gov.au  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

