Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.







The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health



TRANSCRIPT

21 December 20



INTERVIEW WITH BELINDA RUSSELL AND DAVID CAMPBELL  TODAY SHOW



E&OE…

Topics: Northern beaches COVID-19 cluster; Testing and contact tracing; Mental health support;  TGA vaccine assessments.

BELINDA RUSSELL:  Holiday plans have been cancelled for Australians right across the country. State border closures are  back as COVID rears its head in Sydney once again.

DAVID CAMPBELL:  But despite the despair, Health Minister Greg Hunt says the nation has prepared for this moment.  He joins us now from Somerville in Victoria. Minister, good to see you. Are you confident New  South Wales has acted quickly?

GREG HUNT:  Yes, I am. What we’ve seen is a combination of very widespread testing, tracing and distancing  measures, all of the three things that are prepared and put in place.

We’ve seen 28,000 tests in the last full day's reporting. We have had a 700 per cent increase in the  testing rates at the Commonwealth clinics in the northern beaches areas.

Tracing, I think the New South Wales tracing is not just Australian gold standard but global gold  standard. There’s no question that they have an outstanding system.

And then the northern beaches, they’re going through the very difficult distancing process at the  moment of being under lockdown across Greater Sydney.

There are additional restrictions in place. And so rapid response, the community partnership with  the Australian and New South Wales Governments has been incredible.

And we know how to do this, we know how to flatten the curve.

In a world of 700,000 cases a day on many days, we’ve had 71 community cases in Australia in the  last week. We can do this. It is going to be difficult, but we’ll get through it.



Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





BELINDA RUSSELL:  Yeah, everyone is anxious to find out what those numbers are today. A thousand disappointed  families this morning, states slamming their doors shut just days before Christmas. Was there any  other option, Minister?

GREG HUNT:  We declared a Commonwealth hotspot, the Chief Health Officer of Australia, Professor Paul Kelly  did this on Friday.

From that it’s understandable that states took measures. That’s the process under what is called the  medical expert panel.

So we did have a significant cluster which was obviously acknowledged and recognised (inaudible)  the northern beaches - the Avalon cluster.

So there are responses, and this is part of the national approach - that of any country in the world,  we are as well prepared as any of them.

And we do know that, as I say with over 700,000 cases a day on some days, there will inevitably be  cases - a touch, a breath, a surface that come to Australia, and we have to respond. And that’s what  we are doing.

The one thing I would ask is, if you’ve got family who are separated now at Christmas, if you’ve  older Australians that you know or it could be somebody living alone, reach out, give them a call.

And there’s mental health support on the Head to Health line or the Head to Health website.

But just that little bit of extra care, which Australians have done magnificently.

I think our hardest year since the Second World War, but very, very clearly potentially our finest  year.

But now is the moment over the next ten days to reach out to each other, to give that support, to  provide that emotional and mental health support.

DAVID CAMPBELL:  Minister, you know, we’re always going to have outbreaks, they’re always going to pop up until we  get the vaccine.

So how can the country deal with this inevitable outbreaks happening without shutting down every  single time? Or is this the new normal? We just shut down every time a state flares up?

GREG HUNT:  No, there are two huge strategic parts. It’s an important question.

One is flattening the curve, and we have had cases of, we’ve had over ten days of zero cases  nationwide which has had the world literally agog.

I’ve had messages from overseas saying, you know, how extraordinary.

Now we have one of these outbreaks, and it could be Perth, it could be Penrith, it could be  Melbourne, it could be Brisbane.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





But we know that these outbreaks are inevitable in a world of 700,000 cases a day.

So we respond, we respond quickly - that’s what protects Australians.

And then at the same time, the vaccine, our regulatory team at the medical regulator, what’s called  the Therapeutic Goods Administration, they’re working right through Christmas, right through the  New Year.

They’re looking at making the first of the decisions over the course of the next six weeks or so, and  then we’re on track for the first vaccines to be rolled out in March.

Literally, we have teams that are working around the clock right through the break and that’s about  making sure that we have the safest assessment of our vaccines.

But then we have that national vaccine roll out, free, voluntary, universally available for every  Australian that wants it during 2021.

So there’s light at the end of the tunnel, and I just want to say thank you to Australians. There’s  more work, but we know we can do this.

BELINDA RUSSELL:  Yeah, we sure can. We’re all in this together, and can't wait for that vaccine in March. Thanks for  your time.

ENDS

