



Dementia still not receiving the dedicated attention it deserves

An estimated 460,000 Australians are living with dementia.

While Dementia Australia welcomes the $11.3 million for expert psychosocial supports, the lack of focus  on dementia within a $115.5 billion budget in 2020-21 for health, aged care and sport, reveals that  dementia is still not receiving the attention it deserves.

Dementia Australia CEO Maree McCabe said the failure to provide targeted and dedicated supports,  workforce training and system changes for people living with dementia, their families and carers is  concerning.

“There is an assumption that more money for aged care means that quality dementia care will also be  addressed.

“The stories highlighted to the Royal Commission into Aged Care Quality and Safety plus those shared by  people living with dementia, families and carers during the COVID-19 pandemic starkly reveal that  dementia is not core business for the sector,” Ms McCabe said.

“The additional $8 billion investment in aged care is welcomed.

“However, with more than two thirds of people in residential aged care living with dementia, unless we see  dementia-specific targets in workforce training and education, regulation and quality, people with  dementia, their families and carers will continue to fall through the gaps.

“The impact of COVID-19 alone demonstrates this. While many members across the community have  been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, this has disproportionately affected people living with  dementia, their families and carers.

“This has resulted in a decline in cognitive functioning and the loss of abilities for many people living with  dementia, as a result of changes to routine, lack of mental stimulation and social isolation.

“There is also a subsequent flow-on impact for carers.

“The calls by Dementia Australia to invest in quality dementia care through targeted outreach and early  intervention, workforce training and capacity building and its translation into quality dementia has been  overlooked in this budget.”

Dementia Australia is the source of trusted information, education and services for the estimated half a million Australians  living with dementia, and the almost 1.6 million people involved in their care. We advocate for positive change and support v ital  research. We are here to support people impacted by dementia, and to enable them to live as well as possib le. No matter how  you are impacted by dementia or who you are, we are here for you.

For support, please contact the National Dementia Helpline on 1800 100 500. An interpreter service is available and the  Helpline is open 8am to 8pm Monday to Friday excluding public holidays. The National Dementia Helpline is funded by the  Australian Government. People looking for information can also visit dementia.org.au

-Ends-

Media contacts: Christine Bolt, christine.bolt@dementia.org.au; 0400 004 553

When talking or writing about dementia please refer to Dementia-Friendly Language Guidelines.

Wednesday 7 October 2020

