

Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA

MEDIA RELEASE

16 September 2020

SIGNIFICANT BOOST FOR SKILLS TRAINING IN NSW

The Commonwealth Government and the New South Wales (NSW) State Government have  launched the NSW JobTrainer Agreement.

An extra $318.56 million will be injected into the NSW Vocational Education and Training  (VET) sector, with $159.28 million from the Commonwealth Government matched dollar-for-dollar by the NSW Government.

JobTrainer will fund approximately 108,000 free or low-fee training places in NSW, with a  combination of short and long courses for job seekers and young people, including school  leavers.

Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business, Senator the Hon Michaelia  Cash, said the funding will be an important boost to a skills-led recovery in NSW.

“JobTrainer will play a central role in our recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, not just in  New South Wales but right across the nation,” Minister Cash said.

“I thank the New South Wales Government for signing up to this important initiative.”

“The Commonwealth Government has been working closely with jurisdictions to establish  the $1 billion JobTrainer Fund, including a $500 million investment from the Australian  Government to be matched by the State and Territory Governments.”

“This will fund up to 340,700 additional free or low-fee training places to help Australians  upskill and reskill in areas of demand.”

The Morrison Government is committed to strengthening the VET system to get Australians  into work.

“We’re investing $6.5 billion in VET in 2020-21 to provide valuable opportunities and skills  to Australians and help drive the nation’s prosperity in the years to come.”

“This includes additional funding under the Supporting Apprentices and Trainees wage  subsidy, which has provided more than $500 million to employers across Australia since  March this year.”

For more information about the JobTrainer Fund visit: https://www.dese.gov.au/jobtrainer-fund

MEDIA CONTACTS  Guy Creighton - Guy.Creighton@dese.gov.au - 0438 815 302  Brittany Higgins - Brittany.higgins@dese.gov.au - 0449 171 294

