

SENATOR THE HON MATHIAS CORMANN  MINISTER FOR FINANCE

THE HON ANGUS TAYLOR MP  MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND EMISSIONS REDUCTION

MEDIA RELEASE

Thursday, 6 August 2020



GOVERNMENT SUPPORT FOR AUSTRALIA’S ENERGY FUTURE

The Morrison Government is investing in new and emerging technologies that will  support our economic recovery, create jobs and reduce emissions.

Today the Clean Energy Finance Corporation (CEFC) released its 2019-20 Investment  Update, detailing $1 billion of investment in 23 energy projects with a combined value  of $4.2 billion. These projects span the agriculture, cleantech, energy, infrastructure,  transport and waste sectors.

Over $187 million of Government finance will support approximately 6,700 smaller-scale  investments in clean energy projects across the agribusiness, property and transport  sectors.

Energy and Emissions Reduction Minister Angus Taylor said the Government is taking a  technology not taxes approach to reducing emissions.

“Reducing emissions without imposing new costs on households, businesses or the  economy is central to the Government’s Technology Investment Roadmap,” Minister  Taylor said.

“This is more important than ever as we recover from COVID-19.

“The Government has leveraged $27.3 billion of private investment in Australian  businesses and projects since the CEFC’s inception, equating to $2.30 in private sector  finance for each $1 committed through the CEFC.

“The creation of the $1 billion Grid Reliability Fund and $300 million Advancing  Hydrogen Fund are clear examples of the Government’s ongoing commitment to  accelerating new technologies and confirming Australia’s place as a global leader in low  emissions technologies.

“The Government is focused on supporting initiatives and projects that deliver  affordable, reliable energy while backing new industries that will create jobs and  strengthen the economy.”

Through the $1 billion Grid Reliability Fund, the Government will support private  investment in the new energy generation, storage and transmission infrastructure  needed to provide affordable, reliable power to Australian households and businesses.

The $300 million Advancing Hydrogen Fund will support the development of a clean,  safe hydrogen industry and position Australia to take advantage of future economic  opportunities.

Finance Minister Mathias Cormann said the CEFC was established to facilitate increased  investment into the clean energy sector and has delivered significant projects.

“As Australia looks to drive its economic recovery, the CEFC will continue to play an  important role in driving investment in our energy future, which will also create vital  new jobs,” Minister Cormann said.

“The CEFC’s two most recent initiatives in the Advancing Hydrogen Fund and the  Australian Recycling Investment Fund have enabled the CEFC to expand their reach to  create win-win opportunities to contribute to emissions reduction and provide a return  to taxpayers.”

ENDS

Minister Cormann’s office:                         Karen Wu,  0428 350 139  Minister Taylor’s office:                               Liam O’Neil,  0428 113 617



