



The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

MEDIA RELEASE

Wednesday 25 March 2020

NATIONAL COVID-19 COORDINATION COMMISSION

Today I announce the creation of a new National COVID-19 Coordination Commission (NCCC) that will  coordinate advice to the Australian Government on actions to anticipate and mitigate the economic and  social effects of the global coronavirus pandemic.

The Commission will ensure the Government receives the most comprehensive advice to meet the  challenges ahead to cushion the economic impact of the coronavirus and help build a bridge to  recovery.

This is about working cooperatively across private-to-private and public-to-private networks to unlock  resources, break bottlenecks and fix problems so Australian families, businesses and communities are  supported through the challenging months ahead.

Mr Neville Power has been appointed Chairman and brings both high level business expertise and a  strong commitment to social issues.

An Executive Board of Commissioners, will advise the Prime Minister on all non-health aspects of the  pandemic response. The Board will work in tandem with the Chief Medical Officer (CMO) Dr Brendan  Murphy, who continues to lead the Commonwealth’s health response.

The National COVID-19 Commission Executive Board includes leaders across the private and not-for-profit sectors: Mr Greg Combet AM, Ms Jane Halton AO, Mr Paul Little AO, Ms Catherine Tanna and Mr  David Thodey AO (Deputy Chair).

They will be joined by the Secretaries of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Mr Philip  Gaetjens and Home Affairs, Mr Mike Pezzullo.

The National Cabinet, comprising State Premiers and Territory Chief Ministers, continues to lead the  national response at a government level. The Australian Government’s National Security Committee of  Cabinet’s COVID-19 Taskforce and the Expenditure Review Committee of Cabinet continue to take  decisions that determine the Commonwealth’s response to the global COVID-19 pandemic.

The National COVID-19 Coordination Commission is about mobilising a whole-of-society and whole-of-economy effort so we come through this unprecedented health crisis.  The Commission will assist the  Government to ensure all resources are marshalled to this vital task in a coordinated and effective  manner.

At all times, our actions are guided by the best possible medical advice, while putting the economic and  social wellbeing of all Australians front and centre of our response.

The NCCC will be based in the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet.  The existing National  Coordination Mechanism based in the Department of Home Affairs, which coordinates the cross  jurisdictional response to non-health aspects of the pandemic, will report to the Commission, as will the  Coronavirus Business Liaison Unit based in the Treasury Department.

[END]

Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

Press Office of the Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Prime Minister, Canberra



