

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES  MEMBER FOR HUNTER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2GB  FRIDAY, 20 MARCH 2020  SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; Bipartisanship

DEBORAH KNIGHT, HOST: Order, order. I wonder if I'll have to do that today -  we'll see. Our new segment, our very own Question Time and I'll try to keep the  pollies under control - we'll see how we go. Every Friday we'll chat about the  big issues of the week with Energy Minister, Angus Taylor, and the Shadow  Minister of Agriculture and Resources, Joel Fitzgibbon. Normally we'd have  them here in the studio but because of social distancing, they're on the phone  for us now. Fellas, hello, and welcome.

ANGUS TAYLOR, MEMBER FOR HUME: Thanks for having me.

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: Great to be with you Deb.  G'day Angus

TAYLOR: G'day Joel.

KNIGHT: Good on you guys. Now, look, alright we want more than ever  cooperation. So, I'm just going say it from the outset, forget the political point  scoring you two. We want to see a bit of bipartisanship if we can, but the big  issue, of course, Coronavirus. It's been such an incredible week, one that I  don't think I've experienced before. The contrast to where we were this time last  week to where we are today is really stark. I'll go to you first Angus. How are  you going yourself personally with you and your family?

TAYLOR: Well, it's tough for everyone. It's not about me obviously, it's about all  Australians. And this is obviously a tough time, whether you're cooped up with  family trying to look after your parents or grandparents, or you've got a  business you're try to keep going through tough times, own a cafe or a  restaurant, and of course they're really at the frontline of this. So it's not an  easy time. We're incredibly conscious of this, you know, as Energy Minister, I'm

seeing the importance that we see the energy sector, making sure they supply  their electricity.

KNIGHT: I'll talk to you about that in a sec, because that's crucial. Absolutely.  And Joel, for you social distancing, what are you doing? You into the foot-shake  are you?

FITZGIBBON: Can I say first of all, Deb, Angus and I have been sparring  partners in the past, and various radio programs…

KNIGHT: Well, keep it together you two.

FITZGIBBON: We've always been pretty civil, and I can guarantee  bipartisanship on this issue. Yeah, look, my life hasn't changed a hell of a lot.  Our kids have grown up and moved away. Obviously my diary is a little more  empty than it usually is. Most of my electorate staff and Canberra staff are  working from home. My wife has a small business, she has a beauty therapy  salon and she's facing some real challenges. Obviously, there's no social  distancing when you're doing facials and the like, and she's on [inaudible]. She  doesn't know what is next for her. Of course, customers are already falling off,  understandably. And of course if they have someone in the salon who's  diagnosed positive then I'm sure it will be a real problem for her. So, she's seen  what it's like close up in terms of the business community.

KNIGHT: Yeah, so many businesses in so many sectors are being affected by  this. Angus, in terms of the energy sector, I know that the energy ministers are  meeting today to try to come up with a way to protect our energy supplies.  What's on the table? What are we likely to see?

TAYLOR: Well we are seeing real bipartisanship already. So, we spoke last  night and we'll be speaking again this afternoon and we'll be putting in place a  nationally coordinated approach to energy, and in particular keeping the lights  on, making sure there's enough gas and enough liquid fuels to use all petrol to  ensure that businesses and of course households have what they need.  There's an enormous amount of work that's already been going on and will  continue to go on around making sure we've got a safe, healthy workforce,  making sure we've got fuel coming through the supply chain, we know exactly  how much is there.

KNIGHT: And what about the energy companies, though, to ensure that if  people lose their job and they can't make their payments, how are you going to  protect them?

TAYLOR: Exactly. Hardship policies are really crucial at this time, and we've  asked the energy companies - I've spoken to all the major companies and

asked them to extend their hardship policies to impacted coronavirus people  and businesses. That's not just someone who gets the virus, but someone  whose business has lost a huge amount of revenue, that sort of example that  Joel just talked to you about. We've seen lots of that now, particularly in the  hospitality front line businesses, service businesses. And it's really important  that the companies have hardship policies in place that look after those people.  It's also important by the way that people who can pay their bills do so we can  we can look after that way more easily those customers who really are in  trouble,

KNIGHT: Which is terrific to see and we know, Joel, that there is that that  sense of working together which is great from Labor with the government on  the issue of Coronavirus. We saw Anthony Albanese - he's doing a press  conference right now - and he's saying that he will support the government's  tough measures to tackle Coronavirus. They'll pass the first stimulus package,  but he's saying it'll wait and see on the details of the second one. But in terms  of the official medical advice, I wanted to ask you about this, Joel, because Bill  Shorten came out on the Today Show saying he's keeping his kids at home.  The Prime Minister was really strong saying we shouldn't be doing that, we  should be following the official medical advice. Surely if MPs aren't setting an  example here, you can't expect general population to do it?

FITZGIBBON: I’m sure like Angus, I am using every medium available to me as  an MP to get the message out to people appealing for calm, but appealing to  them also to follow the medical advice, and of course to respect the new  arrangements on social distancing and the rules that go with that. Look, I  respect Bill Shorten's decision to take his children out of school, I think every  parent is entitled to do so if that is their will. I've been in the National Security  Committee of the Cabinet, and I know that people who sit there receive a lot of  information you and I, and even possibly Angus, don't necessarily receive. So, I  think we have to have some confidence in the people who are in that room and  receiving the advice. And we all know the downside of closing down schools. It  means parents, working parents or ambulance, paramedics or nurses our firies  etcetera lose what is effectively a child-minding arrangement in the school. And  of course, some kids will also end up with grandparents or even great-grandparents. So, there are arguments on both sides of this debate, and I think  we just have to have confidence that those in that room are making the right  decision. I suspect this is inevitable. But, look, if Scott Morrison and his team  believe that it's not time yet to close down our schools, I think we've got to have  confidence that they're making the right decision and an informed decision.

KNIGHT: And Angus, do you think that it's fair enough that in Queensland, for  example, the schools are saying that if parents choose to keep their kids away,  if they're not sick, or if there's not a threat to their own health, the kids don't  have asthma or respiratory issues, and they take them out of school just

because they are concerned, they could face punishment for truancy?

TAYLOR: Well, look, you know, the advice we have is very clear, which is that  the risk to kids is very low. And, of course, as Joel rightly pointed out there are  very significant workforce issues with forcing kids out of school. We think it's  appropriate to keep them in school. I've kept my kids in school, the Prime  Minister has kept his kids in school.

KNIGHT: Has Bill Shorten made a mistake taking his out then?

TAYLOR: Well, we just think the right thing to do is to keep the schools open at  this point, and to keep the kids in school. And that's the advice we have. We  know from the data we're seeing all around the world that the kids of that  school age the risks are much, much lower - they're much more resilient.  Obviously, if there's a child with a serious health issue that there might be some  special circumstances, but keeping the schools open we think is enormously  important. The workforce issues here that Joel mentioned are very significant.  We have to keep our workforce, particularly health workers, central services,  energy workers, we need to look after them, look after their families and make  sure their kids have a place to go and that they're not being forced to stay at  home to look after the kids.

KNIGHT: Now Rick has called in. I won't put him through, I'll get the question  that he's asking though to you guys directly. He says he runs a small business.  He's going to have to take a 60 per cent pay cut. He's asking if you politicians  would be willing to take a pay cut as well, Joel?

FITZGIBBON: Look, I am open to any proposition to be Frank, Deb. But I think  that's a reasonable argument for people to be putting in. But I think it's a side  issue at this point. I think we need to get that stimulus package out into the  business community, and the community more generally. And at the risk of just  departing from the bipartisanship, just a little, none of this first stimulus package  is yet into the business community or the broader community. And of course,  we haven't even seen the second stimulus package. So, government's doing  some good things, but I think we need to up the pace.

KNIGHT: Angus, what's your response to that?

TAYLOR: Well, Joel, I’ll respond to that. Look, apart from my last point, I do  agree with Joel. But the point here is we do need to have appropriate stimulus.  Of course, it's been escalating over time and on $105 billion of stimulus from  the Reserve Bank and the government just announced and that will focus on  making sure we've got credit available for small businesses in particular and  households. And that's enormously important. We know if people are having  debts called, it would be very, very dangerous at this time. So, making sure we



can help them with that and, of course, as much as possible making sure that  small businesses are in a position to continue going over the next few months  and then there to ramp up on the other side of this. That is enormously  important. I agree, Joel and I'm sure absolutely agree on that, and that is a  priority for the government

KNIGHT: And just quickly - a story if we can, I want to end it on a positive note.  We know that there's been lots of bad stuff happening but any good stuff that  you fellas have seen out in the community? Some good news stories, Joel?

FITZGIBBON: Well, rather than go to a local story, I just want to say something  about the death of Catherine Hamlin on Wednesday because that is something  to celebrate as sad as her passing is. I had the opportunity to visit her and  others at Addis Ababa, Ethiopia on two occasions. Her work there as a  volunteer has been phenomenal over many, many decades - 55,000 young  women in Ethiopia benefited from her work and before her the work of her  husband, and many, many more indirectly as a result of that the establishment  of the midwifery school.

KNIGHT: Yes, she changed lives for the better.

FITZGIBBON: Through Dr Catherine Hamlin we saw absolutely the better side  of our humanity We've seen a bit of both sides over the course of the last  couple of months. But in her, we only saw good. She really was the modern  Mother Teresa.

KNIGHT: Absolutely. Angus, how about you?

TAYLOR: A good friend of ours lives in an area with lots of older people around  him. He put notes under their doors offering help and support this week, and he  got a nice response. But the most overwhelming response  was from other  people wanting to help him to look after those older people, to bring them  meals, to do anything they could to help. And an absolutely overwhelming  response. And the result of this is you got neighbours helping neighbours.  We're going to see lots of that over the next little while. Australians at their best  are absolutely, you know, wonderful people, and I think we will find a way of  working our way through this, tough as it may be. And I'm looking forward to  having some real bipartisanship on that with Joel.

KNIGHT: Bring it on, that's what we want more of fellas. Thanks for joining us.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 614









