BILL SHORTEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT SERVICES

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE SCHEME

MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

TRIPLE M

MONDAY, 21 DECEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: 2020; COVID; Mind Your Mate.



ANNOUNCER: This is Triple M's Mind Your Mate, with Gus Worland and Hugh

Jackman.



GUS WORLAND, TRIPLE M: Yeah. And I've got a guy on the line now Jacko,

called Bill Shorten, who's become a really good mate over the last year. We spend

Tuesday mornings together just before seven o'clock chatting away on the Today

Show and Bill, I really enjoyed our chats this year. How are you this morning,

brother?



BILL SHORTEN, MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG: Yeah, I'm outstanding this

morning. And how are you gentlemen?



WORLAND: We are very well, Bill, for you, it's been tough, obviously, being a

politician in a year like 2020. But what I've loved about you, mate, is the fact that

you've kept it Team Australia very much this year. And in fact, the Labor Party

have done that because you realise that there's bigger things going on in the

world.



SHORTEN: Yes, there is and, you know, this great Australian saying’s come to the

fore that whenever you speak to someone about how they're going, they always

say there's someone doing it worse. And that has been 2020. Everyone's

conscious that everyone else is doing it hard and we've all got to pull together.



HUGH JACKMAN: Yeah. Bill, can I ask you, I'm always really in admiration of

politicians who can take such heat from so many people. Literally the moment you

sign on as a politician, half the world hates you, and then you go through the ups

and downs, you get elected, you don't get elected. How do you deal with the ups

and downs of it? How do you actually compartmentalise things for yourself? And

how do you decompress?



SHORTEN: Well, it’s a good day when only half the mob hates you. And it's a

privilege to serve. But most people won't be happy until we're hitchhiking to

Canberra and camping on the lawn. But in all seriousness, it's a privilege. And

what you've got to do is not take it personally. So, you know, losing the election,

that was bad, at least for half of us. The way you cope with pressure, one of the

ways I do is when I go home to see my family, once you shut that door, you almost

take your job - it's like a uniform, your suit of armour, you take it off and you just be

yourself. So what you've got to understand is that when people sink their teeth into

you, or you get criticised in the media, by and large, it's the position they're

attacking, You can't afford to take these things personally. So once you realise

that, then you realise that who you are is not necessarily who is copping all the

negative flak. Does that make sense?



JACKMAN: Yeah, totally. I think knowing who you are, having a place of refuge,

which obviously for you is home where you can completely be yourself and just

unload everything, I think all of that is really important. And you seem to be doing a

really good job of it, mate.





SHORTEN: Yeah, well, this COVID’s put a different set of pressures on people. I

know there's a great poem, from poet Adam Lindsay Gordon. And he said, Life is

mainly froth and bubble, two things stand like stone. Kindness in another's trouble,

courage in your own. And it's good life advice, isn't it? Be kind to others. And, you

know, do what you have to do to be strong in your own. So there ya go, bit of

poetry as well gentlemen. First time poetry’s been on Triple M?



JACKMAN: Gus reads a poem every morning.



WORLAND: You brought your A game to the radio show. I wish you'd done the

same on Today with me all year, Bill. But mate, it's absolutely wonderful to have

you on this show. As I said, you know, a year ago, didn't know you very well, but

now I think you're an absolute champion. And thanks so much for joining us on the

show today and mate, just have a wonderful Christmas and look forward to talking

to you again soon.



SHORTEN: It's good, in talking to you, Hugh, you've now answered the question

about my new mate, you know, to understand him better. And, you know, he's very

hairy, very manly, perhaps trains in a different paddock to you, but you know,

you’re both Wolverines.



WORLAND: Thanks a lot, Bill. Appreciate your time. Bill Shorten.



JACKMAN: Bill, I’m never going to hear the end of that. Never hear the end of it.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM HOULIHAN 0438 366 400

