

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

PRESS CONFERENCE

SYDNEY

THURSDAY, 19 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; economic implications of coronavirus; supporting the

casual workforce and sole traders; Tasmania’s tougher border control; government

funding for independent schools.



ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: I am here today with Jim

Chalmers, Labor's Shadow Treasurer. And we eagerly await the news from the Reserve

Bank of Australia who are having an extraordinary meeting and then Philip Lowe will be

giving a special address at 4:00pm. We do support further action being taken by both the

RBA and the Government to protect our economy and to protect our jobs. We want to

protect lives in this health crisis. But we also want to make sure that we emerge from this

health emergency with our economy as intact as it can be and with jobs saved, with

protection of living standards and particularly with protection for the most vulnerable in our

community. We want to protect businesses but those who work for businesses. And today

we think of those 20,000 Qantas workers who've been laid off temporarily. This will be a

very difficult day for them. They've contributed to the building of a business that is perhaps

the most iconic Australian brand internationally. This is a good business. And the

difficulties that it, Virgin, and other airlines are going through are not due to any errors that

they have committed. It is due to circumstances well beyond their control. We do know that

the sooner the response, the more effective it will be. We also know that the sooner the

response, the less the cost will be in the long run. So, if we are going to do something next

week, please, let us do it today. I have said before that Australians need to have

confidence in authorities, whether it be the health authorities or our economic authorities

such as the Reserve Bank. And in order to do that, the authorities have to have faith and

trust in the Australian people. Be transparent about where we are at. I think it would be a

good thing, for example, whereby just as the Reserve Bank of Australia, when they make

an announcement, there is then an explanation for why it occurs, if when there have been

changes in health advice from the Australian Government, such as we have seen over

simple issues such as whether people should be shaking hands, over social distancing,

over cancelling of various gatherings, there needs to be an explanation of why that change

is occurring. I think that would go a long way to easing peoples’ anxieties and building

confidence. Australians do need calm, consistent information. Let’s make sure that during

this crisis that we spread kindness, not spread coronavirus. I think that is the key. And

we're seeing already emerging in local communities right around the country, people

putting a note in the letterbox of a neighbour, checking if they're okay, checking if there's

something they can do for them, particularly our elderly and vulnerable Australians. And

that is a very good thing indeed. I now will ask Jim to make some comments, particularly

on the economic measures that might come later on today.



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: Thanks, Anthony. This unfolding economic crisis

demands urgency, and scale, and it demands coordination among all of the decision

makers in our economy. We are conscious that the Government, the Reserve Bank, the

private banks and others right across the board are working out the next steps to be taken

in the economy. We need to see those as soon as possible to get support out the door and

circulating in an economy which desperately needs it.



In the last day or two, I've spoken to the CEOs of the big four banks, I’ve spoken to

regional banks, the customer-owned banks, the peak business groups and others. I'm

conscious that they are working as hard as they can to get a package of support out there

to support borrowers and businesses right around the economy. I want to extend my

gratitude to those businesses, those CEOs, and those peak groups for the opportunity to

engage at a time when we need all of us coming up with the best ways to help our

workers, businesses, families and communities right around Australia.



It's become abundantly clear that what the Government announced last week was too

small and too slow to make a genuine difference in this unfolding economic crisis. This is

an extraordinary set of economic challenges and it requires an extraordinary set of

economic responses, right across the board. We need to make it easier for borrowers to

pay their loans and we need to make it easier for businesses to avoid defaulting on theirs

as well. If that means considering steps that wouldn't ordinarily be contemplated, then so

be it. Every decision maker in the economy has a role to play here to support workers,

businesses, families and communities.



Australians are anxious about their jobs, their mortgages, their rent, their superannuation

balances and how they'll pay all of their household bills. As we have been right from the

beginning, Labor stands ready to support effective, decisive measures which are big

enough and deploy quickly enough to make a difference in the economy. We will be

responsible, as we have been, in the aftermath of whatever the Reserve Bank, the private

banks and the Government announces in the coming days.



That also means being constructive about where the Government can do better and where

the gaps are. There are still issues with casuals. There are still issues with sole traders,

and renters, and charities and the entertainment industry. There are a number of

substantial gaps which need to be addressed by the Government when they release their

next package of stimulus. It needs to be released urgently. We need to get that support out

the door as soon as we can so that it's circulating in an economy which desperately needs

it. We'll examine the details of what the Reserve Bank, the other banks and the

Government announces in the next day or two. Our commitment to the Australian people is

that we will continue to be responsible, constructive and supportive because these are

serious times and they do warrant a serious response. We will be as bipartisan as we can

be to help Australians through a difficult period.



ALBANESE: Thanks very much. Happy to take questions firstly from people in the room.

We're trying social distancing. So, there's journalists on the telecom system here.



JOURNALIST: I guess you mentioned the measures there. What sort of specific measures do

you think should be put in place to maybe help people like sole traders? Is it a Newstart

payment? Or is it something more than that?



CHALMERS: We don't want to pre-empt what the Government proposes in the next day or

two but clearly there are substantial gaps in the support that has been announced so far.

The feedback that we have all been receiving, and which I can only assume the

Government has been receiving too, is that sole traders have largely missed out in the first

package that was announced a week ago today. Without being prescriptive about it, the

Government needs to do something about that. There are hundreds of thousands of sole

traders in Australia who desperately need assistance. We want to see that in the package

that's released. Similarly, there's an issue with renters and an issue with charities, whether

it be food providers and others. There are a number of gaps there which ideally the

Government will address when they announce the next package of stimulus measures.



ALBANESE: Can I say on that issue that one of the issues that has emerged, I think, during

this crisis is the implications behind changes in the labour market that have seen an

increased casualisation of the workforce, less security at work, less conditions like paid

leave, sick leave, annual leave, have, I think, been a bit of a wake-up call for what's been

happening in the labour market in general. And there will need to be, like with other issues,

arising out of these emergency conditions, an examination of where we go as a country

heading forward. In the immediate sense, of course, no one should be in a position

whereby if they don't turn up at work, they lose all of their income. And unfortunately, there

are a range of people in professions, particularly soul traders who have definitely been put

in that position.



JOURNALIST: The issues surrounding coronavirus change every day. Do you have any

revised figures or amount that you think needs to be spent on this in general?



ALBANESE: Look, we are not the Government. What we say is that you need to spend

whatever is necessary. And we also say that if you delay action, then it will end up costing

you more. And so, we stand ready to support measures in Parliament next week. We're not

in a position to appropriate funds. But quite clearly, the first response was not adequate.

Which is why two working days later, the Government was talking about additional

expenditure.



JOURNALIST: Do you support the Tasmanian Government's decision for going ahead with

the toughest border controls in the country?



ALBANESE: I do support the Tasmanian Government decision. I am firmly of the view that

we can't take this issue seriously enough. And that one of the issues that we don't want is

for us to be having a media conference like this in November or December this year. And

for you to be in a position of asking, 'Do you think that we should have acted sooner with

any measure which is proposed?' So, I think the Tasmanian Government have made a

strong decision. But it's the right decision for Tasmanians. And I congratulate them on it. It

will, of course, result in some inconvenience. It will have a particular impact on the

Tasmanian economy given that it is so reliant upon the tourism sector. But I do think it's the

right decision. We need to make the right health decisions first. And then consider what the

economic implications are of that, and then address the economic consequences. But

people's health has to come first. That will result in better economic outcomes as well.



JOURNALIST: So, should then other states implement the same border control?



ALBANESE: Look, Tasmania is an island state. So, there are particular circumstances there

for Tasmania, I believe. Other decisions are a matter for the respective decisions of the

state and territory governments. But Tasmania is in a unique circumstance, of course.

When we dealt with a major outbreak 100 years ago, in the aftermath of World War One,

Tasmania was free of that virus at that time. So, we need to, I'm sure that the Tasmanian

Government have made the decision in that context.



JOURNALIST: Mr Albanese, would you be supportive of (inaudible) workers potentially that

are going to lose their jobs, or would you prefer the Newstart allowance to be raised?



ALBANESE: Well, quite clearly one of the issues that is exposed here is that Newstart isn't

enough. I spoke to someone on Saturday who was in here in working on my statement to

the nation, a camera person, working in your industry. He is the sole breadwinner in his



family. He has a wife and three kids. They can't survive on $40 a day on Newstart. And his

work has dried up. That will be the case for so many people. And I think we need to do as

much as possible to provide assistance to those workers. I note that a range of

businesses, and I congratulate them, businesses like Coles, Woolworths, Target have

announced voluntarily that their casual workforce will be given leave if they're forced to

self-isolate. That is a good thing. We need to pull together as a nation. But the Government

needs to do its bit as well.



JOURNALIST: Just another thing, this talk about wanting independent schools to have

government funding slashed because they are sending students home already and public

schools aren't. Is that something you think is a positive thing or should happen?



ALBANESE: This isn't a time to slash school funding. Thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053







Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











