

THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT SERVICES

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE

SCHEME

MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC NEWS BREAKFAST

THURSDAY 22 OCTOBER, 2020



SUBJECTS:  JobCutter; National Integrity Commission; Victorian COVID

outbreak



PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: My next guest this afternoon is the Shadow

Minister for Government Services and the National Disability Insurance

Scheme, Bill Shorten. Bill Shorten, welcome.



BILL SHORTEN, MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG: Good afternoon, Patricia.

KARVELAS: Firstly, is it right that the CEO of Australia Post has been stood

aside during this investigation and will potentially lose her job over the purchase

of these Cartier watches



SHORTEN: Well, I'm not going to pre-empt the investigation, but what I will say

is that posties have been working harder than ever, especially during the

pandemic and delivering massively increased parcels and mail. Customers are

taking longer to get their mail. And then you've got this out of touch, sort of

rewarding the officer class of Australia Post with medals and watches, and

everyone else is doing all the grunt work. So it's out of touch.



KARVELAS: Okay, but how about if there were salaries or bonuses? So

instead of three thousand dollar watches, there was a bonus for delivering a

good deal, or whatever the reason was for actually rewarding these people.

That's happened before. Not the same outrage. Is it just the optics, are

bonuses are okay?



SHORTEN: I think it's optics and substance, isn't it? But what I want to know is

why is it the CEO's been stood aside and the board? I mean, the board is like a

branch meeting of the Liberal National Party. And they apparently, as I

understand from media reports, they knew about the watches. So why does the

woman CEO have to walk the Morrison plank? But all the men, the Liberal

National Party men on the board, you know, nothing to see here. They're like

the three wise monkeys, see no evil, hear no evil, say no evil.



KARVELAS: So you think a woman has been forced to take the fall for

something, what, that you think the board should take responsibility for? Do you

think that means she shouldn't take the fall?



SHORTEN: I think her gender is not the key issue. I think the issue is that if the

board knew about this, why is the CEO being stood aside? That's a good

question. I'll ask Mr Morrison why. Why is she stood aside, the CEO, but if the

board gave this the tick what was their culpability in all this? But isn't this, you

know, just the slow clap that we give the national Morrison government? Yet

again, they are investigating themselves for perceived poor behaviour. I mean,

this is why we need a National Integrity Commission, because people are sick

of the antics. Politics gets a bad name because of the government. And the

sooner we make a down payment to restore trust in our system and our

politicians through a National Integrity Commission, the better. I mean, I said

this a thousand days ago at the Press Club at the beginning of 2018. And this is

a government who are just, you know, very slow to be accountable.



KARVELAS: So given you think that the board should take responsibility and

perhaps the board should go, I just want to go to that substantive issue around

salaries and bonuses. Do you think they should also not be given?



SHORTEN: Well, first of all, what I said is, did the board know? I've read

reports that they did know. But I mean, this is where the link to the government

and the liberals and the Nationals gets a lot stronger, doesn't it? I mean, not

only do they run Australia Post, but they've stacked the board of Australia Post

in a way which would make political branch stackers blush. In terms of the

issue of bonuses and remuneration, I think good organisational behaviour starts

from looking after the people at the bottom of the organisation. I mean, the

posties have been delivering, Star Trek Express and Australia Post, have been

delivering increased amounts of mail and parcels during COVID.I think with the

bonuses are going round, rather than reward yourselves who are already well

remunerated, why not put some bonuses in the workers’ pay? That's what I

think sets the rewards. And you and I both know that Minister Fletcher has

been ducking and weaving like an acrobat around the standard of regional post,

potential closures of post offices. Consumers are doing it hard. The workforce

is doing it hard. And the sort of extravagance at the top, I think, sits very poorly

with people who've lost their jobs or people who rely on the postal service or

indeed the hardworking postal workforce. Why not give your bonuses to the

people who do the work?



KARVELAS: So this revelation that obviously came out through the Senate

estimates process, this might have been the dominant issue today but you

mentioned the National Integrity Commission. Should Labor back Helen

Haines’ private member's bill for National Integrity Commission?



SHORTEN: Well, first of all, I raised the National Integrity Commission, I was

the first leader of a major party to do so and back it in, and this was in January

of 2018. Now we're not the government. So the only thing which is going to

have to move before the next election, the only way we get a National Integrity

Commission is if the government budges. But I thought it was actually

downright insulting yesterday to watch Morrison and Porter, Mr Morrison and

Mr Porter, duck and weave and say the only reason they haven't done a

National Integrity Commission is because of the bushfires and the pandemic.

Well, you know what? I actually think that insults the people who went through

the bushfires, that insults the people who've gone through the pandemic, my

hometown of Melbourne and everyone else. You know, we've all been getting

on with our lives, people have been putting up with the hardship and doing their

day jobs. But this is a government who hides behind the excuse. They're using

the pandemic. They're manipulating the pandemic to suit their political laziness

at best, or their complete go-slow. I mean, wouldn't it be funny, Patricia, if there

was - if a bunch of wharfies at the wharf took a thousand days to unload a

container, this government would have them in jail. They'd be suing them and

fining them. But this government has adopted industrial relations tactics of the

go-slow on the National Integrity Commission. Like, they can do it. Helen

Haines - well intentioned. Good person. But the people who get this done are

the federal government. And we want to keep the pressure on the feds.



KARVELAS: I want just return to Australia Post and that accountability and

how that's going to be handled. You mentioned Christine Holgate is the fall

woman for the government. Are you concerned about a shabby treatment of

her personally, do you think perhaps she's not being treated well throughout

this and that gender might be part of that reason?



SHORTEN: I don’t want leap to conclusions. The decision is going to be

investigated, but I'm always wary of just blaming one person. I mean, what is

the board's role in this? Presumably with its senior executive remuneration,

most large corporations have a remuneration committee of the board. The

board, they've got a superb curriculum vitae, not in post, but in Liberal Party

service. There’s former national directors, there's the fellow McIvor from

Queensland, Michael Ronaldson, you know, affable enough ex-politician, fair

enough. But, you know, this is like a branch meeting of the Liberal Party, the

Board of Australia Post. And presumably they have some interest in their

remuneration strategies adopted by Australia Post. But Mr Morrison's just gone

for Christine Holgate, the CEO, but what of the board? What do they know?

Where are their fingerprints in all of this? Or do they just turn up for a digestive

biccie and a cup of coffee on the board meeting days?



KARVELAS: What are your concerns around the sacking of more than 400

Victorian Centrelink staff employed by Serco?



SHORTEN: This government loves a slogan -  JobMaker, JobKeeper,

JobSeeker. But at the moment, secretly, they're running Operation JobCutter.

They've got rid of 420 contract Services Australia staff at operations at Mill Park

and at Dandenong, they’re doing the same thing with 180 jobs in Sydney.

We're hearing worrying signs about more jobs going in Tasmania. This

government's getting rid of 600 long term casuals, when 1. we need

employment, 2. we’ve got more pressure on Centrelink operations than at any

time since the Great Depression, since Centrelink was invented. And yet

they're getting rid of people who can help keep the queues short, who can help

resolve people's distress. I don't know what this government's on about cutting

vital government safety net services, just when more people than ever require

them and pushing more people onto the unemployment queue when there's

meaningful work for them to do. It’s just, completely contradictory.



KARVELAS: I just want to talk about Victoria. How concerned are you by this

fresh coronavirus outbreak in public housing in Melbourne?



SHORTEN: Well, what I've read is that the student at a school tested positive

for it, but has come back quicker than the quarantine period. So I don't know all

of the facts. Of course, I'm concerned. I mean, like you, Patricia, I live in

Melbourne. It's been tough for businesses, been tough for families. Five million

Australians who live in Melbourne, it's like a different world. Coming up to

Canberra during my 14 days quarantine, I'm going to be away from the family

for a month. But that's the price you pay. But what I realise is that a lot of the

rest of Australia is sort of moving on from COVID. I mean, Sydney's got its

challenges, but Melbourne, we're very much still in the middle of all of the

restrictions. So, of course, I'm concerned with any reports of an outbreak.



KARVELAS: Is a third lockdown in Melbourne feasible? If it were to get out of

control?



SHORTEN: I genuinely don't know. I sincerely hope that doesn't happen. I

mean, again, coming to Canberra and watching the disconnect between the

Morrison government and reality. They've all been standing up here very

bravely saying just open everything up, open everything up, and I know some

people say that should happen. But one thing which you can't take away from

what's happened in Victoria is that once the second outbreak occurred, what

the Victorian government tried to do was crush it. I saw an interesting statistic

that one particular day in July, when Victoria and Melbourne had 735 cases

England and France had about the same number of cases on that day. But you

dial forward to now, they've now got 14,000, 15,000 cases a day and we're at

less than five. So for better or for worse, we're on the path of crushing it. And

that's really where I think we’ve got to focus.



KARVELAS: But you know, business has been concerned that the

announcement should have only been made for reopening. Do you think they're

being too slow to reopen?



SHORTEN: Well, I'm not going to second guess them at this point. I know

people are doing it hard and, you know, there's big business, but there’s small

business. As a federal politician I tend to worry about the things that I can

influence. I spend most of my time thinking about that. And that's why I think

the federal government needs to wake up and realise, Victoria is still in the

pandemic. So, dialling forward to the end of the year and early next year, we're

still going to need JobKeeper. There’s industry sectors who are getting no

attention at all. I can think of two I've met within the last two days. The travel

agents, that employs 40,000 people around Australia. They've been wiped out.

There's no work, yet they've got to go to work to try and recover all of their

customers money from the tourism wholesalers and the international

companies. And I don't hear the government on the travel agents. And I was

just talking to the live music industry. And by that I mean the concert promoters,

the people who run the Palais, the venue operators, they were the first to close.

And whilst they are self-sufficient and economically sound in the good times,

they're going to need some help being able to keep staff on, not lose necessary

skills. There’s a lot of things the federal government could be doing to help

Victoria rather than just be the critics from the cheap seats.



KARVELAS: Thank you so much for joining us, Bill Shorten.





SHORTEN: Thanks, Patricia.



KARVELAS: Bill Shorten, the Shadow Minister for Government Services and

the National Disability Insurance Scheme, joining us there.



ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM HOULIHAN 0438 366 400







Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













