



The Hon Stuart Robert MP  Minister for the National Disability Insurance Scheme  Minister for Government Services

TRANSCRIPT



E&EO……………………………………..

Transcript: Interview with Melissa Doyle, The Latest, 7 Network, Tuesday 31 March 2020  Topics: Delivering economic support payments

MELISSA DOYLE:   And earlier I spoke with Government Services Minister, Stuart Robert, about who has received  the money, and where the Government hopes it will go.

Minister, are you confident that everyone who is entitled to this money has now received it?

MINISTER ROBERT:          I am. We've said all along that the 6.6 million Australians who receive the $750 will receive it  between today and 17 April. The first 1.5 million Australians have started receiving it today, and  we're hopeful that we can have 90 per cent of it paid out this week, so 10 days earlier than we  had first stated.

MELISSA DOYLE:     90 per cent is a pretty good figure. What would you say the Government would like to see  Australians, I guess, spend it on?

MINISTER:      Well, the Prime Minister has outlined the restrictions Australians are currently under, and he's  emphasised that it's all about essentials, so I'd encourage all Australians to go to  australia.gov.au or download the coronavirus app on the app store or Google Play. All the  information you'll need is there, but this money is there for essentials and to help Australians in  terms of providing for those essentials.

MELISSA DOYLE:

Are you concerned that senior Australians, who've taken a significant hit to their retirement  funds, might save this stimulus money rather than spending it?

MINISTER:      Treasury advice is that the money will be spent and, of course, they've reached back to the GFC  to look at trends in how people behaved; different then, of course, because there was a lot  greater freedom of movement, but again, we'd encourage all Australians to get advice from  australia.gov.au, get hold of the app and spend it on essentials.

MELISSA DOYLE:     Alright. So, you're pretty confident it's flowing quickly, sticking to plan, about one per cent of  people to go to get theirs?

MINISTER:      We're very confident we'll get these funds out this week, 10 days earlier, but we've given  ourselves through to 17 April. So, the key is Australians don't need to call us, the funds will flow  through automatically to all primary payment holders because they're already part of our social  security system. We know who they are, and the funds will be moving quickly.

MELISSA DOYLE:     Stuart Robert, thanks for your time.

[ENDS]

Authorised by S. Robert MP, Canberra







James Larsson  Senior Media Adviser  Office of the Hon Stuart Robert MP  Minister for the National Disability Insurance Scheme  Minister for Government Services  Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600  Ph: 02 6277 7200 M: 0427 100 431  E: james.larsson@servicesaustralia.gov.au

