THE HON ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER

E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

THURSDAY, 27 FEBRUARY 2020

SUBJECT: Sports rorts saga.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: This Prime

Minister treats the Parliament with contempt. There are real questions to answer about his

office and his involvement with this sports rorts sage. The fact is that there were 136

emails between his office and Bridget McKenzie’s office. The fact is a list given to his office

by the Minister’s office in stage three of which 76 per cent of the projects chosen were not

those chosen by Sport Australia. And the fact is, the Prime Minister continues to mislead

Parliament. He says that all projects were eligible. What we thought was, ‘Well, what does

that mean anyway?’ Because I’m eligible to play the Davis Cup, but I won’t get to play

because I am not as good as another 20,000 players who could be chosen ahead of me

around Australia. But, this Prime Minister didn’t even get that right. Because we know that

in 43 per cent of cases, in terms of this sports rorts saga, they weren’t eligible projects.

And we heard that from the Australian National Audit Office. Then we know that there was

actually these colour-coded documents that were going between Bridget McKenzie’s office

and the Prime Minister’s office. But Mr Gaetjens, the Prime Minister’s former chief of staff,

who was investigating as head of Prime Minister and Cabinet, whether the Prime Minister's

office had any involvement, only got one copy of the colour-coded list, which was colour-coded in terms of rort here, rort there. And we saw yesterday, the Prime Minister speak

about members making applications on behalf of their electorates. Bear in mind that this

was taxpayers' funds. This wasn't election commitments. This is something that was in the

budget. And he referred to the Member for Lindsay, who of course, wasn't a Member of

Parliament at that time. It just shows that the Prime Minister was saying that this was a

Liberal Party and National Party fund, but it was actually taxpayers' funds. The Prime

Minister treats taxpayers' funds as if they're his own.

JOURNALIST: Bridget McKenzie has already resigned. What would you like the Prime

Minister now to do?



ALBANESE: Well, the first thing he should do is front up to Parliament this morning and

correct the record. He's misled Parliament. And in responding to questions about

misleading Parliament, he misleads Parliament further and further again. He needs to tell

the truth about what happened here. It'd be nice if this Prime Minister was capable just

once of saying that he got something wrong. And this is what happens with this Prime

Minister. We saw with the bushfire crises, where day after day, week after week, month

after month, he said it was a state issue. He said there was no need for a national

response. And then when eventually, there was some movement, he pretended that

everyone had forgotten everything that had happened beforehand. Similarly, on the

economy, we've been speaking about the flat wages, the lower growth, and it's been

downgraded three times, the low consumer demand, the low productivity, the problems in

the economy well before the bushfires or the coronavirus issue struck the country. And this

Prime Minister pretends none of that's happened. He's incapable of actually having a bit of

self-examination. And conceding that he's done anything wrong. Well, the whole of

Australia knows that this stinks. The stage two was about women sports rooms and

change rooms. And we know that money was redirected as well. We know that the Urban

Congestion Fund, $3 billion, 83 per cent went to Liberal National Party seats and to

targeted seats. We know that this Government just treats taxpayers' money as if it's its

own. Thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











