

CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP

SYDNEY

SATURDAY, 22 FEBRUARY 2020



SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; Labor’s 2050 emissions target; Morrison

Government’s climate change denial.



CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH:  Thanks for coming,

everyone. I'll deal with two matters before taking questions today.



Firstly, obviously there's the ongoing management of the Coronavirus, which

the Labor Party has been engaging very constructively with the Government, at

21 cases in Australia and six now from the Diamond Princess.



Of course, we have supported every measure that's been put in place by the

Government it's appropriate that the Government and Opposition are working

carefully and closely together as such, a medical issue is managed. Of course,

we're seeing calls for people in Wuhan for another evacuation flight, we would

hope and expect the Government will engage constructively with those calls.



We understand the complexity of the arrangements and we pay tribute to the

work that's been put in place by the DFAT officials. We understand that the

families left in Wuhan will be facing a number of different complexities. Some

will have chosen not to board earlier flight others would have faced complexity

in boarding. Again, without diminishing, the complexity the difficulty of the

situation we hope and expect, and trust the Government will engage with those

left in Wuhan with a view to acting appropriately as my colleague Penny Wong

has said today, and she has previously written to Marise Payne along those

lines.



The second issue that I'll address today is of course, the important

announcement made yesterday by Anthony Albanese.



Anthony Albanese showing leadership, showing that he's prepared to make

tough decisions in the national interest.



What we get from the Government is confusion, chaos, and the old fashioned

fear campaign and advertising campaign from Scotty from Marketing. As

Anthony Albanese was outlining that important step, the zero emissions by

2050 target yesterday, Scott Morrison was getting the Liberal Party to arrange

silly memes for social media.



That's not leadership.



Now the Government has to answer some questions. Why do they think

Australia should stand against 73 other countries including countries under

conservative leadership, like United Kingdom and Germany, which have the

same target?



Why should the Australian Government not have the same targets every single

state and territory, including Liberal and National Party led state and territories?

Why should Australia stand against the likes of our own businesses led by the

BCA and BHP and Santos who have all called for such a target.



Now, the Government's got one line, what's the cost?



Well, we know that this will unleash billions of dollars worth of investment. We

know that wages will be higher, investment will be higher, growth will be higher,

with this target in place now, so that our economy can start that important

transition. The Government says they are now toying with a technology target.

The same mob who railed against electric vehicles less than 12 months ago

who said they would "end the weekend", and that they would be a "war on

tradies". Scott Morrison and his alleged team have no credibility when it comes

climate and Australians know that.



We know that the cost of not acting is huge.



And we know that the economic benefit of appropriate action is real. With

wages higher, growth higher and investment higher. CSIRO says so. The New

South Wales Government and other conservative governments have relied

correctly on that CSIRO modelling. We understand the modelling. We

understand the science. We understand the economic impact, we're prepared

to lead. Scott Morrison is not prepared to lead. He leads a coalition of climate

change deniers and gutless wimps when it comes to climate change - those

who believe in it, but aren’t prepared to act on it.



Well, Anthony Albanese leads a team that is prepared to act.



Happy to take any questions.



JOURNALIST: On the issue of the coronavirus, is there a compelling argument

to relax the travel ban for students if they self isolate?



BOWEN: Look, I think the measures put in place at the moment are sensible.

Of course, this is of very significant importance for the universities, not just

universities, TAFEs and schools in many instances as well. But particularly

acute for universities with the return to university. The Government needs to be

working very productively with universities to manage this.



Now I see some people have taken themselves to third countries to quarantine

for 14 days so they can make the journey to Australia. That's one way of

dealing with it. I think the travel ban has been necessary. I mean, the fact that

we've had 21 cases in Australia, including six off the Diamond Princess is a

testament to what's been put in place and could have been much, much worse.

And this is still an ongoing issue of course.



So the Government needs to be working very proactively with universities but

we are not calling for a relaxation of the travel ban at this time.



JOURNALIST: The Education Minister is expected to make an announcement

about how the Government can help Chinese students, what do you think

needs to be done?



BOWEN: Well there needs to be assistance given to universities to manage

this very proactively. Universities are putting various steps in place. Of course,

there needs to be full communication with students in China. And of course, we

would welcome any other proactive steps that the Government chooses put in

place.



JOURNALIST: Were you always in favour of Labor re-affirming a 2050 goal

before coming up with a policy mechanism to achieve it, and the modelling.

Obviously there is a risk for Labor in doing so and could come under fire from

the Government like we saw before the last election?



BOWEN: Well as Anthony Albanese and Mark Butler made clear, we are laying

out this target and we'll have much more to say about the mechanisms and the

pathway to meet the target. That's a measure and a process I fully support,

have supported, will continue to support and have supported consistently.



JOURNALIST: How do you successfully convince Australians that jobs won't

be lost and that their power bills won't be higher as a result of this goal?



BOWEN: Well, I think we prosecute the case on the facts. The facts  are that

the cheapest source of new energy is renewable energy. The fact is that more

renewable energy puts downward pressure on energy prices not upward

pressure. Despite what the troglodytes in the National Party and Liberal Party

will have us think that somehow renewable energy is more expensive.

Renewable Energy is the cheapest form of energy. Despite the fact that the

billions of dollars that will be unleashed by renewable energy investors will

create jobs, which the Liberal and National Party seem to ignore. These are all

the facts. We will prosecute those facts we will make the argument and I'm

confident we can win the argument.



JOURNALIST: Further to that the Coalition is saying that it's going to release

its long term energy plan before it heads to the Glasgow Climate Change

Conference later this year. Will Labor have any more details on its 2050 target

by then?



BOWEN: Well, congratulations to the Government. Seven years in and they

say they're going to come up with a policy. Seven years this mob has been in

office. Seven years of stop start of climate change denial, of new ideas, of one

plan after another, successive ministers, failures years of ministers. Angus

Tayler just being the latest in a long line. Now he says he'll go to Glasgow with

a plan. Well, he has just come back from Spain where Australia was rightly

criticized around the world for our lack of action.



Now seven years in, we're meant to trust that they're going to have a plan.

Now, as we've made clear, we will take to the Australian people a very

comprehensive and detailed policy when it comes to this. We're laying it out

step by step. I think Anthony was right to lay out the 2050 objective as the first

step in that in that process. But this Government has no credibility and

Australians know it.



JOURNALIST: Should Labor at lease consider adopting the coalition's

emissions target for 2030?



BOWEN: Well, look, what we said is that the target that we originally set out for

2030 was set in 2015. We've had seven years of missed opportunities from this

Government.



Obviously now we're five years after that target was originally set so it is

appropriate to take our time to consider. It would have been a lot easier to

achieve it if we started in 2015 than nd starting today. So I support the

measures that have been outlined, of course will have more to say about the

pathway and the detailed policy mechanism. But we have plenty of time to do

that before the next election.



JOURNALIST: Would you be open to nuclear power?



BOWEN: No. I mean, here we have again, the economics of nuclear power

don't stack up. Report after report have shown that. Nuclear power, that Keith



Pitt is promoting as the relevant minister is complete furphy. I mean, you could

start building a nuclear power station today, and it wouldn't be ready for

decades. The idea that this is part of the mix for Australia's response to global

warming is a fantasy and a furphy.



JOURNALIST: So just confirming Labor will have more details on its 2050

target by the end of the year?



BOWEN: As Anthony Albanese and Mark Butler laid out yesterday, we will

have detailed pathways, mechanisms and policies in place, but the most

important starting point is the zero target. One that Boris Johnson subscribes

to, Angela Merkel subscribes to, Canada, Justin Trudeau subscribe to. Every

state and territory in Australia subscribes to. The Business Council subscribes

to. The people who don't subscribe to it are Scott Morrison, Josh Frydenberg

and Michael McCormack.



JOURNALIST: Can you confirm that Labor has no plans to ban thermal coal

exports?



BOWEN: Yes. Thanks very much.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512



