

THE HON ANGUS TAYLOR MP  MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND EMISSIONS REDUCTION

MEDIA RELEASE

Friday, 13 November 2020



ANOTHER REPORT CONFIRMS ENERGY PRICES ARE FALLING

Energy prices are continuing to fall under the Morrison Government.

According to the Australian Energy Regulator’s (AER) Wholesale Markets Quarterly Q3  2020 report, wholesale electricity and gas prices during the third quarter of 2020  dropped to levels not seen since 2014 and 2016 respectively.

Average wholesale electricity prices ranged from $34 per MWh in Queensland to $54  per MWh in Victoria, marking the first time since 2014 that third quarter prices were  below $55 per MWh in all regions.

Importantly for consumers, significant wholesale price falls, also reported by the  Australian Energy Market Operator (AEMO), are flowing through to retail electricity  price reductions.

Recent ABS findings show that year-on-year retail electricity prices have fallen for seven  straight quarters, with prices dropping by 0.7 per cent for the quarter nationally and 2.5  per cent through the year.

This comes on top of recent findings from the Australian Competition and Consumer  Commission (ACCC) that shows competitive retail prices have fallen by up to 7.6 per  cent for residential customers, and 3.7 per cent for small businesses from 2018.

The AER also found wholesale gas prices have remained at 2016 levels of $4-$5.50 per  gigajoule (GJ). In Victoria, wholesale gas prices decreased for the seventh consecutive  quarter to $4.56 per GJ.



A contributing factor to these trends is the Day Ahead Auction (DAA) scheme. The  scheme was introduced by the Government in 2019 and the AER note that it is  continuing to have a positive impact on competition and driving down gas prices.

The AER highlighted increased gas generation is important for keeping the lights on,  particularly during the evening demand peak when solar generation drops off.

Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction Angus Taylor said lower energy costs were  good news for Australians, especially those families and businesses experiencing  financial hardship due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

“COVID-19 continues to impact households and businesses, so any reduction in energy  prices across eastern Australia is welcome relief for many Australians,” Minister Taylor  said.

“When Australians are paying less for their energy bills, they have more money in their  pocket and the Government remains focused on helping all Australians get ahead.

“Cheaper energy will also help drive the recovery of businesses hit hard by the  pandemic.

“Many critical industries rely on gas to power their operations and when businesses  have access to affordable and reliable gas, they can hire more Australians.

“Cheaper energy brings benefits across the Australian economy, which is why the  Government will continue to take strong action to bring down the cost of energy for all  Australians.”

With wholesale prices making up around a third of retail energy bills, the Government  expects falling wholesale electricity prices to be passed on to consumers. The  Government’s Big Stick Legislation will ensure this happens.

Since the Big Stick legislation was first introduced into Parliament, there have been 13  straight months of wholesale price reductions on the previous year.

The best way for consumers to benefit from lower wholesale electricity and gas prices is  to shop around for the best deal possible. The Government’s energymadeeasy.gov.au  website makes shopping around easier than ever.



ENDS

Minister Taylor’s office:               Liam O’Neil,  0428 113 617  John Hulin, 0466 443 917



