



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

Bridget Archer MP  Federal Member for Bass



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au

17 November 2020

“LIQUID GOLD” FLOWING TO NORTH EAST TASMANIAN  IRRIGATORS

The $57.3 million Scottsdale Irrigation Scheme, which has just delivered the first irrigation water to  the region North East Tasmanian will provide a boon for local farmers.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack and Federal Member for Bass Bridget Archer today saw first-hand the impact this major  investment is already having.

More than 84 irrigators across 106 properties will benefit from this important water infrastructure  project, with many planning to boost production by up to 50 per cent, employ additional farm  workers and invest in new pivot irrigators and smart technology.

The scheme will deliver up to 8,600 megalitres of high-surety irrigation water to underpin increased  productivity, efficiency, sustainability and growth.

Deputy Prime Minister Michael McCormack said the Scottsdale Irrigation Scheme in North Eastern  Tasmania would have tremendous economic benefits for the region.

“The Scottsdale Irrigation Scheme is enabling an increase to irrigated agriculture by around 13,000  hectares allowing higher value agriculture, including dairy,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“By growing our agricultural production, we are supporting regional Australian livelihoods, creating  jobs and contributing to regional economic recovery.”

The Scottsdale Irrigation Scheme includes the Camden Rivulet Dam, a one megawatt pump station  on the St Patricks River, 92 kilometres of pipeline and eight kilometres of power line.

The Camden Rivulet Dam was a significant component of the Scottsdale Irrigation Scheme. With a  9,800 megalitre capacity, 40 per cent of the dam will be filled via natural inflows from the Camden  Rivulet, and 60 per cent pumped from the now complete one megawatt St Patricks River Pump  Station.

Federal Member for Bass Bridget Archer said the irrigation season started on 16 November 2020 in  Tasmania and it was great to see the scheme delivery.







“Scheme participants have been able to activate farm outlets to test on farm infrastructure ready for  the irrigation season,” Mrs Archer said.

“By investing in infrastructure, including critical water supply projects, the Australian Government is  laying the foundations for economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic.”

Tasmanian Irrigation Chief Executive Officer Andrew Kneebone said the Scottsdale Irrigation Scheme  was another outstanding example of what could be achieved through the unique public-private  funding model.

“The Australian Government contributed $25.3 million, the Tasmanian Government $20 million and  irrigators $12 million, enabling many local design, engineering, earthmoving, construction and civil  firms to be contracted to commence site works in October 2018,” Mr Kneebone said.

“Farmers from areas surrounding Scottsdale, Bridport, Springfield, Nabowla and Waterhouse are  absolutely thrilled that they can invest and expand with confidence, with one farmer recently telling  me he will increase their irrigated dairy grazing area by 50 per cent to milk an additional 300 cows  and another increasing the area planted to vegetables by around 30 per cent.

“There is no doubt that irrigation infrastructure is a game changer in Tasmania, and we are extremely  thankful to the Australian and Tasmanian governments, as well as landowners, who commit to  funding each project.”

The Scottsdale Irrigation Scheme is the final of five Tranche 2 irrigation projects to be completed,  following the successful launch of 10 Tranche 1 projects. A further 10 irrigation projects are now  being planned as part of Tranche 3.

By 2025, Tasmanian Irrigation will manage a portfolio of irrigation infrastructure valued at more than  $680 million, capable of delivering 168,998 megalitres of water via 1,451 kilometres of pipeline,  55 pump stations, 24 dams and three power stations.

More than 60 jobs were supported during construction and a further 45 ongoing jobs will be  supported once the full scheme is in operation - 30 on farm and another 15 in support services.

The Australian Government is investing $3.5 billion towards a 10-year rolling program of water  infrastructure projects in partnership with states and territories, to supply billions of litres of water  for productive use each year and enhance the National Water Grid.

This investment will grow Australian agriculture, increase water security, build resilience to drought  and support regional prosperity.

For information about the National Water Grid visit www.nationalwatergrid.gov.au.

Ends.

Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Jo Williamson 0418 475 668 | Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Mrs Archer - (03) 6334 7033  Mr Kneebone - Sarah Hirst 0448 906 021

