

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY  DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AFTERNOON AGENDA  MONDAY, 23 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Ruby Princess debacle; Scott Morrison blaming Gladys Berejiklian;  temperature tests at airports; Rex Patrick; Stuart Robert’s MyGov cyber attack  claims; Centrelink and stimulus.

KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: I'm joined by the Shadow Minister for Home Affairs, Kristina  Keneally. Thanks for your time. Let's start this huge story, the Ruby Princess, where were  the problems with that? Because the Government is saying it was a New South Wales  health issue. What's your view on where this all fell over?

KRISTINA KENEALLY, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE AND SHADOW  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Thank Well the Government said, as clear as a bell,  last week that they were going to stop cruise ships from arriving in ports for 30 days.  Senator Cash in Senate Question Time repeated that claim. But what has happened? Four  cruise ships have arrived, passengers have been allowed to disembark even though they  had some over 100 cases of reported illness, people were allowed to get off the ship and  go out about across the country. Six cases now in WA connected to the Ruby Princess. 49  confirmed cases of coronavirus coming off that ship. Now, I gotta say the Australian Border  Force do a great job. Their responsibility is not to set health policy; their responsibility is to  enforce health policy. The question I have- what is the health policy?

GILBERT: So what should have happened in your view then?

KENEALLY: What is the health policy that Border Force should have been implementing?

GILBERT: Well what's your view on how that should've been managed?

KENEALLY: Well Kieran unfortunately it is another example of just mixed messages from  the Commonwealth Government and mixed messages when they are trying to interact with  state governments. You have to question the extent to which this National Cabinet is  working effectively. If you have in this circumstance, the Commonwealth pointing fingers at  the state of New South Wales for what is essentially a border responsibility. Now last time I

checked under our laws, borders are the responsibility of the Commonwealth Government.  And this Government, backed into a corner by a mistake that has allowed some 50, nearly  50 and climbing I suspect, number of coronavirus cases to come off this Ruby Princess.

GILBERT: It is more than 50 now.

KENEALLY: They blamed Gladys Berejiklian and the New South Wales Government. You  think about the bushfires- they tried to blame Gladys Berejiklian. Is there not a problem that  this Government won't seek to punt home to the Premier of New South Wales? A Liberal  Premier, who by the way, I think is doing a really good job, trying to work with empathy and  leadership in her community.

GILBERT: But most people recognise that these are extraordinary times and that that the  National Cabinet is a good initiative.

KENEALLY: It is a good initiative; it should be working more cohesively.

GILBERT: Is it inevitable that there are going to be some mistakes along the way? As  grave as this one is, but there are going to be mistakes along the way when you're dealing  with such a huge epidemic.

KENEALLY: Kieran this is a case where the Commonwealth, the Prime Minister himself,  stood up in front of the nation and said for the next 30 days there will be no cruise ships.  Now somebody made an exemption for these four ships; it would have had to have been  the Commonwealth. They are now trying to duck and weave around that and shoot the  blame home to Gladys Berejiklian- the Premier of New South Wales- and her state  Government. It is their border responsibility and it's their responsibility to ensure that if  people are coming off ships or airplanes, they should be temperature tested.

GILBERT: Do you want everyone off a plane tested? Because this is the other point I was  going to ask you in a broader sense. Anecdotally, we're seeing people arrive, saying there  aren't the tests at airports. Should everyone be temperature tested upon arrival?

KENEALLY: You know, we are being told by the Prime Minister that Singapore is the  example we should be following. The kids in Singapore going to school. Well, kids in  Singapore are being temperature tested. They have people who are being contact-traced  or being temperature tested. People coming off airplanes are being temperature tested.  The best medical advice, the precautionary approach around the world, is telling us that  testing people as widely as possible is what helps us stop this virus.

GILBERT: The Chief Medical Officer says we are doing ad hoc tests; people with flu  symptoms are being tested. Isn't that something you've argued for in terms of, you know,  spot testing in hostels and so on like New Zealand's done?

KENEALLY: Well, what we would like to see in terms of some of the spot testing- that's a  different issue. It's not just temperature testing in hostels, it's actually ensuring that people  are self-isolating. What New Zealand is doing is using their border force equivalent to go  out and spot check that people are following directions around self-isolation and also doing  temperature testing. This is the problem Kieran- we are simply not doing enough as quickly  as possible to ensure we are doing as wide of testing both for the coronavirus itself as well  as temperatures.



GILBERT: We've just had confirmation Rex Patrick has tested positive for coronavirus as  well. So it's shown how easy this is to spread with him being on the same committee as  Senator Bragg and therefore being in isolation.

KENEALLY: The good news that's come out of this, of course, is that Jenny McAllister  tested negative, but it does show the fact that this is quite a spreading disease. And I wish  Senator Patrick all the best with his diagnosis, in what I hope to be a speedy recovery for  him. But Kieran, it goes back to this point. This is a highly contagious disease; it is far more  contagious than the flu. We should be asking ourselves, what are the countries around the  world that have flattened of the curve of this spread doing? And how can we replicate that  here? And if we should be doing something, if we think we're going to need to do it in two  weeks, let's bring it forward and do it now.

GILBERT: Now onto the MyGov website. The Minister concerned, Stuart Robert, initially  said it was a denial of service. As it turns out in Parliament, it was the same alarm that the  system would have in that instance, but it was just from demand.

KENEALLY: It was the demand of service that triggered a denial of service. It was an  extraordinary demand...

GILBERT: Shouldn't Labor recognise that this is, this is an extraordinary time and rather  than put the boot in just understand these sorts of things are going to happen?

KENEALLY: To be blunt here, Kieran, we are in an extraordinary health and economic  crisis and we are being constructive. We are going to pass this stimulus package. We are  going to do it because it's necessary; people are losing their jobs now- 88,000 people- in  hospitality alone have already lost their jobs. We're going to be as constructive as possible  but that doesn't mean the Government gets a blank cheque. And it doesn't mean where  there are things that where we want to point out, where we can be doing things that will  save people's lives and that's what we're talking about now Kieran. We're not just talking  about an economic stimulus package; we're talking about the need to take steps that will  save people's lives. It might be your parents, it might be our neighbours, whoever it is,  these are people's lives we're talking about and if there are things the Government could  be doing now and should be doing now, we're going to ask them to do them.

GILBERT: And in terms of just quickly on the MyGov website, the demand they had for  55,000- it was more than 55,000. So it shows you the sort of dire straits that we're facing  right now in terms of employment for many people in this country, let alone those terrible  scenes that we're seeing- almost Great Depression-like at the front of Centrelink.

KENEALLY: These are extraordinary images that most people in our country will have  never seen in their lifetime. But the thing is, this shouldn't have been unanticipated either.  You know, we've known now for weeks what is coming. The Government has been talking  for weeks.  They introduced a $17 billion stimulus package last week. It was possible to  foresee this and put measures in place. It's unfortunate that hasn't happened today.

GILBERT: Kristina Keneally, I appreciate your time. Thanks.

KENEALLY: Thank you.



ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110











