

THE HON JOSH FRYDENBERG MP  Treasurer

MEDIA RELEASE

Media contact: Leanne Jones — Office of the Hon Josh Frydenberg MP — 02 6277 7340  The Hon Josh Frydenberg MP | Treasurer | MELBOURNE

20 March 2020

HELPING SMALL BUSINESSES GET ACCESS TO CREDIT

To help small businesses get access to credit quickly and efficiently, the Government is providing  greater certainty by ensuring that responsible lending obligations do not apply to the provision of credit  to small businesses.

Currently, responsible lending obligations do not apply to lending which is predominantly for business  purposes. To fall within this exemption, a lender must undertake due diligence to confirm that the  money borrowed meets this test.

To allow lenders the ability to move quickly to support small businesses, the Government will provide  an exemption from responsible lending obligations for a period of six months in relation to the credit  they extend to their existing small business customers, provided there is an existing borrowing  relationship and some proportion of that credit is used for business purposes.

The exemption will apply to new credit, credit limit increases and credit variations and restructures.

Credit providers regulated by the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) will remain  subject to APRA’s prudential standards while the exemption applies, and providers who subscribe to an  industry code will remain obliged to abide by that code. The Australian Financial Complaints Authority  will retain its current jurisdiction to resolve complaints relating to lending.

The Government recognises that the environment for small business has changed and continues to  evolve with the rapidly-evolving challenges posed by the coronavirus. This exemption represents a  deliberate, measured and targeted adjustment of regulatory settings to provide the certainty and  confidence necessary to allow small businesses access to credit in a timely and efficient manner.

These changes complement the Government and Reserve Bank of Australia’s coordinated actions  yesterday to inject $105 billion into the financial system to support small and medium businesses to  deal with the economic challenges that are being caused by the spread of the coronavirus.

The Morrison Government will continue to work closely with the banking industry and our financial  regulators to support Australian jobs and businesses during this challenging time.

Ends.

