



The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister



The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health

Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Public Service and Cabinet



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE



6 March 2020

CORONAVIRUS PUBLIC HEALTH PARTNERSHIP WITH THE STATES   COMMONWEALTH TO MEET 50 PER CENT OF STATE COSTS

The Australian Government has committed to a 50-50 shared health funding deal with the states and  territories to ensure a rapid health response to the evolving COVID-19 (coronavirus) outbreak.

The Australian Government will pay 50 per cent of the additional costs incurred by state and territory  health services as a result of the diagnosis and treatment of patients with COVID-19, those suspected of  having the virus or activities to prevent the spread of it.

This support will be uncapped and demand driven and our funding will rise in response to the changing  health needs of Australians.

We estimate a likely partnership of $1 billion to meet state health costs including $500 million of  Commonwealth funding.

Under the proposed agreement, an immediate $100 million advance payment will be delivered, on a  population basis, to support states and territories as we partner together to protect the health of all  Australians.

This support will cover health services provided by state or territory governments in public hospitals,  primary care, aged care and community health expenditure, such as health related activities in childcare  centres.

This recognises the need for immediate financial assistance so we can prepare the health system, while  providing maximum flexibility to respond as the outbreak evolves.

The National Partnership Agreement would be effective from 21 January 2020; the date that ‘human  coronavirus with pandemic potential’ was identified as a Listed Human Disease under the Biosecurity  Act 2015.

This new support sits above the current health agreements with the states and territories, and follows  the health ministers meeting last week where we activated our Emergency Plan.

Under the current agreement, the Commonwealth and the states and territories jointly fund hospital  services on a 45 per cent Commonwealth and 55 per cent states and territory share basis. The states and  territories are responsible and fund community health services, while the Commonwealth funds general  practice and health services through Medicare.

In addition, the Australian Government is conducting two forums today with the primary care providers  and the aged care sector to identify areas for additional support.

We understand that our doctors and aged care providers will be central to management of COVID-19.

Our support will be aimed at protecting patients, particularly people with chronic conditions, and aged  care residents - the groups most at risk of serious illness from the virus

As part of this the Commonwealth government will meet 100 per cent of the costs of additional  Medicare services in areas such as Medicare Telehealth or home visits, increased Medicare pathology  services, and the national medical stockpile.

The Government is ensuring the capacity of our health system to effectively assess, diagnose and treat  people with COVID-19 in a way that minimises spread of the disease in the community.

We continue to manage the risk of the virus based on the best and latest evidence and medical advice.

The Australian Government’s aim is to slow the spread of the disease and ensure Australia stays ahead  of the curve in reducing the impact of COVID-19.

[END]

Media Contacts:  Prime Minister’s office: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  Minister Hunt’s office: James Perrin, 0447 534 427  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

