



The Hon Ken Wyatt AM MP

Minister for Indigenous Australians  Member for Hasluck

MEDIA RELEASE

27 November 2020

ADDITIONAL RELIEF FUNDING FOR CENTRAL LAND COUNCIL

The Australian Government is providing an additional $858,000 from the Aboriginals Benefit  Account (ABA) for the Central Land Council to support social wellbeing and economic growth  projects as part of their continued response to COVID-19.

Minister for Indigenous Australians, the Hon Ken Wyatt AM, MP, said the funding will allow the  delivery of remote art equipment, telecommunications access and mental health support.

“This funding from the ABA continues the Government’s health and economic response to  COVID-19 and responds to ongoing needs,” Minister Wyatt said.

“The Central Land Council received $4 million in April to address immediate infrastructure  requirements and travel expenses for people returning to homelands to self-isolate from  COVID-19 risks.

“The new funding will encourage residents staying in communities to contribute to local  economic development projects identified by the Central Land Council.

“The package includes $612,000 for Desart’s Art Centre Resilience Project, $201,000 for the  NPY Women’s Council Ngangkari program, focussed on mental health outcomes, and $45,000  to upgrade the power supply in Brumby Plains, to ensure ongoing telecommunications access.

“The support for Desart includes studio materials, small infrastructure and equipment, storage  and studio equipment, and upgraded information technology support within art centres.

“The Government remains committed to working in partnership with Aboriginal and Torres Strait  Islander people to deliver projects that improve the health and wellbeing of Indigenous  Australians according to the aspirations of each community.”

The Aboriginals Benefit Account receives royalties from mining operations on Aboriginal land  and is provided to Indigenous organisations for projects that have a lasting impact on Northern  Territory Aboriginal communities.



Media contact: Luke Nayna, Senior Media Adviser, 0438 231 687

Authorised by Ken Wyatt AM, MP, Member for Hasluck.

