TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  4BC BRISBANE   TUESDAY, 15 DECEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Jobs; A better normal after Covid-19; Apprentices and Trainees; American-sized  university debts.

SCOTT EMERSON, HOST: Now part of the front end of Labor's team is Tanya Plibersek. She's the  Shadow Minister for Education and Training and the former Deputy Leader of the Labor Party. And  she joins me live in the studio. Thank you, Tanya Plibersek.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Good morning  Scott.

EMERSON: Wonderful to have you here. Now, we were just talking off air beforehand, this'll be one  of the first trips you’ll be making. Not just to Queensland, anywhere at the moment.

PLIBERSEK: It feels really strange actually because you know normally when you're a federal  politician you're traveling every week when parliament's not sitting - going to different parts of  Australia. This is my first trip other than to Canberra - I've been driving from Sydney to Canberra.  This is my first trip on a plane interstate for most of this year - and it's so great to be in Brisbane. I  had a beautiful walk along the river this morning before coming into your show. You know, I was  expecting it to be pretty rainy and pretty miserable but it's a gorgeous day out there - little bit  steamy, but very Brisbane.

EMERSON: A lot better than Sydney I hear from down south but extraordinary to see how quickly  the weather has changed. We've had the heavy rains and winds the last three days. But you haven't  been traveling, so you had the chance now to write a book in the meantime.

PLIBERSEK: Well, you know what they say, ‘idle hands are the devil's work’. I had to do something  during lockdown. Yeah. Look I've written a book. It's called Upturn: A Better Normal After Covid-19.  And the book really had two purposes. The first is it’s raising money for charity, so it's raising money  for two homelessness charities because obviously they've been run off their feet this year.

But it's also - I was thinking, after big changes - like after the Second World War, after a depression,  recession, pandemic, we really need to think about what got us through this tough time. What's great  about Australia and how do we harness that to take another step forward and another step forward.  So this is a book about hope. It's a book about full employment, which I think we really need to focus  on as a nation. People have lost jobs, businesses have closed. So many people are struggling, so  many are worried for themselves or their kids or their grandkids. So this is really about what comes  next.



How do we rebuild our economy out of this recession? How do we make sure the jobs are there?  That they're secure, permanent, well-paid. How do we make sure our society's fairer? How do we  look after people who've been struggling at a time like this?

EMERSON: How do you think the Government has handled the pandemic over the last six, seven,  eight, nine, ten months I guess it's been?

PLIBERSEK: Look I think Australians have done a fantastic job. And I really do think it's down to the  discipline we've shown, the kindness we've shown each other, the fact that we've followed the  advice of the health experts. And I think what you said earlier, Scott about there being a lot more  cooperation and people really responding well to that is an important thing for us to know.

That is good. That’s something good we were able to do. I don't think the response has been perfect  when you look at the federal government. We've still got thousands of Australians stuck overseas  who were supposed to be home for Christmas, and they're not. We had big outbreaks in aged care  facilities, which is one of the real weaknesses that we've had; and the things like that app that we all  downloaded. I encouraged people to download the app. That's been a real abject failure. You know,  that's been sadly- it hasn't really traced many people at all. So I think it's mostly good when you  when you ask Australians, ‘how have we got through this?’ You look around the world, you think we  have done great compared to the rest of the world. But there's lessons to learn for next time too.

EMERSON: I think there’s always lessons to be learned from the any of these events. And obviously  it's not something that comes up so often in terms of pandemics, as you know, first in a hundred  years.

PLIBERSEK: Fingers crossed.

EMERSON: But as you say whether it's a government or Australians and I think yep, they should  both be applauded in that sense and mistakes have been made but overall, clearly you look at the  polls, the federal government has been given the tick by most voters out there. When you look at  those polls, they're doing much better than Labor at the moment in the polls and much better  compared Scott Morrison to Anthony Albanese. Why isn't Anthony Albanese doing better in the  polls?

PLIBERSEK: I think two things about the polls- well three things about the polls. Never believe the  polls. We learnt that to our cost at the time of the last election. Secondly if you look at the two-party  preferred vote, Labor and the LNP are pretty close together. And in fact, our primary vote has gone  up since the last election. So I don't think we're doing that badly. We're not doing well enough, but  we're not doing that badly.

I think what's important for us is that we focus on what matters to people and that's jobs. It's jobs for  themselves. It's a future for their kids and their grandkids. It's job security. At a time like this during  a recession, that is more important than ever.

EMERSON: Well you're not doing too badly in terms of the two-party preferred vote. But the  Coalition is still ahead, but on the preferred Prime Minister marker, Anthony Albanese is well behind  Scott Morrison. We saw speculation again over the weekend about his future. Your name is always  mentioned as a potential Opposition Leader. Do you believe that Anthony Albanese will lead the

party to the next election?



PLIBERSEK: I'll tell you what I know for certain is that people will never forgive us if we start talking  about ourselves again. My focus, and the focus of Anthony and all of our colleagues, is on what  matters for people in their lives and that's a job. That's job security. It's a future for themselves and  their kids.

EMERSON: I heard Wayne Swan, you talk about books, we saw The Write Stuff coming from the  right faction of the party and Wayne Swan was very well to point out, I think it was Gough Whitlam  he was quoting, when he said that ‘you can be right on a lot of things but if you're not in office, that  doesn't matter.’ Surely for a lot of Labor supporters, they want to see their party in government and  they'd be worried given those poor results at the moment for Anthony Albanese?



PLIBERSEK: I think the way to convince people that we are ready and fit to govern is to focus on  what matters in their lives, which is a job, a secure job with decent pay. Wayne actually writes a  chapter in my book too- it's good to have a Queenslander in the book. We talk about full employment  a lot. And I think that is something that the Government and the Opposition should be able to agree  on. We want to aim for full employment in Australia. After the Second World War, Australians had  sacrificed so much during the Second World War, the Government at the time said what do we want  to achieve for Australians? We want to increase homeownership and we want to aim for full  employment. We got unemployment down to 2% or 3% and homeownership went up really  substantially after the Second World War. That's the sort of big vision we need to have for Australia.

We need to focus on jobs and that means building things. It means roads, bridges, all the rest of it -  but also smaller community infrastructure throughout our communities, upgrading the local  community hall, fixing the footpath, fixing the park, building a new school, building a new hospital.

We need to make things. So we need to be a manufacturing country. We need to have cheaper  energy so businesses keep manufacturing in Australia.

We need to care for people. I cannot believe we still have got more than a hundred thousand people  on waiting lists for home care, who have been assessed as eligible and needing help in the home,  because they're old and frail and have worked hard all their lives and deserve a bit of help. More  than a hundred thousand people waiting on the home care waiting list. We’ve got 2.4 million people  who don't have a job or want more hours of work, and we can't manage to connect those people with  the people who need home care? And of course, we need to make sure that the jobs are secure.  We've got all these people, these days who don't know what their next pay packet’s going to be.  How do you borrow money to buy a house, let alone buy a car, if you don't know whether you're  going to have 30 hours of work next week or six hours of work next week. So we need job security  as well.

EMERSON: Now Tanya Plibersek, you're in Queensland today heading out to Bundamba at Ipswich  today.

PLIBERSEK: Yeah, we're going up to visit a factory that makes valves and pumps because one of  the things that the Government seems to be suggesting is that you can do a manufacturing  apprenticeship without any hours of mandated, on-the-job training and that's just nuts. We all know

that apprentices do much better the more on-the-job training they've got, the better they're going to  be when you release them into the wild. And so we're talking to apprentices and the employer up  there.

And I'm also, before that, talking to some year 12 kids. They've been told by the Federal  Government that the cost of the degree they want to study next year has more than doubled. So  these kids, if they do a four-year degree - $58,000 of debt they're going to have when they graduate.  So how do you buy a home, how do you save a deposit for your first home if that's the debt you start  with before you get into the labour market? It's just cruel at a time when these year 12 kids have had  the year from hell. If they're not working, they should have the opportunity to get a trade or get a  degree so that they're ready for the jobs that we hope come when the recession is over.

EMERSON: All right Tanya Plibersek, great to have in the studio here for summer breakfast.

PLIBERSEK: Great to talk to you Scott.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

