MEDIA RELEASE

All in this together? Budget entrenches poverty

It is unconscionable that the Government did not include a permanent increase to Jobseeker in  the budget.

"If we can fund billions of dollars worth of tax cuts for the wealthy we can ensure that no one in  this country is living in poverty", Senator Rachel Siewert said.

Budgets are about the choices we make. This is a budget that ignores people trying to survive  without work when we know that there will be far more people without work than there are  jobs available for a long time into the future.

Everybody knows that the Jobseeker payment is too low, even the Government does because  they brought in the coronavirus supplement.

This budget is based on very big assumptions that there will be a vaccine by next year and that  the expenditure on Jobseeker will be half by the next budget.

While disabled people can make use of the extra $500 in this budget it does not make up for  the fact they did not receive the coronavirus supplement and the extra costs they had to wear.  Disabled people feel abandoned by this Government, they are extremely anxious about both  the health risks of this pandemic and their ability to get their medication and pay rent. $500 is  not enough.

“Refocusing” existing employment services programs will make savings of $1.4 billion over four  years and includes a transition to a new digital employment services platform. The Government  is investing further in on-line and digital services before the digital trials have been evaluated.  This process is likely to increase the digital divide.

For a start anyone who has spoken to or at least listened to someone on Jobseeker would know  that it is very difficult for people to actually afford internet services and smartphones.

The money for aged care is an insult to older Australians, their families and the workforce.  It’s

No publication date: received by Parl Library 07/10/2020

not enough.

Where is the proper funding for a workforce strategy? The sector needs at least $3.5 billion to  fix the workforce.

Where is a pay increase for our aged care workers who are caring for our mothers, fathers and  grandparents?

Piecemeal funding announcements won't fix the aged care sector and this budget once again  fails older Australians and their families

While more home care places are welcomed, the $1.6bn for an additional 23,000 home care  places still leaves a significant portion of the 100,000 Australians on the waiting list on that list.

There is no further funding to the royal commission COVID recommendations, despite the  Government accepting all the recommendations.

The Government is now describing the Cashless Debit Card funding as “ongoing funding” rather  than funding for trial sites. Clearly the Government wants to make this card permanent.

This is yet another attempt to stealthily entrench this racist and punitive card that it is not  accepted by the community or has any evidence that it is achieving its purported outcomes.

Of course they won't tell us how much this social experiment is costing. What we do know is  that it is costing people their dignity and quality of life.

Another budget and another failure to recognise the impact that climate change is having on  our health.

Climate change is affecting our health through an increase in infectious disease transmission  during extreme weather events and heatwaves, worsening air pollution, higher mortality rates  from heat stress, and increased incidence of mental illness.

This budget fails so many in our community, the Government should look after the well being of  everyone not just their wealthy mates.

Media Contact  Lucy Cowcher-Guthrie; 0418 401 180

No publication date: received by Parl Library 07/10/2020

