

CLARE O’NEIL MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INNOVATION, TECHNOLOGY AND THE FUTURE

OF WORK

MEMBER FOR HOTHAM





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

THURSDAY, 5 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Sports rorts; Bushfire response; Coronavirus



CLARE O’NEIL, SHADOW MINISTER FOR INNOVATION, TECHNOLOGY AND THE

FUTURE OF WORK: We're at the end of another week in Canberra, and it's been another

week of a flagrant abuse of power through the sports rorts scandal. There are millions of

Australians around this country who are struggling to pay their bills at the end of the month,

and they look to Canberra and see a government not focused on their interests, but

focused on covering up a scandal that stinks to high heaven. We have seen extraordinary

evidence through Senate Estimates this week that shows that Scott Morrison took money

from Australians through their taxpayer dollars and spent it on trying to win himself an

election. It looks very much like the Prime Minister was up to his neck in this scandal, with

the 136 emails that went between his office and Bridget Mackenzie's office. We also found

out this week very clear evidence that there were changes made to the sports rorts

recommendations after the Government went into caretaker mode, and that those changes

were made at the request of Scott Morrison's office. Now, there are obvious questions to

answer this week, but anyone who is watching federal politics has seen a Prime Minister

doing anything but give us a straight answer to straight questions about this. The thing that

is bothering me so much about this sports rorts scandal is, of course, the inherent misuse

of public funds that's occurred, but also the fact that the Prime Minister is trying to spin his

way out of this by pretending that this is business as usual in Canberra. Well, we do not

live in a corrupt autocracy. This is a high-quality representative democracy where we are

bound by law to use taxpayers' dollars for the good of the country, not for our own

interests. Scott Morrison needs to come into the Parliament today and answer questions

about why he's up to his neck in this scandal and why he thinks he shouldn't have to resign

just as the Sports Minister has had to.



I want to make a comment just quickly about what's happened with the bushfires. What we

see with sports rorts is that when it's in the Government's interests, they can get millions of

dollars out the door in a very short space of time, but when it comes to a situation where

Australians have lost their homes and lost their businesses, everything seems to be too

hard. We saw the Deputy Prime Minister make an extraordinary attack this morning on the

state governments about a blame game essentially about who's responsible for this. Now,

why can Scott Morrison and Michael McCormack not take responsibility for anything in this

country? They are the two most powerful people in the country. They have the power to

make sure that these Australians who have lost homes and lost businesses are able to

move on with their lives, and instead they're throwing up their hands and saying that it's

someone else's responsibility.



JOURNALIST: Italy has closed its schools and universities for two weeks. Shouldn't that

mean we change our travel advice for Italy?



O’NEIL: We've got the best expert advice on how to manage the coronavirus and we're

working very closely with the Government to make sure that's followed. If advice is given to

the tune of your question, then no doubt the Government will act on it. I'm going to trust the

advice of the medical doctors about what the infectious disease spread is looking like for

us. But I think if it gets to that point, then of course the Government will do what it needs to

do. I think the most important thing for us to say right now is that if you are going to be in

any country in the world, when a crisis like this hits, you want to be here in Australia. We've

got the best medical system in the world. And we're really confident that we're going to be

able to see this through. So people don't need to panic, they need to wash their hands,

perhaps a little bit more than usual, but we're going to get through this.



JOURNALIST: We see three people involved in a—they were diplomatic mail service



couriers—they were referred to the AFP. How will that affect our standing in the diplomatic

community? A day before we saw defence recruitment potential hacking as well.



O’NEIL: I haven't read the story, so I'll let Penny Wong comment on that. I think that's her

portfolio.



JOURNALIST: Just a question about Michael McCormack. Reports this morning that he's

blaming the states for non-distribution of funds. The problem I think most Australians would

understand is that states have the authority to do that and if the Government were to try

and take over their role, they'd be up in arms about it, saying you're basically stepping on

our turf. If you were the Government, how would you do the same thing?



O’NEIL: Well, I don't think the states are trying to engage in turf warfare here. They're

trying to work in partnership with the Federal Government to help rebuild the lives of

people who have just literally lost everything. And the thing that I find extraordinary is that

instead of showing a bit of empathy and a bit of care for people who have just experienced

the worst disaster of their lives, the Government wants to engage in a blame game about

who might be responsible. I mean, surely what matters here is that there are many people

who have just lost everything that they've worked for their entire lives, and government

needs to come in and help them. Now, Labor's presented some suggestions for how we

think that can be done better. It doesn't have to be done our way. But what I want is for

Prime Minister Morrison to stand up in the Parliament and take responsibility. How

frustrating—the most powerful person in the country, who can fix these problems, instead

wants to point the finger at everyone but himself.



MEDIA CONTACT: JORDAN NEWNHAM 0410 308 896





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













