

DON FARRELL

SHADOW SPECIAL MINISTER OF STATE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR SPORT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM

SHADOW MINISTER ASSISTING THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA



MURRAY WATT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR NORTHERN AUSTRALIA

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DISASTER AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

LABOR SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

CANBERRA

FRIDAY, 6 MARCH 2020



SUBJECT/S: Bushfire funding being used for coronavirus recovery; tourism; sports

rorts; Bridget McKenzie.

.

DON FARRELL, SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM AND SPORTS: We've had a

pretty busy week this week with Estimates. I'd like to talk about a couple of things today.



First is the effect of coronavirus on the tourism industry in Australia. We were up very late

last night questioning the minister, Minister (Simon) Birmingham, about this issue. What's

very clear is that as a result of the bushfires - that was the first catastrophe to affect the

tourism industry at the start of the year - the Government committed $76 million to try and

provide assistance to Australian businesses to cope with the bushfires and try and give

them some support.



What now seems to be the case is that with the coronavirus emerging as a very significant

factor in determining whether overseas visitors will come to this country, the Government

seems to be suggesting that they are going to stretch that $76 million that was meant for

bushfire relief to small businesses, to those businesses affected by the coronavirus.



Now, we know, as a matter of fact, that the coronavirus will do more damage to the

Australian tourism industry than bushfires have done so far. We're saying that that's $76

million has to go to the bushfire relief and the Government has to expand the envelope of

money.



We know from the sports rorts affair that in a matter of days, the Government managed to

find $150 million to give to a couple of their swimming pools in marginal seats in the last

federal election. Surely this Government can find some money to assist tourism

businesses throughout Australia who are now in desperate need of government

assistance. We know from all the medical advice that this problem is likely to get worse

before it gets better. And we're now calling on the Minister and the Prime Minister to come

to the assistance of Australian small businesses, accept that there's a serious problem and

they simply can't use bushfire money to deal with the issue of coronavirus.



So with the ministers meeting today, we've got all the state tourism ministers are here in

Canberra. We're calling on the Government to expand the envelope, accept that there's

real problems in the tourism industry in Australia, particularly in Far North Queensland,

where Senator Watt comes from, is significant issues up there. The Government has to

act. We can't see them do what they did over the bushfire issue and simply delay. This

emergency now requires immediate action. And we're calling on the Minister and the Prime

Minister to act immediately about this issue. And I'll hand over to my colleague.



MURRAY WATT, SHADOW MINISTER FOR DISASTER AND EMERGENCY

MANAGEMENT: Thanks very much, Don. Just to reinforce what this means, from what

Don has been saying. One of the things that has become very clear over the course of this

week during Estimates is that the Prime Minister's promises to bushfire victims are entirely

hollow. And in addition, when it comes to tourism support, this week has shown that the

Government is just all over the shop about what support it's providing for the tourism

industry in the wake of the bushfires and now in the wake of coronavirus.



About a week ago, the Member for Leichhardt, Warren Entsch, did an interview with his

local paper in Cairns, where he claimed that some of these tourism funding to support

bushfire regions was going to be diverted to other parts of the country to help with

coronavirus.



And I want to be clear, Labor absolutely thinks that areas affected by the coronavirus need

our support. But about a week ago, we had Mr Entsch saying that the bushfire money was

going to be diverted towards areas that needed it for coronavirus.



I put that in Estimates this week to the coordinator of the bushfire response. Mr Colvin. He

had never heard of it and he'd certainly never been consulted about it. And then in the

same Estimates session we had Senator Seselja, the minister at the table, rule out that

money was going to be diverted from bushfire funding towards coronavirus.



But now we read in the papers, in The Guardian, today that the meeting papers for the

Tourism Ministers Council showed that the Government does intend to raid the money that

it has put aside for tourism, supporting bushfire regions, to help out other regions suffering

now from coronavirus. The Government has been all over the shop about this, but the truth

finally seems to be seeping out that all of the Prime Minister's promises about support for

the tourism industry and the many jobs that it provides after the bushfires are hollow.



We learnt this week that the Prime Minister's claims to have a $2 billion bushfire recovery

fund aren't real. It's just more spin. It's a notional fund. And now what we're learning is that

the promises about support for the tourism industry are also not real. I just think it is

completely unacceptable for the Government to be plundering funds that it has promised to

bushfire victims for another purpose. No matter what that purpose is. They should be able

to walk and chew gum at the same time. They should be able to find money in their budget

to assist bushfire victims as they have promised to do. And they should also be able to

support those parts of the country whose tourism industry is suffering from coronavirus.



Unfortunately, this is yet another example where the Prime Minister's marketing isn't

backed up by the reality. All this Prime Minister cares about, whether it be about bushfires,

coronavirus or anything else, is about getting the headline. And then he runs away and

leaves it to other people to expose the fact that his promises are hollow. It's not good

enough. It's insulting to bushfire victims and it's insulting to those parts of the country that

are struggling with coronavirus.



I know Don’s got some other issues we've got to address, but we can take questions after

that, if you like.



FARRELL: Thanks very much. The drip, drip, drip in respect to the sports rorts saga

continues. And overnight we saw that former minister, former Sports Minister (Bridget)

McKenzie indicated that the document that she signed approving the final round of sports

grants program was signed by her on 4th of April. So a week before the federal election

(was called) and as far as she was concerned, they were the final projects. Now, we know

from evidence given by the Australian National Audit Office that a further 12 changes were

made to that program before the document was finally signed off a week later after the

election had been called and $43 million worth of sports programs were then approved.



Now if, as Minister McKenzie has said overnight, she didn't approve that list, the question

now arises, who did approve that list? If it wasn't Minister McKenzie or her office, who did

approve that $43 million worth of projects? We think it's now time for the Prime Minister to

come out and make it clear who finally signed off these projects. You might recall the

Prime Minister's defence throughout this whole process has been he simply referred to

grant applications to the Minister. Well, the Minister's made it very clear overnight that she

signed off on the final list a week before the election (was called). The final list was then

changed. It was changed as a result of communications between her office and the Prime

Minister's office. It's now time for the Prime Minister to come clean. Tell us honestly, tell the

Australian people honestly, what was his real role in awarding these grants and tell the

Australian people who made the ultimate decision to grant what we now know to be an

industrial scale pork barrel?



JOURNALIST: Can I ask on tourism first? What level of overlap is there between the

areas affected by the bushfires, in the areas that have been hit by coronavirus, is it a case

of domestic tourism versus international tourism?



FARRELL: No, no, it's not a case of domestic tourism versus international tourism

because a whole lot of the places that were affected by the bushfires were places that

international tourists go. But I think what we know now is that as bad and as terrible as the

bushfires were in terms of their effect on the community, but also their impact on tourism,

the coronavirus is going to be much worse. So if the Government is saying, look, we are

going to give $76 million to help out domestic tourism for bushfires, we're going to need a

whole lot more money to deal with the issue of coronavirus, because the reality is it has an

impact far broader than just those bushfire affected areas. So it's going to be a bigger

problem. And if it's a bigger problem, then the Government needs to have a better

response. And as I said, in the dying days of the election, the Government found $150

billion for a couple of swimming pools in two electorates in Western Australia and Victoria.

And if they could find $76 million to help out the bushfires, how about coming up with a

decent amount of money for all those areas, including Far North Queensland, that have

been dramatically affected by the coronavirus?



JOURNALIST: If the money that is already allocated to telling international visitors to

Australia isn't burnt to a crisp, we're still open, we're still welcoming, why can that

campaign not just simply be broadened to say we're still welcoming people?



FARRELL: Well, that may be that that might be a solution, but the reality is $76 million isn't

going to be enough to do that. We're now talking about a much bigger problem. The reality

is that the whole world affected by the coronavirus, but tourism operators, generally small

businesses in this country are now significantly affected by the combination of the

bushfires and the coronavirus. The Government simply can't leave it at $76 million. There's

a big issue here. We have to ensure that our small businesses in the tourism area, with

some assistance from the Government. The Government is simply sitting on their hands.

They can act. They've got the money to act. They allegedly have a surplus, at least last

year. Why aren't they spending that money to help and assist Australian small businesses

and keep jobs going, particularly in the region? I mean, most of these big tourism areas are

affecting the regions. We need support for these regions. They're crying out for it. They're

telling the Government ‘what about doing something’? And the Government simply isn't

listening.



JOURNALIST: So when you say we need more money, is it a little bit more, or are we

looking at double the amount?



FARRELL: Well, I'd be starting with at least doubling the amount. I think if the Government

thinks $76 million was enough to deal with bushfires, we're now dealing with a far more

serious issue of coronavirus.



JOURNALIST: Senator McKenzie's statements that she put out late last night - do you

think that that was aimed at rehabilitating her reputation over this?



FARRELL: I think, to put the best interpretation on it, Senator McKenzie was telling the

truth. I think when she said that the final document that she signed was the 4th of April, I

think she was telling the truth. What we now have to find out is who's been lying in this

process. The Prime Minister came out and said all he was doing was sending along

suggestions for grants. Well, if that was the case then Senator McKenzie's final list on 4th

of April should have been the one that made the final decision. We now know that 12

changes with a total of $43 million worth of grants was made sometime after the election

was called on the 11th of April. I think Minister Mackenzie is telling the truth. Well, she'll

have an opportunity in a short period of time to come and tell her version of the events to

the select committee, which is now investigating this matter. But if, as I believe, Senator

McKenzie is telling the truth, then somebody is lying in this whole process. And we need

the Prime Minister now to come out and say what was his involvement. It was obviously

more than just making suggestions. He's now got to tell the truth as well.



JOURNALIST: Do you think she's now pointing the finger to Scott Morrison?



FARRELL: Well, I think she's decided that after what's been a scandal that's gone on for

two months that she needs to make sure that what she did has been correctly reported.

She's now saying 'the document I finally signed, which I thought was the final list on 4th of

April, was the final list'. We now know that list has been very, very significantly changed.

Millions of dollars changed hands in that short period of time. The Prime Minister must now

come out and say, look, he either rejects the Minister McKenzie's defence and says, no,

she's not telling the truth, but I think she is telling the truth. I think, to her credit, she's come

out and said the right thing to correct the record. Now it's up to the Prime Minister to tell us

what did he know and when did he know it.



JOURNALIST: She also said that there was obviously an administrative error that had

taken place and that tallies with what Luke McCann told you on Wednesday morning. Do

you not accept that there was some error and that an earlier version of the spreadsheet

might have been attached?



FARRELL: I don't think even Mr. McCann  would claim that the 12 changes that were

made after Minister McKenzie signed what she thought was her final document were

administrative errors. That's not to say that it might not have been a couple of mistakes in

it, but we are talking 12 projects that went in and out over that period of time. We're talking

millions of dollars changing from one project to another. That was not an administrative

error. Somebody made a calculated decision about where that money was going to be

spent and where was it spent? It was spent either in marginal seats that the Government

was trying to win or independents seats that the Government was trying to win. That was

not the sign of an administrative error. That's a deliberate decision to target public money,

money that sporting clubs around this country thought was going to go to their benefit to

help their clubs, because they thought it was an above the board process going on, that if

they put in a good application, that that would be considered fairly and they would be

judged on their merits. Now, we know from the ANAO report that's not what happened.

And I don't believe this was simply administrative. It cannot be that millions of dollars

changed hands from projects through an administrative error.



JOURNALIST: Would you like to see further rounds of this grant [inaudible] go to those

clubs [inaudible] highest score on this round?



FARRELL: The first thing that this Government should do is come clean, admit that this

was a giant rort, an industrial scale rort, but then say to those clubs - which Sport Australia

itself selected as deserving of the money - say to those clubs, ‘look, we're sorry. We know

we've done the wrong thing here’. And those clubs ought to get the funding. That's where it

ought to start. I'm all for more funding being spent on sport. I think it's a good investment in

health and in young people. So I'm all for that. But I think we start with a process, and not a

process where all these clubs are told, 'oh, by the way, we're opening a new round and

you've got to reapply'. That simply isn't a fair a fair outcome. These clubs won fair and

square. They were the best projects that were assessed as such by Sport Australia. I think

the Government now has to say, 'okay, whatever else we do, we start by giving those clubs

the money they should have got before the last election'.



ENDS





MEDIA CONTACTS:

TOM ZED (FARRELL) 0419 227 286

TALI ELEY (WATT) 0448 078 456



