

TRANSCRIPT



Senator James Paterson

Liberal Senator for Victoria



Thursday 20 August 2020



ABC News: RN Breakfast



Subjects: Superannuation, border restrictions, UK-AUS FTA



Fran Kelly: The side effects of the COVID19 crisis is a deeply polarised debate over

compulsory superannuation. The government's leaving open the option of delaying next

year's legislated increase in the super guarantee levy on the grounds that it would

suppress wages and ultimately cost jobs when the country's in recession. The push to

abandon the super rise is being driven by a growing number of Coalition backbenchers

who say workers need this extra money now, not in retirement. Liberal Senator James

Paterson is the chair of the parliament's Financial Services Committee. James Paterson,

welcome back to breakfast.



Senator James Paterson: Good morning Fran.



Kelly: Earlier in the week, we were speaking with the assistant superannuation minister,

Jane Hume. She told us she's ambivalent about this legislated super rise. You're not

ambivalent. Why shouldn't the super guarantee levy increase to 10 per cent from July next

year, as was promised and legislated?



Paterson: The evidence has been mounting for some time now, Fran, and I think it's

becoming very difficult to ignore that increases in the superannuation guarantee come at

the expense of take home wages and also jobs. An authority no less than the Reserve

Bank Governor Philip Lowe last week confirmed that, as he has done multiple times, and

groups as diverse as the Australian Council of Social Service, the Productivity

Commission, the Grattan Institute, Treasury and basically every independent economist

that has ever looked at this agrees, that if you increase the super guarantee that wage

rises will be lower than they otherwise would have been and that employment will grow

less than it otherwise would have. And I think most Australians in ordinary times would

probably make a choice to take more take home pay, but particularly when we've got

unemployment over seven percent and sadly heading north and when wages growth we

know is going to be very flat for a number of years.



Kelly: Wages growth has already been flat for the last three years. We haven't had a

super increase since 2014. So no increase in the superannuation guarantee for six years

and virtually low or no wage growth for the last three years. So how do you how do you

make the case that one is connected to the other? I mean, there's already no wages

increases.



Paterson: That's right, Fran and it would have been even lower if the superannuation

guarantee hadn't be increased.



Kelly: It can't be lower than almost nothing?



Paterson: Well, in fact, it can be negative. And that's my fear that wages growth, which it

already looks like it's going to be negative over the next few years, will be even greater in

negative numbers if the superannuation guarantee goes ahead.



Kelly: We spoke to Greg Combet on this week, he's the head of the industry super

grouping, and he said that for a lot of workers on minimum wage, I think it was or average

wage a lot of these increases would have, the July increase, the legislated increase to 10

per cent, which is an increase of half a per cent, would amount to five dollars a week. Is

five dollars a week really gonna break the boss?



Paterson: Well, Industry Super's own private research, which has revealed to the House

Economics Committee, shows they actually privately agree that wages increase...



Kelly: He disputed that completely on the programme this week.



Paterson: Well, it's in black and white. And your listeners can go to the House of

Representatives Economics Committee and see that private research note. But the union

movement themselves have conceded this. There was a story in the Sydney Morning

Herald yesterday which showed that unions had negotiated two different sets of enterprise

bargaining agreements going forward. One, if the super guarantee rise goes ahead and

one that doesn't. And if the super guarantee rises goes ahead, guess what happens?

Wages increases are lower. But if it doesn't go ahead, then wages increases are higher.

So the union movement has openly conceded this in the most obvious way in an

enterprise bargaining agreement.



Kelly: Can I just get your position clear? Are you saying that the increase, this increase to

10 per cent in the first instance and then going up to 12 per cent by 2025, that the initial

increase should be deferred or scrapped altogether, that we shouldn't move beyond the

nine and a half per cent ever?



Paterson: Well, my view is that the research shows - the Grattan Institute spelt this out

most clearly - that the current settings of private superannuation, of private savings, and

the pension ensures that most Australians retire better than the OECD benchmark of 70

per cent of your lifetime earnings at a replacement rate. In fact, most Australians have

closer to 90 per cent of their lifetime earnings in retirement. That shows we actually have a

very good retirement income system…



Kelly: So you're for keeping it at nine percent. You don't want to go any further.



Paterson: I certainly don't think there's a case to do so if Australians are retiring in relative

security as the Grattan research shows that it is. But I think the government's got to

consider very carefully the retirement incomes review, which it has received and the

evidence that it has compiled.



Kelly: We haven't seen that yet, of course, publicly, but there's all sorts of conflicting

statistics that come out on this. One analysis by Industry Super Australia shows that eight

million people would lose sixteen hundred and thirty dollars on average every year. That's

a total of 14 billion dollars per annum. If the super increase doesn't go ahead. So that's a

lot of money out of people's retirement accounts that would surely place even bigger

demands on the pension.



Paterson: I don't actually agree that there's a lot of conflicting evidence on this. Basically,

everyone in this debate largely agrees other than Industry Super Australia, and they're

obviously an enormously conflicted vested interest here. They collect - the Super Industry

as a total - collect $32 billion a year in fees from Australians’ retirement incomes, and they

stand to gain even more of that if the super guarantee increases. So I don't think we can

take their word on their own, particularly because it's supported by virtually no independent

economic evidence.



Kelly: There's a lot of people suggesting, though, that this push from yourself and others

has been really you using the cover of a public health crisis, this pandemic, to pursue what

some people regard as an ideological campaign against superfunds. Paul Keating, for

instance, is the architect, admittedly, of the superannuation guarantee levy says the

economic case for dumping the increase doesn't stack up. And there's just a prejudicial

case from some of these baby faced liberals. I'm sure he was probably talking about when

he said that. I mean, is it all a bit rich calling for workers super to be capped at nine per

cent when politicians super, is at 15 percent?



Paterson: Well, I’d like to know what Paul Keating thinks of the Australian Council of

Social Service, which represents low income and poor Australians.



Kelly: He doesn't agree with the modelling.



Paterson: Well, are they also motivated by ideological warfare? Are they also motivated

by self-interest? I don't think so. I think they've just looked at the evidence like the Grattan

Institute has, like the Reserve Bank governor has. And it's pretty compelling and pretty

hard to ignore. Now, it's certainly true that politicians are well-paid and no one needs to

worry about our retirement security. But I am worried about millions of Australian workers

and their families who desperately need every dollar they can at the moment to boost their

household income. And they don't want to see that locked away in the system for decades.



Kelly: Just before I leave super, there would be even less money for a time. And if young

people could access this super now to pay for a first home deposit, which is what the

master builders are calling for. If you're all for people having access to their super, should

that extend to buying a home?



Paterson: My priority at the moment, Fran is addressing this legislated superannuation

guarantee increase…



Kelly: I understand that, but what do you think about this, people accessing their super for

home deposit. It's an idea that's been around for aeons.



Paterson: What I would say is that a lot of research shows that the most important thing

for financial security in retirement is owning your own home. We know that retirees,

whether they're on the pension, or whether they have superannuation, who don't own their

own home, are much worse off than other Australians that do. So we do have to look at

every possible measure to boost home ownership. I think that's critically important. And I

think what the government's done in this area so far is welcome. Allowing people to

effectively deposit money at a lower tax rate into their super fund for a deposit is a good

start. And we have to look at how successful that is before considering further measures.



Kelly: You're listening to RN breakfast, our guest is Liberal Senator James Paterson.

James Paterson, Australia has some of the toughest COVID border restrictions in the

world. Few people are allowed to leave the country and a lot of Australians overseas are

finding it very difficult to return home because of the caps on the numbers allowed in per

week. And some of them are saying they feel abandoned by their government. Is it time to

ease up on some of the restrictions. As long as tough quarantine protocols remain in

place?



Paterson: Fran, I'm also the deputy chair of the COVID-19 Senate Select Committee and

I've explored this issue with Professor Brendan Murphy and also the head of the border

force, Michael Outram, because I've got a lot of constituents who are concerned about this

and contacting me about this. Brendan Murphy and all the medical experts we've had

before the committee have said that the most successful measures the government has

introduced so far to fight the virus are the border closures and the mandatory hotel

quarantine, when competently administered. So I think they're going to stay in place for

some time. The Border Force commissioner confirmed that the only real constraint on the

number of Australians who can come home at any one time is the caps that state

governments have placed on their hotel quarantine system. So in New South Wales, it's

350 people per day. In the other states, it's 500 per week. And Victoria's currently

accepting none at all given their hotel quarantine failures. So I'd like to see Victoria come

back online as soon as possible. And I'd like the other states to consider whether they can

accept more Australians back through their hotel quarantine system. Otherwise, it is going

to be very expensive and very difficult for Australians to return home.



Kelly: And what about beyond that? I notice you wrote a piece this week advocating for

free trade and movement between Australia and the UK. Now, that's going to be hard to

achieve given the current border restrictions. But would you would you like to see some

kind of travel bubble created between Australia and the UK?



Paterson: Well, if we're going to be creating travel bubbles in the COVID era it's going to

be with countries that have been really successful in fighting COVID-19, so that's probably

going to be more likely to be countries like New Zealand who we already have a freedom

of movement arrangement with. But in the medium term, as part of our free trade

negotiations, absolutely I want to see a liberalised movement of people between the UK

and Australia initially, perhaps something like the E3 visa, which we've negotiated with the

United States in our free trade agreement with them. But over time, something more akin

to a New Zealand arrangement where for work or for study of tourism or for business,

Australians and Poms can move very easily between each country. That would be a great

thing.



Kelly: Senator Paterson thanks very much for joining us.



Paterson: Thank you Fran.





