







The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology  Federal Member for McPherson

The Hon David Littleproud MP  Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management  Deputy Leader of the Nationals

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

COUNTRY OF ORIGIN FOOD LABELLING EVALUATION BEGINS

31 July 2020

The Federal Government has begun an evaluation of Australia’s country of origin  food labelling system to make sure it’s working for both Aussie consumers and  businesses.

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said the evaluation  would help determine if the new system which came into effect in 2018 was helping  Australians as intended.

“Consumers made it known they wanted to understand in a clear and simple way  where their food is grown and processed,” Minister Andrews said.

“Our Government responded with comprehensive reforms to the country of origin  labelling system and now we’re making sure it’s delivering as intended.

“While this evaluation was planned since the reforms were introduced, it is  particularly timely as COVID-19 has seen a ground-swell in support for Australian  Made food.

“This is about making sure consumers are being given the tools they need to make  an informed choice, without crippling Australian businesses with unreasonable and  expensive labelling expectations.”

Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management David Littleproud said  it would be good to ensure the reforms are delivering the right information to  consumers so they can choose to support our agriculture sector and regional  Australia.





“When consumers buy Australian goods, they aren’t just supporting those  manufacturers, but also our farmers, truck drivers and regional communities more  broadly,” Minister Littleproud said.

“We know that so many Aussies are more determined than ever to buy domestically  made products like bacon and cheese, and Australian grown products like seafood  and flowers. It’s important that it as simple as possible for them to do that, without  placing undue burden on business.

“Agriculture and manufacturing is at the heart of many regional communities, so we  want to make sure that the country of origin labelling system is delivering its intended  objectives.”

The evaluation of country origin labelling for food will consider if the labels are  helping consumers make more informed choices, as well as clarifying the origin  claims that businesses can make, while avoiding excessive costs for businesses  which will be passed onto shoppers.

The consultation will include surveys, consumer focus groups and interviews with  industry and government.

A discussion paper and an opportunity to provide views is available at  consult.industry.gov.au until 11 September. The evaluation is expected to be  completed by mid-2021.

More information on country of origin labelling is available at  foodlabels.industry.gov.au



Media Contacts:

Minister Andrews’ office: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846

Minister Littleproud’s office: Douglas Ferguson 0455 448 985

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

