











THE HON PETER DUTTON MP  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

MEDIA RELEASE



29 October 2020

NATIONAL MISSING PERSONS HACKATHON RETURNS FOR SECOND YEAR

More than 500 ethical hackers from around the country will come together today in an  effort to find new leads in long-term missing persons’ cases in Australia.

These ethical hackers will apply their unique skills to interrogate open source resources on  the internet with the goal of generating new leads for current long-term missing persons’  cases.

Following the success of the inaugural Hackathon event in 2019, the Australian Federal  Police (AFP) will again partner with AustCyber, a not-for-profit Federal Government funded  organisation, and Trace Labs, a Canadian based non-profit organisation who provide  crowdsourced open intelligence (OSINT), to hold the second Hackathon event in Canberra.

The Minister for Home Affairs Peter Dutton said that this is an opportunity to exploit the  internet for good, and to use innovative tools to continue the search for some of those we  have lost.

“The use of open source intelligence gathering, or ethical hacking, by our participants for  this initiative embraces the spirit of innovation, of partnership and of community in an  effort to help solve these long-standing cases,” Mr Dutton said.

Due to COVID-19 restrictions, the event is being held virtually across Australia with a small  in-person event in Canberra, complemented by hundreds more participants joining via  livestream.

Mr Dutton said the pandemic has presented us with new challenges and caused us to  rethink the way we live our lives. We are all spending more of our time, working and  socialising online and it is exciting to apply it to important events such as this one.

Every year, more than 38,000 Australians are reported missing to police. Most are found  within a few days, but there are currently around 2,600 people who have never been  located.

Twelve missing persons have been selected from existing State and Territory police cases for  participants to collect open source intelligence on and to hopefully generate new

2



information. All leads generated on the missing person cases will be handed to State and  Territory police forces, through the AFP’s National Missing Persons Coordination Centre  (NMPCC) after the completion of the event.

The event compliments other efforts to solve Australia’s long term missing person cases  including the $3.54 million allocated to the AFP earlier this year to establish the National  DNA Program for Unidentified and Missing Persons. This program, funded from the  proceeds of crime, aims to use contemporary forensic techniques to establish the identity of  the many unidentified human remains around the country and provide new information to  historic investigations.

“I understand the broad range of challenges that law enforcement faces, but the quest to  find answers for those who are missing in our country is surely one of the greatest,” Mr  Dutton said.

Anyone with information relating to a missing person is urged to contact Crime Stoppers on  1800 333 000.

For further information: Minister’s Office - 02 6277 7860

