JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES

MEMBER FOR HUNTER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SUNRISE

MONDAY, 10 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: COVID-19 in Victoria; State Governments to provide more economic

stimulus.



NATALIE BARR, HOST: Victoria has reported 394 new cases, including 17 deaths, the

highest number of daily fatalities recorded so far. It comes after the state's Health Minister

apologised on social media for any mistakes that she might have made.



DAVID KOCH, HOST: Meanwhile, the Federal Government has called on Premier Daniel

Andrews to explain what went wrong. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg says Victorians are

entitled to answers over the deadly bungles. Let's bring in Nationals MP, Barnaby Joyce,

and Shadow Resources Minister, Joel Fitzgibbon - good morning Gents. Barnaby, these

are pretty strong words from the Treasurer. How accountable should Daniel Andrews be

for Victoria's COVID crisis and should he have to have the answers right now?



BARNABY JOYCE, MEMBER FOR NEW ENGLAND: Look, Jenny Mikakos says that

Pericles built the Athenian temple, the Parthenon, which obviously he didn’t; he was the

leader of it. He was leading the Athenian statesman. Well, the leading Victorian statesman

has got to claim responsibility for the debacle which is their management of the

Coronavirus. I mean, Daniel Andrews goes to the podium now it, looks like a man with a

1000 yards stare. It's out of his control. It's been a debacle. And maybe the constituents

might forgive him but the economy won't, and you'll have to answer that and we don't. So,

we certainly don't want to be pinned with his problems.



BARR: Yeah, Joel, there are two schools of thought here. For weeks - he called the

inquiry, and he said now let's leave it to the inquiry. But I guess then there's a void isn't

there? He's putting everything on to the inquiry. And some people are saying no, we want

some answers now. What do you think?



JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: Look, we have a situation here where, you

know, people either want to talk about the Ruby Princess in New South Wales or what's

happening in Victoria depending on their political persuasion. I think the community just

wants the politicians to get on with the job. I think they expect the mistakes will be made

and where they are made, I believe they expect politicians to be held accountable. I

thought the Victorian Minister sounded very genuine, sincere and even contrite in her

commentary, and I think we can all thank her for that because that's what people want

politicians to do. They want them to look genuine and sincere. Now, she's effectively

thrown herself at the mercy of the judicial inquiry that's playing out in Victoria. And I think

most Australians would expect we should wait for the outcomes of that inquiry.



KOCH: Yeah, what do you reckon, Barnaby, that inquiry might not deliver the answers till

November. Should we put aside the blame game and just get on with dealing with the

issues.



JOYCE: It's not a blame game, it's self-evident facts. You can be sincere, you can be

contrite but if you play a shocker on Saturday, you get dropped. And that's how it works.

And, look, the problem is not over. You can't sort of say: oh well, I'm sincere, contrite, and

problems still going. If you don't have the capacity to manage it, you've got to do the right

thing by your state and by the country and say I'm going to hand it over to someone who

can. It just can't go on like that. Ministers get dropped all the time. And if Daniel Andrews

can't manage the Health Minister, then people will say he can't manage his government;

simple as that.



BARR: Yeah. Victoria's Health Minister, she's apologised for the mistakes she's made. It

was a pretty emotional tweeted thread over the weekend. This is what we've been talking

about. This is what - she made it on Saturday night. It was it was pretty emotional. It's on

the screen. Joel, you know, I guess a lot of people are sort of saying, you know, yes, it's

been hard but you've got a 10 per cent increase in people self-harming in that state.

You've got people losing their livelihoods. As Kochie said, the inquiry won't be giving any

kind of results till the end of the year. There is a void now and people want some kind of

answers, and Daniel Andrews is just batting them back every day. It's not a court, as the

head of the inquiry has said. He can give some kind of answers now. And it feels like

people want something more than just there's an inquiry.



FITZGIBBON: And people will want answers because what's happening in Victoria is just

terrible, and it's affecting the whole nation. But mistakes obviously have been made, and

they may be mistakes of politicians, or they may be mistakes made in the bureaucracy.

Now, ultimately, the politicians are responsible, but I think most people would see it

reasonable to allow the inquiry process to proceed. But they expect in the meantime,

politicians to not be spending too much time answering what happened in the past, but

rather thinking about the future and making sure that I fix this problem because it is a real

crisis for the state and for the country.



KOCH: The Prime Minister has called on the states to increase their spending to deal with

the pandemic so it's just not all up to the feds. Barnaby, where should that extra money

go?



JOYCE: Well, it should go into maintenance of an economy. I would like to see it go into

things that people get employed doing but leave a legacy, a positive legacy for the state

such as infrastructure, such as keeping your tradespeople going. They're dead right, the

states have been incredibly lacking in what they've been spending. And the Prime Minister

will walk this fine line to try and keeping them onside in the so-called National Cabinet and

then saying to them, you can't just claim responsibility for Federal Government spending

and not spend very little money or spend very little money yourself. They’ve got to put their

hand in their pocket. We can't go onto the Federal Government borrowing money hand

over fist. That has got to stop.



BARR: Yeah, Joel, the states need to stump up?



FITZGIBBON: Yeah, and I want local government involved as well. Every Council in my

electorate, and indeed across the country, has a list of infrastructure programs as long as

you're arm ready to go if they could just secure the money. This would create employment

quickly and establish long lasting infrastructure projects. We did it - the Labor Government

did it through the Global Financial Crisis. I don't understand why we are not doing it now.

It's the best way to create jobs and it's the best way to build local communities.





KOCH: All right, Gents, thank you for that.



JOYCE: Joel, we've got to stop agreeing. We're going to lose ratings. We need to stop

agreeing.



KOCH: [laughing] That's why we get you on, you’re both so sensible... sometimes. All

right, have a good week.



FITZGIBBON: Thank you.



JOYCE: Thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641



