KRISTY MCBAIN MP

MEMBER FOR EDEN MONARO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT   RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC SOUTH EAST NSW  TUESDAY, 27 OCTOBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Stranded Aussies; bushfire recovery.

SIMON LAUDER, HOST: We just heard from Cansin Fricke Danis from Jindabyne, she is still stuck  in Turkey despite moves last week by National Cabinet to allow another 300 Australians a week to  fly home. She's not among them. It's among the issues we'll discuss now with the federal member  for Eden-Monaro Kristy McBain, Good morning.

KRISTY MCBAIN, MEMBER FOR EDEN-MONARO: Morning Simon, how are you?

LAUDER: I am really well thanks for joining us again on ABC South East. What more needs to be  done, every now and then national cabinet meets and lifts the cap on international arrivals. Is it  enough to get all of these home by Christmas?

MCBAIN: Clearly not at this stage. Obviously more needs to be done to lift that cap. Cansin is one of  many Australians who receive a compassionate leave pass to leave Australia so she could attend a  funeral. And now can't get back to Australia which is her home where she has a job waiting for her -  a home and family and friends. So obviously very distressing for her and many like her in this  situation, and more needs to be done.

LAUDER: But obviously these decisions are made in consultation with epidemiologists and experts  on how much our contact tracers can handle once people back hear in quarantine. So I mean, do  you accept that these the cap is as high as it can be? Or do you do think that the government is  holding out, that the state governments might be holding in?

MCBAIN: Well, we know that people aren't flying into all of the available international airports  Canberra airport, for example, is an international airport and hasn't been receiving any flights, its  currently closed a couple of days a week because they don't have the traffic to support it being open  seven days a week.

Warren Entsch from Queensland is another Liberal MP, calling for the use of Cairns airport. And  there are a plenty of quarantine options. I guess at this point in time, we have to put all options on  the table because the numbers of stranded Australians overseas who are registered and want to get  home is growing. It's now over 33,000 people. And these are people who have left the country on  compassionate grounds to attend funerals and the like. These are people who stayed put initially  because that was the advice of the government if you're if you can stay where you are, stay where  you are. And since then, things have changed for them. You know, they've lost jobs, or they've had  babies and they want to come home now. And so I guess you know, we need to put all options on  the table because at the end of the day, they're Australians.



LAUDER: Still on Coronavirus and Melbourne coming out of lockdown at midnight tonight. Does that  mean the New South Wales Victoria border should open? Or do you support the state government's  more cautious approach with the plan? The premier announced last week to wait a couple of weeks  after Victoria's restrictions ease.

MCBAIN: Look, I am have been supportive to an extent of the border closure. Once we got the  border bubble in place, it was obviously a lot more workable for people to be able to traverse  between the two areas. But you know, I'd make the point that regional New South Wales and  regional Victoria aren't or haven't been where any of the problems have been located. So, you know,  I would be calling on the NSW state government over the next couple of weeks to really look to  remove that hard border between the states. I've got business owners in Eden crying out for the  border to be reopened because they potentially face a summer of cancelled bookings.

LAUDER: Do you want it to be open now?

MCBAIN: As I said, I think that the sensible approach is obviously to wait a couple of weeks, but I  think after that we really have to figure out how we continue to live with Coronavirus safely because  at this point in time there isn't a vaccine.

LAUDER: You have raised concerns recently about bushfire recovery funding under the regional  recovery partnerships and pointing to the fact that Eurobodalla, Bega Valley and Shoalhaven.  haven't made the cut. I raised this with the Minister for emergency management, David Littleproud  yesterday, he said decisions around Emergency Relief Fund funding are being made by Emergency  Management Australia, which is still in the process of coming to some more recommendations on  that. Are you satisfied by that?

MCBAIN: What I would say is that the regional recovery partnership does actually run through the  deputy prime minister's office. It's a regional development fund that was 100 million dollars  announced for those regions across Australia that have borne the brunt of natural disasters. The  deputy prime minister said that it was so those regions have impacted been impacted by drought,  fire and COVID-19. And on any data available, you would find most of the South Coast and Snowy V  alleys should have been eligible regions.

LAUDER: So, why do you think I've missed out? Are you suggesting politics is at play here?

MCBAIN: Look, I don't know. But what I would like to see is the data I know that the national  bushfire recovery agency wasn't consulted over data for those most impacted regions. And my call  was specifically on I don't take anything away from the 10 regions that were announced and I was  really happy that Snowy Mountain was included. But the programme needs to be expanded because  the South Coast and the Snowy Valleys are regions that need to be included in that regional  recovery partnership.

LAUDER: Kristy McBain coming up to eight o'clock news. Thanks very much for joining us this  morning. Thanks Simon. Kristy McBain the Member for Eden-Monaro.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: IAN CAMPBELL 0417 482 171

