NITA GREEN

SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND



CHRIS MEIBUSCH

CANDIDATE FOR GROOM





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

TOOWOOMBA

WEDNESDAY, 25 NOVEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Aged care crisis; Groom by-election; International Day for the

Elimination of Violence Against Women.



CHRIS MEIBUSCH, CANDIDATE FOR GROOM: Well good morning everyone. It is good

to be here in Laurel Bank Park in Toowoomba in this by-election campaign. This morning

we have Senator Nita Green - a Queensland Senator - visiting the electorate today to talk

about aged care which is a major concern in this community. Obviously as part of our

campaign we are trying to highlight the lack of federal funding for this community in a

number of areas. In particular today, we are stressing aged care and the fact that marginal

electorates around Australia are receiving significant discretionary funding spending in

their electorates that we are missing out on because we have been for far too long a safe

LNP seat. There are issues in relation to aged care and there are also issues in relation to

funding for NDIS in this community, which just shows the failure of funding for community

infrastructure. So this morning in relation to aged care we really need to focus on the

tragedies and scandals that have taken place under the Morrison Government within this

electorate in relation to particular facilities and the care being provided to the elderly in our

community. It is just not good enough and it’s not appropriate for us to have to wait for the

Aged Care Royal Commission to provide a final report. We have an interim report which is

titled “neglect” and neglect is what we have seen in this electorate in relation to aged care

from this Government, which is their responsibility.



So I’ll now pass over to the Senator to give some detail in relation to the Labor Party’s

specific calls on the Federal Government in relation to aged care and also the community-based care which is the Federal Government’s responsibility for the elderly in our

community.



NITA GREEN, SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND: Thank you everyone and thank you

Chris. It is great to be here in Groom today during this by-election to talk about a really

important issue that has been raised and highlighted during the COVID-19 crisis. There is

one word to sum up the Federal Government’s response to aged care and that is neglect.

That is a word the Royal Commission used to describe the Federal Government’s

response to aged care at the moment. We know during COVID many things have been

highlighted - many discrepancies and shortcomings of the aged care system. The Federal

Government rejected about 1500 requests for PPE from aged care providers during

COVID-19. We know that many aged care workers are feeling incredibly pressured at the

moment to do the work that they need to do. So many aged care workers at the moment

are working in one or two facilities because they feel so pressured - but they don’t have

enough hours to actually support themselves and put food on the table. We know that we

have heard terrible reports of neglect in aged care facilities - we have heard reports just

today in the Chronicle about a local story here.



And these are stories we hear all over the country. We have heard them for many months

and many years now under this Morrison Government. The Minister for Aged Care is a

Senator and the Senate essentially censured this Minister for his lack of respect and lack

of competency when it comes to aged care. But the Morrison Government and Scott

Morrison has still refused to sack this Minister and do the right thing and put someone in

charge of aged care who is willing to do everything that is necessary to get this system

where it needs to be. To be providing people in aged care with dignity during their

retirement years. We want to make sure that people who have spent their entire lives

committing to this community and giving to the Australian community, paying their taxes

and doing the right thing are taken care of when they need us the most. That is not what is

happening under the Morrison Government. Ultimately, aged care is a responsibility of the

Federal Government. They regulate it and they fund it. But so far all we have seen from

Scott Morrison when it comes to aged care is neglect, pushing off responsibility and

refusing to take action.



So today we are here in Groom to ask members of the community to send Scott Morrison

a message during this by-election. Send Scott Morrison a message that he needs to do

more when it comes to aged care and he needs to make sure that every single aged care

resident in communities like here in Toowoomba are taken care of in retirement. That is the

very least he can do. COVID-19 has shown the very stressed situation we are in - but it

shouldn’t take a crisis to convince this Government that they should be doing their job and

taking care of aged care residents. Thank you and I’m happy to take any questions.



JOURNALIST: Toowoomba resident Kat Cherry started a petition for the House of

Representatives calling for a legislative nurse to patient ratio in aged care as a priority

following incidents involving her dad here in Toowoomba. She is also requesting the

House of Representatives put forward an advocacy group to help them represent families

in the complaints process and that the House of Representatives address the shortage of

aged care. I know you are a Senator and not in the house - but are those sort of proposals

that this Toowoomba resident is putting forward something Labor supports?



GREEN: Can I just say firstly on this very personal story that appeared today in the

Toowoomba Chronicle - my heart goes out to families like that. I know that there are many

families who are experiencing the same situation out there and it takes a lot of guts to tell

your personal story. I don’t know the intricate details of that particular case but I know that

Chris, the candidate here in this by-election, has tried to reach out to find out a little bit

more about this story so we can understand what is going on and make some further

comments about it.



But more generally, what Labor has called on the Government to do is make sure that

there are minimum staffing levels in aged care facilities. It is a really crucial step that this

Government could take right now to make sure there are enough people staffing these

facilities to make sure there isn’t a situation where people fall through the cracks. That is

something we want to see. We have also called on the Federal Government to make sure

there is enough PPE equipment for each aged care facility, so we are not having a

situation where aged care workers are being told they need to wear one glove instead of

two.



And I’ll just say this - there are many aged care workers that love their job, go to work

every day, love the residents that they care for and do an incredible job, and they are

under pressure. During COVID-19, I have met with many of them - some of them not face-

to-face as we have had to do Zoom meetings - but what they have told me is truly

shocking. They want to do a really good job but they are not being given the resources to

do it. There isn’t enough staff to go around and so the petition that you have referred to

does call on the Government to look into this minimum staffing issue. It is something

Anthony Albanese has called on the Government to do already. We would like to see the

Government act quickly.



JOURNALIST: I just have a question for Chris. If you are elected what are some of the

things you are going to be doing, I guess promising on the ground and working with to

make sure aged care in Groom is actually going to be helped along?



MEIBUSCH: Yes, I really appreciate the Senator’s comments to make sure we are

speaking about the aged care system generally in this community and I certainly do not

want to identify or target any particular facility or family in the difficult times they are going

through. Clearly we are going to need more funding in this electorate. We have many

facilities here, not only in the Toowoomba city area, where there are many older

establishments but particularly in the regional towns where those facilities are clearly under

strain. We have 100-year-old buildings being facilitated and that is clearly where the major

discretionary funding from the Federal Government should be coming to this safe LNP

electorate, and that will only come if we make this electorate marginal. There is significant

money though to make sure we have sufficient staffing ratios in our facilities. And at the

moment we are aware generally that is a local issue the unions and their organisers have

had significant discussions with operators about. And that will require serious advocacy on

behalf of the next member for Groom here.



JOURNALIST: So is staffing probably the top concern at the moment?



MEIBUSCH: I identified staffing as a major concern and that is not just today, it has been

obvious to everyone in our community here and to the Federal Government for many years

now. And you just look at the various articles that the Chronicle have led the way on in this

respect over the last two to three years. But yes, the major capital investment that needs to

be made on the various establishments to refurbish or to rebuild a number of regional

establishments is well and truly overdue.



GREEN: Can I just make some other comments on another issue, thanks Chris. Today is



also the International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women. While I have got

this chance, I just want to give a shoutout to some of the very hard working women here in

Toowoomba that help domestic violence victims through their hardest times. This morning,

I visited DVAC - a domestic violence action centre - and they do incredible work. We

know today is a day for us all to recognise this is a big problem in Australia. One in three

women will experience domestic abuse from their partner in their lifetime and 45 women

have died already this year at the hands of their domestic partner. That is the equivalent in

Australia of one woman every week dying from domestic violence. This is a crisis in our

community, it is something we should all take responsibility for and it should be a

bipartisan issue and it is today. I know every member who holds a position like mine is out

there talking about it. We need to raise as much awareness as we can on the issue and we

need to commit ourselves to take action to make sure every single woman who wants to

leave has a place to go, that every child that wakes up in a house of violence is able to feel

safe eventually in a place where they feel comfortable. And we need to make sure that

men are included in the discussion about how we change our culture and change the way

we think about relationships and we think about violence against women - because today

is the day to say its not okay and there is zero tolerance in the community for violence

against women - and I’m very thankful for the hard work women in Toowoomba do to

support women in crisis. Thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JACOB WILSON 0457 961 596



