

MARK BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENERGY  MEMBER FOR HINDMARSH



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PORT ADELAIDE  TUESDAY, 15 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Scott Morrison has no plan for jobs; climate change; state borders.

MARK BUTLER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENERGY: This  morning we received an announcement from the Prime Minister that was heavy on spin but  light as a feather on substance.

Today’s gas announcement won’t deliver a single job in the timeframe Australia needs. We  are in the deepest recession in almost a century. Within a fortnight the Government will cut  JobKeeper, cut JobSeeker, and we will see 400,000 more Australians out of work between  now and Christmas. Australia needed a jobs plan from the Prime Minister today. All we got  was hot air.

JOURNALIST: What are your biggest concerns in term of climate policy going forward?

BUTLER: Our biggest concern is the biggest concern for everyone in Australia at the  moment; the need for a jobs plan to get the economy going again. To ensure that people  who have been put out of work or who have had their hours cut because of the  Coronavirus recession see a future. This gas plan has been hyped for several months now  but there is not a single job that will come out of this in the timeframe we need - and that is  now.

JOURNALIST: Many people are saying and science is showing us that, if anything,  COVID-19 is good for the environment. Is our Government doing enough to address this  going forward? We’ve seen the west coast of America on fire right now are we facing a  pretty scary future with summer coming up?

BUTLER: The CSIRO, the Bureau of Meteorology, the Academy of Science, all of our key  scientists and their equivalents overseas for two decades now at least have been warning  us that we will see the impacts we are seeing. More intense droughts, more intense and  longer fire seasons. We saw that over the summer just passed in Australia, we are seeing  it in North America now. Australia needs to do its bit to meet the commitments we made as  a global community to keep global warming below dangerous levels. At the moment under  Scott Morrison, under Malcolm Turnbull, and Tony Abbott before him, Australia is not  meeting those commitments. We need a more focussed commitment on climate action.





JOURNALIST: Announcement today out of SAPOL, they are opening up the borders to  the ACT. This is good new for politicians probably but also good news for South  Australians that they won’t have to isolate for 14 days?

BUTLER: Labor has had a consistent position that state premiers across the country  should follow good health advice. We’ve been very lucky to get great health advice from  Doctor Spurrier and we support all of those decisions.

JOURNALIST: Do you want to see the rest of the country opening up if possible by  Christmas?

BUTLER: This is a once in a century pandemic. We are seeing the impacts of that not just  here in Australia, in Victoria, but across the world. It is important that governments across  the world follow the advice of their Chief Health Officers.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LUCY CARUSO 0408 803 428





