

AMANDA RISHWORTH

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION AND

DEVELOPMENT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR YOUTH

MEMBER FOR KINGSTON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

TASMANIA TALKS

FRIDAY, 9 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECT: Labor’s Working Family Child Care Boost.



AARON STEVENS, HOST: Amanda good morning. It is realistic for all

Australians to have free childcare?



AMANDA RISHWORTH, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD

EDUCATION AND DEVELOPMENT: Well what we're looking at is a three-year

boost to families, with the Productivity Commission looking into how we deliver

a 90 per cent subsidy for all families. Because what we know is at the moment

and families are doing it tough, but importantly the current child care system

actually disadvantages the second wage earner, particularly mums, to go back

for the fourth and fifth day of workl. So we actually have parents that have to

pay to go to work on the fifth day as a result of the way the child care subsidy

system is structured. So we want to eliminate that, because not only is that

good for families, but it's also good for women's workforce participation and

helps grow our economy, which is good for everyone.



STEVENS: Because clearly we've seen women hit hardest with the jobs

shortage during COVID-19.



RISHWORTH: Absolutely, women have been hit the hardest when it comes to

work and as we had go into the recovery, what I don't want to see and what I

think most people wouldn't want to see is women saying it's not worth my while

to take those extra hours, it's not worth my while to take that extra day of work

because child care fees are too high. Because what then happens is women's

careers are often stunted and they have less superannuation. Now, of course

it's a choice, everyone has a choice, but if women want to go back more hours

or for a greater amount of work, we shouldn't be making them have to pay for it

because child care is just too expensive.



STEVENS: Also does take away some of that decision on whether to actually

have kids or not?



RISHWORTH: Absolutely, when we look at the three things that we need to

grow our economy that's population, productivity and participation. This policy

actually addresses all three because it what it does is shows that people can

have children and actually balance their work as well . What we don't want is

the fact that child care is just too expensive to hold families back, to hold

women back, or not have children at all.



STEVENS: So how would the working family child care boost work?



RISHWORTH: Well in the first three years we’re going to increase the subsidy

rate but also scrap the ten thousand dollar cap which currently exists. There's a

ten thousand cap, once you get that amount of subsidy from the government

you don’t get any more, which means that could cut in three-quarters through

the year. So we're going to get rid of that as that's one of the biggest barriers,

as well as increase the subsidy overall. But what we also want to do in the long

term is get the Productivity Commission to review the ability to go to 90 per cent

subsidy for all Australian families. At the moment our boost will cover 97 per

cent of Australian families.



STEVENS: Did you receive a call about this, I mean was there obviously a

discussion in the community, because it seemed to come from nowhere?



RISHWORTH: Well no there's been a lot of discussion in the community. Firstly

we've had a lot of families talking to me, I have a lot of mums even in my own

mother's group who've been talking to me saying it's just going to cost me if I

do the extra day, I'm actually going to have to pay to go to work. So there's

been a lot of conversation with families, anyone living this really understands it.

But there's also been calls from economists, from the business community.

There’s been a lot of businesses calling for this as well because if you've got a

good employee and you want them to work full-time and they want to work full-time, but just can’t afford to do so, then that's not good for business either. So

we've had calls from right across the spectrum from families, but also from

business groups, whether that be small or large business, saying that this

needs to be done. We've also had a lot of economists calling for this because

they've seen workforce participation as something that can actually grow our

economy, and some recent modelling from KPMG has suggested a similar

model to this could grow our economy to about 7 billion dollars per year. So

there's been calls right across from a variety of sectors, not just families, but of

course it's families that are the loudest voice in this.



STEVENS: Are you surprised the government hasn't reacted then?



RISHWORTH: I am surprised the government hasn't reacted. I thought that

they would have something in this budget and I was really surprised they

haven't. But you know, ultimately this system was designed by Scott Morrison

as the Social Services Minister, so maybe he has too much pride. I don't know

but I was really surprised because this has been a real groundswell of actually

people wanting change here.



STEVENS: Obviously we saw child care available for free in many cases during

the COVID-19, it was stopped pretty quickly wasn't it?



RISHWORTH: Yeah it only lasted three months, but I think a lot of people that

were still using it, particularly those essential at workers, realised that they were

actually able to up their hours or up their days of work has a result of that. I had

many centres and families saying I've enrolled in an extra day now so I can go

to work more, because it actually makes financial sense. So there is no doubt

that three months of free child care was a bit of a taste about what could

happen if you made the system more affordable, so I was surprised the

government finished it so quickly and went back to the high fee system, some

of the highest fees in the OECD, especially in the middle of a recession. But

Labor thought to put a plan out there, put an alternative out there, and I think

that it has been widely welcomed by many people.



STEVENS: I did see a concerning statistic that 55 per cent of families make the

choice between paying for groceries or child care each week, that's worrying

isn't it?



RISHWORTH: It is really worrying and when you look at the cost, you know you

do get a subsidy, but it does cost before that subsidy $120 a day so it adds up

very quickly. And if you reach that cap of $10,000 then you've got to pay that



$120 a day, so it is really expensive without government support and I think

we've got to see this as an essential service. This is something that is needed

by families to get back to work to grow our economy and we should be

supporting that.



STEVENS: What sort of feedback have you had since the plan was laid out by

the Opposition Leader and do you think that the government will take some of

this on board?



RISHWORTH: I've overwhelmingly had really good feedback, like I said from

economists, from business groups as well as of course families and the sector

themselves as well. They see the impact that the cost has on families, so I've

had widespread support. I think the government, if they are smart, will do

something in this area, but as of up to now they seem to have had a blind spot

so I'm not holding my breath. But certainly the widespread support across the

economy, whether that be like I said economists, business groups and indeed

families, has been overwhelmingly positive.



STEVENS: Good to talk to this morning, thank you for that.



RISHWORTH: Thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JEMMA SLEVEC 0405 752 923





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.









