







The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology  Federal Member for McPherson

MEDIA RELEASE

LOCALLY MADE VENTILATORS BOOST FIGHT AGAINST COVID-19

1 August 2020

Australia’s front line defence against COVID-19 has been bolstered with a group of  local manufacturing companies and engineering firms delivering its first invasive  ventilators to the National Medical Stockpile.

This shipment, and the rest to follow over coming weeks, comes only three months  after the Morrison Government reached a $31.3 million agreement with Grey  Innovation and its industry consortium to produce 2,000 invasive ventilators.

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said not only has the  consortium produced much-needed medical equipment, Grey Innovation has been  able to employ an extra 22 engineers and another 250 jobs have been created or  retained across all suppliers.

“Since the start of the pandemic, the Government has been working hard to secure  supply and increase the domestic manufacture of ventilators as well as critical  personal protective equipment,” Minister Andrews said.

“The local production of these ventilators is an outstanding example of what can be  achieved when industry and Government work together and draw on our highly  advanced manufacturing capability.

“These ventilators are available to be sent anywhere they are needed in Australia  and give us an impressive reserve capacity.

“Hopefully they won’t all be needed, but these machines will ensure that our  hospitals are well equipped to withstand future surges in intensive care cases.”

Grey Innovation’s Executive Chairman Jefferson Harcourt said he was grateful to the  local consortium partners and the Grey Innovation team for pulling out all stops to  produce the NOTUS emergency ventilator in just a few months.







“We’ve got regulatory approval and now we’re manufacturing at speed,” Mr Harcourt  said.

“It’s incredibly gratifying to see the first of the 2,000 ventilators ordered being loaded  onto the pallet for delivery to the national stockpile. We’re very proud to support the  Government’s efforts to increase Australia’s ventilator capacity in the fight against  COVID-19.”

The National Medical Stockpile is providing states and territories with personal  protective equipment (PPE) and other essential medical items to supplement their  supplies and support their health systems through the pandemic.

The NOTUS ventilators are being manufactured in Victoria under a contract with the  Department of Health. Victoria, like all states and territories, has access to the  National Medical Stockpile, including ventilators, should they need them.

The Grey Innovation consortium comprises more than 30 Australian engineering and  manufacturing companies and leading clinicians.

Media Contact: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846 / Jen Jennings 0435 121 347

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

