

BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRY SHADOW  MINISTER FOR SCIENCE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  MEMBER FOR GORTON





CONCERNS RAISED OVER AUSTRALIA’S R&D CAPACITY

Reports today reveal additional pressure on the Morrison Government to  develop a comprehensive manufacturing and industry plan to drive employment  and boost economic growth.

A number of business leaders and experts have raised concerns about  Australia’s research and development capacity.

Research and Development is inextricably linked to a recovery led by advanced  manufacturing, and the manufacturing sector is the second largest spender on  R&D.

However, the only plan the Morrison Government currently has is to rip $1.8  billion from the Research and Development Tax Incentive (RDTI).

The Morrison Government speaks publicly against raising taxes to drive  economic recovery, but at the same time they want to increase the tax burden  on innovative firms by nearly $2 billion.

The RDTI is retrospective, with an operational date of 1 July 2019, meaning if  passed in its current form, the Government will claw back money from  investments made by businesses under the current law.

COVID-19 has demonstrated just how vulnerable Australia is to global supply  chain shocks. The Liberals’ lack of a economic plan is leaving Australia, and  the manufacturing sector, dangerously exposed to turbulence in the global  economy.

While some of our manufacturers have adapted to produce much needed  Personal Protective Equipment and other essential suppliers during COVID-19,  Australia needs a more sophisticated manufacturing plan than just responding



to crises.

Yet the Morrison Government failed to outline a plan for manufacturing in last  week’s Budget update.

Australia has always been a nation that makes things, but this ability is  shrinking as the manufacturing sector has been contracting not growing.

As we look to the future and how we best emerge from the health crisis and  recession, the Morrison Government must do more to support the Australian  manufacturing sector. A strong local manufacturing industry will create jobs and  long term export and trading opportunities

WEDNESDAY, 29 JULY 2020

MEDIA CONTACT: ERIN SMITH 0458 950 010





