LINDA BURNEY MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND SOCIAL SERVICES

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AUSTRALIANS

MEMBER FOR BARTON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RN BREAKFAST WITH HAMISH MACDONALD

FRIDAY, 18 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Pension freeze; JobSeeker; Aboriginal heritage sites and

mining.



HAMISH MACDONALD, HOST: Linda Burney is the Shadow Minister for

Families and Social Services. Good morning to you.



LINDA BURNEY: Good morning Hamish.



MACDONALD: We’ve heard the logic behind why pensioners will not see this

increase this weekend. What do you want the government to do?



BURNEY: I want the government to do what they say they’re going to do and

have a good look at this. When the announcement was made that there would

be no indexation of the pension for this part of the - for this six months to

September - the Prime Minister said well he didn’t know about it. He was going

to have a look at it. He really does need to have a look at it because there are

two and a half million people on the age pension in Australia. And there are

also many many thousands of people on disability support, carer and

JobSeeker payments. The pension indexation - the argument is that CPI hasn’t

increased, therefore indexation shouldn’t happen. But cost of living for

pensioners is going up.



MACDONALD: What are we talking about in actual terms? How much would it

be going up?



BURNEY: Usually, it’s about $20 per indexation. It depends on what CPI is. But

on average it’s about $20. And pensioners are really frugal people. And you

know, they’ve worked hard. They’ve paid taxes all their life. And the age

pension, particularly for people that are renters is a very difficult situation.



MACDONALD: Given, as you say this is attached to, as we know - attached to

inflation - I know you made the point that the cost of living is going up for

pensioners. But in theory at least, if inflation is going backwards, shouldn’t

actually they end up in a better position, regardless of any indexation?



BURNEY: Sure. In theory you are right. But the reality is is that pensioners

budget very carefully. And their budgets include an indexation twice a year. And

we’re not talking about, as I said Hamish, ten thousand people. We’re talking

about over two and a half million people and there needs to be some sort of

compensation for the lack of indexation - and it’s up to the government to work

that out. But I’m very happy to have those discussions.



MACDONALD: Might you accept an argument that if the government said well,

‘we’ve given pensioners $1500 coronavirus pandemic payment this year and

we may do something in the budget as well to top that up’.



BURNEY: Well, that needs to be made clear but this is what we don’t know. All

pensioners know is that they are not going to have the normal indexation and

the government has not been forthcoming in how, as Scott Morrison said, he’s

going to have a look at this. And that’s what we’re calling on.



MACDONALD: I want to ask you about the future of JobKeeper and

JobSeeker. There was some good news in terms of the job market yesterday

with the unemployment rate falling 0.7 of a per cent to 6.8 per cent nationally.

It’s a patchy image across the country because of losses in Victoria. But growth

in places like WA and New South Wales. Does it indicate to you that for the

most part rolling back JobKeeper and JobSeeker is a reasonable thing to do at

the end of this month?



BURNEY: Labor’s argument is that it is not the time to roll back those

programs. And it’s for the very reasons that you’ve articulated Hamish, and that

is that things are patchy. There is no real jobs plan that is regionally based, or

even a national jobs plan. And you know, I’ve watched commentary over the

last two weeks about regions that can’t get enough workers and so forth. And

that just says to me that there needs to be a regional approach to job creation,

training and the idea of a rollback at this time is the wrong time.



MACDONALD: Do you have an immediate solution in mind as to how you go

about matching up these different supply and demand issues in the Labor

market across the country. Clearly training is more a medium to longer term fix.

But do you think there’s something that the government at the commonwealth

level could be doing to actually marry up some of the different needs that exist

currently?



BURNEY: Well plainly the answer is yes. It is obvious and particular, I’ve heard

you talk to many people from regional Australia over the last two months.

Clearly people in regional Australia and local governments in particular, know

exactly what their issues are. Be it Bendigo or be it Cairns or wherever. And it

just seems to me that there is no approach either nationally or at a regional

level at growing jobs. And there is clear demand in some areas.



MACDONALD: But what would it look like? What would a national strategy that

you could roll out pretty soon look like to deliver on that, to take some of these

young people that are so desperate in the major cities that have maybe had to

defer their university or finish uni and can’t find a job. I mean, you can’t force

these people to do fruit-picking, or do a season of shearing in the bush if they

don’t want to, even if those jobs are there.



BURNEY: Well, no you can’t force people that - and let’s remember that part of

mutual obligation for JobSeeker is that if you are offered a job and it’s

reasonable then you have an obligation to accept it. That is in place right now.

And that’s part of the mutual obligation arrangements that exist at the moment.

You can’t force people to do it. But it’s just with the borders closed the lack of

pickers in particular is quite urgent in some areas. And it just seems to me that

the federal government should be working more closely with state and local

governments on filling holes in relation to those positions. And there are many

ways - some of them which you’ve said that could be done - but actually

working with places like Jobs Australia whom I’ve had two long discussions with

this week and Centrelink is referring people to the JobActive program. Well, it

needs to be more than just referrals. There needs to be work done to have a

regional approach to filling those positions.



MACDONALD: I’m talking to Labor’s Linda Burney. I know you’ve been

monitoring closely the fallout from Rio Tinto’s destruction of the cultural sites at

the Juukan Gorge. Both BHP and Fortescue Metals this week rejected

shareholder demands for moratoriums on disturbing cultural heritage sites.

They argue it would disempower traditional owners groups and damage the

economy. What do you make of that? It seems to me that they’re suggesting

that ‘well, we have in place arrangements with traditional owners, there may

have been transactions around those, who are we to say that can’t happen’?



BURNEY: A couple of points there Hamish. Firstly, the reputational damage to

Rio Tinto is probably the biggest damage that’s happened. And I have to say

the hoo-ha about their directors or senior staff stepping down which isn’t til

March next year is interesting …



MACDONALD: What do you mean by interesting? What are you trying to say?



BURNEY: Well, I think that if the stepping down isn’t until for another five or six

months, you have to ask the question is it really taking responsibility for what’s

happened.



MACDONALD: What do you make of the multi-million dollar payouts those

executives appear to be leaving with?



BURNEY: Look, I make very little comment as to what the arrangements are

within those organisations. They are the arrangements. But you can’t in my

view just say that this is a punishment when it’s a few months down the track

and those directors will leave with massive payments and that’s the reality. And

good luck to them. But the big issue really is that Rio will take years to build its

reputation again. And you know, just being kicked - well what’s the word -

removed as a leader in the reconciliation process is something that they’ve

obviously suffered and I think that’s absolutely appropriate. BHP has said that

they’ve got 40 sites at the moment, but they’re going to protect ten of them. The

question is what about the other 35? And I note the Fortescue Metals are

arguing on a technicality about their shareholders actions. I think it was on

Wednesday. So the resource sector really does need to look at itself in

Australia. It’s important. It’s fundamental to Australia’s future. But I think that the

Australian community is saying to the resource sector these sites are important.



We recognise self-determination in terms of the role of traditional owners which

is to the point that you’re going to. And the briefings I’ve had particularly from

Western Australia yesterday, their new cultural heritage legislation will have

exactly what you’re saying in it Hamish, and that’s traditional owners have a

say but there will be an authority that will have the final say on what’s destroyed

and what’s not.



MACDONALD: Linda Burney, thank you very much.



BURNEY: Thank you Hamish.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DARYL TAN 0422 028 222



