

NATIONALS CALL FOR CONSISTENT APPROACH TO BORDERS

24 August 2020

A nationally consistent approach to border closures and quarantine processes is vital in  allowing regional and rural communities to function, as we continue to navigate our way  through the Covid-19 pandemic.

The call comes on the back of an announcement by the Queensland Government that will  see exemptions for farmers and agriculture workers to cross the NSW/Queensland border.

Leader of The Nationals in the Senate Bridget McKenzie, NSW Senator Perin Davey, Member  for Mallee Dr Anne Webster and Member for Nicholls Damian Drum are calling on the NSW  and Victorian Governments to urgently replicate the move.

Senator McKenzie said if Queensland can introduce an exemption system, other states should  be able to do the same.

“Protecting the health of the Australian community is the number one priority but because  of city-centric parochialism many of our farms are at a standstill and businesses are being  forced to shut without the medical evidence to justify border closures,” Senator McKenzie  said.

“What has been announced in Queensland is the practical and realistic approach we have  been pushing for. There now needs to be a standard approach to inbound quarantine with  stringent checks, and equivalent processing systems that will give confidence as we learn to  live with the virus.”

“After months of immense emotional pressure and unfair economic restrictions, Covid-19  free regional Australians need a plan.”

Senator Davey said with Victoria’s daily infection numbers easing, there is no reason for  border communities to not be given exemptions to cross the border.

“It is extremely important to follow the advice of health officials, in order to keep the virus  out of regional communities, but we need to make sure the rules and regulations are  practical and balanced,” Senator Davey said.

“Residents in cross-border communities have borne the brunt of the border closures,  livelihoods and the education of our students is suffering because of these unrealistic  border permit rules.

“National Cabinet, along with the states, need to develop a common-sense national border-closure strategy.”

Federal Member for Nicholls Damian Drum has called for critical workers to undergo Covid-19 tests so they can go about their daily work.

“State health authorities need to implement an extensive testing regime to bring about  greater freedom of movement for workers, by having them continually tested,” Mr Drum  said.

“Thousands of workers are willing to get tested and isolate until their results come back  negative, if it means they can then travel across the border to their place of employment.”

“We urgently need to create a workable solution for our residents in border communities”

Federal Member for Mallee, Anne Webster has called for national codes for Agriculture,  Health and Education to be implemented without delay.

“We need national cross border codes which provide clear and consistent treatment to all  Australians. The National Freight Code is proof we can achieve this.  We now need an  Agriculture Code, a Health Code and an Education Code but they must be expedited - two  weeks from now is too far away,” Dr Webster said.

“Genuine human emergencies could be avoided if these codes were put in place, saving a  lot of heartache. Until then, communities are having to suffer the consequences of  unconstrained belligerence of rival State governments, with cross border permits repeatedly  expiring and rules changing regularly, causing unneeded stress in peoples lives.”



ENDS

Media contacts:

Senator McKenzie: John Chanter: 0437 750 390  Mr Drum: Luke Griffiths: 0436 649 445  Dr Webster: Jon Armstrong: 0423 798 018  Senator Davey: Alex Riddell 0400 766 925

