



THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP  MINISTER FOR POPULATION,  CITIES AND URBAN  INFRASTRUCTURE

SENATOR THE HON  SARAH HENDERSON  SENATOR FOR VICTORIA

THE HON JACLYN SYMES MP  VICTORIAN MINISTER FOR  REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT



CHRISTINE COUZENS MP  MEMBER FOR GEELONG

MARTIN CUTTER  CHIEF EXECUTIVE  OFFICER, CITY OF  GREATER GEELONG

MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Alan Tudge MP, Minister for Cities, Urban Infrastructure and Population   WANTIRNA SOUTH, VICTORIA

5 November 2020

THE FINAL PIECES OF NEW WAVE ATTENUATOR ARRIVE IN GEELONG

The final pieces of Geelong’s new $10.1 million Wave Attenuator have arrived at  Geelong Port after making the journey via ship from Ireland.

The publicly-accessible, 440m on-water walkway - one of the largest of this kind in  Australia - is on track to be completed in December.

Funded under the $370 million Geelong City Deal the project has boosted local jobs,  providing work for 18 separate consultancies and ongoing construction activities  engaging up to 30 contractors at any given time from six separate companies.

Federal Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure Alan Tudge said the  wave attenuator would expand the waterfront precinct and attract new events that would  help the local tourism industries recover from COVID-19.

“This is a great example of a city deal project that is providing local jobs and helping with  the economic boost that Geelong needs,” Mr Tudge said.

“The Morrison Government is committed to the COVID recovery in Geelong and across  Victoria.”

Victorian Minister for Regional Development Jaclyn Symes said the project, part of the  larger Geelong Waterfront Safe Harbour Precinct Project, would encourage more visitors  to the city.

“This redevelopment will transform the entire precinct, improving connectivity and public  access to the waterfront to attract even more people to visit and enjoy Geelong year-round,” Ms Symes said.

“This project will allow us to host bigger and better events along the waterfront, putting  more money back into local businesses, the community and the economy.”

Senator for Victoria Sarah Henderson said the Australian Government was proud to be  investing $3.5 million towards the wave attenuator under the City Deal, in addition to a  previous commitment of $2 million.



“This critical project is being delivered under the transformational $370 million Geelong  City Deal, which is seeing all levels of government, industry and the community work  side by side to invest in and deliver for this beautiful city and our region.”

“The attenuator is incredibly impressive. It will not only be a great asset for the Geelong  community but will bolster our tourism and visitor economy” Senator Henderson said.

“The completion of this project in December, when the last three sections of the  attenuator will be installed, will mark a new era for our iconic Geelong waterfront.”

Member for Geelong Christine Couzens said the attenuator would be an important part of  helping Geelong’s economy recover from the impacts of COVID-19.

“The Victorian Government is helping Geelong become an even better place to live, work  and invest,” Ms Couzens said.

“Once finished, the attenuator will not only be visually striking, but will make the area a  more inviting place for business as the waters are controlled and safe.”

“I congratulate the Royal Geelong Yacht Club and the Wadawurrung Traditional Owners  on their collaboration in making the Wangim Walk attenuator an iconic Geelong  waterfront attraction.”

City of Greater Geelong CEO Martin Cutter said the 440-metre-long attenuator would  open up the space over the water to the wider community and provide greater access for  the facilities to be enjoyed by all.

“The Geelong City Deal is about investing in the future of our region, and this attenuator  will help us to capitalise on major events when they are able to resume, such as Festival  of Sails, which traditionally attracts more than 110,000 visitors,” Mr Cutter said.

“As Geelong grows, projects like this are vitally important to underpin and capture the  benefits of that growth to unlock a brighter and even more exciting future for the city.

“Geelong is a unique and appealing travel destination, and by delivering projects like this  to help open up our public spaces we can welcome even more visitors to find that out for  themselves.”

Royal Geelong Yacht Club Commodore Stuart Dickson welcomed the news, saying well-protected marinas are the most sought-after marina facilities by the boating fraternity.

“The wave attenuator will ‘break’ the wind generated waves so their force is reduced to a  much more workable level before reaching the marina,” Mr Dickson said.

“This means we can safely and successfully operate floating docks, which is why this  project is great news for local boating enthusiasts and the community.”

Part of the Geelong City Deal the Australian Government is investing $3.5 million  towards the wave attenuator.

The $19.35 million Geelong Waterfront Safe Harbour Precinct Project is being jointly  funded by the Victorian Government ($7.85 million), Australian Government ($5.5  million), City of Greater Geelong ($3 million) and the Royal Geelong Yacht Club ($3  million).

More information on the Geelong City Deal is available at  www.infrastructure.gov.au/cities/city-deals/geelong.

[ENDS]

Media Contact:  Minister Tudge - Michael Bennett 0434 782 923  Minister Symes - Casey Lodge 0410 964 928  Senator Henderson - Nicholas Lamanna 0400 673 789   Ms Christine Couzens - 03 5221 4821  Martin Cutter - 03 5272 5272

