MEDIA RELEASE  MUTUAL OBLIGATIONS

Government must use a common sense approach to Centrelink and

suspend reporting requirements and mutual obligations for people

already on Centrelink until COVID-19 crisis has passed

The Greens say the Government must use common sense and suspend the

requirement for people on income support payments to report their income

every fortnight and complete mutual obligations while the system is so

overburdened during the COVID-19 crisis.

“The Minister said yesterday "requirements will be lifted until 31 March, 2020,

however if congestion continues, the Government will consider extending these

arrangements.

“I don’t think the Government can rectify the MyGov issues by then, people

can’t have complete confidence that they can report their income, be paid on

time and be able to access support and advice from Centrelink staff.

“It is not safe for people in our community to be attending meetings,

appointments and work for the dole at this time and that is not going to change

on Tuesday.

No publication date: received by Parl Library 27/03/2020



“The Government has a duty of care during these difficult times and their failure

to communicate effectively and clearly is adding to the stress of people already

going through difficult times.



“This week my office has been inundated with calls from people trying to report

their income, deeply distressed their payment would be suspended or cancelled

if they couldn't get online or through on the phone.



"I’m also hearing reports that despite the suspension of mutual obligations,

older jobseekers aged 55-67 are still being required to complete their fortnightly

activity requirements of up to 15 hours volunteer work. This is dangerous for

older Australians.



“With 3.2 million people accessing MyGov and more than 280,000 people

already lodging an ‘intent to claim’ payment it makes absolutely no sense for

the thousands of people already on a payment to also be trying to get on

MyGov.



“The Government should be helping people, not adding to their confusion and

distress."



Media Contact

Lucy Cowcher-Guthrie: 0418 401 180



































No publication date: received by Parl Library 27/03/2020

