

The Hon Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

The Hon David Littleproud MP  Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management

The Hon Stuart Robert MP  Minister for the National Disability Insurance Scheme  Minister for Government Services

MEDIA RELEASE



Friday 28 August 2020

VICTORIAN BORDER COMMUNITIES NOW ELIGIBLE FOR PANDEMIC  LEAVE DISASTER PAYMENT

People who live in New South Wales and South Australia but work in Victoria are now eligible for a  $1,500 Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment if they need to self-isolate or quarantine due to COVID-19.

The Australian Government announced on 28 August the extension of the payment to people who do  not live in Victoria, but who work in Victoria, to ensure no one is left behind.

In addition to this, Victorians who were directed to self-isolate on or after 5 July can now also submit a  claim for this payment.  This is to ensure people who were not able to access the Victorian payment  during this time don’t miss out on support.

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment is a lump sum payment to help workers during their 14 day self-isolation period.

People may be eligible to claim this payment if they’ve been directed by health officials to stay home  from work, and have used up all their sick leave entitlements, including any special pandemic leave.

They may also be eligible to make a claim if they’re the parent or guardian of a child aged 16 or under  who is a close contact or has tested positive for COVID-19.

Workers are eligible for this payment if they’re not receiving any other income, including JobKeeper  payment or other forms of Australian Government income support.

People are able to claim this payment again if health officials instruct them to quarantine for a period  longer than 14 days.

There is no need to visit a service centre to claim this payment.

The best way to make a claim is over the phone by calling 180 22 66, where staff will be able to walk  people through the entire claim process.

More information is available at: servicesaustralia.gov.au/disaster

[END]

Media contact:   Minister Littleproud’s office, Brett Chant, 0477 744 614  Minister Robert’s Office, Liam Jones, 0448 763 351  Prime Minister’s press office: (02) 6277 7744

Authorised by S. Robert MP, Canberra





