

Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA

The Hon Karen Andrews MP   MINISTER FOR INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

MEDIA RELEASE

23 March 2020

HELPLINE FOR BUSINESSES IMPACTED BY COVID-19

From today, the Morrison Government’s business hotline will give more support to small and  medium businesses impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.

Operations at the business.gov.au 13 28 46 Contact Centre will increase from five days per  week to seven days per week, and provide additional hours of support outside standard  operating hours for the first month, answering calls from 7am to 11pm AEST.

Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business Michaelia Cash said the  operations of the Government’s business 13 28 46 contact centre, are being expanded to  provide specialist advisers and extended support hours.

“The Government is rolling out comprehensive, targeted assistance in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and we want businesses who are looking for information to be supported,” she  said.

“During these challenging times businesses that have been impacted by COVID-19  need readily available access to advice so they can fully understand the assistance available to  them and their employees,” Minister Cash said.

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said this is another practical  measure to support businesses during this uncertain time.

“Our Government is providing a range of support to our business community to navigate the  COVID-19 pandemic and our business hotline helps bring that together into one place,”  Minister Andrews said.

“We don’t want our businesses who are already experiencing the stress of trying to stay afloat  and pay their staff to struggle to navigate the support on offer - so we’re taking this simple  step.

“The Government is committed to doing all we can to help our businesses get through this  outbreak and come out the other side.”

For more information visit business.gov.au.



MEDIA CONTACTS  Minister Cash - Guy Creighton - Guy.Creighton@employment.gov.au - 0438 815 302  Minister Andrews - Keegan Buzza - 0447 697 846

