

JIM CHALMERS MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  BRISBANE  MONDAY, 30 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Economic response to Coronavirus; Wage subsidies;  Changes to FIRB arrangements; Recall of Parliament; Childcare sector;  Access to tests.

JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: This health crisis and its  devastating economic impacts still have a long way to run yet. Australians are  very anxious about their health, their loved ones, their job security and their  financial situation at home. In these uncertain times we take our obligations to  be responsible and constructive very seriously. That's the approach we've  taken to the health measures as they've been announced; it’s the approach that  we've taken to the first two waves of stimulus from the Government; and it’s the  approach that we will be taking when the Government announces the third  wave of economic measures later on today. We will be constructive,  responsible, and supportive where we can.

We will support any additional measures which get more help to more  Australians more quickly. We will be constructive, but being constructive does  not mean being silent. Where there are obvious gaps, obvious flaws or a lack of  urgency we will make those points. In the packages which have been  announced already there are issues with the superannuation changes, and with  getting payments out the door quickly enough to make a difference to the lives  of ordinary Australians. There's an absence of a childcare plan. There are  problems associated with a lack of support for New Zealanders who have been  here for many years working, raising their kids here, and sending their kids to  local schools but are missing out on support. Today the Government has an  opportunity to fix those obvious gaps and fix those obvious flaws. If they do  that, we will be supportive, constructive and responsible about it.

We have welcomed the steps that the Government has taken already to  support people in the economy. Indeed, we voted for all of the measures in the

Parliament. We welcome the additional steps which have been flagged to  include renters and students, and to fix the problem with the income test in two-income households. We welcome the steps which have been flagged by the  banks to be a part of the solution when it comes to commercial rents so that  commercial landlords are not throwing out commercial tenants, many of them  small businesses who can't possibly meet their rental payments in the current  economic climate.

We welcome the announcements made today by the Government about foreign  investment. These are sensible steps in uncertain times. We seek further detail  about some of the deals which have been approved but not yet executed but in  principle we do support sensible steps taken in uncertain times to make sure  that we get our foreign investment regime absolutely right.

We welcome the Government's admission that Australian workers and  businesses desperately need wage subsidies. It has been obvious for some  time now that the otherwise-welcome support for small- and medium-sized  businesses have not been enough to maintain the link between employers and  their workers throughout this crisis. Every day that wage subsidies have been  delayed has meant more Australians joining unemployment queues which are  already unacceptably long.

One of the reasons that the Government has been behind the play throughout  this crisis is they spend too much time dismissing and ridiculing the good ideas  that Labor, the unions, and others in our community have put forward so that by  the time they come around to implementing them it is later than would be ideal.

For wage subsidies to be effective, they need to be conditional on that link  between employers and workers being maintained and there are hopeful  indications on that front. To be effective, wage subsidies also need to be broad  enough, certainly broader than just full-time workers, and they need to be  sufficient enough to prevent some of the mass lay-offs we have seen in the last  couple of weeks. We need these wage subsidies to be comprehensive, to be  broad and we need them to be conditional on people staying in work. If the  Government has had a change of heart we welcome that but we want to make  sure that they get the detail of it right so that these wage subsidies can be  effective and do enough for workers, businesses and our economy in these  desperate, uncertain economic times. We stand ready to be supportive and  responsible.

There will be additional measures announced in the next couple of hours by the  Government. We will support any additional steps which get more help to more  people, more urgently.

The Parliament will need to be recalled to implement some of these steps. We

call on the Government to recall the Parliament as soon as possible so that we  can get this relief through the Parliament and into the hands of workers and  businesses, and circulating in an economy which desperately needs support  right now. We are ready, willing and able to expedite the passage of any good  measures which do the right thing by workers and businesses, in the  Parliament. We're ready to expedite those measures through the Parliament as  soon as possible. Over to you.

JOURNALIST: We understand the wage subsidy will be around $1,500  per fortnight, per worker. Is that sufficient?

CHALMERS: We need to make sure that the wage subsidies are sufficient to  prevent some of these mass layoffs that we've seen in recent weeks. $1,500 a  fortnight has been speculated on. $1,500 a fortnight is less than half of full-time  ordinary earnings. We're also very concerned that if the Government only  focuses on full-time workers then that will leave millions of workers out in the  cold and it will disproportionately affect women workers who are  disproportionately part-time workers. We call on the Government to make sure  that these wage subsidies are conditional on people staying in work, that they  are broad enough so that more workers can access them, and that they are  sufficient enough to prevent the kinds of mass lay-offs we have seen. We don't  want to see women disproportionately impacted in a bad way and we don't  want to see the wage subsidy too small to make a genuine difference.

JOURNALIST: How does it compare to the UK where they're offering 80 per  cent of a worker's wage?

CHALMERS: If it's $1,500 then that's less than half of full-time ordinary  earnings. There are different regimes right around the world, the U.K. as you  mentioned, New Zealand and other jurisdictions as well. If the Government  thinks they have a better way of implementing a wage subsidy, we'll hear that  later on this afternoon. But again, we need to make sure it's conditional, we  need to make sure it's sufficient and we need to make sure it's broad enough to  capture millions of workers who have been adversely affected by this health  crisis.

JOURNALIST: Are you worried this will create two classes of stood-down  workers? So, those given wage subsidies and those on Centrelink?

CHALMERS: Let's see what the Government announces later today. We've  made our views abundantly clear now for more than a week. For more than a  week now, Labor, the unions, big sections of the business community and  others in Australian society have made the point that the welcome assistance  which has been provided so far or is about to be provided won't be enough to  maintain the link between employers and their workers. We stand ready to be



supportive of any good steps which are taken in this regard. We've said that to  be effective, wage subsidies do have to be conditional, they do have to be  broad and they do have to be sufficient as well.

JOURNALIST: You mentioned the absence of a childcare plan before.  Childcare centres are saying that they're on the brink of closure because  people are cancelling enrolments. Should the Government directly fund them  so that they can stay open and [inaudible]?

CHALMERS: The Government's third package of measures for the economy is  an opportunity for them to come forward with a proper plan for childcare and  childcare workers. One of the most impacted parts of our economy will be the  childcare sector. It's not hard to imagine the impact of what is happening here  to childcare providers and childcare workers. My colleague Amanda Rishworth  has been saying for some time now that the situation is urgent in childcare. It  needs to be fixed as a matter of priority. If the Government takes steps in that  regard, we'll support them.

JOURNALIST: An Australian company has signed a deal to bring rapid testing  kits to Australia from April. How important do you think widespread testing  should be for shaping the country's response to Coronavirus going forward?

CHALMERS: It is absolutely crucial that more people can get tested for this  virus. As Chris Bowen and Anthony Albanese have said repeatedly we need to  make sure that everybody who needs a test, gets one. If the Government has  made steps in that regard to bring on additional steps, then those steps are  welcome. This is an urgent situation. We can't have people turned away for  testing because tests are unavailable. We need to make sure that the criteria  for testing is sufficiently broad and that that need can be met by having enough  tests in the system.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949







