The Hon Darren Chester MP Minister for V



eterans’ Affairs

Minister for Defence Personnel

MEDIA RELEASE

GRANTS FOR THE DEFENCE COMMUNITY

Community groups that support Australian Defence Force (ADF) families today received a funding boost under the Government’s Family Support Funding Program (FSFP).

Minister for Defence Personnel Darren Chester said the supplementary grants would assist nine not-for-profit organisations which had been affected by the challenges of this year to provide programs and activities that support the wellbeing of ADF families.

“This year has been challenging for many Australians, and this includes many of our Defence personnel who have been separated from their families while providing vital assistance as part of Operation COVID-19 Assist,” Mr Chester said.

“The FSFP has helped to support organisations as they’ve delivered programs and activities for the Defence and local community and this funding will help this work continue.

“For example, the Singleton PCYC has received funding to deliver a 10-week holistic health and wellbeing initiative aimed at Defence families, focusing on workshops, fitness and educational sessions.

“Importantly, these activities support ADF families build and maintain a strong connections with their local community and helps them create support networks.

“Congratulations to the organisations that received funding and thank you to all those organisations across the nation that support our Defence families.”

More than 50 community projects have shared in around $1.7 million this year through the FSFP, which will help them support their local defence community.

The grants program is managed by Defence Community Organisation which provides a wide range of assistance for Defence families.

Defence families can contact the Defence Family Helpline on 1800 624 608 for information on accessing community resources.

For more information visit the Defence Community Organisation website: www.defence.gov.au/dco.

MEDIA CONTACTS:

Rachel Tharratt: 0419 034 302 Defence Media: media@defence.gov.au

Office of the Hon Darren Chester, Canberra ACT.

FAMILY SUPPORT FUNDING PROGRAM

Date received: 11 December 2020

Recipient State /

Territory Electorate Funding description Amount

Mums Exercise Group Australia Pty Ltd

ACT Bean Mums Exercise Group Australia (MEGA) will provide a program which enables Defence mothers to increase their social networks amongst other mothers in their community. MEGA aims to increase physical activity with a special focus around postnatal classes and to provide opportunities for children to socialise and play.

$19,000

Love Culburra Beach Festival Inc

NSW Gilmore Culburra Beach Festival will deliver a volunteer program aimed at Defence families by engaging with Defence establishments to promote and encourage the Defence community to connect and register in volunteer training, programs and events.

$10,000

Singleton PCYC

NSW Hunter Singleton PCYC will deliver a 10-week holistic health and wellbeing initiative aimed at Defence families, focusing on workshops, fitness and educational sessions. The program aims to introduce new families to local community activities and provide engagement opportunities to link in with the local community.

$9,900

Defence Richmond Family Centre

NSW Macquarie The Defence Richmond Family

Centre will continue offering a safe place for families to nurture friendships, build relationships and be that constant cornerstone to help face the challenges of military family life.

$10,000

One Giant Leap Foundation Limited

NSW Macquarie One Giant Leap Foundation (OGLF) will connect with the Defence community for a fun, educational opportunity to develop new interests, skills, personal networks and friendships. OGLF believe that their 'Rocket into Richmond RAAF' program is an innovative method of introducing new and existing Defence families into the Richmond area in an innovative way.

$11,000

The Younger Heroes Limited NSW Richmond The Younger Heroes (TYH) will deliver camp programs to Defence families between Jan -

Jun 21. The family relationship focused program is for children and parents who are either current ADF members, first responders, health care professionals or anyone working away from home.

$20,000

Little Diggers Community Centre

QLD Leichhardt Little Diggers Community Centre will continue offering social and emotional support for Defence families posted to Cairns. This funding will support weekly programs including playgroups with additional community services that include workshops, training sessions and school holiday activities in a safe family friendly environment.

$8,580

Returned & Services League Mt Barker Sub Branch

SA Mayo RSL Mt Barker Sub Branch propose to

reinstate the Saturday morning BBQs for families, bringing them together and to assist the Sub-Branch to offer BBQ facilities at other Defence community events.

$9,982

Table Tennis Australia Ltd SA Sturt Table Tennis Australia (TAA) will use table

tennis to drive social connectedness within the Defence community as well as to the outside local community by engaging more Defence families in the sport. TAA propose to offer an 8-week program and will use a four-step strategy that will sustainably increase community engagement while promoting the health benefits of an active lifestyle.

$18,900



