Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg







THE HON KEITH PITT MP

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia  Member for Hinkler

MEDIA RELEASE

26 August 2020

2020 OFFSHORE PETROLEUM EXPLORATION ACREAGE RELEASED

A significant announcement from the Coalition Government today will help stimulate  investment in the gas industry according to Federal Minister for Resources, Water and  Northern Australia, Keith Pitt.

The Government today revealed the 2020 Offshore Petroleum Exploration Acreage Release,  comprising 42 areas in Commonwealth waters off Western Australia, Victoria, Northern  Territory and the Territory of Ashmore and Cartier Islands.

Approximately 100,000 square kilometres of acreage has been made available for  exploration across five basins including Bonaparte, Browse, Northern Carnarvon, Otway and  Gippsland basins.

Minister Pitt said the annual Acreage Release is a key component of the Government's  strategy to promote and encourage investment in petroleum exploration for the benefit of  the Australian economy.

“I acknowledge the impact the COVID-19 pandemic is having on the oil and gas industry. The  government strongly believes exploration will play a key role in helping our economy  recover from the pandemic,” Minister Pitt said.

“This year’s release is dominated by areas in established oil and gas provinces with existing  infrastructure. This is consistent with the drive to ensure major projects have and maintain  steady supply into the future.

“Most importantly, I want to make sure Australia remains an attractive destination for  exploration investment and that we can continue to deliver long-term energy security for all  Australians.”

All areas in the 2020 Acreage Release are based on industry nominations and were subject  to a comprehensive public consultation process. Areas are available for work-program  bidding.

Bidding will close on 1 June 2021.

Maps for the 2020 acreage release and information on the bidding process can be found at  industry.gov.au/2020-acreage-release.

Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg









ENDS

Media contact: Marnie Hobson 0407 090 230





















