

SENATOR TIM AYRES

LABOR SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

THURSDAY, 27 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Aged Care; Gladys Berejiklian’s comments on rail manufacturing.



TIM AYRES, LABOR SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES: Today, Labor has been

very critical, rightly critical, of the Commonwealth Government, the Morrison Government's

performance in aged care over the course of the coronavirus crisis. The Minister for Aged

Care, Richard Colbeck, has sought to dodge responsibility, has bumbled his way through

this week's question time. He's clearly unfit for office. Scott Morrison can't evade

responsibility for the crisis in aged care. He was the treasurer when $1.7 billion was ripped

out of the aged care system, he's torn the care out of the heart of aged care for older

Australians.



I also just want to make a comment, in particular, about what Gladys Berejiklian had to say

yesterday about Australia's manufacturing capacity. Gladys Berejiklian said that New

South Wales and Australia aren't very good at making trains. But Gladys Berejiklian and

John Barilaro and Andrew Constance have seen billions of dollars, thousands and

thousands of regional jobs, offshored to India, to China and to Korea. They've deliberately

sent Australian jobs offshore when they knew full well that in Newcastle, in Maryborough,

in Ballarat, in Bendigo, in Western Australia, there are thousands of regional Australian

jobs that depend upon those train contracts. We can build the best trains in the world, we

can build them more cheaply than the rest of the world, and we can build them on time and

on budget. And instead of that, what we've seen is the Liberals and Nationals run up the



white flag on Australian manufacturing and Australian jobs.



And that's made New South Wales a catalogue of disaster. Trains that don't fit through

tunnels. It's meant ferries that don't fit under bridges. It's meant a light rail contract that has

gone years and years over time and billions of dollars over budget. The New South Wales

Liberals and Nationals symbolise everything that's wrong with Michael McCormack and

Scott Morrison and the Liberals and Nationals approach to Australian manufacturing. Don't

forget that David Johnson said when he was in a position to advance the interests of

Australian manufacturing and Australian naval shipbuilding, he said Australians couldn't

build a canoe. It's stuck in their DNA, this approach where they hate Australian

manufacturing, they run it down. And as a consequence of that our regional towns and

regional communities are running out of puff and running out of jobs. It's time for a big

change from the Commonwealth Government on Australian manufacturing.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JOE MCKENZIE 0431 377 319





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













