

JASON CLARE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR REGIONAL SERVICES,  LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND TERRITORIES  MEMBER FOR BLAXLAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC WEEKEND NEWS BREAKFAST  SATURDAY, 1 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Role of the ADF in Victoria; First Home Loan Deposit Scheme;  HomeBuilder.

FAUZIAH IBRAHIM, HOST: Victorians are being warned that the six week lockdown in  Melbourne and the Mitchell Shire could be extended as coronavirus cases continue to rise.  Restrictions in regional parts of Victoria have also been tightened in a bid to curb the  spread of COVID-19.

KATHRYN ROBINSON, HOST: Let's bring in our political panel now, and we're joined by  the Minister for Defence Personnel and Veterans’ Affairs, Minister Darren Chester. Good  morning to Darren. And we're also joined by the Shadow Minister for Regional Services  and Housing and Homelessness, Jason Clare. Darren, I might start with you. If we look at  the ADF personnel who are being deployed across not just Victoria but across the country  in really different roles, they're door knocking, they're helping with tracing, they’re  protecting some of the borders. Can you take us just through how some of these different  roles, or what some of these different roles are actually doing?

DARREN CHESTER: Great to join you, guys. G'day Jason, I hope you and your family are  well in these challenging times too. There's about 3200 Australian Defence Force  personnel now deployed, working with the states primarily. Obviously Victoria, New South  Wales and Queensland has been a major focus. They're working alongside police in some  situations on the border checkpoints, they work with health authorities going door to door  making sure people at home who are meant to be at home, and also doing the contact  tracing. They're supporting the state authorities and work they're doing. Keep in mind, the  Australian Defence Force aren't sworn enforcement officers, they're not doing the police  job. They're assisting the police network.

HOST: That's an interesting point: assisting the police network. Jason Clare, I want to  bring you into this conversation as well because there have been people who have said  that it's quite disconcerting to see soldiers and camouflage door knocking, going from door  to door out in the streets, and corralling people and trying to persuade them to continue  with their self-isolation and to adhere to coronavirus restrictions as well. Some people

would say this is surveillance on civilians. What do you say to that?

JASON CLARE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS: I  wouldn't call it surveillance. This is an unusual year. We've got a virus that's racing through  our community and we need everybody pulling together to try and make sure that we  stamp out this virus, from doctors, to nurses, to police officers, to soldiers. I don't think it's  overdramatic to call it a war. More people have died from this virus in the United States  than have died in all the wars since World War Two. I think it's fantastic that we've got our  military there at the borders checking cars, but also making sure people are at home. I saw  just before our interview started, we're talking about the number of people that aren't at  home. It blows my mind that people who are sick and have got the virus aren't staying at  home. If you don't stay at home, there's a bigger chance of spreading the virus to other  people. We've all got to pull together here as a community and we need all different  governments - Labor, Liberal, state, federal, army, police, doctors, nurses, everybody -  working together to make sure that we don't have more people die from this terrible virus.

HOST: I think those numbers blow everyone's minds, Jason. But Darren, if I can ask you,  we're seeing a surge in numbers of these frontline workers, particularly health workers in  Victoria, that are becoming infected with the disease. Are you confident that the ADF  personnel who are going out to assist authorities and health workers have the right  training, have the right protection?

CHESTER: Just taking up your last point regarding the personnel on the streets as well,  I've got to say here in Gippsland we had the Australian Defence Force helping out during  bushfires. It gave people a lot of comfort to see the ADF here so I think it actually can work  in quite the reverse. But in terms of making sure they prepared, absolutely we're making  sure the Defence Force personnel have access to the personal protective equipment. Don't  mind the rainbow lorikeets coming to say g'day, but they've got access to personal  protective equipment, to the facemasks, and they're working alongside to health  authorities. But as Jason's correctly indicated, this is a highly contagious virus. There are  risks involved in this work. And I want to thank the Australian Defence Force personnel for  their service in doing this work for us. The states have asked for additional systems to  keep up with the demand. Unfortunately in Victoria, we've had a blowout of numbers over  the last few weeks which caused enormous problems for us so having the ADF here to  lend a hand, to support the health authorities, to support the police, has been critically  important. I really want to say thank you for the work they're doing.

HOST: Darren briefly, just before we move on to housing which Jason can speak a little bit  more to, I just want to ask you, you mentioned here we've got ADF personnel being  deployed since last year with respect to the response to the fires and now the Coronavirus.  Are we likely to see this trend to continue this changing nature of how the ADF is deployed  in this country?

CHESTER: The ADF has always been available for what we call humanitarian aid and  disaster relief. So we've seen the ADF deployed before in times of cyclones and floods and  that type of thing, but coming off the summer of bushfires which was unprecedented in  terms of scale along the East Coast, the ADF has an important role to play in recovery.  And now this pandemic has hit us as well so again, it's the capacity of the ADF to be  resilient, to be flexible, to use their skills and logistics and transport, and a lot of medical  training as well. Using that flexibility of the ADF in response is important where the states  can't necessarily have the resources on hand to cope. I think it's been a real test for ADF  and they've passed it with flying colours, and see the young men and women doing the

work they're doing for us right now is something we should all be very proud of.

HOST: We want to move on to another issue that's made headlines this week and the  property market. Jason Clare, I want to put this question to you. You are of course the  Shadow Minister for Housing and Homelessness as well. We saw that the Government is  considering expanding first homebuyer loan scheme to beyond the 10,000 cap and beyond  October. This is something that you've been pushing for, and you say that this is actually  going to help with the construction industry, which of course, is one of the biggest  employers in Australia as well. I'm presuming that you would welcome this move from the  Government?

CLARE: We called for this month ago and there's rumours the Government will do this in  the Budget but I urge them to do it now. The sooner they do something to help create more  jobs in the construction industry, the better because as you rightly point out, Fauziah, this  is a massive industry. It employs about a million people from the tradies building houses  right through to the people in the manufacturing industry who produce everything from  cement to tiles, and the industry is going off a cliff at the moment. As unemployment goes  up, it becomes not unsurprisingly tougher and tougher for people to sign a contract to build  a new house. To provide more support for the industry, one way to do that is to expand this  scheme and provide more support for people who are going to build a new house. This is a  scheme that allows you to get a loan with as little as a 5 per cent deposit without having to  pay mortgage insurance. We support the scheme. We think that expanding this for people  who will build rather than just buy, and that's most people who use the scheme at the  moment who buy a house, if we expand it for people who are going to build it's going to  help a lot of Australian tradies. But another thing that we can do on top of that is also put  some money into building social housing. This would be a win-win. It would put a roof over  the head of people who desperately need it and help to save these jobs in the construction  sector.

HOST: Jason, I do wonder though, these are uncertain times and employment is at an  uncertain rate at the moment. Someone may lose their job the next day, in the next week.  They just don't know. Is this really a time for first home buyers to be getting into the  market?

CLARE: Good point. You can't buy a house if you don't have a job. It's hard to pay the rent  if you don't have a job and unemployment is already high. It's expected to get even higher  by Christmas, another 240,000 people are expected to lose their job. That means as  government support comes down, more and more people are going to struggle to pay a  mortgage, more and more people are going to struggle to pay rent. That's why this is just  one thing that the Government could do to boost the construction industry. One thing we  did during the GFC, and this is worse than the GFC now we're in recession, is we put  money into building social housing, and repairing dilapidated social housing. It saved jobs,  boosted the economy and put a roof over the head of people who need it. And I'd urge the  government on the eve of Homelessness Week to think about doing that, because that'll  save thousands and thousands of tradies jobs

HOST: Darren, with respect to the scheme, the first home loan deposit scheme, why not  extend it now?

CHESTER: I think you'll find Jason and I almost in furious agreement on the challenges  we're facing here about how we support tradies to stay in work. So there have been  schemes put in place by both the state governments and the Commonwealth to support



new builds, so the new HomeBuilder Scheme and also the deposit scheme you're referring  to. Jason's also right, the challenge is making sure that people have jobs so they can  afford to get a mortgage and with low interest rates, there would be a lot of people who will  have the confidence and the hope for the future to actually go out and take loans and to  support their families and getting their first home. We're all about trying to get people into  their first home sooner so I think that's working well, that scheme has worked well. And as  Jason indicated, that's a matter for the Budget in October. That will be an issue for the  Government to work through at that point. What I would say, Jason, I'm not sure if you're  seeing the same thing in your electorate, but I'm seeing tradies and builders in my  electorate absolutely flat out at the moment. So there was a lot of work going on still in the  construction trade. There's been a lot of disruption in other industries in my electorate  around hospitality and other transport and aviation type industries. But construction right  now is going very well to the sense that local builders are telling me they've got work all the  way up next six months. So there's a lot of work still going on in the economy. It's not all  doom and gloom out there when it comes to the construction sector.

HOST: Final word to you, Jason. Are you seeing a lot of tradies, a hive of excitement  which would suggest that perhaps the HomeBuilder Scheme is working, Jason?

CLARE: To Darren's point, you're right. Tradies have been able to keep working over the  last few months but there's a bit of a lag because if you don't sign a contract for a house in  say March or April, then that means cement doesn't get poured on a block in August or  September, and that's why the industry is really worried. We saw figures come out this  week that showed housing approvals are down. That means fewer houses are going to be  built in the next 12 months. The HomeBuilder Scheme helps a bit but not enough and the  Government's great at slogans. It's a ripper slogan, but they've been pretty poor so far at  delivery. They announced it two months ago and still most Australians can apply for the  scheme. So I urge the Government to hurry up, get the scheme out the door. It'll help more  tradies to keep them working over the next 12 months and boost the scheme, expand it by  building more social housing and expanding the First Home Loan Deposit Scheme.

HOST: Gentlemen, we are out of time but as always, it's lovely to talk to you both and hear  the birds chirping behind you Darren Chester and Jason Clare, thanks for your time.

CLARE: Thanks guys.

CHESTER: Thanks.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ARLEY BLACK 0458 834 978









