

ANIKA WELLS   MEMBER FOR LILLEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  612 ABC BRISBANE BREAKFAST  TUESDAY, 18 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECT: MPs Return to Parliament.

LORETTA RYAN, HOST: Now of course one group of frequent travellers are our federal  politicians and Queensland’s chief health officer has issued new rules for them - all  Queensland Federal MPs and Senators who attend parliament in Canberra next week.  Let’s go over those rules and just see what’s happening. Anika Wells is the Labor member  for Lilley. Hello Anika.

ANIKA WELLS MP, MEMBER FOR LILLEY: Good morning, how are you both?

RYAN: Good. Now what have you been told about the rules?

WELLS: Well first let me pay credit where it’s due. On the vintage recipes, I was at one of  my RSLs the other week for dinner and they served me a baked ham with pineapple.

CRAIG ZONCA, HOST: Ooh, Yes.

RYAN: Oh, right.

WELLS: When you’re…I’m pregnant. When you’re pregnant, charcuterie is off limits for  you, for a very long time. So, if you bake it…it’s back on the menu. I was a very happy  pregnant lady.

ZONCA: The old baked ham

RYAN: Baked ham

WELLS: With pineapple

RYAN: You have to have the pineapple…the pineapple ring, from the tin.

WELLS: It’s essential

RYAN: Yes

ZONCA:  Yeah, you’ve got to add that to it as well. I love that. We’re getting some great

vintage recipe selections. Mike from Kedron actually says we had apricot chicken last  night.

RYAN: Oh yeah.

ZONCA: It makes me feel like I’m a kid around the dinner table doesn’t it.

WELLS: Solidarity, Mike.

RYAN: That’s a good one.

ZONCA: But I suppose these rules for when you…well that’s it, are you going to go to  Canberra next week as sittings resume?

WELLS: Yes, I mean as of last night, receiving the advice from Dr Young, that puts it back  on the table for me to go. I’ve been absolutely itching to get back to Canberra and take all  of the things that my electorate has been telling me that they want in the government’s  COVID response. So these conditions that have been determined as of last night will allow  me to go next week.

RYAN: Ok, and then when you come home, what happens?

WELLS: We have a quarantine, we being MPs, have a quarantine at home for 14 days  and the conditions are pretty strict. You’re not allowed to leave your house, you know, for  exercise, shopping, anything like that, just for essential medical purposes or to avoid harm.  And they will be spot checking us, doing COVID tests, all those kind of things that you  would expect.

RYAN: And what about those at home with you? Your husband? You’ve also got another  little one. What happens there?

WELLS: So they, unless I test positive in the first COVID test back after Canberra, they will  not have to do the hard quarantine at home with me. And that was the real sticking point.  Lots of MPs these days have primary care giving responsibilities, so us making the  decision about whether or not we could attend Canberra, was also making a decision  about whether or not we would be forcing the other occupants of our household to do the  hard quarantine with us. And people with school-aged children, that’s missing more school  for them in a very disrupted year already. So, those were some of their concerns while we  waited for those conditions to be set.

ZONCA: We’ve just had a text come through asking why not self-funded hotel quarantine?  So you won’t have to go to a hotel, you’re allowed to just be at your house Anika?

WELLS: Yes, that’s right. And look, I couldn’t speak to why they’ve decided these  particular conditions other than Dr Young makes reference to wanting us to undertake the  vital functions of governing in the letter that she sent. But to be honest, I don’t disagree  with your listener. There are plenty of really good reasons why we all should have just  been able to stay in our electorates and do the work of parliament virtually. That’s  something that the UK has been doing since April, Canada’s been doing it, New Zealand’s  been doing it this year. It’s not something that the Australian Parliament has moved to yet,  and that’s on the government. As of today, Tuesday before a sitting week, they’ve yet to  actually agree to any virtual elements of parliament. And if they had done that, we could

have avoided all this in the first place.

RYAN: We’re talking old school, aren’t we, so, with the cooking. But that seems old school  if they haven’t adapted.

WELLS: It really does. And it is a real battle I think between people who value tradition and  precedent and people who want to see parliament look a little bit more progressive and  reflective of the communities that we represent. I mean, these kinds of things just wouldn’t  fly in the private sector these days, having pregnant MPs not be able attend the  parliament. I’m one of four pregnant MPs at the moment, so it looks like I’ll be able to  attend now but that’s not the case for the others, as of yet, from other states. A lot of  people, I mean lots of people, people cast their vote for many reasons but lots of people  have told me they voted for me because you know, I’m a working mum, I’ve got a three  year old, my husband and I both work full time and they wanted someone who could  understand their situation and represent their interests in the parliament. And their voice  deserves to be heard and their wishes for how we respond to government deserve to be  respected, just the same as people who elect parliamentarians who don’t have caregiving  responsibilities and can decamp to Canberra for three months. So it’s both a question of  the tenets of our democracy as well as just being I think a standard that Australians expect  and that wouldn’t fly in corporate Australia.

ZONCA: Yeah, it’s going to be interesting as to how it unfolds next week. Obviously  parliamentarians from across the country, going to Canberra there have been different  restrictions on those heading into Canberra from Victoria for instance as well.

WELLS: Yes.

ZONCA: Any going from Queensland they will be able to go. On returning, two weeks of  quarantine at home, not hotel quarantine. What about for staffers Anika? Are they allowed  to go or not?

WELLS: So they aren’t categorised as performing an essential activity like MPs who are  elected are. So they, if they attend, will have to go to a hotel and quarantine at their own  expense. So I can’t imagine many of them will be doing it. And again I think it just places  more emphasis on the need for us to get virtual parliament up and running.

RYAN: Yeah definitely, what’s the dog’s name?

WELLS:  That’s Don.

RYAN: Don?

WELLS: Speaking of vintage - we have a rescue kelpie named Don.

RYAN: Don the dog. Alright, well all the very best, thank you so much for talking to us. And  all the best with your quaran-twins too.

WELLS: Thank you very much, it was a pleasure to talk to you.

ZONCA: Anika Wells, the Labor Member for Lilley, on some of those restrictions that will  be in place for Federal parliamentarians from Queensland who go to sitting week in



Canberra in a week’s time. It’s 23 past 7.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: CATHERINE PALMER 0424 823 424











