



THE HON KEN WYATT AM MP

Minister for Indigenous Australians  Member for Hasluck

TRANSCRIPT

ABC AFTERNOON BRIEFING  10 NOVEMBER 2020



Topics: NAIDOC Week, Indigenous voice, COVID-19, Indigenous Evaluation Strategy, Four  Corners Report

E&OE…

Patricia Karvelas The Minister for Indigenous Australians, Ken Wyatt, is my next guest this  afternoon. Ken Wyatt, welcome.

Minister Wyatt It's great to be with you, Patricia.

Patricia Karvelas This year's NAIDOC Week theme is 'always was, always will be'. What  does that mean to you?

Minister Wyatt Actually means not only land, it is the sixty five thousand years of customary  practice, our law, our stories, our history, our culture, the arts, dance, the achievements of  surviving for that lengthy period of time and being resilient, until settlement and things  changed. But we're still here and we're still a strong cultural range of nations across the  geographic diversity of Australia.

Patricia Karvelas I've spoken to some coalition employees off the record. I haven't gone on  the record tosay that the term is divisive. Do you think it's divisive?

Minister Wyatt No, look, it's when they chose that was it, most people will focus on land, all  the discussions I've been in have been the absolute diversity of our lifestyle in the total  context. That's why we need to have our story told, our history told. But people getting to  know Indigenous Australians in the same way they study the history of other nations, other  groups, because if they did that, they wouldn't be saying the term is divisive because that  means I'm just focused in on land. Not every element that is equally important in connection,  and I think that's where it said that they've not taken the time to extend their knowledge.

Patricia Karvelas You've now received this report from Marcia Langton and Tom Calma in  relation to a sort of body to be established to represent Aboriginal and Torres Strait  Islanders. When will you release it publicly?



Minister Wyatt I see as soon as I am going through it at the moment, I will take it to Cabinet  and then we will make a decision about its release subsequently. But I'm very keen for stage  two to occur, and that is consultation on what the three groups have come back with. I am  pleased with the report. I am pleased with the breadth of thinking. And I am pleased that I  chose a range of people in conjunction with Tom and Marcia who were at both ends of the  continuum, those who are strong Uluru Statement, those who had a different view, and  collectively they've shown the leadership in what they believe is a way forward for our people  at the community level, a regional approach and then a national approach. But all of that will  come and certainly once it's released, I'll be happy to come back on your show and discuss  some of those elements within the report that you're interested in.

Patricia Karvelas Do you have a preference in terms of the options going out for  consultation?

Minister Wyatt No, I don't, because I could do if I operated without our people, but I want to  work with our people to find the solutions that I said we would do through Co-design. And I  want to remain committed to co-designing and at the same time working with all of my  colleagues in this place to give them the understanding of what Aboriginal people across this  nation are seeking.

Patricia Karvelas So will you end up legislating before the election?

Minister Wyatt Yes we will

Patricia Karvelas So you will definitely legislate for a body to represent Aboriginal people  before the election.

Minister Wyatt Yes, I will.

Patricia Karvelas OK, and does that mean that the establishment of the body, after you  establish it through legislation, will also happen in that time frame?

Minister Wyatt Well, it'll be and I reflected back on this with the Agency because I said to  them, my recollection of the establishment of ATSIC was this. There was an interim group  until they consolidated the processes because I was an ATSIC regional chair and I know the  processes we went through in order to set up the structures, and that took a little bit of time.  But nevertheless, it gave us the opportunity to put in place an organisation, that gave us  regional and the regional structures were brilliant, because we were able to make decisions. I  think the thing that we shouldn't have had was the the funding control and some of that  programme implementation because it led to state and territory governments off the hook in  that process. This one, I have already indicated to the state and territory ministers that I want  to link with their bodies that they have already established that have been operating and who  are voices to those state and territory governments to link with the voice.

Patricia Karvelas I know a lot of the people, of course, who are sort of key members of that  earlier statement from the heart advocacy group leaders. And and it seems to me that if you  do go ahead, as you've promised in this interview, and legislate for an Indigenous  representative body, that they will say that that's the wrong order, that you need to have it in  the Constitution first. If they strongly oppose it, these very prominent people, will you still go  ahead?



Minister Wyatt In legislation, yes, because I've given that undertaking and so is our  government and I've been talking to three very distinct groups who have strong positions on  this. Because I always said that I would do the voice first and then I will consider  constitutional recognition after that point, because when I travel around the country and  Patricia, you've seen some of these yourself where you go to a community and you think,  Australia is a first world country, why are people living with this, why are they living with water  that nobody else in a city would ever drink? It's all of those factors that is driving me quite  strongly on having a local voice. It's not detracting from the Uluru's Statement. The voice was  never defined in that process. This is about the voices of local people as well as those who  currently sit within peak structures. It doesn't matter where the structures are, who governs  often go to, but don't see the evidence of what happens on the ground. And that's what I  want to try and change so that I get members of this parliament out into their regions and into  communities. And a lot are now doing that. And it's been really refreshing in my time in this  place to see the way in which federal members are engaging with Indigenous organisations  and people.

Patricia Karvelas I just want to change the topic if we can. Should Aboriginal communities,  remote Aboriginal communities, be opened up now that COVID is under control in Victoria  and New South Wales?

Minister Wyatt Look what I gleaned out of the whole COVID experience in working with  Ministers for Aboriginal Affairs, my colleague Greg Hunt was the community's wanted to be  safe. I was on a programme with you previously when we talked about the APY land. And I  said they wrote saying that they want to close their borders to protect themselves. So across  the country, we've got communities that are keen to open, but they are also worried about  the impact of COVID. And they're taking measured steps in unlocking their communities,  allowing interactions in large centres close to them. But they're not opening up their  communities on a broader context. And I can understand that given access to health  services, access to hospitals, so the leadership at all levels has been outstanding. That's why  we've had limited numbers across this nation. The ACCHO's have played a major role, the  Aboriginal community controlled health organisation,.

Patricia Karvelas And should that continue until there's a vaccine?

Minister Wyatt Sorry.

Patricia Karvelas And should that approach, in your view, continue until there's a vaccine?

Minister Wyatt I think it should we should be very measured and very cautious so as not to  put communities at risk. But Australia today Minister Hunt announced that we've had, I think,  three consecutive days. We've had no new cases. Now, that augurs well for our future. But  the vaccinations that are being developed look promising. And we would've, we've both seen  media reports in respect to that. So I'm very optimistic that those vaccines now through trials  are showing the efficacy. But they've still got some other steps to go through in those trials.  And then Australia has certainly secured a supply that will help people in Australia.

Patricia Karvelas And would indigenous Australians get priority to get that vaccine?

Minister Wyatt They'll be towards that front end, along with those who are in the front line  services, the elderly, it'll be the most vulnerable first. And then Minister Hunt will work  through with his key people, including states and territories, on how we roll the vaccines out  across the nation. We do this with influenza A or any of the flu vaccinations we give each  winter. We encourage the most vulnerable to go and get these first. Then we encourage

other Australians to also visit their GP or a pharmacy to have the same vaccination. The  same would apply in this model as well.

Patricia Karvelas Minister, how quickly can an overhaul of how Indigenous funding is  delivered start achieving results?

Minister Wyatt Look, I'm starting to see a number of programmes across the nation  changing, and I won't go into specifics because there are. There are some elements that I  want to explore in more detail, given the Productivity Commission evaluation report. We do  have to evaluate to see if a programme is effective and if it's delivering an outcome. But at  the same time, we're going to have to make some tough decisions if something isn't working,  it's not delivering and we have needs, then we have to look at how do we reengineer or in  some tough cases, what do we seise in order to fund the priorities that we have to address  through Closing the Gap.

Patricia Karvelas Just finally, I wonder, did you watch the Four Corners story last night?

Minister Wyatt Yeah, I did, and I looked at the timeline of when that occurred and. It  certainly was dealt with by Prime Minister Turnbull because I was in government then and  certainly Prime Minister Morrison addressed that in the House today and has reiterated,  every member should, adhere to the standards and the relationships that are important and  that we care for the vulnerable.

Patricia Karvelas OK, then why did Barnaby Joyce lose his job? But these two ministers  didn't, given it happened during this time.

Minister Wyatt I think the decisions of the prime minister then were relevant in terms of time  and context and both last night, the time was in the last term of government. In this term of  government, I've worked very closely with both those ministers in working to achieve the  outcomes that I need for Indigenous Australians. And today to pieces of legislation,  amendments to the native title bill led by the Attorney-General have gone through this House  and they'll have beneficial outcomes.

Patricia Karvelas Do you think the information revealed was in the public interest?

Minister Wyatt Look, I think one of the aspects to the exposure of the private life of anybody  in a public circumstance needs to be weighed up in terms of the gravity. And on that basis, it  doesn't matter whether it's in the corporate world or whether it's within public life serving in  the layers of government, that we have to look at the gravity of that and then deal with  matters. And certainly I give Malcolm Turnbull credit for the way in which he addressed that  fairly promptly.

Patricia Karvelas Yes, absolutely. The private the private issue, people can have  relationships. The issue, though, is is it appropriate to be having relationships with any staff if  you're a minister, not just your staff in your own office, but any staff, given the power  imbalance, do you think it's appropriate?

Minister Wyatt My short answer to that is no,.

Patricia Karvelas And why isn't that appropriate?

Minister Wyatt Everyone should focus on our jobs?



Patricia Karvelas Why isn't it appropriate?

Minister Wyatt Because, because all of this and I'm going to use everybody in this in both  chambers of the House are put there on the basis of how people see this as having integrity,  having a focus on representing them and being focused on the business of government or in  opposition, challenging government on its policies, not in the minds of the public to do what  we saw exposed on that Four Corners programme. So this is about reform, which Malcolm  put into place. And I think that we're seeing people adhere to that.

Patricia Karvelas Ken Wyatt. Thanks for joining me. Have a happy NAIDOC Week I know  you wore a fantastic shirt in the parliament, so I really enjoyed watching that too. It's worth  looking up the pictures. Thanks for joining us.

Minister Wyatt I'm sorry that I came in a white shirt for you, Patricia, but it's always a  pleasure being on your programme. And Happy NAIDOC Week as well.

Patricia Karvelas Ken Wyatt there, the Minister for Indigenous Australians. And he was  wearing an amazing shirt with an Indigenous design that's worth looking on social media for  or, of course, any of the websites.

[ENDS]

Authorised by K. Wyatt, Member for Hasluck

