

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  SYDNEY  THURSDAY, 5 NOVEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: US presidential election; Australia’s relationship with the US;  democracy; democratic values; coronavirus vaccine.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Thanks very  much for joining me. The alliance between Australia and the United States is our most  important. And we respect the United States because of its democratic values, which we  share. And what we have seen is the largest turnout in the United States for any  presidential election since 1908. We need to await the result, clearly. And we need to be  patient, as observers from around the world are, as well as US citizens. Because in a  democracy, it's always based on one vote, one value. Every person having their vote  counted. And it's absolutely critical that the counts are allowed to continue so that  everyone's view can be tabulated, and it can be determined who the next President of the  United States will serve for the next four years.

Labor, of course, will work with whoever the American people elect. We also understand  that American institutions are so important for our democracy. Australians will be  somewhat concerned, I think, at some of the footage, for example, outside Detroit,  Michigan, outside a county, of people shouting in a chant to ‘stop the count’. That's really  shouting, ‘Stop democracy’. And we need, all of us who hold democratic values around the  world, need to be prepared to speak up for democracy. I also say to Joe Hockey, the  former Ambassador from Australia to the US, that it doesn't help to have Australians make  comments that aren’t thought through such as this morning's where he said that there was  clearly a question mark over the legitimacy of the Washington DC vote, where Joe Biden  secured 93 per cent of support, and said he couldn't believe that was the case. Joe needed  perhaps to get out more when he was in Washington DC, because the Democrats, of  course, got over 90 per cent of the vote in 2016, in 2012, and in 2008. And it's pretty  consistent with those outcomes. So, we look forward to continuing to watch the progress  that occurs in the United States. Our democratic values are shared. It's important they be  upheld. And Labor looks forward to working with the United States. Because the  relationship between us is a relationship between our peoples based upon our common  democratic values. Happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: A huge part of the reason Americans are saying, ‘Stop the vote’ in Detroit  is because the President himself said to stop the vote and called for counting to stop. What

is your reaction to a President doing something like that?

ALBANESE: Well, I made some comments in Darwin a couple of days ago about the  importance of political leaders upholding the principles of a democracy. I drew a contrast  between comments questioning democracy and what occurred in our own great  democracy of Queensland on Saturday, where both Annastacia Palaszczuk and Deb  Frecklington commended the democratic process that had occurred there. And I think that  Deb Frecklington, I repeat, again, my comments that I made two days ago, I think her  speech gave herself a great deal of credit.

JOURNALIST: And so, how worried are you that the US could end up in a violent  situation?

ALBANESE: I'm very confident that the US institutions and their support for democratic  processes will prevail. These are strong institutions. I've participated for many years in the  Australian American Leadership Dialogue. And whilst there are Chatham House Rules,  those forums, what it is, is a chance to exchange views between Australian leaders of  politics, business, the media, and civil society, and our American counterparts. And one of  the things that it has struck me, as someone who's attended under both President Obama  and President Trump, is the consistency in which Americans hold democratic principles so  dear, regardless of where they might stand on the political spectrum. And I'm very  confident that American institutions, and indeed the American people, will come through  this. People would have, of course, everyone would like to see a result clearly on election  night, but often that doesn't happen. They are still counting votes in Queensland, in  electorates like Currumbin. In Eden-Monaro, on the night, I privately told those journalists  who were there that I was very confident that we'd won by about the amount that we ended  up winning by. But we didn't declare on the night, because there were votes to be counted.  Once those pre-poll votes were counted on the Sunday morning, and it was clear that we  were definitely going to win, then Kristy McBain claimed victory. That's the democratic  process. And here, it's not surprising given the different rhetorical positions about early  voting, that there's a difference in the vote cast on the day and the vote cast earlier on.

JOURNALIST: Do you think Donald Trump is trying to undermine democracy in the US,  given his reaction?

ALBANESE: I think that democracy is too important for it to be undermined by any  individual. And I think that the United States institutions, and its democratic values, which  are at its core, can't be undermined by anyone, beyond any undermining at any particular  time. America will come through this. And the fact that more Americans have voted than at  any time for over a century in this presidential election really signals how important  Americans value their capacity to have a say and express that through the ballot box. That  is how we do it in democratic countries. And that is really important. Here in Australia,  every time there's an election in a country that has voluntary voting, I say that Australia's  democracy is very, very strong. It's a reminder that we got it right when we had compulsory  voting. It's a reminder, as well, that almost all the time, the political party that gets the most  support, after people express their preference, gets to form government. There are times  where that doesn't happen, for Kim Beazley in 1998. But that, of course, was accepted  completely by the Australian people. And I value our democracy. But I value democratic  values around the world as well.

JOURNALIST: Do you believe Joe Biden will be better for Australia and the relationship



with the US?

ALBANESE: Look, I don't think it's appropriate to make comments until the votes are  counted and it's determined who the next President will be. At that time, certainly, I will be  making comments. But I believe that Australia would work with, as we have with President  Trump, we've worked with presidents of all political persuasions, and our alliance has  remained strong. I know Joe Biden. I've met him a couple of times when he was the Vice  President, of course, people retain their titles in the United States. So, in terms of Vice  President Biden, I found him to be a great friend of Australia. I haven't met President  Trump. Of course, Scott Morrison and he have a good relationship. It's important that that  we work with whoever the US people decide will be the next President going forward. Just  one more.

JOURNALIST: Just on vaccines, does Labor support the spending of another $1.5 billion  on potential coronavirus vaccines? Chris Bowen suggested that Australia catch up to the  rest of the world, how would you suggest the Government does that?

ALBANESE: Well, the agreements that were announced today, we welcome as a step  forward. But they now bring four agreements. The rest of the world is looking at six or  seven agreements. There's an issue with the vaccine and whether they can be  manufactured here. And that presents another challenge. Their transportation, under very  severe low temperatures, mean that they could present potential difficulties. But we've  been calling upon the Government to do more, to catch up with the world in terms of  putting agreements in place so that our health can be looked after. Every Australian,  indeed, I think every citizen of the world, wants to see a vaccine and wants to see us win  over this terrible virus that has caused chaos, has caused a great deal of death and health  concerns. But also, it has also wreaked havoc on our economy. So, it's critical that we do  everything possible. And when we look at expenditure, it's a matter of opportunity cost  here. Getting a vaccine is absolutely critical for our future economy, but also for keeping  people healthy and safe. Thanks very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053





