AMANDA RISHWORTH MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION AND

DEVELOPMENT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR YOUTH

MEMBER FOR KINGSTON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS WITH ALAN JONES

THURSDAY, 15 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Gladys Berejiklian; Labor’s Working Family Child Care Boost.



ALAN JONES, HOST: Welcome to you both. I don’t want to dwell on this issue but a

comment on the Berejiklian affair. We’ll go to South Australia’s Amanda first.



AMANDA RISHWORTH, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION

AND DEVELOPMENT: It’s a pretty messy situation and of course we’ve seen a lot of

speculation. For Gladys Berejiklian her private life is her private life, and I wouldn’t want to

go speculating about that. But there’s clearly a process to go through here and there will

be evidence, and hopefully that will be tested properly. The process just needs to take its

course.



JONES: Okay I agree. Amanda Stoker?



AMANDA STOKER, LIBERAL SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND: I think it’s important to

note while the admissions made today by Mr Maguire are apparently quite damming, the

evidence seems to corroborate and support everything that’s been said by Premier

Berejiklian so far, demonstrating that she’s been honest with the public and honest with the

ICAC hearing. It’s also really important I think that we don’t allow this process to distract

from the very good job she is doing, I would say best in the country of all the State

Premiers, of keeping the economy as open as is possible and allowing as much freedom

as is possible in the context of COVID-19.



JONES: Let me ask you this, the Liberal Party have always claimed the higher ground on

corruption, and they’ve taunted Labor about corrupt ghosts of the past. Amanda Rishworth,

what does this mean do you think for the Liberal Party?



RISHWORTH: Look I think they’ve had their fair share of accusations as well. But

obviously as the process goes on there’ll be a question in the public mind about whether

there can still be trust in politics, and I think that’s a really worrying situation when people

are questioning trust. I’m not going to make this a partisan thing, but I think as politicians

we have to absolutely uphold the public’s trust and there’s an obligation on all of us to do

that.



JONES: Good on you, well done, great answer. Amanda Stoker for a long time the Labor

brand has been identified with dodgy deals and corruption. Is this Maguire Berejiklian stuff

an electoral gift to Labor?



STOKER: Well we’ve got until 2023 to see how that plays out in New South Wales, there’s

a fair way to go until we’re facing that. But more electorally relevant is to look at the more

recent and front of mind for me at least being in Queensland, is the conduct of the

Queensland Labor Party. Where we’ve had Labor here doing deals to change the electoral

funding laws, to exclude the people who don’t support them, while making it possible for

unions to donate ever-more. Rigging sign laws so their people can have plenty of signs,

but those who are more conservative can’t. They’ve changed the advertising laws so that

they can divert public taxpayer funding to applying to their election well hopefully for them

re-election campaign. And they’ve been doing it all while refusing to have a Budget. That’s

dodgy if I’ve ever seen it.



JONES: I just want to ask you both, this Maguire fella fancy bringing Chinese Communist

Party members into the New South Wales State Parliament, reportedly charging them to

meet Barry O’Farrell, from the United Front a network controlled by the Chinese

Communist Party. Just a quick one from you both Amanda Rishworth



RISHWORTH: Well I think foreign influence is something we must tackle as a country and

as a Parliament. And that’s why I think foreign donations need to be banned in this country,

they should be banned and that’s critically important. But we’ve got to look at other foreign

influences and make sure that we have a squeaky clean electoral system.



JONES: 100 per cent correct. I know what Amanda thinks so I won’t bother to ask. I

wanted to ask about Anthony Albanese wanting to increase the subsidy per dollar that

families spend on child care from 85 cents to 90 cents, and households earning below

$530,000 would receive a subsidy. What do you say to people with no children who may

well be subsidising the career ambitions of well off parents, Amanda Stoker?



STOKER: I think most people in the community can get behind the idea that providing

some help for child care for single parents or lower socio economic households is a

valuable thing to do. But when we’re talking about households that have incomes of

$400,000 and over, it really is a bit of a joke. It’s not right to be providing enormous

subsides in those circumstances, and when we have evidence that the Morrison

Government’s current scheme the Child Care Subsidy is getting the balance right between

helping those families who truly need it to be able to earn a living, and making sure that

those who can pay their own way, there’s no demonstrated need for this proposal.



JONES: Well let’s go to Amanda because she’s qualified in this area too. I’m sure this is

well and right for children in single parent or lower socio economic households, but surely

in a household of $400,000 as Amanda says, this is just glorified child minding?



RISHWORTH: It’s not at all. KPMG and the Grattan Institute have recently both released

reports. What Labor is doing is we are removing a disincentive for women to go to work, at

the moment what those two studies show is for a woman to go back to work on the fourth

or fifth day, depending on their income, they actually have to in some cases pay to go to

work, or they get five cents in the dollar when they turn up to work. So what these reports

have said is if you remove those disincentives, you actually grow the economy, and that’s

better for everyone.



JONES: Amanda the greatest the greatest growth in female employment in this country

was in the 70s when there was none of this stuff.



RISHWORTH: Well if you have a look at the OECD figures we trail well below full time

work for women, the OECD in average is 37 per cent, we are trailing at about 23 per cent.





JONES: You’re both mothers, I’ve read books on all this stuff, isn’t the best child care in

the home? Amanda Stoker can I just grab a comment from you on that.



STOKER: Alan can I say this first about what Amanda has put before you tonight, and that

is to say just before COVID-19 hit, we have record womens workforce participation in this

country, and we had it without this absurd policy proposed by Albanese. But it is true to say

that a lot of studies show that the best start for children is in the home, and quite frankly

the policies we have in place in my view personally should provide real choice and real

options for all families. So those that are prepared to make the sacrifice necessary for one

parent to stay at home get some support in doing so, particularly if they’re at the lower end

of the income scale.



JONES: Labor Amanda we’ve we run out of time, but I’ll just make one point to you

Amanda, and thank you for your time tonight and the clarity of your thinking. I must just say

if you happen to be a mum or dad and you stay at home to look after your kids you get

nothing. But look we’ve run out of time and I will resume this discussion next week, and

Amanda I hope we can talk to you again. Thank you for your time.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JEMMA SLEVEC 0405 752 923



