

SENATOR MURRAY WATT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR NORTHERN AUSTRALIA

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DISASTER AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

LABOR SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

MACKAY

WEDNESDAY, 14 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECT/S: Casualisation in mining industry; Morrison Government

backing mining companies over workers; High Court appeal re

‘permanent casuals’ rort; Scott Morrison playing politics with

Queensland’s borders; Pauline Hanson missing from Queensland

election campaign; George Christensen on hydroxychloroquine



MURRAY WATT, QUEENSLAND LABOR SENATOR: Thanks everyone for

coming along. Today is the second day of our campaign to highlight the

explosion of casualisation and labour hire in the mining industry across Central

Queensland.



The reason we're doing this outside George Christensen's office, and we were

outside Michelle Landry's office yesterday in Rockhampton, is that people like

George Christensen, Michelle Landry, Matt Canavan, all of the LNP, they love

to get out there and tell us how much they love coal. But what they really love is

coal mining companies and coal mining bosses. They don't like coal mining

workers. And if they did, they would actually fix this casualisation rort that has

been going on under their own noses.

This Government has been in power for seven years, and over that seven

years, we have seen a complete explosion of casualisation and labour hire in

the mining industry here in Central Queensland. And these guys have done

nothing about it. They've known it's been going on. They've had every

opportunity to fix it.



They don't support coal mining workers like the people who are here with me

today. This has real consequences for individuals, their families and local

economies. I've met many casual and labour hire coal miners across Central

Queensland - in Moranbah, in Middlemount, in Tieri,  here in Mackay, in Rocky

and other places as well - who get paid less than a permanent worker, even

after they get their casual loading. And of course, they miss out on the benefits

of job security, leave, all the other benefits of permanent employment as well.



This Government has had every opportunity to fix this. They haven't done so.

And now they're actually joining with the labour hire companies in a High Court

appeal to entrench "permanent casuals" in the mining industry. Right now, the

Government has decided to intervene in a High Court case to back the labour

hire companies and the big mining companies who want to hang onto this

"permanent casual" rort. That's how much these people like coal miners. They

want to dance around, they want to put on their nicely-ironed high-vis shirts and

get out there and pretend to care about coal mining. But they always, always

line up with the coal mining companies and the labour hire firms. They're never

with the actual coal miners - the people who dig the mines and get the coal out

of the ground, that's the people who they should be supporting. And that's the

people who Federal Labor is supporting.



JOURNALIST: In terms of, I suppose, the impact of this, Murray, it stems

further than just the initial pay. The people may not be able to get mortgages

because they can't prove that they've got permanent income. It could really

destroy families.



WATT: Absolutely. Again, I've met many, many labour hire casual workers

across Central  Queensland who can't get a home loan, can't get a car loan

because they're casual employees. I've met a bloke who couldn't get a day's

sick leave, even though he was incredibly crook and had to turn up to work. He

would have lost his job. I met another bloke who couldn't get a day off to take

his own kid to the hospital. These are the consequences of people not having

those leave benefits of permanent work. And it's not that they're not working as

permanents. These are people who are working the same shift, the same

roster, week after week, year after year. If you actually just take a look at their

work, they're permanent employees, but they're engaged as casuals so that the

boss doesn't have to pay them the right rate, doesn't have to give them the

leave benefits, doesn't have to give them the job security and can give them the

flick whenever they want.



JOURNALIST: In terms of, I suppose, the policy itself Murray, George

Christensen claims that it would ruin kind of local businesses. Are you

concerned that introducing a bill like this could have a bigger effect, than just on

the mining industry?



WATT: I don't accept that argument. I mean, there have been bosses and

mining companies and labour hire companies who have been taking advantage

of this system for a long time, who've been underpaying their workers and now

they're being held to account. All that's happened here is a union and its

members have taken companies to court and the courts have found that these

companies have been underpaying people.



If you're getting underpaid at any other business around town, you've got a right

to go to court and your employer has to pay up, and that's what's being asked

for here. This is only something about the coal mining industry. It doesn't affect

other types of industries. The thing that's different about the coal mining

industry is that people do get engaged on the same rosters week after week,

month after month. It's different if you're working at Macca's or at a local retail

shop where your hours do change from week to week. That's not what happens

in mining. And that's why these people should be classed as permanents.



JOURNALIST: There are a lot of legal experts who would say that this case

before the High Court does have a chance to set precedents around casuals

and the entitlements to them though, that could extend far beyond the mining

industry?



WATT: Well, certainly that's what some of the big employer groups are saying,

they've come up with some multi-billion dollar figure about what this will cost.

But what they are ignoring is that this case is about the practices in the mining

industry, which is where people get the same rosters year after year. You can't

tell me that if you're working the same hours, week after week, month after

month, year after year, that you're not a permanent employee.



JOURNALIST: In any industry though?



WATT: I just don't think that you're going to find that situation in other

industries. I worked in hospitality and retail as a casual and my hours were

changed from week to week. That's the nature of casual employment. No one

is saying that casual employment goes altogether. What we are saying is that

casual employment should be restricted to casuals. It shouldn't be used as a

way to rip off people who are actually permanent employees.



JOURNALIST: Just on the back of this High Court challenge and the bill that

was passed, because I know that George Christensen often points to in the

previous term of Parliament there was an opportunity to guarantee these

workers' rights and Labor didn't support it?



WATT: So what actually happened is that because of the pressure the union,

the Labor Party and others were putting on the Government about this issue in

the run up to the last federal election, in the dying days of the last term the

Government rushed in a piece of legislation that they said was going to fix this

problem. But it absolutely wasn't. The legislation that the Government

introduced did nothing to stop employers classing people as casuals, even if

they were permanents. And all it did was give someone who had been

employed as a casual the right to ask to become permanent. The boss could

still say no, you had no right of appeal from that decision. And it didn't do

anything to stop a boss incorrectly classing you as a casual in the first place.

That's the real problem, is that bosses are incorrectly classing people as

casuals when they're actually permanents.



The other thing about that legislation is that if George Christensen thought it

was so good, why hasn't he bothered to reintroduce it since the election? They

introduced this in the dying days before the last election because they were

scared of losing. And then they haven't lifted a finger to get it moving again

since the election. They're not serious about this. They've let it go on for seven

years and they're still letting it go on. And it's people like this who are suffering.



JOURNALIST: Are you more likely to find George Christensen in Manila than

at a mine site?



WATT:  I'm not going to comment on any of that sort of stuff. I'm just focussed

on George letting down people in Mackay and letting down people in this

region. He and the LNP always say they're for coal mining, but they're actually

for the coal bosses, not the miners themselves.



Just while I'm here, before I hand over to Julieanne, would you mind if I just

make a couple of quick observations election-wise, because of state election,

obviously?



At the moment, we've got Scott Morrison doing a tour of Queensland, don't

know if he's going to come to Mackay or not but he's been in Rockhampton

overnight. If he does come to Mackay, I think it's important that he explains to

people why he has been coordinating a campaign to open Queensland's

borders with Deb Frecklington. I understand Deb Frecklington is going to be in

town today, and I think it's legitimate for us to ask her as well. Why has she

been coordinating a campaign to open Queensland's borders with the Prime

Minister? There was an article in one of the papers this week that revealed that

at Deb Frecklington's own business forum only a couple of months ago, she

admitted that her “Open the Borders” campaign was being coordinated with the

Prime Minister of Australia. Now, you and I both know that most Queenslanders

are pretty happy with the approach the Queensland Government has taken to

keep us safe, to keep our borders closed. What we only learnt this week is that

Deb Frecklington and Scott Morrison have been coordinating a campaign to

open those borders. I think it's incredibly disappointing that the Prime Minister

of our country has been playing politics with Queensland's borders and now

he's in Queensland playing politics, trying to help elect Deb Frecklington so that

she'll just go along with everything he says.



The other person, though, who's been pretty absent on the political scene here

in Queensland is Pauline Hanson. She was making a lot of noise, and I see

she's got a handful of volunteers over there today on the corner, but we haven't

seen much of Pauline Hanson herself. For someone who was going to win all

sorts of seats, hold the balance of power, where is Pauline Hanson? Doesn't

she actually care about Central Queensland and towns like Mackay? She

should be out here. She should be standing up for mine workers. They're the

ones that she says she supports. Again, she's always missing in action when

anything needs to be done.



JOURNALIST: That's the candidate for Mackay amongst the volunteers there.



WATT: Well, she's left the candidate stranded on their own. If she's actually

serious about Mackay, she should be here in person herself.



JOURNALIST: Just to this issue of the border, Deb Frecklington would push

back, that a lot of the push, coordinated or otherwise, with the Federal

Government, was made before a second outbreak in Victoria which really

changed the goal posts. They would say since then they've altered their

position.



WATT: Well Deb Frecklington can try and say whatever she wants to get away

from the fact that she called for Queensland's borders to be open 64 times.

Sixty-four times she demanded and harangued and harassed the Premier-



JOURNALIST: -how many times has she done since the second outbreak?



WATT: I haven't been keeping count because once you get to 64, that's a

pretty big number. It's all on video. It's all on audio. Sixty-four times Deb

Frecklington called for our borders to be opened. Just imagine if we'd done

that. Scott Morrison, the Prime Minister, was repeatedly calling for our borders

to be open. Just imagine if Annastacia Palaszczuk had backed down? Thank

God she stood her ground against Scott Morrison, Deb Frecklington and

everyone else who was calling her to open the borders. That's what's kept us

safe. That's what allowed our economy here in Mackay and across Queensland

to keep ticking over.



JOURNALIST: I'm genuinely curious about this. Every chief health officer in

every state, the federal deputy chief health officer and epidemiologist all seem

to have a completely different views of what is an advisable time to have a

border open, particularly New South Wales, because that's the main one that I

guess people are talking about a lot and that seems like a realistic chance of

opening at some point. Dr Norman Swan, perhaps the most respected health

communicator in Australia, says that it is almost impossible for this 28-day limit

that the Government has set, which conveniently ends the day after the

election, is one that would be so hard for any jurisdiction to meet during the

pandemic. Are they also playing politics on the border?



WATT: Well, all I can say is that the Queensland chief health officer has been

proven right with the advice that she's given to the Queensland Government.

Annastacia Palaszczuk has listened to that health advice and the results are

there to see. Queenslanders have been kept largely free of COVID. We've

been able to open up our economy much more quickly than other states. So to

be honest, I'm not that interested in what the advice that other states are

providing is. I'm interested in what's happening here in Queensland. And the

Queensland Health chief health officer has done a fantastic job, as has

Annastacia Palaszczuk.



JOURNALIST: Just finally on COVID, the man whose posters you're standing

in front of (George Christensen) released and since distributed a letter calling

for the use of hydroxychloroquine - something that the deputy chief health

officer advisor to the Federal Government has said is a ridiculous notion. He’s

said it’s at best, ineffective, at worst, could actually make patients worse. The



World Health Organisation has echoed that, as have many other esteemed

journal articles and medical journals that say hydroxychloroquine is ineffective.

How dangerous then is it that someone with quite a captive audience is saying

that this should be used as a treatment?



WATT: I think it's incredibly dangerous and irresponsible for political

representatives to be out there spreading untrue information about COVID. The

idea that George Christensen and some of his colleagues in the Liberal Party

are out there spreading false cures for COVID is highly dangerous. It is only by

following real health advice - rather than what George Christensen finds on the

internet in the middle of the night, when he's in his basement - it's following real

advice from real doctors that has kept us safe. If we were to go and do what

George Christensen and his mates are saying, we'd have a lot more COVID

around. It's irresponsible. It's dangerous, and it's putting lives in Mackay and

other towns at risk.



JOURNALIST: Should Scott Morrison kick him out of the Coalition

Government?



WATT: I think Scott Morrison should certainly take some responsibility for

disciplining George Christensen and other Members of Parliament who are

spreading fake cures and fake news about COVID.





ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TALI ELEY 0448 078 456





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.









