

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

SYDNEY

SUNDAY, 8 NOVEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: US presidential election; Australia’s relationship with the US;

democracy; democratic values; climate change; Australia’s relationship

with China; trade.



ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY:

Well, the people of the United States have had their say in that great

democracy and they have elected Joe Biden as the President-elect and Kamala

Harris as the Vice President-elect. We congratulate both of them on an

extraordinary victory. We also note that President Biden - or President-elect

Biden will have been elected by more people than any President in the history

of the United States. We acknowledge the fact that Kamala Harris will not only

be the first woman elected as Vice President of the United States, but also the

first woman of colour.



They have a big challenge ahead to unite the United States once again, to

overcome the challenge that the world is dealing with, with the global COVID-19 pandemic. But also in terms of the challenge of climate change, the

challenge of uniting the United States after what has been a divisive period,

particularly on issues including race relations. But I have every confidence that

they'll be able to do so. I have met Joe Biden and he is a friend of Australia.

The United States alliance is our most important one. It was forged in the wake

of World War II by John Curtin as Prime Minister when the United States

responded to assist Australia in our hour of need. Ever since then, we have

been partners. Partners on security issues, partners on the economy and the

trade relationship which is important, partners as well we look forward to being

in the future on climate change.



It is a good thing that President-elect Biden has said that the first act of his

administration will be to bring the United States back in to the Paris Accord and,

of course, President-elect Biden will also bring the United States back in to

multi-lateral organisations including the World Health Organization. It's critical

that the US play the leadership role that it has historically played since the

Second World War as a critical democracy and I congratulate both President-elect Biden and Vice President-elect Harris and look forward to working with

them into the future.



Happy to take questions.



JOURNALIST: Inaudible



ALBANESE: Well, I think one of the things that I said earlier this week was that

it was up to world leaders to assert the importance of democracy. Those of us

who hold democracy so dear. Our alliance with the United States is based upon

our common values and that includes the value of our democratic principles. It

is critical that happened, the fact that Scott Morrison, along with other world

leaders, has welcomed the election of President-elect Biden is a good thing.

And you have that being welcomed by not just the leader of Australia, but other

democracies as well - the United Kingdom, India, Germany, France and others

have all welcomed this election outcome which is very clear in favour of Joe

Biden and Kamala Harris.



JOURNALIST: Inaudible



ALBANESE: What I suggested was that Scott Morrison needed to stand up for

democracy. He's done that in acknowledging the election of President-elect

Biden. The other thing that needs to happen - and this is the context here - is

that Scott Morrison needs to dissociate himself and his Government from

government members who are questioning the democratic process and

continue to do so. Members of his party. The fact is that these conspiracy

theories do nothing to advance our common interest of standing up for

democratic values. It's good that Scott Morrison has accepted the election

outcome, has congratulated President-elect Biden and that was what I was

calling for - for Scott Morrison to stand up for our democratic processes. I

pointed out at that time that we had an election a week ago in Queensland

where in contrast to some of the things that we're seeing, both Premier

Palaszczuk and the opposition leader, Deb Frecklington, both gave speeches

accepting the democratic outcome.



JOURNALIST: Inaudible



ALBANESE: No, I have said very clearly - I have said very clearly that what

Scott Morrison needed to do was to stand up for democratic values and to

make that publicly. He's done that. He's done that today. That's a good thing.

The second thing he needs to

do is to dissociate himself and his party from members of his Government who

are sending two sorts of messages. You can't have the leader of the Australian

Government saying one thing and members of his own party saying something

very different.



JOURNALIST: Inaudible



ALBANESE; I think that Scott Morrison should make comments publicly, that's

the way that you can do these things. You can make comments publicly

standing up for democratic processes. That's happened. It wasn't happening

earlier in the week when you had Joe Hockey and a range of, a former

Ambassador to the United States, a former Liberal Party Treasurer of this

country, and other sitting members of the Government make comments that are

entirely inappropriate suggesting that there had been fraudulent activity in the

United States where there is no evidence that that has occurred. The clear

evidence is that people have been able to express their view through the ballot

box and that they have made a clear decision indeed that Joe Biden has

received more votes than any presidential candidate in the history of the United

States of America.



JOURNALIST: Inaudible



ALBANESE: Well I note the comments of Scott Morrison this morning once

again about the Paris accord. The fact is that Australia went to the last

international forum that was held in 2019 and continued to argue that Australia

should be able to count Kyoto credits from the period essentially when the

former Labor Government was taking action on climate change, in order to

meet its targets. What Australia needs to do is to reduce our emissions, not to

engage in accounting tricks. And I'm very confident that just like the rest of the

industrialised world, like the European nations rejected that move by Australia,

I'd be confident given the position taken by President-elect Biden that he will

also reject any accounting tricks and wants there to be real action. The fact is

that Australia when it was last at a climate change conference was effectively

sitting with Saudi Arabia and some other recalcitrant nations and arguing for

less action, not more. The truth is now we will have international leadership

returned from the United States just as we ad under the Obama and Clinton

administrations.



JOURNALIST: Inaudible



ALBANESE: Australia is now isolated on climate change and was at the last

international conference. Scott Morrison pretends that black is white. Pretends

that he can count Kyoto credits - something that is not acceptable to the rest of

the global community. You have a Minister in Angus Taylor who engages in a

whole lot of rhetoric but no real action. We still don't have an energy policy in

this country. We've had twenty-two separate announcements and no clear

policy direction, no framework and last year we saw a considerable decline in

new investment in renewables.



JOURNALIST: Inaudible



ALBANESE: Well one of the things that the Biden administration will do is to be

much more engaged in multilateral institutions, it will be involved much more in

processes including United Nations processes rather than undermining them. I

think we will see a very different role for the United States. Historically it's

played such such a critical leadership role and I think we will see a role on

issues like trade that is far more consistent with Australia's position of support

for trade, our partnership with the United States is something that is enduing. It

is something that goes that beyond relationships between individual presidents

and individual prime ministers here in Australia. Scott Morrison had a close

relationship with President Trump. He attended the defacto campaign rally,

people will recall, in Ohio. Something that I think was unwise. But I have no

doubt that Australia's strong relationship with the United States will grow into



the future and in my view will be strengthened because of what a new

administration is likely to do with regard to respecting multilateral institutions.



Thank you.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512



