Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania









Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck  Minister for Aged Care and Senior Australians  Minister for Youth and Sport



28 October 2020



Elite athletes offered certainty for the future



The Australian Government, through Sport Australia and the Australian Institute of Sport, has  locked in an investment aimed at keeping our leading sports men and women on track.

Athletes will benefit from a $115 million commitment for the 2021-22 financial year aimed at  reinforcing individual Olympic, Paralympic and Commonwealth Games campaigns.

As part of the investment, direct funding for Paralympic sports will increase by more than $3  million, with the majority of current funding levels for able-bodied sports also extended to the  2022 Birmingham Commonwealth Games.

Minister for Youth and Sport, Richard Colbeck, said the nation’s elite athletes continue to  inspire Australians in what has been a challenging time for sport at every level.

“The Australian Government’s record core funding levels to support athletes builds on the  recent investments to support wellbeing and pathways for young aspiring Olympians and  Paralympians,” he said.

The boost for Paralympic competitors, across 13 sporting programs, marks a 40 per cent  increase in funding via the Australian Sports Commission since 2012.

Paralympics Australia president Jack O’Callaghan said the funding marked a significant  moment in the evolution of Paralympic sport in Australia.

“We are so proud and thankful the Federal Government recognises the value and impact of  growing investment into Paralympic sport and has entrusted us with greater responsibility to  lead and grow our movement even further,” Mr O’Callaghan said.

“Paralympics Australia applauds the Federal Government, Sport Australia, particularly its  Chair John Wylie, and the AIS for sharing our vision for more equitable funding for  Australia’s Paralympians and for acknowledging the unique and irreplaceable contribution  that Paralympic sport provides the broader community.”



Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania





Minister Colbeck said the Government has been a strong supporter of Paralympics Australia  and its athletes with recent investments of $8 million toward preparations for the Tokyo  Paralympics and $4 million to support the construction of a Community, Education and Events  Centre at Paralympic Australia’s base in Victoria.

He said given the challenging fiscal environment associated with the impact of COVID-19,  Sport Australia and the AIS had also worked closely with national sporting organisations to  provide greater flexibility with use of existing Commonwealth grant funding.

High performance funding allocations to national sporting organisations are determined by  the AIS.  Sport Australia determine participation funding.

In March 2020, Sport Australia introduced guidelines offering flexibility within existing  funding agreements to give sporting bodies the ability to redirect funding into areas of need  within each organisation.

“Sport Australia will continue to provide flexibility in the release of this funding,” Minister  Colbeck said.

The expenditure guidelines initially developed for the period 1 March to 31 December 2020,  will be extended until 30 June 2021.

“The funding decisions of the Australian Sports Commission strike a balance in providing  certainty and flexibility as athletes look ahead to the Paris 2024 Olympics,” Minister Colbeck  said.

“It also underpins the Sport 2030 objective of backing our best athletes, coaches and sporting  bodies to develop a high-performance culture and help ensure Australians can reach their  potential on the world stage.”

