

JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW   ABC HOBART DRIVE  WEDNESDAY, 9 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECT: Morrison Government’s failures in aged care.

LUCY BRAEDEN, HOST: Shadow Minister for Ageing Julie Collins and Labor Member for  Franklin. Julie Collins, what do these figures tell you?

JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS: Well, I think they  would concern most Tasmanians Lucy. The fact that the regulator didn't do any visits for  three months and nobody knew about it . We were only told about that a week or so ago,  that they suspended them based on health advice. We then had the Deputy Chief Medical  Officer say that as far as he was aware, no such medical advice has been provided. We  obviously saw the devastating outcomes in aged care overseas with COVID-19 and then  we had the two major outbreaks in New South Wales and we had a report on that by mid-April. And now here we are being told in September that the quality commission, the  regulator, is only just investigating aged care homes in Tasmania now. Checking on them  and checking that they are ready in case there's a COVID outbreak. Before that, they did  some phone checks, but nobody has been inside these facilities until the last few weeks -since before March. It is not acceptable.

BRAEDEN: Isn't that a positive thing, though, that, you know, maybe they have learnt from  their lessons and that this is happening now?

COLLINS: Well, they haven't learnt from their lessons, and that - several months too late -  that this is happening. The fact that the spot checks won't be completed until the end of  this month. These spot checks should have been done at least three months ago. They  should have been done ages ago. And we're now in a position where we've got the  Premier saying one of the reasons he can't open borders, to COVID free states, is because  we're not ready for an aged care outbreak in Tasmania. You would think that the  Government should and could do better than that. And the fact that we're doing this now is  good, but it's far too late, it should have been done months ago. I mean, the other thing  we're not getting, of course, is transparency around what's happening in these visits. Some  of the facilities in Victoria where they've had significant outbreaks passed accreditation and  passed the visits, and yet they still had major outbreaks. So it would be good to have a bit  of transparency around what is happening in these visits as well, whether some of these  facilities have minor breaches that have been fixed or whether the Commission has

serious concerns about some of these facilities.

BRAEDEN: Do we know yet what type of issues there are that's happening within aged  care homes, like some of the breaches that you speak of?

COLLINS: We don't. We only get notified if there's a serious breach and then it goes onto  the website of the Commission, but all the minor breaches or the minor issues are not  made public. And I think there needs to be a lot more transparency around that, around  when places are visited, when their accreditations are done, whether they pass spot  checks and it's also really good for those facilities that are doing a great job because you  know, if they have a really minor breach they can just say what it is and what they've done  to rectify it. And people have that information and can make informed decisions. We need  a lot more transparency, I think, around what's going on.

BRAEDEN: Are you happy with the number of checks that are happening?

COLLINS: Well, I'm glad now that all the facilities in Tasmania are going to be checked.  But let's be very clear here. The only reason that this is happening now is because it's  been exposed that there were none done and because, of course, the fact that the  Government had no comprehensive plan, the Federal Government, or this would have  been done ages and ages ago. And because you've got State Liberal Premier now calling  it out, essentially he's saying the Federal Liberal Government didn't have a comprehensive  plan and we wouldn't have got to September before these checks were being done.

BRAEDEN: 13 minutes past 5, Lucy Braeden with you on Drive. And Julie Collins is my  guest, the Opposition's aged care spokeswoman and Labor member for Franklin. In a  statement, Aged Care Quality and Safety Commissioner Janet Anderson said that  processes related to these spot checks actually changed between mid-March to June to  minimise infection risks. She said all of the state's aged care providers had been assessed  for COVID-19 preparedness over the phone, as you mentioned. Does that satisfy you,  though?

COLLINS: Well, it doesn't, because clearly some of the facilities that passed this have had  significant outbreaks, in Victoria. And clearly, whatever the Aged Care Quality Commission  was doing was not sufficient because we've now had very significant outbreaks in Victoria.  And as late as last week, we still had the Chief Medical Officer in Victoria saying that half  of the new cases were being, you know, people were catching it in aged care settings. So  clearly there are still issues in facilities in Victoria, I mean, we knew about this and the  Government had reports what happened in New South Wales in the middle of April. And  here we are now in September. People's lives are at risk here. We need to do more and  we need to do it faster. Everything seems to take the Government so long to do, and it's  usually only under pressure. It's like they had no comprehensive plan, which is not just the  Labor Party saying it, but the Royal Commissioner said it, the Liberal State Government of  New South Wales said it in relation to the outbreaks there, we had Malcolm Turnbull say it  and now we've got the Tasmanian Liberal Premier saying that he can't open the borders -  one of the reasons he can't - to the COVID free states is because aged care is not ready in  Tasmania.

BRAEDEN: On 7:30 last night, there was a story on home care. There are more than  100,000 on the waiting list nationally. Thousands of people die while on that list. Now, the  latest figures we have for how many are waiting in Tasmania is almost 3,000, which was at  December 31, 2019. What are your concerns when it comes to home care, Julie Collins?





COLLINS: My concerns about home care is, as we've heard, that there are a number of  home care providers across the country who have been operating for almost three years,  that the quality regulator commissioner has not yet investigated to see if they're up to  scratch or done an assessment of them, and they've been operating some of them as I  said for three years. My other concern about home care is obviously that, you know, with  what's happened in COVID, we're going to have a lot more older Tasmanians and older  Australians that are going to want to stay at home. And if this waitlist is already so  significant, and people are literally waiting years for care they've been approved for and  that they need, it's just simply not good enough. The Royal Commission calls it 'neglect'  you know, in its interim report. The Royal Commission said as its number one  recommendation to the Federal Government, fix the home care wait list. And here we are,  you know, that was the 31st of October last year. And here we are, September the  following year. We still have 100,000 older Australians waiting on that wait list, still 3,000  Tasmanians still waiting. And that list is only going to grow because of what's happened  through COVID.

BRAEDEN: We'll leave it there. Julie Collins, thanks for your time.

COLLINS: Thanks Lucy.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119









