

TONY BURKE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ARTS

MANAGER OF OPPOSITION BUSINESS

MEMBER FOR WATSON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC AFTERNOON BRIEFING WITH PATRICIA KARVELAS

WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 9, 2020



SUBJECT: Scott Morrison’s scheme to cut workers’ pay, unions, right-wing

extremism.



PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: Tony Burke is the Shadow Minister for Industrial

Relations, he joins me now. Welcome. Do you accept that the BOOT, which is the

Better Off Overall Test for people who don’t know these over the top acronyms,

needs to be fixed given unions and employers both agree it has flaws?



TONY BURKE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS: You need

to do something to get enterprise agreements moving again and to get enterprise

bargaining moving again. What the government has done today is not what you

have just suggested in the question but to actually completely suspend the Better

Off Overall Test for two years. So all the requirements to make sure that workers

are better off disappear for the next two years, and while the Prime Minister in a

very strange way today was denying that there is a wage cut coming, I have to say,

you get rid of a test that is making sure people are better off, what you think’s

going to happen?



KARVELAS: Would Labor consider supporting changes to the BOOT if there were

amendments or changes?



BURKE: We’ve got the legislation today, we were not privy to advance copies of it

or anything like that, so we're still working through the detail. The one section that

we have been able to get through quickly enough, to say we certainly will not

support is the suspension of the Better Off Overall Test, that they have done under

the cover of the pandemic. The effect of this is that agreements that happen over

the next two years, and each of them themselves is then a two-year agreement, so

you are looking at four years down the track that people will still have pay cuts

because of legislation the government wanted to get through now. And the scale of

those pay cuts is extraordinary. An aged care worker, you think of the people who

have had an extraordinary year but work on weekends, work late nights, they’re

the people where losing your shift penalties really hurts. And aged care worker

could stand to lose $11,000 a year as a result of this. I think the heroes of the

pandemic deserve a better level of thanks and a better Christmas present then that

sort of pay cut that was brought down in black and white today in the legislation

that came into Parliament.



KARVELAS: It is based on this two-year period, so that businesses can make sure

to keep as many people on the books as possible. Is that not a worthy project to try

to get as many Australians working?



BURKE: Right now we need people to be getting back into work and we need

people to be spending money. If people know that there are pay cuts coming the

last thing they will be doing is spending money. And if you don't get people

spending money in the domestic economy, you don't get a recovery.



KARVELAS: But you need people working to also spend money, don't you?



BURKE: I hear that but there are some countries in the world that have decided to

get their economies moving by making the workers in those countries poorer and

poorer. I don't want Australia to be on that list. And the government is being

completely contradictory in their arguments here. We’ve got Josh Frydenberg out

there saying the economy is doing so well that now we can cut JobKeeper and

JobSeeker because business does not need it anymore. And at the same

time we have Christian Porter saying the economy is doing so badly that we need

the frontline workers to be the ones that take a pay cut of an extraordinary level,

potentially all their penalty rates are up for grabs in what has been introduced

today because the economy is doing so badly. Both cannot be true.



KARVELAS: Isn't it misleading to call this the Morrison pay cut when workers

under the legislation actually have to vote to approve any variation of their

agreement?



BURKE: We know what happens, particularly in workplaces that are not unionised

where people don't have that strength of a collective voice when an agreement is

put to them and the boss says unless you vote for this you are going to lose your

job is. We know what happens. And a whole lot of the timeframes that people

would normally have to think about this - they have been cut too. This is a

deliberate strategy about cutting pay, that was what was announced today, and

you don't get an economy moving and the answer in Australia has never been that

the path to prosperity is by making workers poorer.



KARVELAS: Where is the evidence that this will cut the pay of essential workers

as the Opposition Leader has suggested?



BURKE: At the moment the protection against a pay cut is the Better Off Overall

Test. In any new agreement you have to overall be better off. For two years, they

are taking that away. So your hourly award rate, ordinary time, is protected - but

that is about it. All the extra allowances, the extra penalty rates, all become up for

grabs because the protection that used to be there for all of those gets suspended

for two years. That is the proof, it’s in section 19 of the bill. And I had expected in

Question Time today that we would have a serious argument about whether or not

that is right for the economy. But bizarrely, Mr Morrison and Mr Porter just denied

that they were doing it, on the same day that they had introduced it to Parliament.



KARVELAS: Do you acknowledge that businesses that have either done well or

only been mildly affected because of coronavirus wouldn't actually qualify under

the test required by the Fair Work Commission?



BURKE: That's not true. What you describe there is something Christian Porter

said in his media conference. You read the bill and the bill does not say that your

business has to have a particular level of detriment as a result of COVID-19, it

simply says you have to have been affected by the pandemic. I cannot think of a

business in Australia that has not been affected by the pandemic.



KARVELAS: That’s interesting you put that. So if the government were to define

the level of “effected”, just like they do with JobKeeper, put some sort of definition

on it, would Labor consider it?



BURKE: Then you get right back to the definition that is already in the Act. If you

are going to confine it to the most extreme, extraordinary cases, that is already

there in the legislation. The only reason the government is adding this is because

they want to have a broad-based policy that allows for the next two years wages to

be cut.



KARVELAS: You say it is already there but I'm asking you a very specific

question. If they were to say downturn has to be 30 per cent - I’m making this up -

would you consider it?



BURKE: The answer is no, and the reason is the amendment that would

completely fix this is the Act as it currently stands. Anything more than that is a

situation where at the end of a pandemic the government is saying to the workers

that got us through this, now is the time, the government will withdraw support and

it's all on you and you get the pay cut.



KARVELAS: That means there is no negotiation from you?



BURKE: We made clear today, we not supporting legislation that cuts the pay of

workers. That is what this does today.



KARVELAS: Full stop? There is no change to the BOOT, no negotiation that could

satisfy Labor?



BURKE: They have come out today with legislation that cuts the pay workers. I

gave - and we telegraphed this a long time in advance - I made clear we had a

really simple test we would apply to legislation, and that was it had to provide

secure jobs with decent pay. This fails that test.



KARVELAS: Why did Labor ultimately decide to back the legislation that allows

the demerger of big unions?



BURKE: At the moment, there is a brief window where if you are a division of a

union you can vote after an amalgamation to leave. So that's two years after the

amalgamation until five years after. So, that brief window is already there. There

was an argument that we had to work through as a party, as to whether or not

there would also be, after that window, some extreme circumstances where a

division of a union, even though the window had passed, might want to still have a

democratic vote for their members to choose whether or not they wanted to stay in

the amalgamated union. The only justification for that in our view was if the

amalgamating union, the larger body, had engaged and had a record of illegality,

that would be a reason for a division that had not been part of that illegality to say

we want to have a democratic vote as to whether or not we get out. What was

presented to us over the weekend was broader than that, and we made it clear to

the government it was only that narrow circumstance where we would support it.

What they introduced today, we don't need to amend because they already made

that change.



KARVELAS: Just finally on an issue that is not in your portfolio but I know you

have been following because you are the leader of opposition business, which

makes an all-rounder as well, there have been negotiations and now Peter Dutton

has referred this issue that Labor has been pushing for which is

around right-wing extremism, white supremacy groups - an inquiry into that. But

part of that referral from the government has also included Islamist extremism.

Why has Labor got a problem with that?



BURKE: We’re no longer pushing for the separate inquiry. We wanted to make

sure there was an inquiry into right-wing extremism and then there will now be. I

understand there is now an agreement, the government put that forward as a

compromise, and we have agreed with that. The thing that matters, and that we

want people to know is no matter what the threat to you is, no matter what sort of

terrorist activity might be the threat, we want it to be being dealt with an equal level

of seriousness. It's important for people to have confidence that our agencies are

doing that and an inquiry to make sure of that is really important to. On the

anniversary of Christchurch, I think that was brought home to everybody.





KARVELAS: No doubt about that, and I know Labor is not opposing the referral

but Kristina Keneally did make the point in the press conference that was just

broadcast before we started talking … The point she made was in the last 20 years

there had been a lot of focus on Islamist terror, on right-wing extremism, that focus

has not happened.



BURKE: And she is exactly right on that. I have had it put to me many times,

including after Christchurch, that people want to know - particularly the people who

will be the targets of right-wing extremism - they want to know that there is as

much attention going on that as there needs to be. People have not felt that there

is evidence that enough of that is happening, and I think we are also all very aware

that in terms of where the terrorists came from, the tragedy of Christchurch might

have been in New Zealand but the development of the terrorist happened in

Australia. And we have to know that, we have to sadly own that and make sure

that in future we can prevent that.



KARVELAS: Tony Burke, thanks for joining me.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ADAM GARTRELL 0427 008 525



