MEDIA RELEASE  SARAH HANSON-YOUNG 27 FEB 2020HEALTHCLIMATE & THE

ENVIRONMENTENVIRONMENT AND BIODIVERSITYTOURISM

SHARE

Hanson-Young welcomes Greens portfolio announcement

Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young has welcomed the announcement she is continuing as spokesperson for Environment and Water, and Media and Communications, and adding Tourism and Dental Health to her portfolio responsibilities under the new leadership of Adam Bandt MP.

“This year will be defining for our environment. We are experiencing environmental collapse in the face of a climate crisis and the people in charge are riddled with division and have no plan. There’s a lot of work to do,” Senator Hanson-Young said.

“I’ll be fighting for environmental restoration and habitat protection so we can save our precious places, protect our wildlife and halt the extinction crisis.

“Our beautiful environment and wildlife is what makes Australia the place people want to come and visit. Ensuring it is here for future generations is vital for jobs and our tourism sector.

“This is why our campaign for World Heritage protection for the Great Australian Bight is so important. The tourism sector needs a boost after taking a huge hit from the devastating climate fires this summer and then Coronavirus.

“The Bight deserves protection not just because of its ecological and environmental significance but because a World Heritage listing will put it on the global stage which is good for everyone.”

Senator Hanson-Young said a Media Freedom Act is also a priority this year.

“Press freedoms have been eroded in this country and we need to move quickly to protect the public’s right to know and whistleblowers who speak truth to power, before the shutters are completely pulled down on the actions of this secretive government,” she said.

On the new portfolio of Dental Health Senator Hanson-Young said she “can’t wait to sink her teeth into it”.

“Australians cannot afford to go to the dentist. It’s a priority for the Greens to fill the gap in our health system and get dental into Medicare.”

