SENATOR TIM AYRES

SENATOR FOR NSW





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2NZ INVERELL

MONDAY, 24 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Regional Media; Unemployment; Aged Care; 60 Minutes Revelations

about the Victorian Liberal Party.



MONTE IRVINE, HOST: I hope you having a good morning this morning. But enjoying now

on the phone by Senator Tim Ayres, Senator Ayres a Labor senator from New South

Wales. Good morning, Senator, how are you this morning?



SENATOR TIM AYRES: Good morning. G'Day and good morning to your listeners.



IRVINE: Now Senator, lots to get through this morning. The first thing I wanted to talk

about is unemployment. Now it's been reported that the unemployment rate is expected to

reach 13% in coming months. I mean, that's huge for Australia - 13%. But part of what I

want to talk about with that is just on Friday a rival radio network, which doesn't affect us

here, but SCA canned the morning shows, the breakfast shows on a lot of their regional

stations and are just doing it out of one area. And it brings the concern up that this

organisation has received $10 million from the federal government to keep regional media

going. But they've just laid off the majority of their breakfast programs. What do you see as

being a solution with that? Or what should the government be doing with about these?



AYRES: Well, the first thing is there's never been more Australians out of work than there

is at this point in our history. The Treasury predicts that there'll be almost a quarter of a

million people who lose their job’s in addition to the unemployed at the moment, between

now and Christmas. An effective unemployment rate around 13% is a disaster for the

Australian economy and it's getting worse. The government doesn't have a plan to make

sure that we grow the economy, that we rebuild out of the Coronavirus recession and that's

what we need to be hearing from the government this sitting fortnight. What is their plan to

get the country out of recession? To rebuild jobs, particularly in regional areas?



Now the individual example that you've pointed out is very important because those 38

people are going to lose their job. So they'll add to that national unemployment statistic and

those jobs in regional communities really matter. But regional radio is very important for

pulling regional communities together, just like the 150 regional newspapers that have

closed since the beginning of this year, many more over the course of this government. So

communities are losing the country town newspaper that keeps the community together,

that reports on sport and kid sport, cattle sale prices and does all of the local news.

Regional radio is also very important.



I chair the Senate bushfire inquiry and we heard from the ABC, community radio and from

regional commercial radio. And it was very clear just how important those services were

during the crisis itself, giving people information and directions about whether to evacuate,

when to evacuate, but also critically important for rebuilding country communities in the

wake of that crisis. The government should be stepping in with an effective package to

rescue regional media overall.



IRVINE: Yeah, absolutely. Very interesting what you're talking about, and as you said,

regional radio, they become such an integrated part of the community. And while these

breakfast programs are not affected here, in Inverell - but you're looking at some of these

other major towns and you can see the messages on Facebook of when they've finished

up from the community. They're so disappointed that they're not going to have local live

Breakfast radio. And you know in the cases of emergencies like bushfires, that's the

advantage of radio, it comes to you as soon as we get the information, we can get it out

there straight away. Whereas television, while they do serve a great purpose and do what

they're supposed to do, they have other issues involved with trying to get that information

out as quickly.



AYRES: It's an irreplaceable part of the local community. You know, from your own work,

just how important country town radio is to the Inverell community and to the communities

in your listening area, how important it is for community activity and community action on

things: breast cancer, drought, kid's sport, to all of the things that really matter for the

community that you serve. We are losing regional media right across the board. And that's

really attacking the fabric of country communities.



IRVINE: Absolutely. Now, one of the other big focuses that's going to be in Federal

Parliament this week is on aged care. Now what is the Labor Party hoping will be the

outcomes of this focus?



AYRES: Well, there've been alarm bells ringing about aged care since well before the

pandemic. The revelations of the Aged Care Royal Commission, the poor quality of care

for older Australians, the lack of regard for the rights and welfare of older Australians has

been shocking before the pandemic. During the pandemic itself, it was clear from what

occurred in New South Wales in aged care centres, that there was an absolute need have

a plan, a proper plan, for delivering training skills, for making sure that staff were

supported, and that there was sufficient staff for surge capacity right around the country.

And those warnings were ignored by the federal government. And we've got an unfolding

catastrophe in aged care facilities in Victoria now.



In his mind, Scott Morrison is only responsible up until the end of the press conference or

the press release where he makes a big announcement. He's been trying to run away from

responsibility for the aged care system. Everybody knows aged care is the sole

responsibility of the Commonwealth Government. They are not just the funder, but they

direct policy and they direct strategy right across the aged care sector. He can't run from

responsibility.



So the performance of his minister for aged care last week, it was just awful to watch; a

bloke who didn't understand his portfolio, didn't understand his brief, couldn't tell the

COVID Commission and couldn't tell Australians how many people had died in aged care

in Victoria over the course of the coronavirus pandemic, couldn't explain how many people

were stricken with the illness in Victorian aged care centres. Just absolutely not up to the

job. And it just sets out the disregard that the Commonwealth Government has for this

really important portfolio area that's just so vital to the health of people that we should be

loving and looking after. That's the thing here - these people are due our respect and our

love and our care. We should be delivering the best aged care services in the world. But

we've got a run-down aged care system that is in crisis. And during this pandemic crisis,

it's been absolutely terrible.



IRVINE: It does seem as though the pandemic has highlighted a lot of areas that need to

be looked at and reviewed and should have been looked at well before we received

something like this.



AYRES: Well, it's just laid bare the inadequacy of the Commonwealth government's

administration of this area of policy. The Aged Care Royal Commission is making it very

clear that there are big gaps and big failures in aged care. And, sadly, older Australians

and their families had been quietly getting on with things even though the system wasn't up

to scratch. The pandemic has just made it absolutely clear.



This idea that the employment strategies in the sector are so poor, that people in Victoria

were working in aged care facilities on casual employment and, in order to make up a

weekly wage, were working at two, three, sometimes four aged care facilities - that doesn't

make any sense. It doesn't make any sense from an employment perspective. Aged care

jobs should be good jobs in every community, every country town and every suburb. They

should be good jobs. But of course, the infection risk that that it poses for aged care

residents is profound and shouldn't have been allowed to happen. But it's happened on

this government's watch. And we've got to hear this week how the government proposes to

improve the delivery of aged care services in Australia.



IRVINE: Absolutely. Now, something else that we're going to be watching as well is: last

night, 60 Minutes exposed a very troubling example of brain stacking in the Victorian

Liberal Party. I don't know what it is about Victoria and branch stacking, the Labor Party

had a scandal much the same earlier on in the year. But it's also exposed what appears to

be a power grab from a very conservative wing of the Liberal Party. What do you think the

Prime Minister should be doing to smooth over this appearance of disunity within the

party?



AYRES: Well he certainly shouldn't be smoothing it over. This is a test for Scott Morrison's

leadership. When similar matters to this happened in the Labor Party in Victoria, Scott

Morrison was very critical of the Labor Party at the time. But Anthony Albanese acted very,

very quickly when those revelations happened. That's the contrast here, that the person

who was the subject of the 60 Minutes inquiry, Anthony Albanese bounced out of the Labor

Party in hours. And within days, there was a full-scale intervention into the affairs of the

Victorian branch of the Labor Party. And there is an absolutely systematic administration of

the Labor Party from the National Executive, occurring still today and will continue for

many, many more months and deliver a cleaned-up operation in Victoria. That's the test for

Scott Morrison. I saw him this morning, like every other time, trying to wash his hands of

this issue and say all this is just a matter, an administrative matter, for the Victorian division

of the Liberal Party. It is absolutely a test of his leadership, whether or not he acts.



Mr. Sukkar is the minister responsible for the administration of the early release

superannuation scheme, which has seen half a million low income Australians entirely

empty their superannuation accounts. They will reach their retirement, some of them, with

more than $100,000 less retirement income. It's become a magnet for fraud and organised

crime, attacking the early release super scheme and defrauding Australians of their

superannuation. This guy has been devoting his complete attention to branch stacking and

an extremist take over the Victorian branch of the Liberal Party, not his real job, which

should be looking after the retirement incomes of Australians and making sure that they've

got healthy superannuation account balances, and that Australians can retire with

confidence with decent retirement incomes.



This is a symbol of how this government has got all of its priorities wrong. It's internally

focused, avoiding its responsibility, running away from blame rather than stepping up to the

plate, acknowledging responsibility and delivering what Australians need. If Scott Morrison

understood his job, Sukkar would have lost his job already. And there'd be proper

intervention into the Victorian branch of the Liberal Party. But I suspect that what we're

going to see is more avoidance, less taking responsibility. It's a real simple symbol of

what's wrong with this government.



IRVINE: There are accusations in this report that taxpayer money has been used to to help

with this branch stacking used to create members of a branch. Is this another good

example...



AYRES: It's much worse than that, Monty. This man, Mr. Sukkar, has employed a staffer

for the sole job of branch stacking in the Liberal Party - he used taxpayer resources for that

purpose.



IRVINE: So is this a good example, another good example of why we need a Federal

ICAC?





AYRES: Well, certainly Labor's been consistent over the last few years. We've said that

we will deliver a Federal ICAC. The government's made a similar commitment, but we've

seen nothing from them. It has certainly been of great assistance, the ICAC in New South

Wales, in delivering a level of accountability and dealing with issues of corruption in an

effective way. But really, this should be a slam dunk. It is a test of the leadership of Scott

Morrison. Is he going to deal with these issues? Or is he going to walk away from them?

Anthony Albanese acted. Scott Morrison is yet to act. We'll see what the next few days

bring us.



IRVINE: Very interesting. Senator, as always very interesting to talk to you every Monday

morning. Thank you so much for your time. We'll talk to you next week.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JOE MCKENZIE 0431 377 319



