

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  AFTERNOON BRIEFING WITH PATRICIA KARVELAS  MONDAY, 31 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: COVID-19; aged care.

PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: Shadow Health Minister Chris Bowen joins me now. Chris  Bowen, welcome.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks, PK. Good afternoon.

KARVELAS: Do you welcome this $563 million funding boost for aged care?

BOWEN: Of course. But it doesn't even reverse the budget cuts which Scott Morrison has  presided over in various capacities including Treasurer, and the other interesting things out  of that press conference were that Richard Colbeck and Greg Hunt had to admit that there  was still - as we speak today - aged care workers working across facilities in Melbourne -  ie, in different facilities - potentially through no fault of their own spreading COVID-19. They  couldn't say how many, but they were forced to admit it is still happening, months into this  pandemic, after hundreds of deaths in aged care facilities. That is still happening, despite  all the spin about the Aged Care Response Centre in Victoria and everything else. So,  every day we see more evidence that the Morrison Government has been completely  behind the eight ball when it comes to aged care and COVID-19 and there have been  tragic consequences as a result.

KARVELAS: Well, some of the funding announced today is going to the single site worker  program. Are you surprised that some aged care workers are still working at multiple sites,  as you just expressed? And are you confident that that program will be able to deal with  that problem, which we know is still alive in the sector in Victoria?

BOWEN: Well, I'm not surprised to this degree, we knew that the Government's response  until this point has been inadequate. And that people through no fault of their own have  had no choice really but to work across different facilities, and that the workforce shortages  and issues have been a key part of the poor handling of COVID-19 in aged care facilities in  Australia. Now, as to whether this belated announcement today works or not, we will have  to see and we will have to go through the detail. I have already seen comments from the  Health Services Union, for example, that many workers will miss out on various elements  of it. So, we'll see what the impacts are. But, you know, clearly - here we are, almost in

September, this has been going on all year. We knew that aged care facilities were an  exposure area for Australian. We have known since the beginning of the pandemic. At  every test the federal Government failed and at every step they have been playing catch-up.

KARVELAS: Greg Hunt it says it is important facilities aren't left short of workers. Do you  agree that has to be part of the consideration, that it is ultimately an issue around the  workforce, how big the workforce is and you can't have aged care providers short on  workers?

BOWEN: Of course. Sure. Of course. You can't have those shortages. But that shouldn't  been an excuse for inaction and it shouldn’t be an excuse for workers across multiple  facilities when we have known it was a key exposure. If the Government said we put the  measures in place but they haven't worked that would be one thing, but they haven't tried.  They couldn’t admit that workers were working across multiple facilities last week when we  asked them. They finally admitted it today. As I said, this is not at the beginning of the  pandemic or halfway through. This has been going all year, aged care has been a key  exposure all year. The aged care - sorry, the COVID-19 document, which the Prime  Minister waved around in the Prime Minister's courtyard in February - in February - we are  now almost in September - said the federal Government would be responsible for matters  of infection control in aged care facilities. A key part of infection control is minimising or  eliminating workers working across multiple facilities. Here we are, almost in September,  and it's still happening.

KARVELAS: 33 more deaths have been recorded in aged care today. But some of them  happened as far back as July. And they weren't reported. What do you make of that?

BOWEN: I was deeply troubled by that when I heard it this morning. Deeply troubled.  We've had instances of families being told their parents are doing fine when, in fact, they'd  already passed away, which is just mind blowing. And now we have the revelation that a  number more people have died of COVID-19 in aged care facilities and it appears either  the federal aged care regulator didn't know or didn’t disclose it. That does concern me. I  think we will have to - obviously take further steps to find out what's gone wrong here.  Clearly, if you don't know about a problem you can't fix it. Clearly this has been a shortfall.

KARVELAS: The aged care regulator is doing short notice inspections at Victorian  facilities. Is that adequate? Is that a good way forward?

BOWEN: Well, it should have been happening all the way through. Again, the Aged Care  Minister admitted today that that practice had ceased, that no-notice inspections had  ceased during the pandemic. That just beggars belief. That should be - that should be - I  would have thought - right at the very top of things the aged care regulator should be  doing. No notice or very short notice inspections of aged care facilities. It ceased at one  point. The government's been shamed into admitting that they had ceased. Of course, it  should be a fundamental part of the response. With all due respect to everyone involved, if  you know the regulator's coming, with great notice or they're not coming at all, then the  regulator is not working as it should. This has been another deeply concerning failing at the  federal Government administration level.

KARVELAS: OK. If the regulator's not working, then what should happen instead?

BOWEN: Well, the regulator should be very active. We know that St Basil's told the  regulator of a positive infection and the regulator didn't even tell the federal Department of  Health for four days. The federal Department of Health, I accept, inadvertently misled the  Parliament because they said the regulator hadn't been informed when, in fact, they had. It  appears absolutely nothing happened. So, here we have a key federal Government  responsibility, really the key federal Government responsibility of aged care, and simply  nothing has been done when the federal Government's been told about positive diagnoses  of COVID-19 in a facility. We've all seen the tragic consequences play out.

KARVELAS: What do you make of the modelling by the Health Services Union that found  an additional $20 billion over the forwards is needed to bring the sector up to scratch?

BOWEN: Well, of course, that's an important contribution.  Of course will look at it closely.  The Health Services Union has done an excellent job of not only representing their  members, but the needs of members, to ensure that the aged care sector is responding in  a much better fashion. And frankly, many of the things the HSU has been calling out for  years have come to pass. The impact of casualisation, the impact of workplace shortages.  I know unions get a bad rap in this building, I know it's the flavour of the month - well,  longer period than that - flavour of the term for the Liberal Party to bash unions. But really  when unions have been calling out things which have gone wrong, I think they do deserve  to have that recognised and respected.

KARVELAS: OK. Would a Labor government be prepared to spend as much as what was  promised?

BOWEN: Well, Anthony outlined our eight-point plan last week. Now, that was an eight-point plan based around principles. He made clear there would be further detailed policy to  be announced around that. We are not announcing all our election commitments now.  They were important announcements in terms of a principles approach. We have seen  more detail from Anthony in terms of an aged care plan than we have from the Prime  Minister, who happens to be the person who could press the levers tomorrow. Anthony is  doing the preparation now for what a Labor government would do. The eight-point plan he  announced last week is an important part of that.

KARVELAS: Is an increase in the Medicare levy a possible good way to fund it?

BOWEN: Again, I won't go through details today.

KARVELAS: I know you are not going to make the announcement. What do you make of  the idea? Is it - an idea with promise and merit? Something you will explore?

BOWEN: I'm not going to speculate about hypotheticals.

KARVELAS: It's a live proposal.

BOWEN: Sure.

KARVELAS: It is something Labor will consider?

BOWEN: Lots of things have been proposed. The Labor Party will work through all the  issues, carefully. I'm just not going to speculate about things like that today.



KARVELAS: Do you agree with the Council on Ageing that the funding priority should be  home care places?

BOWEN: Yes. Yes. This should be a key priority, it is part of Anthony's plan. We know that  there are people who could look after themselves at home with a bit of assistance through  a home care package, who are in aged care facilities. Whether it's COVID-19 or not, they  would be better off at home with the appropriate care in place. The waiting list for home  care packages is enormous, it's blown out remarkably under this Government. They have  put band aids on it from various - at various times. But there are still massive shortfalls. Of  course, it's common sense. If somebody can be at home with just a bit of extra care with a  home care package, and they don't need to be in the facility, well, it is better for them,  better for the system, it's better for everyone, and it beggars belief we still have these  massive shortfalls, massive waiting lists for home care packages.

KARVELAS: Why didn't Labor offer to increase funding for home care packages at the last  election, then? That was the - that is what the government argued. If you look at the detail,  you didn't. So why didn't you?

BOWEN: We have been calling out the shortfall in home care packages for a long time,  PK. We are the ones who have been calling it out. The Government's been in office for  seven years. They can blame us all they like. Seven years they have been in. And we  haven't been in office for that time. So, they can hardly blame us for the shortfalls and the  weakness in the system today.

KARVELAS: OK. No doubt you can't be blamed for what's happening today. No-one is  expecting that kind of attribution to be made. But in terms of a promise for the way forward,  you hadn't promised more, had you?

BOWEN: As I said, we've highlighted the issue, we have been calling for an expansion of  home care places. We have done that very consistently. The 2019 election's been and  gone. We can't win the 2019 election. What we can do is put forward plans for the next  election. Anthony started that process with the eight-point plan. It is a good plan. The  detailed announcements to follow will be important part of our offering.

KARVELAS: He did say something on Insiders, that given you were the Shadow  Treasurer I thought was interesting to follow up with you. Saying the next election Labor  would have a narrower sort of range of policies, narrower was the kind of language he  used. Does that mean Labor plans to be a small target at the next election?

BOWEN: I have said similar things. I made a similar point. You need to be able to focus on  key priorities and looking back, in hindsight, we had too many plans, which were too  confusing to people - good plans, but there was too much on the table. It's not a matter of  less ambition. But if you try and boil the ocean from Opposition, it's not the right formula  going forward. We need to focus on things that are really important to us. I think COVID-19  has shown us that when governments have force of will and turn their mind to things,  things which have been in the too-hard basket, can come out of the too-hard basket.  Governments, to their credit, have worked together to expand the number of ventilators  across the country from 2,000 to more 7,000 since February. Governments have worked  together to reduce the proportion of homelessness in Australia very dramatically. I mean,  these are all things which you would say were too hard. But when governments prioritise



and show force of will, they can come out of the too-hard basket. But both of those things  are important, focus and priorities as well as force of will. We will provide both as we  approach the next election.

KARVELAS: Chris Bowen, thank you very much for joining us.

BOWEN: Thanks. Always nice to chat.

KARVELAS: Chris Bowen the Shadow Health Minister.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512









