



The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT HOUSE, ACT  FRIDAY 3 APRIL 2020



EO&E…

PRIME MINISTER: Good afternoon. The National Cabinet has met again this morning.

The National Cabinet now is moving into a new phase, having established the many baseline supports and  measures that we've put in place to suppress the spread of the virus, and we're now moving into a new  phase where in our regular meetings we'll be able to review the data and in particular review measures  on a regular basis and make such adjustments as is necessary as we move through this next phase.

But I can say this, that had the virus kept growing at the same rate it was 12 days ago, we would now have  more than 10,500 cases in this country. There'd be over 5,000 more cases. And in fact, some  commentators who were doing the maths were suggesting that we would have had 8,000 cases just as  recently as last weekend. That is a tribute to the work that has been done by Australians in getting around  and supporting the very sensible measures that are being put in place all around the country by the state  and territory governments. But we must continue to do this. It doesn't matter what the temperature is. If  it's a warm day, don't go in masses down to the beach. That's a simple instruction that all Australians  expect other Australians to abide by. It isn't just the government asking you to do this. It's your fellow  Australians asking you to do this, because by complying with those arrangements and supporting those  arrangements, you're supporting your fellow Australians.

We need to continue to keep the pressure on. We need to continue to suppress the virus. We are now at  single digit rates of growth, but we need to do more. The changes that you are making Australia are  working and we need to keep making those changes and making sure we can make those changes on a  sustainable basis in our daily lives.

We also must continue to get the balance right. And that's why, as I said, the National Cabinet will be  regularly reviewing the data and all the baseline supports and the baseline restrictions that are in place  to ensure that we're only doing what is necessary to protect the health of Australians and at the same  time ensure that we continue to keep our economy running and the income that is available to people  through their work will be available to them, and not unreasonably taken from them. This is the road  ahead. This is the road that we're making into this virus, but the National Cabinet is also very focused on  the road out as well. We've talked about six month periods and that is true. They're not a guarantee, it

could be longer. We pray it’s shorter, but a six month period should give people a good indication of what  they have to ready themselves in terms of the changes they're making in their daily lives.

So we are in what we describe today, as a National Cabinet, as the suppression phase. We are now in a  place where we're seeking to put the pressure down on constraining this virus in Australia. We then need  to look at the recovery phase, which is beyond. And I want to assure Australians that the National Cabinet  is very focused on those issues as well. But in these early phases, the work has had to necessarily focus  on establishing all the rules, establishing the restrictions, putting the economic supports in place,  particularly through arrangements like JobKeeper and JobSeeker to ensure we were getting the additional  resources into our health system, supporting initiatives in areas of community supports, domestic  violence, mental health, all of these things putting in place the supply lines to ensure that we can get  access to the medical tests, to the PPE equipment, the personal protection equipment, and all of the  upgrading of things like ICU’s. And that work has been going at a great pace to ensure we have the contact  tracing. And one of the most pleasing figures that the Chief Medical Officer and I have been observing  each day is that great job the states and territories are doing. And they have employed an army of people  to do this in their ranks, to be going out and tracing the contacts of those who have picked up the  coronavirus. Those figures of untraced cases has fallen dramatically over the course of the last couple of  weeks. And that is a great effort from the states. And I want to thank them for the tremendous work that  each of them are doing on the end of that phone, ringing people up, tracking down where they've been.  It's painstaking and frustrating work, but they're doing it and it's saving lives and it's saving livelihoods.

The National Cabinet having put those controls in place, and will now continue to assess these measures  on an ongoing basis. Today, we had a further report on modelling work that had been done, that modelling  work is not yet complete. That modelling work looks at different scenarios. So we can be confident to an  acceptable level that the potential course of the virus in Australia will run at a pace in which our health  systems will be able to support the Australian population. The early news on some of this early modelling  is that at the current rate, if we keep doing what we're doing and we keep doing the work to upgrade our  ICU capacity and secure the extra ventilators and all of the things we're doing right now, then right now  that trajectory is promising. It's encouraging, but there are no guarantees I want to stress, this virus writes  its own rules and we have to seek to try and understand them as best we can and respond as best we can  to the pressures that we face. Now, that modelling will have further work done over the course of the  next few days. It will be reviewed again by the National Cabinet when it next meets next Tuesday morning.  And then following that, the Chief Medical Officer and I will be conducting a briefing on that information  and sharing that with the nation. The good news, though, is that on the scenario planning we have at the  moment, we are tracking well, but we can take none of that for granted.

Also agreed today was a range of very practical issues that we believe that are necessary at the margin  and to address issues that have arisen in the community. We have from this afternoon we'll be releasing  a daily dashboard on all the key statistics with a very straightforward and simple summary by the Chief  Medical Officer about the key features of that data that will be done on a daily basis. Of course, that will  be of great use to the media. Much of the data you'll already be familiar with in the media, but that  information will be available on health.gov.au and people can look that up on a daily basis. It will be  published in the afternoon because that is the period of time in which all the information has come  through from the states and territories. You will note many of the Premiers are updating their information  again the following morning, but that afternoon report is a daily baseline on where things are at on each  and every day.

We also agreed today, that for Easter and religious services, given all of these religious services now where  they are continuing are being done in a streaming or broadcast mode. That the places where the  broadcasts and the streaming is taking place from, most usually in a place of worship, they will be

considered as workplaces. Now, what does that mean? It means that the same rules that apply to a  workplace for those who are participating in presenting the service, conducting the service, will apply as  they do in other places of work. That means particularly for orthodox religions, where particularly when  it comes up around Easter, there are additional canters and there are additional other religious  ecclesiastical roles that are played in those services. That means there can be additional people that are  taking part in the celebration of those services, not people going to church. It's the priests and the others  formerly involved in the conducting of the ceremonies. That way they can be faithfully relayed to the faith  communities around the country. So it doesn't mean, churches are not open, places of worship are not  open. I want to be very clear about that. But we've had a lot of feedback from religious communities that  there are ways that these services are conducted and they'll be able to do that respecting absolutely the  four square meters per person rule that applies in those workplaces and that and that should be followed.

Also on working holiday maker visa holders. Now, there are many of them still in Australia. Many have  returned to their home countries. There are particular places that in the agricultural sector that rely on  those workers each year as you go into the seasons, either for planning or for harvesting or for fruit picking  and so on. And it's important that those businesses and those producers are able to continue to conduct  their business. Now, of course, Australians who want to do that work, then please do, get out there and  do that work. And there'll be opportunities there. For working holiday makers who are looking to engage  in those occupations as they regularly do. They will be required to self isolate and to go on to  Australia.gov.au and register for self-isolation and do that where they are now for a period of 14 days  before they transfer to another part of the country out in a rural or regional area. At that time, their  employer will be looking to see that they have conducted that self-isolation before they would be  employed in that work. Now this is important to ensure that we don't get a lift up of the virus that might  be in many metropolitan areas and it gets transferred to more vulnerable areas in rural and regional  communities, which as yet are not experiencing the same level of the virus being transmitted in those  communities. So this is being done to ensure that those producers can get the work done, but also to  ensure that the communities are protected. At the same time working through the states and territories  and local governments. We will be working to ensure that the workers accommodation that would be in  those places is also respecting strict health requirements. You can't have 6 backpackers in a caravan up  out in rural parts of the country. That's not on. Not gonna happen. You need to have more strict rules  around that and local governments and shires will be observing those health rules and working with their  states and territories to put those conditions in place.

On the economy. We are continuing to do everything we can to limit the impacts wherever possible and  to provide all the necessary supports. And JobKeeper and JobSeeker are critical to those plans. In relation  to JobKeeper, in discussion with the states and territories today, local governments and their support will  be provided by the state government so that local government employees are no different to state  government employees in these arrangements. Local governments are not eligible for JobKeeper from  the Commonwealth government where there is support necessary, if there is support necessary for local  governments that will be provided by the state and territory governments, not the Commonwealth  government.

On commercial leases. As you know, we've been working on this issue for some time and I have, had  hoped we'd be in a position to have finalised this today and we are very close to doing that. And the  National Cabinet considered the proposals that came forward. An industry code of practice for  commercial tenancies, including retail tenancies, has been worked on by the various stakeholder groups  representing tenants and landlords over the course of the next few days, that industry code as the the  National Cabinet reviewed that today, has not got to the point that we believe it needs to get to to ensure  a sufficient security for tenants and landlords that are affected by these arrangements. What we are  seeking to have happen is for the industry to complete their code and that code will be made a mandatory

code, incorporated into state and territory legislation where appropriate. Where it will be mandatory for  tenancies. That is the tenant and the landlord, where they have a turnover of less than 50 million and they  are a participant in the JobKeeper program. As you know, the JobKeeper program has a threshold which  has a 30 per cent loss of revenue. If you're in that situation and you're a tenant, then we will be working  to implement a mandatory code of practice regarding the negotiations, the discussions that you will now  have with your landlord to ensure that both of you, the landlord and the tenant, can get through this next  period and on the other side be able to go back to business as usual and enable those businesses to  succeed. And the landlord also to succeed in the future. What is important as part of this code is that both  parties negotiate in good faith, that there is a proportionality principle that needs to be in this code. And  that proportionality principle is simply this, that the turnover reduction of the tenant needs to be reflected  in the rental waiver of the landlord. Now, how that is done inside the lease is up to the landlord and the  tenant. There are many different ways you can achieve this. If, for example, there was a 3 or 6 month  rental waiver because a lessee, a tenant would have had to close their doors and there's just simply no  money coming in. Then one way to achieve that is to extend the overall lease by 6 months on the other  side, if they're going to give a rental waiver. Similarly, they could agree to a different level of rent over the  entire term of the lease. And that was shared over a longer period of time. These are things that we do  not wish to be prescriptive about. What we want to do is have landlords and tenants in the room to ensure  that they can work these issues out between them, so they can have an arrangement which enables them  to get through this period and to get to the other side. The banks will need to come to the party as well.  The banks are not parties to those arrangements. And so that makes it legally a little more difficult. But  banks are already moving to providing all sorts of new facilities and arrangements to their customers. And  we would expect banks to be very supportive of the agreements reached by landlords and tenants who  would be working under this mandatory code. But I stress, again, I, we would like as a national cabinet for  this to be done by industry and for them to finalize a code with this proportionality principle as quickly as  possible so we can move to have that adopted into state and territory regulation as a matter of a  mandatory arrangement. Now, if you're in that arrangement, which you would be required to enter into,  if you're in the terms that I said, then you would be, have that protection of of issues around evictions.  You would have the protections around claims on penalties or acting on guarantees of interest protection  on rent, on all of these matters, you would be protected. Also, the landlord will be protected in that the  lease would not be able to be terminated on those grounds. So there's give and take on this, give and  take, those tenants and landlords are being encouraged to sit around that table and get that done now.  The mandatory code would require it. And if you sit outside the mandatory code, then you are leaving  yourselves out in the cold. So with those measures, we are looking forward to make further progress.  States would also, under those arrangements, be looking to provide various exemptions and and waivers  and reductions to some of their fees and rates. But we're looking to see that industry code come in place  to ensure we can make progress more quickly. And that was the arrangement we came to today. And  National Cabinet will consider this again at the latest on Tuesday morning. And if we're able to come to  an arrangement before then, then we would convene to make that possible.

With those rather lengthy, but again, I thank you for your patience, remarks. I'll pass over to the Chief  Medical Officer.

PROFESSOR BRENDAN MURPHY, CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER: Thanks, Prime Minister.

So worldwide, we've now passed 1 million reported cases of COVID-19. We believe that the true number  is probably five or 10 times as much as that, because we know that judging by the death rate, the testing  rate, in many countries, they're not detecting all the cases. There are some countries that don't have the  capacity to test. In Australia, we're now reporting 5,274 cases. But in Australia, we're pretty confident that  our testing has been probably the best in the world and that we are very confident that whilst there will  certainly be some undetected cases, we have a pretty good idea of the size of our outbreak.



As the Prime Minister has said, the growth rate has been falling. It's about 5 per cent a day at the moment.  The border measures have had good effect. We're still detecting return travellers. We're still detecting  contacts of return travellers. But those numbers are reducing. We still have cruise ship people to come  home. We still have a lot of issues with people that have contracted the virus from overseas, but we are  in control of those issues. The issue that worries all of us, and I've said this on many occasions, are those  community transmission, those cases which have been passed from person to person in the community  without a clear epidemiology link. We know there are over 300 of those in Sydney, about 60 in Melbourne,  30 in Brisbane, and smaller numbers in some other states. That means that there are people who have  COVID-19 or incubating it who don't know it. And that is why we introduced these social distancing  measures that we've all been taking to heart really well. And I, like the Prime Minister, I'm truly delighted  at the way the Australian public has embraced these measures, which are all about stopping, slowing that  community transmission so that when cases are identified, they can be tested, they can be dealt with by  the public health units and we can continue to suppress this virus. So we are quietly pleased with the  direction we're going, but we can not stop because those community transmissions have been growing  and they are still growing slowly. And we have to keep doing these measures to bring them under control.  Thanks Prime Minister.

PRIME MINISTER: Thank you. We’ll start this side and we’ll come around. Greg?

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, [inaudible] relatively low. People are going to be wondering you know, is it  all worth it? So Donald Trump has told Americans that social distancing could potentially save 2 million  lives, if Australians were just getting about their lives as normal, you know, how many lives are we saving  through social distancing?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, as I said at the outset, had we not taken the measures we'd already taken just  twelve days ago, there'd be 5,000 more people with the virus right now. Now we'll be sharing more  information on our modelling next week. And I think that will go more to the issues that you're raising.  But I can absolutely assure you that social distancing, combined with the many other measures we've put  in place, is saving lives and it is saving livelihoods. Now, one of the things the National Cabinet is very keen  to do now we've got through and I'm sure you would agree, there has been a massive amount of work  that has had to be done to put in all the measures and arrangements we have done over the last several  weeks. $200 billion worth of economic supports, investments in our health system, our childcare system,  our mental health system, our emergency relief. All of these things, don't happen by themselves. There's  been an enormous amount of work. The restrictions, the regulations, the state and territory governments  have been putting in place as the National Cabinet has come together, has been to get us to this first stage  of establishment to get the baseline of the protections and supports. Now, what we are looking to do is  let Australians know what our next target is and what we're hoping to achieve in the weeks ahead so we  can work together to achieve those goals. So you can expect me to be saying more about what our goals  are, whether it be in what we're trying to do on the spread of the virus or what we're doing on our targets  on ICU beds and things like this so we can share with Australians how we're getting there along the way.  And I think that's an important point. Australians are making big sacrifices. They want to know what it's  achieving. I can tell you what it's achieving right now. You're saving lives. You're saving livelihoods. And if  you want to know how much, you only have to look overseas and see what is happening in other  developed countries around the world. That is not our experience in this country. And we're doing  everything we can to ensure it does not become our experience. No, just just one each I think.

JOURNALIST: If churches are workplaces that can safely be attended by those conducting a service, why  can't the Australian Parliament sit if parliamentarians observe the four-square metre rule? And what do  you say to calls for a joint committee to scrutinise the Government's response on Covid-19?



PRIME MINISTER: Parliament will resume this week and Parliament will be called and will do the work it  needs to during the course of this crisis. And that will be done promptly, as you will see next week, and  will be done on the modified rules that respect the social distancing and other practices that are needed.  In terms of other arrangements regarding oversight, the Government doesn't have any issues with that.  The Senate provides, I think, very good mechanisms for doing that and we discussed that with the  Opposition last night.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the JobKeeper program, it is set up so that employers could, with  confidence, pay their employees $1,500 a week - a fortnight - this month knowing the Government would  reimburse them in May. Many employees have been stood down or are being reportedly told that their  business, their company just doesn't have the cash flow to provide that money now. What should those  people do for the next month if they're not being… if they're not going to go onto JobSeeker but they  aren't able to get that $1,500 a fortnight from their employer before May 1?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, the employers need to talk to their banks straight away, because what we're  providing under the JobKeeper program is an absolute guarantee you can take to the bank. Because those  payments will be made for each of those employees and that should enable them to put a facility in place  with their bank so they can make those payments to their employees. Now, where a business chooses to  not go into the JobKeeper arrangements, I mean, it's not a mandatory program. It's there to provide  support. Then those employees will be able to go and make applications through the safety net process  of the JobSeeker program.

JOURNALIST: Just on international students, they’re not covered by any of the support measures that  have been announced so far, is that something that the Government's looking at? We're hearing that a  lot of students are struggling to keep their accommodation. If they're kicked out, that obviously causes a  lot of other social issues and could more be being done by the Government to communicate to people  who speak languages other than English? A lot of the feedback from communities is that these measures  they're trying to keep on top of them, they want to do the right thing, but it's very difficult for them to  understand in their own language.  Is that something that the Government can look at as part of his daily  dashboard?

PRIME MINISTER: The communications program that has been running on people's screens now for us  for some time, that also has a languages component to it, which has been rolled out around the country  as well. And even in my own communications, whether it's WeChat or other arrangements, we've been  pretty focused on communicating through the various language media to achieve that end. In terms of  students, the Immigration Minister, well, Acting Immigration Minister i should say, will have more to say  about other visa holders and the arrangements the Government is coming to for those. And I'll leave that  to him to make those announcements in coming days. People should know, though, in particular for  students, all students who come to Australia in their first year have to give a warranty that they are able  to support themselves for the first 12 months of their study. That is a requirement of their visa when they  come to that first year. And so that is not an unreasonable expectation of the Government that students  would be able to fulfil the commitment that they gave. Now, these visas and those who are in Australia  under various visa arrangements, they're obviously not held here compulsorily. If they're not in a position  to be able to support themselves, then there is the alternative for them to return to their home countries.  We still have quite a number of people who are here on visitor visas. My simple, as much as it's lovely to  have visitors to Australia in good times, at times like this if you're a visitor in this country, it is time, as it  has been now for some while and I know many visitors have, to make your way home and to ensure that  you can receive the supports that are available where they are in your home countries. At this time,  Australia must focus on its citizens and its residents to ensure that we can maximise the economic

supports that we have. But there are many students who are in Australia. That's why we lifted the hour  restrictions on student nurses, for example, some 20,000 additional student nurses then became available  into our health system. That's very important. For those backpackers in Australia who are nurses or  doctors or have other critical skills that can really help us during this crisis, then there'll be opportunities  for them as well. But our focus and our priority is on supporting Australians and Australian residents with  the economic supports that are available.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said the National Cabinet has moved from the containment phase to  the suppression phase. Can you give us an insight into what the benchmarks were for making the decision  to move to the phases and what the benchmarks are for moving to the subsequent prescribers like that?

PRIME MINISTER: I wouldn’t describe it like that and if that's how it came across, then I apologise. What  I'm simply saying is in our first few weeks, we've been establishing getting all these measures in place.  That is also part of the act of putting the pressure down on the virus and having those restrictions and  those limitations and those controls and then the economic supports that are necessary to cushion the  impact of those across the community. That's what the suppression phase is and we'll be in this for some  time. We'll be in this for some time. There will be a recovery phase and we are working at the same time  on the road out, not just the road in. And Nev Power, as you know, heads up the Coordination Commission.  There is important work being done as part of that body's work, particularly by people like Andrew Liveris  and others who are thinking about the next phase and what will have to do to get the economy back up  and running again on the other side of that. And then there'll be a phase after that which will be a return,  hopefully, to some form of business as usual in Australia as we once may have known it. But that is quite  a way away at the moment. And so right now, we are focused on keeping that pressure down on this virus  and ensuring that the measures, the restrictions, the supports that we have are sustainable. I can't stress  how important this is. You can't do that forever. The Budget is only so big and the restrictions that people  live under can only be lived under for so long. And so that's why it's important that we continue to look  at it all the time as a National Cabinet and that we calibrate these things to how the country is moving,  how they're responding, and that's why we are so grateful for their support. Mal.

JOURNALIST: PM, can we take from your comments that the National Cabinet has deployed or at least  identified the major measures of the response and that subsequent meetings are going to be more  progress reports than the deploying of something significant.

PRIME MINISTER: I think as a general rule, Mal, that's a pretty reasonable summary. That doesn't exclude  us from considering additional measures. The Commonwealth Government, through our Cabinet, will  continue to consider those. But over these last few weeks, I think we've put the big rocks in the jar in  terms of our response and that's important. That doesn't mean there won't be others, though. I mean,  yesterday's announcement on child care, I think was incredibly important. The work we've done on  domestic violence. And while I've said it on a number of interviews in the last 24 hours, people should go  to esafety.gov.au. Your children will be online more than they ever have been and that means they are at  risk more often than they ever have been online. And I encourage all parents to go to esafety.gov.au and  check out the very helpful hints that will help keep your children online safe as so many of them now are  engaged in distance learning. So that, I think, is a pretty good summary of where we're at, Mal. We will  be looking very carefully at the data and ensuring we're being driven by what that's telling us, what the  medical experts are telling us, but also in the area of education. We had a good discussion about education  again today. The work is already underway about what schools should look like on the other side of the  school holidays. And while I'm on that, people should not be going away for Easter holidays. This is Easter  at home. We put the Easter decorations up in the house yesterday with Jenny and the kids. It might  actually keep them occupied for at least an hour or so if they're painting Easter eggs or whatever. But this  Easter will be at home. People should not be getting in their cars and going to other places. But beyond

that, on the other side of school holidays, the education ministers around the country will be working with  the medical experts to further inform how the rest of the school year can be conducted. We do not want  our children to lose a year of their education. John.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you say to a minority of noisy critics out there who believe or don’t  understand why the Government may be unnecessarily causing economic destruction to save the lives of  predominantly older Australians?

PRIME MINISTER: Every Australian matters. It doesn’t matter whether they’ve just been born or they are  approaching the end of their life. Every Australian matters. They matter to me, they matter to my  Government and all of the members of Parliament in this place, every state and territory premier and  chief minister. Every Australian matters. That's my response.

JOURNALIST: PM, you've given us an update on the commercial tendencies. There’s a lot of confusion out  there from residential landlords, is it a situation that their deals with their tenants are being dealt with on  a state by state basis and not the National Cabinet and what can you tell us?

PRIME MINISTER: The priority has been on the commercial tenancies, given the business issues involved  and the many business closures. And so that's where the National Cabinet has put its first attention and  all of the state and territory treasurers. On residential tenancies, you'll recall that we already announced  that there was a moratorium on evictions. That doesn't mean there's a moratorium on rents. It means  that people are responsible for their rents, but there is a moratorium on evictions. We won't have anyone  thrown out of their homes. That's very important. And there'll be further work that is being done by the  treasurers on residential tenancies. But the commercial tenancies are what is very important at this point.  And I should have stated before to add what I indicated earlier, the intention is there would be mediation  available in the event that landlords and their retail commercial tenants were unable to reach an  agreement. And I should also point out that if you are not a JobSeeker tenant, if you're just a tenant that  hasn't had a reduction in their business turnover, then your leasing arrangements stand. You should be  still paying your rent to the landlord. Those things haven't been suspended. These arrangements are  designed to address particularly the small and medium sized tenancies. The larger retailers and the big  landlords, they'll sort it out. They'll get together, they'll sort it out and they'll have arrangements because  they know how much they both need each other to make both of their businesses work. But we want to  make sure that smaller tenants have the protections they need to be able to sit down with their landlords.  Many landlords are doing the right thing, talking to their tenants, understanding that they both need each  other and coming to sensible arrangements that help them both get through. But there's  unreasonableness that is happening from both landlords and tenants alike, landlords not taking the  tenants calls and continuing to take the rent, tenants who are just threatening to throw the keys in their  door and walk away from their leases. That's not the way we need to behave in this. What we need to do  is have a code of behaviour which will be mandatory under state and territory laws that will get people  into a room and get them to sort it out. And if people don't want to do that, well, they won't have those  protections. Yep, Jen.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, not everyone is considerate or patient. Six months is a long time, six weeks  is a long time. Are you worried people are going to start getting frustrated with these social distancing  rules and start intentionally breaking them, particularly around Easter when they just want to go see their  families? Apart from telling people to be patient and the state laws that are in place, what can be done?  And one for Dr Murphy, if I can as well, do you believe the numbers that are coming out of China at the  moment?

PRIME MINISTER: I might let you go.



PROFESSOR BRENDAN MURPHY, CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER: Look, I think we... the only numbers I have  total faith in are the Australian numbers, frankly, because we have the highest testing rate in the world. I  think China is in a really difficult position. They did clamp down incredibly hard and they stopped  transmission, but their population is not immune. They still have a lot of people in their population and  they are obviously trying very hard to prevent second waves. I think they have been pretty transparent.  But as I said, I'm only confident about our numbers. I'm certainly not confident that the numbers even  out of the US are probably much higher than are being reported because nobody else in the world has  been doing testing like we have. Nobody else in the world got on to all of those original cases out of  Wuhan in January and contained them. That's why we are now dealing with what we know rather than a  huge community transmission that happened all through February in countries like Italy and the US. We  are on top of our cases but we still have a long way to go.

PRIME MINISTER: Thank you, Brendan. Patience must become the virtue of Australians over the next six  months, at the very least. It is something we need to get very familiar with. It's something we've got to  encourage each other in and it also is something the National Cabinet, all the states and territories I know  are very conscious of, to ensure that we can keep these arrangements sustainably in place over the many  months ahead. Where we think they can be eased, where we think they can be modified in their  enforcement and how that's done, I know the state and territory premiers and chief ministers are listening  very carefully to their communities. I have no doubt the police commissioners in each of the states or  those who are responsible for the enforcement are listening carefully and exercising the appropriate  discretion. I think we have to sort of give each other a bit of a break on ensuring how we're adjusting to  this new normal. It’ll take a little while. But patience must become our virtue in Australia. That will save  lives, it will save livelihoods.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what is the Federal Government doing in terms of buildings that the  Commonwealth owns? Will you be offering rent relief as well and setting an example as the Federal  Government?

PRIME MINISTER: We intend to. The Commonwealth doesn't have too many retail tenancies that would  fall into this category. They are predominantly held by state governments and it would be our expectation  that we'd be acting as a model landlord in those arrangements. Yes, I think we should absolutely do that  and I know the Treasurer and the Finance Minister will be ensuring that those arrangements are in place.  I’m going to keep coming around.

JOURNALIST: PM, two quick questions. One, would you consider any option of people using financial  hardship rules to take any of their superannuation to help pay rent? And secondly, overnight the US  recorded its biggest historical jump in unemployment in a week. They’re a bit of a lead indicator. Do you  have any concerns that that might happen in Australia?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, first of all, on the issue of access to super, we've already set out our rules about  accessing super, and that applies to those on JobSeeker and they can access $10,000 of their super before  the end of this year and $10,000 next year. We haven't made any additional announcements on those  issues and so obviously someone who was on JobSeeker, they are clearly in a position of financial distress  and there are other broader rules that apply and the Commissioner will continue to exercise his discretion,  as he always does on those issues. And on the second issue, on the level of unemployment, well, this is  why we put JobKeeper in place. This is why this program is such an important program. This is why we've  put $130 billion into supporting the jobs of potentially 6 million Australians so they can stay connected to  their employer. This is going to save tens and tens and tens of thousands of jobs immediately, and  hopefully millions more, as we go through the many difficult months ahead. Now, our scheme was

designed for Australia. It is Australian made, for Australian circumstances. It's built for Australia,  JobKeeper, and I think it'll work for Australia as well.

JOURNALIST: Just on you've got reports of people in Queensland…

PRIME MINISTER: Sorry, I couldn’t hear you.

JOURNALIST: You’ve got reports of people in Queensland having to go to the state administration tribunal  on rental claims, that their landlords are saying the eviction moratorium you guys have introduced is not  law. Do you have any comments on that?

PRIME MINISTER: My comment to the landlords is do the right thing. Do the right thing. We're all in this  together. Sit down with your tenant, the tenant that's been paying you rent, working in their business,  week after week after week, respect each other's livelihoods and support each other's livelihoods  wherever you can. This is going to be a tough time, whether you're a tenant, and I know there will be  landlords that will feel it as well. Of course they will, and that's why the banks have got to do the right  thing by them. This isn't about picking sides. It's about ensuring that Australians work together to solve a  problem that they share together. It's not the tenant’s problem. It's not the landlord's problem. It's not  the bank's problem. It's all of their problem. And so we need them all to work together to solve it.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, are you aggrieved by the way Ruby Princess was handled? And also, you  mentioned Chinese wet markets this morning. What do you think needs to be done about those?

PRIME MINISTER: The matters in relation to that vessel, I think, have been addressed by the New South  Wales Premier, and we've just focused on meeting the next challenge and learning from the past ones  and we will continue to do that. In relation to wet markets, I was asked about this this morning. It's not a  matter that I've sought to raise. You asked me a question, I'll seek to give you an answer, and Alan Jones  asked me about that this morning. Look, no doubt, and perhaps the Chief Medical Officer might want to  comment as well, but these markets it is not the first time we've seen these types of viruses come out of  these sorts of places. We don't have them here and there's good reason and I think this is a big challenge  for the world into the future, the World Health Organisation and other international organisations. I think  this is an area they can spend a bit of time and attention on because we can clearly see the great risks to  the health and wellbeing of the rest of the world as a result of these types of places and facilities. Now,  I'm not making any criticisms of anyone. I'm not making any cultural references or anything like that. I  mean, there are all sorts of different countries and we all live different ways. But it is important that when  you're handling these types of food supplies and how they are provided to the public and how they're  treated, these things can be very dangerous, as we've seen. Did you want to say anything about that,  Brendan?

PROFESSOR BRENDAN MURPHY, CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER: Zoonotic viruses, so viruses that spread from  animals to humans, are our biggest risk and that's what we've seen with Covid-19. And clearly that risk is  much greater when you have close contact between a lot of live animals and human beings. So it is a risk.  It's been well identified. You know, other other viruses like SARS and MERS crossed from animal to human  in the same way. So it's a very important issue and I think it's something, obviously, that the Chinese  authorities have been very concerned about.

PRIME MINISTER: But for now, we'll be focusing on what we need to do in Australia. We'll let other  countries focus on what they need to focus on in their country. I'm speaking regularly to leaders around  the world and trying to learn from their experiences and share our experiences with them. This is a very  difficult challenge, as we all know, and we're fighting this war on two fronts. We're fighting the virus, put

the pressure down on the virus to stop it or slow it's spread, to save lives and to ensure that we keep our  economies running to support the livelihoods that Australians depend on. Thank you.

[END]



Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

