SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE

MANAGER OF OPPOSITION BUSINESS IN THE SENATE

CHAIR OF THE SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON COVID-19

SENATOR FOR THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC CAPITAL HILL

WEDNESDAY, 26 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: China relationship; Border closures.



JANE NORMAN, HOST: To discuss this topic and the other political issues of the day, I

am joined by Wednesday’s political panel. Nationals Senate Leader Bridget McKenzie and

Manager of Opposition in the Business in the Senate and Shadow Finance Minister, Katy

Gallagher. Thank you both for joining me today.



BRIDGET MCKENZIE, LEADER OF THE NATIONALS IN THE SENATE: Great to be with

you.



NORMAN: We've got a lot to get through. The legislation to extend the JobKeeper and

JobSeeker payments has been introduced into the lower house, along with the

Government's amended bill to overhaul university funding. But just first on Wang Xining's

speech, I hope you both got a chance to at least listen to some of it, but just starting with

you Bridget McKenzie as a member of the Morrison Government. One of the many

objections that the China's Deputy Ambassador laid out there to Australia was the fact that

Scott Morrison didn't consult China before he called for an inquiry to the origins of COVID-19. His language is pretty emotive. He said it hurt the feelings of the Chinese people. It

was a shocking proposal from a country that was supposed to be good friend of China.

What's your response to that? Should Scott Morrison have consulted our counterparts in

Beijing?



MCKENZIE: Well, thanks, Jane. I thought it was a fascinating speech and there's a lot to

pick over there. Obviously, our relationship with China is one that's mutually beneficial, and

has developed over a long period of time. And I was really bouyed by comments around

mutual respect, given our incredibly divergent political systems. But it is one of mutual

benefits and partnership that I hope we can continue to grow. But that doesn't mean we

need to consult on each and every issue. The Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister

made the right call in asking the globe to actually examine how this global pandemic

started, as it is wreaking havoc right across the world. And I'm looking forward to the

findings, as I'm sure everybody is, once the World Health Organisation gets started.



NORMAN: And just sticking with you for a moment, Bridget McKenzie. The Deputy

Ambassador there said that diplomatic channels are open, but it remains a fact that no

Minister, no Prime Minister in Australia has managed to speak to their Chinese

counterparts since November 2019. What did you think about the Deputy Ambassador's

reasoning there that because of the COVID-19 crisis, you can't have face to face meetings,

but of course, we know you can actually have a meeting via the telephone.



MCKENZIE: Absolutely Jane, and you know, as the former Agriculture Minister at the time,

it was impossible to get my counter-minister in China on the phone. On a zoom meeting.

Let alone face to face. That makes it problematic to do things like consult on issues such

as the investigation into the COVID virus. The fact remains, that the behaviour of China

around things like barley, like our beef industry, and concerningly around the wine industry

and our higher education. The messages they've put out to the domestic students around

our international education industry, I think are concerning for us. We've got a high value

product. It's globally recognised for high quality. We’re the best in the world at producing

many of these products. We want to see them on shelves in Beijing and Shanghai, but not

at the cost of our national interest. We won't be trading our national sovereignty. And that I

think that's at the heart.



NORMAN: Yeah, I want to get to the trade spat in just a moment Bridget McKenzie. But to

bring Katy Gallagher into the chat. From what you heard there, does it give you any reason

to think that the diplomatic relationship might be coming out of the freezer anytime soon,

Katy Gallagher?



KATY GALLAGHER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE: Hi, Jane. Hi, Bridget. I did not

catch the speech. I just saw the end of the snippets there. But certainly we think it's an

important relationship. It's one that the Prime Minister clearly needs to work on in our

national interest. We would hope that they've been trying to do that, even though they've

haven't been able to get meetings or phone calls answered. But obviously, the relationship

under the Morrison Government hasn't been strong for some time and it actually pre-dated

the pandemic. So, we think they need to be making sure that they are engaging with

China. It's an important relationship as we can see from all the trade difficulties we're

having now. When these relationships break down, it impacts on jobs and livelihoods in

Australia. So, it's one of the Morrison Government needs to get right.



NORMAN: Katy Gallagher, the Deputy Ambassador today was talking a lot about China's

anger about the call for COVID-19 inquiry. He made some subtle references to the fact that

Australia has banned Huawei from the rollout of the 5G network. These don't appear to be

easy issues to resolve with China.



GALLAGHER: Oh, that's right. It's a complex relationship. Nobody's trying to suggest

otherwise. Australia must all always assert our national interest and our values in our

engagement with any country around the world. It's no different with China. But

engagement is important. I don't think we're in a world where China isn't a part of that

engagement. And so again, it's up to the Morrison Government to work out, while

balancing our national interests and our values and things that are important to us, how

they engage with certainly an important economic partner, but also a partner from our

region.



NORMAN: Bridget McKenzie, just back to you on the trade spot. It's interesting to see

Wang Xining sort of reframe the trade spat. He was saying that, you know, China's

accused Australia of anti-dumping, anti-competitive kind of behaviour when it comes to

beef and barley, but he claims that Australia is one of the worst abuses of the anti-dumping

complaint system. Does he actually have a point there?



MCKENZIE: Absolutely not, Jane. I remember a classic case of dumping against Italian

tomatoes that we took, that SPC Armona actually drove, looking after our clean green

product here. We are one of the least subsidised primary producers in the world. We are

happy to compete globally, with the best in the world. And we usually win and it's because

we actually offer a clean green product, at a great price and we're a very reliable trading

partner. Come season, come hell or high water. So, we have some great things going for

us in the international trade space. Claims of us dumping product are simply not true. I

know that our grains industry is working very, very hard to prove that case. As will, indeed,

our grape growers, who really been doing it tough. They've had drought, they've had

smoke taint, if they've gone through bushfire season this summer. We've got a great

product. There are other markets we've been working very, very hard as a Government to

develop that diversity of options for our exporters. And I know they're relishing the

opportunity to take their product to other places where it will be enjoyed.



NORMAN: Okay, I want to move on to the issue of borders, which remains a point of

friction between parties. Between states and the Commonwealth. Katy Gallagher, the

National Cabinet has asked the top health advisory committee, the AHPPC to come up

with the uniform definition of a "hotspot" for the purposes of travel. Is it something that you

would welcome given that in a pretty unusual decision, Queensland declared your home

territory, the ACT, a hotspot, despite the fact that we've had no COVID cases in weeks?



GALLAGHER: I think it's sensible progress within the National Cabinet. I think the National

Cabinet is increasingly shown to be not a "National" Cabinet. They're going their own ways

in a whole range of areas. But some consistency I think, would be useful. It's not an easy

situation to solve. From the outset Labor has said that we should follow the medical advice.

State and territory governments are getting their own medical advice, as is the

Commonwealth. I think Premiers and Chief Ministers have to follow that local advice. And I

don't think there is much choice about that. But if there is some areas where national

consistency can be applied, I think that's probably a benefit. It's obviously going to be

months to go yet and I think business community members, average people like me, want

to know what the rules are and some consistency around that.



NORMAN: Yeah. And Bridget McKenzie, this has been a big issue for the Nationals

because the borders that are basically maintaining Victoria as an island right now on the

South Australia and New South Wales side. Yesterday, both New South Wales and South

Australia rather, sort of, extended the zones in which border communities can travel. Is that

going to be enough to satisfy the concerns of those people in the border communities.



MCKENZIE: Well that remains to be seen Jane. It is great to see, sporadic, shall we say,



removal of some of the restrictions for border communities that have been suffering for

weeks and in some cases months, with draconian city-centric policymaking. You

mentioned evidence in your opening remark, and there is absolutely no medical evidence

that says Aubury-Wodonga, for instance, shutting them down, making sure they can't

actually access health care, education, their job, or their family on compassionate grounds,

has any basis in fact. The reality is 12 local government areas developed community

transmission in mid-June in Melbourne. They should have been shut down swiftly and

securely by the state Labor government. They weren't. It spread throughout Melbourne and

even now today, you can leave the hotspot of Melbourne and drive out into COVID-free

regional Victoria and our border communities being waved through our major arterials. It's

just not on.



Katy I understand who closed the border. If you want to look at my commentary I have not

spared blue nor red. I don't care which t-shirt you wear. It is regional Victorians, New South

Welshman, South Australians and Queenslanders that are bearing the brunt of city centric-state premiers, who either can't control the quarantine and contact tracing systems as in

Labor in Victoria, or indeed closing borders.



NORMAN: All right, Bridget McKenzie, Katy Gallagher. We have unfortunately run out of

time. Question Time is starting just a few minutes. I'm very sorry. We're gonna leave it

there. But thanks for your time today.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: PAT CRONAN 0432 758 224



