

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

TODAY SHOW

FRIDAY, 13 MARCH 2020



SUBJECT: Coronavirus.



KARL STEFANOVIC, HOST: Deputy Opposition Leader Richard Marles joins us now.

Good morning to you. We should say, Home Affairs Minister, Peter Dutton who is normally

here on a Friday is sick...



ALLISON LANGDON, HOST:  But with a with a stomach bug.



STEFANOVIC: Thank you for clarifying.



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: We

wish him the best.



STEFANOVIC: We have just seen, Richard, the U.S. they have than banned these

gatherings of more the than 500. Is it time now for the Australian Government, I know you

are taking advice from the medics, but is it time now for us to say go, you know let's do

whatever we can to shut this down?



MARLES: Well, you have just heard what Robert said then; social distancing is obviously

important. I think what matters here is we get leadership from the Government. Now, there

are reports today that the Grand Prix is going to be cancelled. If that turns out to be right, I

think that is a decision that we can all understand. We have seen the NBA in America

suspended. I think what matters here, though, it’s not just organisations that it is just

making those decision, it is that we get leadership from the Government about these

questions. There is clearly an economic dimension to this but first and foremost this is a

health crisis. And that is the lens through which the Government needs to be giving its

messaging and making its decisions and that needs to be very clear. And, I actually think

in terms of giving a sense of calm to the Australian people, is a very clear and substantive

plan that the Government is laying forward in respect of the health dimension of this.



LANGDON: Do you think for a lot of when people, it is concerning right now front when

you see NRL games going ahead in front of crowds, when you do see measures being put

in place by a lot of other countries; France has just closed its schools, obviously Italy is in

lockdown and that response we have just seen from President Trump, in not even just

saying no to crowds, but suspending leagues.



MARLES: And, I think the other point to make here, Ali, is in other countries where

significant measures have taken place, you see a flattening of the graph. These things are

having an impact-



LANGDON: And look at our graph, it is exponential.



MARLES: It is going the wrong way.  And you’ve heard what Robert said, with 20 per cent

of the population to get this, we are talking about a very significant loss of life. I think it is

actually incumbent on the Government to be doing everything they can to make sure that

every step is taken to prevent that possibility.



STEFANOVIC: Here is here the thing. I mean, we can all sit here and go, let's shut the

borders. Let's close our schools. Let's close our universities, let's all self-isolate as much

as we can- especially those people who have it. We are not making the decisions. We are

just the public and we are looking at it from our rudimentary understanding of things, it

looks bad, let's try and do something about it now. We are not taking into account the

troubles with the economy. As you say this is a health issue. What is standing in the way of



us doing that now?



MARLES: I think what we have to make sure is that we have leadership from this

Government. Complacency ain't going to get us there- that is to state the obvious. And, the

Prime Minister gave his address last night. That is all fine. But rhetoric on its own is not

enough. We are not going be able to salute this disease into submission. There actually

needs to be an articulated health plan that is put out by the Government and think that is

what we need to hear.



STEFANOVIC: I think so too. Good on you Richard, thank you so much for your time, we

appreciate it.



MARLES: Thank you



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363







Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













