

SHARON CLAYDON MP

MEMBER FOR NEWCASTLE





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

THURSDAY, 27 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Manufacturing in Newcastle and Gladys’ Berejiklian’s comments; New

videoconferencing measures in the Federal Parliament.



Sharon Claydon, MEMBER FOR NEWCASTLE: I come from Newcastle, a city that

makes things. Indeed, we have a long and proud history of manufacturing -  ships and

trains, and indeed, we’ve transitioned into much of the advanced manufacturing in recent

years. So when the New South Wales Premier, Gladys Berejiklian, said Australia and New

South Wales are no good at making trains and that’s why we have to purchase them

offshore, you can imagine the hurt felt by hundreds of highly skilled tradesmen and women

here in Newcastle. It’s astonishing that the New South Wales Premier could be so out of

touch with the people in the city that’s just two hours north of where she lives.



Indeed, I’d invite Gladys Berejiklian to get on a train - one of those Tangara trains that was

built by the blood, sweat and tears of Newcastle men and women thirty years ago, that are

still being used to carry passengers in Sydney today - to get on that train and come to

Newcastle to meet people who still know how to make things. And what they need is a

Premier to have some faith in their capacity. A premier that understands the need, that at

the height of the greatest recession we have faced since the Great Depression, she needs

to invest in manufacturing - not be pulling back and feeding the addiction by consecutive

conservative Governments to send jobs and industry offshore. It’s time that the New South

Wales Premier backed in people in her own state - backed in the men and women in

communities like Newcastle that are desperate for jobs. We’ve got massive youth

unemployment right now. It’s not only disrespectful of the highly skilled tradesmen and

women of today, but we need to create a pipeline of young people coming through that are

going to be able to pick up the tools and do the job that we have done for more than a

century in Newcastle. The disrespect she shows to working men and women is

astonishing. Now’s the time we need to invest in local jobs and put our money behind our

people - the greatest asset this nation has.



JOURNALIST:  What do you make of how the video conferencing software is working in

Parliament this week so far?



CLAYDON: I’ve been very privileged to be in the Speaker’s Chair this week on a number

of occasions, and I’ve been amazed by the astonishing quality of the audio and visuals that

are coming through on the videolink. I think it’s an important mechanism to provide a

pathway for people who, through no fault of their own, just simple cannot be here

physically in Parliament due to the impact of COVID-19. It’s important that those

representatives continue to have a voice in the Australian Parliament. Their constituents -

many of who are feeling the brunt of lockdown in Victoria - they need to have their voices

heard in the Australian Parliament. And if we’re able to facilitate that through the use of

modern technologies then that’s a great thing. I don’t think it is easy for those

representatives to adjust to this new form of contribution but it’s making the best of a very

difficult world.



JOURNALIST:  Would you hope that it can be kept on beyond this trial period? Do you

hope that it becomes part of the normal, day to day of Parliament.



CLAYDON: This is a very special set of circumstances and I think we that we should never

lose sight of the fact that this is the people’s house, this is where people should gather and

this is where debate takes place. And I think given the choice, most elected

representatives would want to be here in the People’s House to debate the important

issues of their electorates. That’s not possible in these circumstances, so yes, it’s

important that we create alternative pathways and make use of modern technologies

available to us. If it’s to continue in other circumstances, I think we’d need to review that on

a case-by-case basis, but as I said, my understanding from all my colleagues that I’ve

spoken to is that they would much rather be here prosecuting the case for the people they



represent but that’s not possible, so the next best thing is for them to join us by video link.



JOURNALIST: Thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: REBECCA WILLETTS 0425 442 148





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













