

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

NATIONAL PRESS CLUB- Q&A

CANBERRA

TUESDAY, 4 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECT: State COVID-19 restrictions, Defence bipartisanship, China,

South China Sea, Hong Kong, Full cycle docking, Ausmin, Future

submarines program, strategic fuel supply.



SABRA LANE: Thank you for that speech. I'll get to a question about that

speech in a moment but first just for the audience's sake and for those

watching at home, I'd just like you to give us an example of the hoops that you

had to get through to be here. You were wearing a mask here earlier. You

didn't need to do that, but you are wearing that. Just tell us what you've gone

through.



MARLES: Yeah well it has been something of a process, Sabra. So I suppose

from a legal point of view the first thing was a requirement to get a medical

exemption from the Australian Capital Territory to be here now to make this

speech, so we applied for and received that. That exemption allowed me to

come here last night, spend the night but only one night, so the exemption

requires me to leave the Territory later this afternoon. I also have applied for

and received a permit from the Government of New South Wales to traverse

New South Wales by car. That permit stays live I think until tomorrow but I can

assure New South Wales I'll be out of the state by tonight. To be honest, I was

driven here which allows me to do work on what is 15 hours’ worth of driving.

But I was only able to get one permit and so I didn't have  a permit for one of

my staff. So what that meant was that a Victorian based staff member drove me

to the border, dropped me off there, I was then picked up by a Canberra based

staff member who drove me there.



LANE: So you walked across the border?



MARLES: Well tonight I will be doing that. I will be dropped on the New South

Wales side of the border, I will take my trundle bag and walk across the bridge -- across Checkpoint Charlie and then I will get to be picked up on the other side

by the person who will be looking out for me and driven home tomorrow. I'll be

spending tonight in Wodonga. Having said that, you know it's, I mean I've been

able to work while I've been driving and as I said at the outset this is important.

I mean, our democracy needs to continue in the midst of this crisis and

democracies around the world are having exactly the discussion about how

they continue their operations in the midst of a crisis such as this. And it's really

important to understand the part of our capacity to be dealing with this in a way

where we do so well is the fact that we are a democracy and so the functions of

it have been acknowledged by Governments, State and Federal as being

essential, like those of us who work in Parliament are essential service workers.

And that's as it should be because it's really critical that the elements of our

democracy continue through this period.



LANE: Now Defence typically enjoys bipartisan support but just picking out

some of the phrases from your speech ‘one giant fiasco,’ ‘Australians are less

safe’ , ‘national security is been profoundly compromised.’ This feels like one

big shot across the Government’s bow. Now you also said that the decision to

select the one company to build the future submarines was negligent. Was it

corrupt?



MARLES: I'm not going there, I don't think I would say that, but it was

negligent. And I think, that the point I do make is that I think politics ruled day. I

think the reason why the Down selection occurred at the time that it occurred in

the lead up to the 2016 Federal Election was about trying to sell a political

message to first the people of South Australia but to the people of Australia as

well. And in the process, politics trumped what was in the national interest and I

guess to your broader point Sabra you're right that Defence has enjoyed

bipartisan support and it's not a small thing to make the decision to make the

speech in in the way that I have. But you know, I after a lot of consultation with

people that I trust around Australia feel that this is a moment where it is

absolutely essential that this now be called out because the fact of the matter is

that our national security has been profoundly compromised. I mean it is the

most significant platform that we have in terms of shaping our strategic

circumstances and empowering our nation, not just in respect of Defence but in

the way in which we engage with the world in every respect - like they matter.

This is hard power and a huge mistake has been made and it's impacting the

way in which we relate to the world and it needs to be said.



LANE: Ben Packham.



BEN PACKHAM: Thanks for your speech Mr Marles. You mentioned China in

there and said that the Morrison Government hasn't helped our relationship

with China with its muscular language. You went on a study trip to China with

China Matters last year. You said you came away with a new perspective on

the country. I'm wondering what that perspective tells you about recent events

in Hong Kong, about China's trade sanctions on Australia, its denunciation of

Australia as a racist country and ongoing Chinese sponsored cyber-attacks

against Australia and other countries. What would Labor do differently to the

Morrison Government on China and how would you manage the strategic

challenges posed by that relationship?



MARLES: Well firstly what I'm referring to in terms of the muscular language is

language used by a number of Government MP’s who really are on the fringe.

You know at times I think you get inconsistent messages actually in terms of

the strength of the language which is being used by those who we need to be

hearing from-  namely the Foreign and Defence Ministers and the Prime

Minister himself. So I don't actually think you get a consistent position in

relation to that and that speaks to the fact that I do think this is a fundamentally

critical relationship to our nation which has been poorly handled and poorly

handled over the period of this Government. So firstly in terms of answering

your question what would we do differently, what we'd do is have a clear set of

guiding principles about how we relate to China, which is a deeply complex

relationship. You will not be able to hear a Government MP, not the Foreign

Minister, the Prime Minister or Defence Minister stand here and articulate to

you what are their guiding principles in terms of the way in which they are

seeking to manage their relationship with China. The second point is that whilst

our professional diplomats do an incredible job, the diplomacy at a political level

has been singularly hopeless and it really has been. We're seven years into this

Government and there is not one relationship of significance which exists

between a Morrison Government Minister and a senior member of the Chinese

Government. This is our largest trading partner. Whatever you think about

China it is clearly a relationship that matters and they don't have one single

personal relationship in place, not one. Now you wouldn't have been able to

say that about the Rudd and Gillard Governments, you wouldn't have said it

about the Howard Government. I mean the truth is that Alexander Downer

throughout that period had a lot of significant relationships with those in the

Chinese Government and you certainly wouldn't have said it about the Hawke

and Keating Governments. This Government uniquely has found itself in a

position where it can't talk to our largest trading partner. Now there are times -

it’s a complex relationship. It is not one which lends itself to saying that we

should be hard line all the time or accommodating all the time. The truth is you

need to have an adult, sensible, nuanced, evolved sense of how you're going to

manage the relationship. And this mob simply don’t have it and they don't give

expression to it and that is at the heart of the issue here. And as a result what

we're seeing is the trade relationship being significantly impacted, its tens of

thousands, if not hundreds of thousands of jobs which are at stake at a time

when we are in recession for the first time in 30 years. So when we get through

the Coronavirus there are going to be a whole lot of workers in this country

which will wake up with a really rude shock about what our trading situation is

with our largest trading partner. So I think all of that is a major problem.



PACKHAM: Would Labor have made those statements recently though for

example on the South China Sea or Hong Kong?



MARLES: When it comes to the South China Sea, Ben, I actually think we

have spoken with a more robust and a more clear voice than the Government.

But I'll be the first to say this, China presents a whole lot of challenges for

Australia's national interests. China presents a whole lot of challenges for

Australia's national interest and we must have the space within our relationship

and the courage to express our voice when it differs from Chinese action and

the South China Sea is a perfect example of that. So when you want to find a

political party which has consistently been talking about the need to have

freedom of navigation operations on the table, it's Labor. It's not the people who

are running the country right now, it's Labor, because that exercises our core

interests. 60 per cent of Australia's trade goes through the South China Sea. As

an island trading nation, we are deeply invested in the UN Convention on the

Law of the Sea and any attempt to take that out of being in place, it absolutely

goes to our core interests so we speak about that. But what we don't do is have

you know people on the fringe out there writing opinion pieces which are

comparing China to the rise of Nazi Germany and that's what they've been

doing and that doesn't help. So a clear voice is what you need. And actually

you've been getting it from Labor. You haven't got it from this mob.



LANE:  Lanai Scarr.



LANAI SCARR: Lanai Scarr from the West Australian. Thank you for your

speech. One decision that has been the subject of much speculation and been

delayed is the future of Full Cycle Docking. If you were Defence Minister, would

you like it in WA or South Australia or a combination of both? And why do you

think it's been constantly delayed?



MARLES: So that’s an admirable job asking that question from the West

Australian. Again, the honest answer to this is that it's tied up with the fate of

the Future Submarine Program and it is in this sense for those who would make

the argument of moving Full Cycle Docking from Adelaide to Perth. It goes

along the basis that there won't be the workforce available in one city to do both

the work on Full Cycle Docking and ultimately extending the life of Collins whilst

also building the future submarines. But what is clear right there is then how the

progress of work in respect of the Future Submarines is going is critical on

whatever decision you make in relation to Full Cycle Docking. Now you know,

the nature of Submarines is such that uniquely almost it's information which

rightly is held in the hands of the Government is not in the public domain. So it's

an unsatisfying answer that I'm about to give you but the short answer is I don't

know. And there is no way I could possibly know because this is information

held by them. But what I do know is this, they have in their failure to make a

clear decision in relation to the fate of Full Cycle Docking, I think done an

enormous injustice to workers in both Adelaide and Perth by not giving them

certainty. There are workers right now in Osborne who are in a high degree of

stress about the future of their job and indeed those in WA who are looking to

this opportunity are also in a state of limbo. And it's not good enough to leak out

a few lines to get a run in a piece that's buried in the middle of the paper and

pretend that is action. That's actually what the Government's been trying to do

in terms of making a decision. They were going to make this decision by the

end of last year-  the end of last year. It's August, like they need to make a

clear decision and it is absolutely tied up with the progress of the Future

Submarines and that's why we need to hear from Scott Morrison or Linda

Reynolds standing right here explaining to the Australian people what's going

on with Future Subs because that will answer the question that you've just

asked.



LANE: Andrew Greene.



ANDREW GREENE: Richard Marles, Andrew Greene from the ABC you spent

a lot of time criticising the Future Submarine Program and the approach, there

if I can take you to Australian industry content generally.  What does Labor

intend on doing to keep the government to account on various policies in that

area? Do you accept that there's not a lot you can do once these projects are

signed? And why has it taken so long for this criticism to emerge?



MARLES: Well let me deal with the last bit. It's a very good question and it

really goes to the first question that Sabra asked on Defence which is that we

don't take lightly the criticism that we've just engaged in in terms of the

Government in relation to defence. It’s not how we would like things to be, it

should be a place of bipartisanship. And we've really stuck to that for as long as

we think we responsibly can, but we're at a point now where this thing needs to

be spoken about and where this needs to be put out there. So if there has been

a delay in us making this criticism it has been about trying to keep the

government an opportunity to fix this but they ain’t - they are not. And so it is at

a time now where we need to make this criticism. In terms of Australian industry

content, I think there’s a couple of points I'd want to make there. The failure to

get a contractual commitment with Naval Group around a specified level of

Australian industry content for the Future Submarine Program is all about the

fact that they down selected too early and they were not in a position of

bargaining power which enabled them to achieve that-  but that is a massive,

massive issue. I mean it's an issue in terms of jobs in South Australia. It is a

complete breach of faith for the workers of South Australia that this government

is now sending hull fabrication on the first future submarine to France. That is a

breach of faith. No question.  There is one opportunity which comes with the

signing of the build contract, so briefly explain this you have the strategic

partnering agreement which sits over the whole of the program. But underneath

that there are a number of specific contracts and the next contract to be signed

is in relation to the actual construction and build of the first submarine. In that

contract is the last opportunity to get a legal commitment out of Naval Group to

have a specified level of Australian industry content for the Future Submarine

Program and that is an opportunity that Scott Morrison must not miss. I mean

it’s absolutely essential that he gets that commitment into that agreement.



GREENE: Can anything be done to make companies meet commitments that

they did during a bid phase once they’ve won that project?



MARLES: Well the law can and so if you can get it as a legal commitment

that'll help-  more than help -  that should ensure it. But the issue here is this,

how you manage it in terms of how long you keep competition in play and when

you ultimately down select to one and clearly you do need to down select to

one at some point in time as only one person is going to build the submarines

or one company. But the moment at which you do that is fundamental to

ensuring that you have the bargaining power to get these things into legal

contracts.  And that's why the mistake that was made by Malcolm Turnbull and

Christopher Pyne back in April of 2016 is so profound. It is a mistake of

enormous proportions and everything that we have seen now flows from that

original mistake because it absolutely compromised our ability to have any say

and power in the negotiation process with Naval Group going forward.



ANTHONY GALLOWAY:  Thank you for the speech. Just to go back to your

trip to China last year you told an audience in Beijing that on the China

relationship we must seek to  build it and not just in economic terms but also

through exploring political cooperation and even defence cooperation. Now a

lot has happened in the world since September last year. I was just wondering

do you think it's still tenable to explore defence cooperation with China in

today’s world?



MARLES:  Look I stand by those comments. I do. And one of the reasons why I

stand by those comments is because one of the only places where there

remains high level contact between Australia and China is in the military realm.

Now we have an annual dialogue between our Chief of Defence Force and

theirs which is continuing.  It’s probably the highest level engagement between

the two nations right now. So in fact the military to military relationship is the

one place where we actually do have contact and it's the reason why I made

that comment. Now it's not like-  we shouldn’t over blow this, exercise

Pandaroo is a small exercise which is about building trust between China and

Australia through a co-operative defence exercise. I think that is a useful

exercise and that should continue. But let me make it also clear what I said in

that speech in China so we're clear about what needs to be done in terms of

actually living your actions, in that speech, in Beijing, I raised the question of

the Uighur minority and criticised China for their handling of it.  In that speech in

Beijing I raised the question of Hong Kong and the way in which China was

acting in relation to that. So it's really important that you have the courage to

express our national interest and to raise questions of human rights even in

China even when that differs from what China wants and that was no small feat

in the sense China obviously not happy about the fact that I did that. But that's

why this is a relationship which needs to be managed by the adults in the room.

Right now the adults such as they exist with the government are asleep and

they are leaving the field vacant to fringe dwellers on the government side who

in my view are doing significant damage to what is a critical relationship for this

country.



GALLOWAY: Well just on that I mean I believe you're referring to an anti-Chinese influence group called the Wolverines in Parliament. They also have

Labor members. So what would a Labor Government do to ensure a so-called

kind of muscular language wasn't put forward by government MP’s if it was a

Labor government?



MARLES: Well I think it's extraordinary and it didn't happen under the Howard

Government, it really didn't happen under the Howard Government but you've

got a situation where most of what you hear from the government in relation to

our most significant relationship is being expressed by backbenchers. Like

would Alexander Downer have ever allowed that? I mean like that's what's

going on right now. In every government that we've seen in recent memory, like

a serious government in this country, foreign policy is determined by the

Foreign Minister and the Prime Minister and it's their voice that is heard and

that matters. But right now you're not hearing from them, you're hearing from all

these fringe dwellers who are making extraordinary comments. And let's be

clear what's at issue tens of thousands, hundreds thousands of jobs in this

country. So that's what we would do differently. What you would be hearing in

terms of an articulation of Australian policy in respect of China is firstly a set of

guiding principles which explain what we're trying to do. And secondly you'll

hear one voice, the voice of the leadership of the Government in relation to our

relationship with China.



LANE: Pablo Vinales



PABLO VINALES:  SBS News. Thank you for your speech. Just further on

your first question on the South China Sea and last week you said before

AUSMIN everything should be on the table including freedom of navigation.

You've reaffirmed that today. Given that Australia has resisted those calls for

now do you think that would warrant a rethink if such a request were made

under a Biden administration?



MARLES: So let me be really careful in answering this because the detail here

matters. It is impossible from opposition to give an opinion about, if you like an

operational call, so freedom of navigation operation actually should be a matter

that is very routine, freedom of navigation operations are deeply in Australia's

national interest because we are an island trading nation. Australia is an island

trading nation; it goes to the core of who we are. That's why we're in the Straits

of Hormuz but it’s certainly why we should be asserting the UN Convention on

the Law of the Sea in the South China Sea where most of our trade traverses.

So as a matter of principal these things should be on the table which is what we

can say from opposition.  In government as to whether you’re asked to engage

in a particular freedom of navigation operation, in a particular time, in a

particular way that ultimately can only be something that can be answered if

you're sitting in the chair.  So what we've been clear to say is you know our

view is as a matter of principle this should be something that is on the table as

in respect of any particular request from the United States, well it obviously

depends on the request and it depends on the details of the request so it's

difficult to answer from opposition, impossible actually.



LANE: Just back getting back to the speech that you did deliver in Beijing,

extracts of that were given to the media at the time will you release the full text

of the speech that you delivered?



MARLES: I stand to be corrected but I'm pretty sure the full text of the speech

is available, and the answer is yes but I think we already have.



LANE: Sure, we’ll double check that soon, Daniel Hurst.



DANIEL HURST: Mr Marles, Daniel Hurst from Guardian Australia. The

Defence Strategic Update that the government released recently pointed again

to the importance of the relationship between the US and China in terms of the

strategic dynamics in our region. Where do you see the landing point for the

tension between US and China, like in Australia's interests? And is the

Australian Government doing enough to assert Australia's interests? Are you

satisfied with what the Ministers did last week in Washington?



MARLES: That's a really good question. I suppose there are a few things you

can say. Firstly, the world obviously looks a lot safer and more secure and

more certain from where we sit, when the relationship between China and the

US is going well. And there are implications from making that observation. I

mean if that's right, well then obviously whilst at the core of our national security

and the core of our foreign policy outlook, is our alliance with the United States

and I'm a firm and deep believer in that, it also stands to reason that from that

place, we should be building the best political relationship that we can and

trade relationship with China. And saying that whilst there are obviously issues

that are challenging and we will have the courage to stand up and speak for

Australia and our national interest, even when it diverges from Chinese action

and that we do as a member of the international community, reserve the right to

speak up around human rights matters and we do, we in a sense give that

judgment in the spirit of submitting ourselves to judgment, which is what it is to

be in the international community. Having said all of that obviously the

relationship with China starts from a place where we value it. Because what are

we saying if we don't, when we're talking about you know our largest trading

partner. So I think it is you know, that sense of principles is something that we

need to be able to articulate better as a nation which can guide us irrespective

of what  ultimately ends up being the landing point in the relationship between

China and the US. And the final point I'll make in relation to your question is,

because of the uncertainty of where we're at now and we do live in a very, very

uncertain world, it speaks to the complexity of our strategic relationships and if

you like the importance therefore of Australia having the capacity to be able to

play bigger, on the international stage, in a diplomatic sense but in a defence

sense .That's where you get back to future submarines. Like, when you're

looking at hard power which actually enables you to have more choices in the

way in which you engage with the world and to play bigger, managing a

program of this kind is where it's at. And this government is failing. So I don't

actually you know -  I don't have issue with how both Ministers performed in

Washington in the last few weeks. But I do think the way in which this

government is going, in particular in managing this program is absolutely

undermining our ability to deal with the kind of very difficult strategic

circumstances that you've just described.



LANE: We're almost out of time but since you've come a long way to give this

speech I don't think you'll mind taking a couple more questions.



MARLES: I won’t.



LANE: Tim Shaw.



SHAW: Thanks Sabra. Tim Shaw, Richard Marles, Director of the National

Press Club. You've spoken about costs. You've spoken about local content and

you've certainly spoken about delays. You could be the next Defence Minister

in just over a year, federal election. How do you in a bipartisan way, where

Labor and the Coalition have worked so strongly together on the defence the

nation, how do you get this ball started earlier because you know we're still

running around with submarines with diesel engines and lead acid batteries,

when in a world of technology nuclear, lithium battery. I mean how do you get

that conversation going now because you could be the person facing the same

criticism about this problem in over a year's time? What do you say to that?



MARLES:  It's a very good question and one that there isn’t a neat answer to.

You know, like there is bipartisanship around the need for us to have 12 future

submarines built in this country. Now there’s bipartisanship now given how

things have played out around Naval Group building them because given the

criticism, I’ve made the criticism and I make it strongly and it's put us in a very

difficult situation. But if you assess, okay given all that where are we now at this

moment, how do we move forward? Naval Group are a fair way down the track,

they should continue to build this. We need to be doing everything we can I

think to try and improve our position within that relationship, it's pretty difficult in

terms of the circumstances this Government's put us in but we need to do that.

So there is bipartisanship across that but I think we are at a point now where,

the conversation is advanced in our nation's interest by actually pointing the

stuff out that I have in this speech today. By if you like, being more robust and

putting this much more in the public domain. We are a long way down the track.

We have given the government not only months but years to get this right and

they haven't and it is really now time to try and put the kind of pressure that one

does in a democracy on this government to actually do something to get this

back on track because I'm telling you it is absolutely fundamental to our

national interests in a way which mightn't seem so obvious but it absolutely is

and it does go to the prosperity and security of every Australian going into the

middle of the century.



LANE: Nick Stuart.



NICK STUART: Thank you very much for your speech, the US military has now

decided it's going to establish a fuel reserve here in Australia. We currently

have our national fuel reserve over in America. Would you, if you were elected,

would you make a decision that we are going to have all the fuel reserves here.



MARLES: Well we've been very clear and we were going into the last election

and we remain very clear and indeed Anthony has been critical of the way in

which the Government has gone about its handling of the question of our fuel

security. We've been very clear that this is a situation which is unsatisfactory

and we need to improve it, and we really do. But it's not going to happen

overnight and we need to be looking at every way in which we can get our fuel

security up to a point where you know we do have the sovereign capability in

this domain that we require. What was announced in Washington in respect of

what the US is going to do in terms of its infrastructure build in Darwin is a great

thing, we support that, it'll be very helpful. It is not a panacea, if the

Government is out there trying to say this solves our fuel security issue well it

doesn't- I mean it's helpful but there's a long way to go.

STUART: So a simple commitment 100% yes, or no?



MARLES: In this space the world is not it's not simple. So that's the answer to

your question-



STUART: It’s pretty bloody simple, yes or no?



MARLES: It’s not simple.





STUART: Yes it is, yes or no?



MARLES: No it's not simple given the situation that this Government has

placed us in but what we will be doing is everything we can to make sure that

we improve our fuel security and our sovereign capability that goes with that.



LANE: Thank you and on that note too I've just been sent a link to a date and a

time as to when the transcript of your speech was sent out in Beijing.



MARLES: Great



LANE: Thank you everybody please join me in thanking Richard Marles.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













