

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



GOVERNMENT BACKS CRAIG KELLY, REJECTS EVIDENCE AND  MEDICAL ADVICE

This morning in the Parliament the Government stopped discussion of a motion affirming  public office holders’ role in supporting the independence and expertise of the TGA and  countering misinformation and conspiracy theories.

This follows the Member for Hughes, Craig Kelly, using Parliament to spout discredited  theories about hydroxychloroquine, undermining confidence in the TGA.

Not only did the Government refuse to back Labor’s non-partisan motion supporting the  science and the independence of the TGA, but they used their numbers to gag the  discussion.

This could have been a good opportunity for the Parliament to come together as one and  reaffirm the primacy of science and evidence.  Instead, staggeringly, the Government  chose to allow Craig Kelly continue to spread dangerous disinformation.

On 25 August 2020, Craig Kelly gave a speech in the Federation Chamber supporting the  use of hydroxychloroquine to treat COVID-19.

In his speech, the Member said that “media bias”, “groupthink” and the “complete  abandonment of reason” were driving a “war” on hydroxychloroquine and “the big hand of  government … interfer[ing] in a doctor-patient relationship”, and cited a number of medical  commentators under investigation or rebuked by experts and peak bodies.

But this morning the Government gagged discussion on this issue, stopping Members from  all persuasions speaking to the critically important motion dispelling misinformation. The  Government gagged not only the Shadow Minister for Health, but also Dr Mike Freelander,  one of the medicos in the Parliament who could provide facts and reassurance.

Staggeringly, every Government member present, including the Health Minister, voted  against a motion defending the independence and importance of the TGA.

In Australia, potential therapies are assessed for safety and efficacy by the independent  Therapeutic Goods Administration, and the TGA “strongly discourages the use of  hydroxychloroquine to treat COVID-19 … or prevent COVID-19”.



The National COVID-19 Clinical Evidence Taskforce, comprised of 29 peak health bodies,  has also recommended that “hydroxychloroquine is potentially harmful and no more  effective than standard care”.

Scott Morrison and Greg Hunt need to urgently back the science, the independent TGA,  and condemn the words and actions of the Member for Hughes.

This mismanagement of independent and expert medical advice is dangerous and a threat  to Australians.

THURSDAY, 27 AUGUST 2020

MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512





