Open Arms - Veterans and Families Counselling, provides support for current and ex-serving ADF personnel and their  families. Free and confidential help is available 24/7.   Phone 1800 011 046 (international: +61 1800 011 046 or +61 8 8241 4546) or visit www.OpenArms.gov.au











The Hon Darren Chester MP  Minister for Veterans’ Affairs  Minister for Defence Personnel



MEDIA RELEASE

Friday 18 December 2020

STATEMENT FROM MINISTER FOR VETERANS’ AFFAIRS AND MINISTER  FOR DEFENCE PERSONNEL

Reappointed Minister for Veterans’ Affairs and Defence Personnel Darren Chester says continuing to  deliver and promote better outcomes for military families will remain his primary focus.

Mr Chester said he was honoured to remain in the roles he has held since March 2018 and would  focus on changing the public commentary surrounding issues impacting defence personnel.

“We have a world-class defence force and a world-class system to support our veterans and their  families,” Mr Chester said.

“It’s not perfect, and work is being done to improve both, but if we want to keep attracting a fair  share of Australia’s brightest talent to serve in uniform, it’s important that we stop talking down our  military community.

“The fact is throughout history, more than two million Australians have worn with pride the

uniforms of the Navy, Army and Air Force and the overwhelming majority have served with

distinction. They are the first people our nation turns to for national security, or when a natural

disaster becomes too big for state authorities to manage.

“If we keep feeding our military community a media diet of hopelessness and helplessness, we can

hardly be surprised when they struggle to find a pathway to better health and mental wellbeing.

“Throughout the remainder of this term in government, I will be doing everything I can to change

that public commentary and demonstrate the respect our government has for ADF personnel,

veterans and their families.”

Mr Chester said he was confident and optimistic the reforms made by the government over the past

five years were heading in the right direction and delivering results.

Open Arms - Veterans and Families Counselling, provides support for current and ex-serving ADF personnel and their  families. Free and confidential help is available 24/7.   Phone 1800 011 046 (international: +61 1800 011 046 or +61 8 8241 4546) or visit www.OpenArms.gov.au



“I will keep standing up for the interests of our servicemen and women, our veterans and their  families,” Mr Chester said.

“Despite the travel restrictions imposed by the coronavirus, I’ve met with hundreds of veterans and  defence personnel this year, and listened to their ideas on additional measures the government can  take to support our veterans and their families, particularly during the transition phase to civilian  life.

“We are continuing to work in partnership to transform DVA and focus on the wellbeing of our  veterans and their families.”

Mr Chester said he was looking forward to continuing his excellent relationship with Defence  Minister Linda Reynolds and newly appointed Assistant Minister Andrew Hastie.

“As a nation, we are indebted to the men and women who serve in uniform,” Mr Chester said.

“Our government is investing heavily in equipment, resources and the defence estate to ensure we  have a highly capable defence force but it is the men and women in uniform who make the biggest  difference.

“My role as Minister for Defence Personnel is to ensure they continue to be well prepared for their  task, they are respected by our community, and properly supported during their military service.

“The ADF needs to keep attracting its share of the best and brightest young Australians and we will  do that by looking after our serving men and women throughout their careers, and when they  transition to civilian life.”



ENDS



Rachel Tharratt: 02 6277 7820  DVA Media: 02 6289 6466  Office of the Hon. Darren Chester, Canberra ACT.





