New Jobs Hub highlighting job opportunities for Australians ministers.dese.gov.au/cash/new-jobs-hub-highlighting-job-opportunities-australians

The Government has today launched a new Jobs Hub which highlights which businesses and organisations have multiple jobs on offer.

In this rapidly changing jobs market the Morrison Government is supporting businesses and those Australians looking for work.

An up to date list of a selection of businesses and organisations that are currently hiring, and how to contact them, can be found at: www.dese.gov.au/covid-19/jobs-hub

Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business, Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash said the Government was continuing to do everything it could to keep Australians connected to the workforce at this time.

“These are critical jobs that will contribute to keeping the economy going and keeping as many Australians in work as possible,” she said.

While many businesses have been adversely affected by COVID-19 and are reducing their workforces, there are some areas of the economy which have an increased demand for workers.

These include jobs in a range of sectors and occupations including health and care sectors, transport and logistics, some areas of retail, mining and mining services, manufacturing, agriculture and government sectors, among others.

“Every Australian with a job is an essential worker. I continue to work with employers, industry peak organisations, employment services providers and others in the labour market to identify where the jobs are and help move people looking for work into these jobs quickly.”

Employers who are hiring and want support to connect with potential candidates can also contact the Department of Education, Skills and Employment at workforce@dese.gov.au to be connected directly with businesses reducing their workforces; and the employment services network to source suitable candidates.

“If you are hiring, particularly scaling up your workforce quickly, I encourage you to email our Workforce Contact Centre so you can be connected with the support you need to get your workforce on board.

“Our Employer Response Unit can work with you to identify the best option to source suitable candidates, and help you with your recruitment to make it as smooth as possible so you can get on with delivering essential services in this difficult time.”

1/2

Media Release Date:2 April 2020



2/2

