Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg







THE HON KEITH PITT MP

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia  Member for Hinkler

MEDIA RELEASE

03 December 2020

RESOURCES EXPORTS UNDERPINNING AUSTRALIA’S ECONOMY

New trade data highlights how Australia’s resources and energy exports are leading  the nation’s economy in its comeback from the COVID-19 pandemic.

October trade data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics shows the value of  Australian iron ore exports continued to set new highs, growing by 4.1 per cent in the  past month and 43.9 per cent compared to a year ago, earning Australia a record  $11 billion for the month.

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt said the data also  shows LNG exports rose 21.9 percent compared to September and the value of coal  exports were up three per cent on the previous month.

“The trade figures show Australia’s resources and energy sector continues to  underpin Australia’s economy and lead the country’s comeback as we emerge from  the COVID-19 downturn,” Minister Pitt said.

“The sector directly employs more than 250,000 women and men and supports more  than one million other jobs across the country, many in regional Australia.

“It is the sweat and hard work of Australian workers in the mines, on oil rigs and in  the gas fields that continues to support the economy.

“Their work supports our standard of living, and ensures governments can pay for  essential services such as hospitals, schools and police.

“While 2020 has been a difficult year for many, with falls in global coal and oil prices,  the trade data shows Australia’s resources and energy sector remains resilient and  ready to supply the world as global conditions improve.

”Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, Australia’s resources and energy sector has  maintained Australia’s strong reputation as an efficient, safe and reliable supplier,  helping our trading partners in Japan, Korea and China to keep the lights on.”

Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg



The trade data found coal exports were worth $3.4 billion in October, while LNG  exports earned $2.2 billion in October.





ENDS

Media contact:    Matt Dunstan 0411 535 072  Marnie Hobson 0407 090 230





















