

JIM CHALMERS MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR RANKIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  CANBERRA  MONDAY, 23 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Impact of Coronavirus on the economy; Additional economic stimulus  measures; Support for small and medium sized business; Concerns about workers.

JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: We need clarity, urgency and coordination.  Now is not the time for mixed messages, half measures or more delays. This is an  extraordinary health crisis with cruel economic consequences and the onus is on all of us  in this Parliament and around Australia to make good decisions in the midst of these very  challenging times.

This morning I'll be recommending to our party room and to our Shadow Cabinet that  Labor support in the Parliament the measures that the Government has announced to try  and support workers, businesses, families, pensioners and communities with their  economic stimulus package. We do that not because we think that every element of the  Government's stimulus packages is perfect, but we welcome the support for businesses  and for workers. We want to see that support out the door as soon as possible.

From the very beginning, Labor has played a responsible, constructive and supportive role  and people will see that again in the Parliament today. The Parliament today has an  opportunity to pass these stimulus measures, to get them into the economy, circulating in  our shops and businesses right around Australia. We should take that opportunity.

Being a responsible, constructive and supportive Opposition also means pointing out  where the Government can do an even better job supporting the economy in this difficult  time. One of our key concerns is that there is a lack of urgency in the rollout of these  otherwise welcome measures. Businesses, workers, families and pensioners need support  right now, not in a month's time or in four months' time. Too many of these measures don't  even kick in until the end of April. Some of them don't kick in until May and others like the  second support payment for pensioners, not until July. Our task in this Parliament today is  to support these measures, but to also see if we can work with the Government to speed  them up because what we desperately need right now is urgency. We need urgency when  it comes to the economy. We need urgency when it comes to dealing with the health  aspects of this crisis as well.

JOURNALIST: How long do you expect Parliament to be sitting this week?



CHALMERS: It remains to be seen but certainly our intention is to support these measures  as soon as we can. Whether that takes a day or two days, it's not clear yet. The Australian  people can be reassured that it's not our intention in the Labor Party to hold these  measures up in any way. We want to see them passed quickly. We want to see them  implemented urgently. We'll play our part in ensuring both of those things.

JOURNALIST: What do you think the delay is for? Some of these measures being as you  say delayed, is that a bureaucratic bog down or deliberate action by the Government?

CHALMERS: Unfortunately, the Government was a bit slow out of the blocks when it came  to these stimulus packages. The need has been obvious for some time. As we've said all  along in a constructive way, and we don't want to play politics here with these measures,  we've been very constructive and said let's work together to find a way to get this support  out the door quicker. It's not clear to me why pensioners need to wait until July for the extra  payment. It's not clear to me why the Government hasn't come up with a way to get the  business support out the door. Workers are losing their jobs as we speak. Businesses are  closing their doors as we speak. They need the support right now, not in a month, not in  three months or four months' time. There should be an opportunity for the Parliament to  speed some of these measures up.

JOURNALIST: The Council of Social Services has expressed concern that some of these  boosts to payments won't go to everyone and some people won't be eligible, for example,  foreign visa holders who are stuck in Australia anyway. Are you concerned by that as well?

CHALMERS: We are concerned that there are still gaps in what the Government is  proposing and that some key groups will miss out. We've said in a constructive way for  some time now that in the first package there was a failure to deal with casuals and sole  traders. We said after the release yesterday that there are a number of gaps there as well.  There are concerns and groups that are missing out. The Government is no doubt looking  at ways to try and fill some of those gaps which have become obvious. One of the issues  that the Government flagged yesterday was that there needs to be a third stimulus  package from the Government. If that is already clear, then again, we need some urgency  from the Government. If they know that that will be necessary they should come forward  and let the Australian people in on what they intend to do.

JOURNALIST: You're backing this bill. What's the likelihood that these packages that are  going to businesses actually flow on to workers?

CHALMERS: This is a really key concern for us. We welcome support for small and  medium businesses who are doing it very tough at this challenging time but there are no  guarantees for workers in the business assistance package. The assistance is calculated  on the workers that they had in the first quarter of the year and not necessarily the workers  that they will hang onto going forward and that is a key concern for us. There are  mechanisms being announced around the world which encourage employers to maintain  that link with their workforce. That's not a feature of what the Government is proposing.  We've made our concerns about that clear. We won't stand in the way of support for small  or medium sized businesses but that's a key concern that there are no guarantees that that  money will necessarily flow to keeping workers on and keep more money in workers'  pockets.

JOURNALIST: The Government says it will do whatever it takes. So is their [inaudible]  fiscal restraint [inaudible]. Could we possibly have the Government spend $500 billion, half  a billion dollars to keep the economy [inaudible], and would you support that?

CHALMERS: This is no time for half measures. Everything that can be done should be  done to support workers, families, businesses, pensioners and communities around  Australia. We've been very supportive of additional spending in this regard and we will  continue to be supportive where the Government comes to the table with efforts to boost  the economy or at least to try and protect jobs in a difficult time like this.

JOURNALIST: When we come out the other side and been dealt with this massive big  deficit, it's going to be incumbent upon your Government if you get into government or the  Liberals to then deal with this massive, big black hole of money that we have to find again.

CHALMERS: A lot of the challenges which were obvious even before the virus showed up  will be around after the virus is dealt with. Net debt, for example, in the Budget had already  more than doubled before the virus outbreak. We already had issues with record gross  debt. We already had issues in the budget. Obviously this virus will turbocharge those  challenges. The Budget, the economy, the country will look very different after this virus is  dealt with. We don't know how long it will take to deal with the virus, but the country will  look different afterwards. We will have a series of very serious economic challenges to  deal with and that will require our best efforts to deal with them like the obvious  implications for debt.

JOURNALIST: Just on the rollout of this, you've mentioned that some of these measures,  you're saying that they need to happen faster. But isn't it also important that throughout this  crisis, which is going to be a long one, that there are top-ups that come along throughout  the ways? Is that not in defence of the Government?

CHALMERS: The Government very quickly realised that their first stimulus package was  insufficient and they wanted to top it up. As I've said repeatedly, we support that. But when  it comes to the individual measures, we think that there is a problem for businesses who  are right now looking at their spreadsheets and trying to work out how they can hang on to  people, how they can keep operating or how they can operate once the various shutdowns  have ended. For a lot of those businesses, and I've spoken to a lot of them, the idea that  they have to wait for another five weeks before they get some assistance is very troubling  for them. It's our responsibility as the Opposition to point out where some of this support  may arrive too late to save some businesses and some jobs.

JOURNALIST: Just on businesses, if you've got a business which employs four people,  five people, and the Government's offering you up to $100,000, it might be $50,000, well  that's hardly an incentive to keep the doors open because four people are going to cost  you half a million dollars. $50,000 isn't going to cut it. That's just one month. So a lot of  these businesses [inaudible] who will be going, actually that's not enough, I'm sacking  people.

CHALMERS: Yes I think there's a real risk that the assistance is not sufficient to keep  people on. The Government has sold this measure as some kind of wage subsidy, but it's  not that. It's cash flow assistance for business. That's welcome on one level but we don't  have any guarantees that people will hang onto their workers because of this assistance.  One of the bits of feedback that I'm receiving is that it's more likely that businesses use this



cash flow assistance to pay rent, even while the doors might be closed and that they will  still find it very difficult to hold on to workers. And that's a very big concern for us. Thanks  very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949









