

The Hon. Mark Coulton MP  Minister for Regional Health, Regional Communications,   and Local Government



The Hon Brad Hazzard MP  Minister for Health and Medical Research

MEDIA RELEASE

5 November 2020

LIFESAVING TELESTROKE SERVICE COMES TO DUBBO

Patients in the Dubbo region will have access to a 24-hour telestroke service, as part of a $21.7  million groundbreaking program being rolled out across NSW.

NSW Health Minister Brad Hazzard and Federal Regional Health Minister Mark Coulton were joined  by NSW Minister for Mental Health, Regional Health and Women, Bronnie Taylor, and Member for  Dubbo Dugald Saunders, to make the announcement at Dubbo Base Hospital ahead of today’s joint  Federal-State Bilateral Regional Health Forum.

Mr Hazzard said the jointly funded, lifesaving telestroke service exemplifies how the State and  Federal Government can work together to bring world-class health care to people in regional and  rural areas.

“This statewide telestroke service effectively breaks down geographical barriers, immediately linking  local doctors with specialists, so patients can be diagnosed and treated as fast as possible,” Mr Hazzard  said.

“Today, with key state and Federal health experts and consumers, we are all focused on how we can  create a sustainable health service for rural and regional communities.”

Mr Coulton said expanding telehealth services, such as this, in the regions meant local doctors in  Dubbo would be supported by first-class specialists to deliver enhanced stroke care and treatment  for local patients.

“Stroke is one of Australia's biggest killers and is a leading cause of disability - which is why rapid  access to specialists is so important in reducing the impact of stroke,” Mr Coulton said.

“In the unfortunate event of a stroke, this service will ensure that people in the Dubbo region have  access to specialist stroke consultants, which will be a huge benefit to patients and their families.”

Mr Coulton said today’s Bilateral Regional Health Forum will continue to look at innovative ways in  which the NSW Government can partner with the Federal Government to deliver better access and  health outcomes for rural residents.

“This year’s Federal Budget has again demonstrated the Liberal and Nationals Government’s strong  commitment to rural health with a $1.2 billion injection to improve healthcare in the bush,” Mr  Coulton said.

“That package includes funding to implement locally-led primary care models in southern and western  NSW - including the four Ts model for the Dubbo region - to help address workforce challenges and  improve health service delivery.”

Mrs Taylor said telehealth for mental health consultations had been a lifesaver for people in regional  and rural areas during the COVID-19 pandemic.

“This year’s Forum will also focus on supporting resilience in regional communities. The community  spirit of people in regional communities is well known, but multiple crises in the past year - drought,  bushfires and now the pandemic - and causing significant distress for many people, placing their  mental health at risk,” Mrs Taylor said.

The NSW Government committed $14.6 million over 2018-19 and 2019-20 for the Emergency Drought  Mental Health Package to improve access to and delivery of mental health services to rural and remote  NSW.

The Forum will discuss the impact of drought, bushfires and COVID-19 on the mental health of  patients, clinicians and residents in the regions; as well as the use of telehealth for sustainable models  of healthcare, including allied health and smaller rural hospitals.

Mr Saunders said he was pleased the Forum, established last year, was being held in Dubbo and  welcomed the telestroke service announcement.

“This collaboration between the bush and the city and State and Federal governments has the  potential to change lives in our community for the better, forever,” Mr Saunders said.

In June, the NSW Government announced the service, which has already helped 200 patients.  Telestroke will be rolled out to up to 23 sites over three years and follows a successful pilot between  Hunter New England, Central Coast and Mid North Coast local health districts. Telestroke is now  available at Port Macquarie, Coffs Harbour, Lismore and Orange with Dubbo due to come on line later  this month.

The funding to deliver Telestroke comprises $12.3 million from the NSW Government and $9.4 million  from the Commonwealth Government.

In 2018-19, 13,651 people were hospitalised for a stroke in NSW. Of those, 32 per cent were from  regional, rural or remote areas.

The NSW Government has committed $10.1 billion in health infrastructure investment across the state  in this term of government.

Since 2011, the NSW Government has built or upgraded more than 130 hospitals and health facilities,  with over 80 projects currently underway - more than two-thirds of those have been in regional and  rural areas.



MEDIA: Natasha Wallace | Minister Hazzard | 0439 484 015   Brigid Glanville | Minister Taylor | 0427 805 738  Minister Coulton | Steph Nicholls | 0417 314 920

