

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  SYDNEY  SATURDAY, 25 JULY 2020

SUBJECTS: Budget update; people missing out on JobKeeper; sole traders’ South  China Sea; Australia’s relationship with China; Australia’s relationship with the US;  vaccines.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Good  morning. We've heard from the Government that there'll be 240,000 Australians  additionally who are likely to lose their jobs between now and Christmas. But we still don't  have a plan from the Government to create jobs. We have no major plan for infrastructure,  no plan to grow productivity, no plan to deal with the growing inequality that is arising from  this pandemic crisis. What we have from the Government when it comes to the medium  and long-term is just going into that bottom drawer and speaking about more labour market  deregulation. The fact is that insecure work is not just a problem for the economy, we've  seen during this crisis that insecure work is an issue with the spread of this virus. The fact  that many people feel that they have no alternative but to turn up to work in order to feed  their kids, or to simply miss out on that income they need. We've also seen the casual  employment with people without proper training being employed at the heart of the spread  of the virus. What we need to do is to think about how we can emerge from this crisis with  a stronger economy and a stronger society. An economy that works for people, not the  other way around. And that's why we need to do much better than what Josh Frydenberg  offered with the statement on Thursday, and then again with his statement to the National  Press Club.

We now know as well that the Government was giving consideration to removing sole  traders from the JobKeeper program. The Government needs to explain exactly what it  had in mind. The fact that Treasury released documentation saying that they'd assumed  that the Government decision was to exclude sole traders, shows just how far down the  track this went.

There's the other issue which Labor will examine about JobKeeper, which is the number of  people who are likely to be excluded as a result of the criteria that they've established for  businesses. The fact is that a range of businesses saw their income improve short-term  and then saw it decrease again when the coronavirus pandemic hit Victoria hard in recent  weeks. So, we may well see, if you look at the June month, a spike in income short-term,  which would exclude businesses from receiving JobKeeper, but then them go back into a  downturn, those very businesses. If we're going to protect jobs, we need to examine the

details of JobKeeper as they are, rather than as we want them to be. And there needs to  be a fair analysis to give businesses and their employees the support that they need during  this difficult time.

Happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: Opposition Leader, on the South China Sea, the Federal Government has  made clear its position to join with the US to formally reject China’s extensive maritime  plans. Do you support Australia’s view to align with countries in this position?

ALBANESE: Well, what I support is the International Law of the Sea being implemented  and all countries abiding by it. That's why we have multilateral forums. That's why the idea  of negative globalism, that was once espoused by Scott Morrison, is a bad one. We need  not just Australia to support those international regulations, but we need all nations,  including China, to abide by the rulings that have been made.

JOURNALIST: Are you worried that this will raise the ire of Beijing and lead to further  retaliation from China?

ALBANESE: Australia needs to defend the Australian national interest. And we also need  to stand up for international law. And the International Law of the Sea provides for freedom  of navigation which is absolutely critical to international trade.

JOURNALIST: And so, with Australia, do you think that we should take an even stronger  stance on China, as the US would like?

ALBANESE: Well, Australia needs to defend our national interest. And that means, also,  as a middle power, ensuring that we abide by, and we call upon other countries to abide by  international organisations. That's why Australia has been quite right, and I'm sure it will be  raised with the US this week, to oppose any withdrawal from the WHO. Those international  multilateral forums are absolutely essential to govern what is a globalised world.

JOURNALIST: And with those discussions in the US taking place, do you think it's the  right decision to send Senator Payne and Senator Reynolds to Washington in the middle of  COVID-19?

ALBANESE: It's absolutely the right thing for Australia to engage and participate with the  United States. The United States is our most important ally. And it's important that these  discussions take place. And I certainly wish the Defence and Foreign Minister well. I'm  sure that there will be appropriate safety mechanisms put in place.

JOURNALIST: And what would you like to see come out of the talks in Washington?

ALBANESE: Look, these talks are important. It's important at this time in particular where  the world is dealing with a global pandemic. But that's also having an impact on the global  economy. The Australian ministers need to stress Australia's national interests as well. We  saw with the decision on barley, an issue whereby Australia was disadvantaged. We need  to make sure that in decisions that the United States makes in terms of its relationship with  China, that Australia doesn't suffer due to consideration not being given to Australia's  national interests.

JOURNALIST: And just on JobKeeper, you want the Government to support more



businesses, but you also have said you don't want the Government to go further into  deficit. So, how do you balance the two?

ALBANESE: No, what we've said is that spending is entirely appropriate, but it needs to  be the right spending and it needs to be targeted and needs to not cause undue waste.  We've criticised, very clearly, the fact that so many people missed out on JobKeeper.  Those casual employees are still missing out. The dnata workers are still missing out. Visa  holders are still missing out. So many people have been excluded. University lecturers and  people who work at universities have missed out. We need to make sure that the principle  of employers keeping a relationship with their employees, which is the basis of wage  subsidies that Labor called for well before the Government decided to support wage  subsidies, is an important one. We don't want people to be left behind. But we also want to  make sure that in the recovery phase, no one is held back from opportunity. So, no one left  behind during the pandemic, but no one held back during the recovery. How do we grow  the economy stronger? How do we have appropriate industry policies to support advanced  manufacturing? How do we make work more secure? How do we provide training and  skills for people? How do we build the infrastructure that will actually lead to productivity  growth and to growth in the future? That's the forward planning that's missing from this  Government's approach. And we want an economy that is stronger, an economy that is  fairer, and an economy that works for people, not the other way around. Thanks very  much. Questions on the phone?

JOURNALIST: Should the Australian Government be doing more to secure commercial  arrangements with international drug companies if a vaccine becomes available overseas?

ALBANESE: Well, the Australian Government needs do everything that it can to make  sure that Australians gain access to any vaccinations should it become available. And  Australia needs to participate in those international discussions. We also need to, of  course, support our scientists here. There's important work taking place in Queensland and  in other places, including through the CSIRO. That's why support for science is something  that has been neglected by this Government. It's quite extraordinary that the CSIRO have  had cuts to its budget under this Government, the very body that we're relying upon to  make a difference and to save lives.

JOURNALIST: How confident are you that other international governments such as China  or Russia would play ball in distributing a vaccine and not use it for political persuasion?

ALBANESE: Look, we need to participate in those international processes. That's why it is  important. And if we look back to the WHO, for example, played a critical role, including  with the United States and China, in finding a vaccine for smallpox and in the eradication of  smallpox. These issues need to go beyond just national borders. This is an issue of  humanity and it requires a global response. Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053





