

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS AFTERNOON AGENDA

MONDAY, 7 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Victorian Roadmap, Scott Morrison failing to be a leader;

COVID Vaccine; Viva Energy.



KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: I am joined by Deputy Labor Leader, Richard

Marles. Mr Marles thanks very much for your time. The Prime Minister says, he

hopes the Daniel Andrews Government Roadmap is the worst case scenario.

We saw 41 cases today which is encouraging. Do you agree with him that that

road map should be the worst case scenario?



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR

PARTY: I think the Roadmap is what has been put forward by the Victorian

Government to try and provide a sense of guidance to the people in Victoria

about what is our pathway to reintegration with Australia. And it obviously

makes for difficult reading but the truth is we're in a difficult situation. But the

point I'd be making is, I’m listening to the Prime Minister and I think I'm listening

more to the Victorian Opposition Leader than I am to a person who is meant to

be the head of our nation. When he describes the Roadmap as crushing, when

he criticizes aspects of it, I mean the obvious question is; does he stand with

Victoria in the midst of this crisis and the very difficult task which is ahead of

us? Or is he in fact heckling from the sidelines and engaging in the really

unedifying spectacle of our national government governing by whinging rather

than governing by leadership and that's the complaint I’ve got when I look at

the way in which the Prime Minister has gone about his reaction to the very

difficult decision which the Victorian Government outlined yesterday.



GILBERT: Isn't it fair for him to point out though that, if you look at the numbers

that the Premier's released as part of that Roadmap, Sydney would be under

curfew right now under those numbers. Isn't that fair for him to point that out?



MARLES: My question is simply this; does Scott Morrison stand with the

Government of Victoria in dealing with the situation Victoria finds itself in? Does

he see that his role as the Prime Minister extends to this state? I mean so often

what I see when I look at the Prime Minister is a man who is desperate to talk

about what legal responsibilities lie outside of his control, what responsibility he

will not take, rather than acts of leadership that he's going to engage in to guide

the entire nation through this. And so, you know you get the sense the man

who is heckling from the sideline, engaging much more like the Victorian

Opposition leader than our nation's Prime Minister- and that's the problem I've

got with the way in which the Prime Minister has gone about his commentary in

the last 24 hours. He's not seeing himself as part of the solution to this problem,

he's not there to help, he is there to blame-



GILBERT: If he sees criticism to be made, if he sees flaws in a plan which

wasn't consulted- you know there was no consultation between the state and

federal governments prior to that Roadmap being delivered- well what else is

he meant to do? Isn’t it fair for him and the Treasurer and the Health Minister to

say they've got doubts where there are doubts.



MARLES: He is there to lead the nation. And it turns out Victoria is a part of it.

And from day one, when we look at the National Cabinet, I mean he's trying to

trumpet this as a step forward in the Federation but in truth all it really amounts

to is that when the States agree on a proposition he’ll be there to try and claim

the credit. But when there is any differences going on, he'll be pointing his

finger elsewhere in respect of blame and making sure that he takes no

responsibility- that's what's gone on here. We are not seeing a national leader,

standing shoulder-to-shoulder with the Government of Victoria to work our way

through what is a really difficult situation for Victoria- but which is happening

within the context of Victoria being a part of the nation. I'll tell you what; if John

Howard was in this situation he would not reduce himself to being a mere

commentator on the side, heckling at what a state is doing, he’d actually be in

there as part of the solution and that's not what we're seeing from Scott

Morrison right now.



GILBERT: Well he said that yesterday was a crushing blow. And I think for

many Victorians isn't that basically stating the reality after six weeks in

lockdown? Another stage four, for a fortnight to come. You know you're closer

to it than me but I have loved ones in Melbourne, I'm talking to them every

single day and it's hard, it is crushing at times, especially you know, various

levels of schooling missing months at a time, and there’s sport and wherever

else let alone the health concerns on the border and so on. This is brutal.



MARLES: Of course. It is a really difficult situation that we are in. And you

know people are living in a set of extreme circumstances that they would never

had imagined. You know we're watching play out in aged care a completely

terrifying scenario; for those who work in aged care, for those who are residents

in aged care, of course for those of us who have loved ones in aged care, that's

actually the responsibility of the Commonwealth Government. But when the

Prime Minister has nothing more to offer than to say this is crushing, what is he

exactly doing? Because it sounds to me like he's almost being a passive

aggressive Prime Minister. I mean is he standing shoulder-to-shoulder with

Victorians in that moment or is he pointing the finger from afar? That's what is

completely unclear to me. And what I'm not seeing is a Prime Minister who is

leading. I mean, the Roadmap is difficult reading. There's no question about it

but what it is, is obviously a detailed description of the way in which both

metropolitan Melbourne and regional Victoria get their way back into a place

where we reintegrate with the country. But it’s a step, or it’s a process which is

taking place in the context of Victoria being part of a nation, a nation that Scott

Morrison is meant to lead. But all we see from Scott Morrison is this kind of

commentator on the side, who's engaging in low rent heckling rather than

actually standing with the Government of Victoria to try and help.



GILBERT: Wasn’t he trying to give a sense of hope today and optimism after a

difficult day yesterday out of Victoria, that today he's talking about the vaccine

and 81 million doses of the vaccine, through the deal done, the Federal

Government's done, with CSL, AstraZeneca, UQ. That's a sense of optimism

and he said that Victorians, the rest of the country needs it. Isn't that

leadership?



MARLES:  I think what we’ve seen around the vaccine is the opposite of

leadership. I mean, it's great we've got the agreement that's been signed today.

It begs the question as to what on earth the media event was a couple of weeks

ago, when the Prime Minister went out in relation to AstraZeneca. And what we

ought to point out that in terms of engaging in leadership on the question of

making sure that we as a nation are well placed in respect to the vaccine, that

other countries around the world were out of the gates in respect of this months

ago. And it's not just enough to have an agreement in place with one company,

with one of the projects which is developing a vaccine, we actually need to be

placing ourselves in respect of the other projects which are currently going

forward in relation to the development of a vaccine. I don't think the way in

which he's handled the media around the vaccine is leadership at all. I think

what we see is marketing from a guy who is much more intent on the way in

which he is presenting himself and his brand of his image in this moment than

actually rolling up his sleeves and doing the difficult things. And the difficult

things in this moment is to lead the nation as a whole. To stand shoulder-to-shoulder with Victorians.



GILBERT: I spoke to the Chief Scientific Officer at CSL, you’ve, you know

dismissed it as marketing but he's saying that these are legitimate candidates

for the vaccine and that there is genuine optimism within the scientific

community that they can be delivered as early, hopefully as January.



MARLES: To be clear, Kieran, I'm not dismissing those comments as

marketing. And I think there is optimism in relation to the development of a

vaccine, I really do. And I think in the context of a whole lot of difficult news in

relation to how the virus has played out, particularly in this state over the last

couple of months, I think the development of vaccines do offer real hope. But

what I'd describe as marketing is the way in which Scott Morrison has gone

about describing the Federal Government's engagement with this. I think it is a

great thing that the agreement has been signed today and I acknowledge that

but it does beg the question as to what on earth was that event a couple of

weeks ago, when Scott Morrison went out to AstraZeneca. I think that was

marketing and I think everyone acknowledges that. And it speaks to the man.

Like right now, we need leadership and substance in the middle of a crisis.

What we don't need is an ad campaign and that's absolutely critical going

forward. And in respect of handling the Roadmap that's been put in place in



Victoria, what we need is a Prime Minister who in this moment is going to stand

up with the Victorian Government and with Victorians rather than heckling from

the sidelines.



GILBERT: Finally before we go, I noticed stories out of the local media in

Geelong that Viva Energy, a refinery, that Viva Energy might close that refinery

in your electorate, it's one of the biggest employers. That would be quite a blow

at this time.



MARLES: Well it would be a blow locally for sure, Kieran were the Viva refinery

to stop refining. But it goes well beyond the situation here in Geelong. It's one

of four refineries left in the country and it begs the question if that refinery were

not to be able to continue what the future for the refining sector in the nation

would be. Now, we have got to remember this is the Government which led the

car industry to leave our shores. Right now I can't think of a sector which goes

more directly to the heart of Australia's industrial sovereign capability than the

ability to refine oil. And so, we need to be hearing again from the Federal

Government about what is their strategy to make sure that we maintain a

refining sector in this country going forward because from a Defence point of

view it goes to the centre of our sovereign industrial capability.



GILBERT: Deputy Labor Leader and Shadow Defence Minister Richard

Marles. Thanks, talk to you soon.



MARLES: Thanks, Kieran.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











