

THE HON MELISSA PRICE MP  Minister for Defence Industry  Member for Durack



MEDIA RELEASE



SETTING SMALL BUSINESS UP FOR EXPORT SUCCESS

30 December 2020

The Morrison Government is supporting Australia’s defence industry to pursue more  opportunities in global markets at a critical time as the nation embarks on its COVID-19  economic recovery.

Minister for Defence Industry Melissa Price today announced the latest recipients of the  Defence Global Competitiveness Grant program, helping small businesses overcome  barriers to exporting.

A total of $361,116 in grants funding has been awarded to four companies: Advanced  Power Drives, Redarc Electronics, Safe Defence Australia, and Ferra Engineering.

“The grants will help these small businesses increase their manufacturing and  production capabilities to tap into new markets and grow their business,” Minister Price  said.

“The Morrison Government is supporting small businesses to export their products and  services to help grow and sustain a sovereign defence industry.

“We recognise that export success is a win for industry, a win for Defence and a win for  the Australian economy.”

The Government’s export support builds on a range of grants and services that Defence  offers businesses to innovate and upskill their capabilities.

Defence Global Competitiveness Grants are available to help Australian small and  medium businesses invest in projects that help to build their export capacity.

Grant applications can submitted at any time through www.business.gov.au/dgc.



The Defence Global Competitiveness Grants announced today:

Company Grant

Amount

Details State

Advanced  Power Drives  Pty Ltd



$71,672 To increase the businesses electronic controller  manufacturing capability for parts used in tank  gunsights and unmanned aerial vehicles. The  company is exploring opportunities in the United  States.



NSW

Redarc  Electronics Pty  Ltd

$150,000 To assist the company expand into new markets by  coating printed circuit boards. The grant will  enable Redarc's existing product to be suitable for  use in several overseas markets as the coating  would provide added protection for use in  commercial military vehicles.



SA

Safe Defence  Pty Ltd  $24,217 To assist in installing equipment to enable in-house production, increasing the businesses

capacity to take on new work and grow exports.  Potential demand is supported by interest from  overseas customers in Canada, Japan and New  Zealand.



QLD

Ferra  Engineering Pty  Ltd



$115,227 To assist in purchasing equipment to enable the  machining of vacuum brazed parts to supply  aerospace components. This will assist the  business to grow sales by opening up further  opportunities in Europe and the UK.

QLD



Media contacts  Ben Spencer (Minister Price’s office): +61 412 754 310  Charlotte Butler (Minister Price’s office): +61 406 338 521  Defence Media: media@defence.gov.au

