

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING  MEMBER FOR SYDNEY

JASON CLARE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR REGIONAL SERVICES,  LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND TERRITORIES  MEMBER FOR BLAXLAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  SYDNEY  SUNDAY, 2 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: National Homelessness Week; importance of social housing;  JobKeeper; Victorian coronavirus outbreak; aged care; Western Australia border  closures.

JACK DE GROOT, CEO OF NSW ST VINCENT DE PAUL SOCIETY: Welcome. My  name's Jack de Groot. I'm the CEO the St Vincent de Paul Society here in New South  Wales. It's tremendous to have you all and to have our local Member, Tanya Plibersek,  with us, the Opposition spokesman for Housing and Homelessness, Jason Clare, and the  Leader of the Opposition at the Federal level, Anthony Albanese, here with us as we talk  about the issues of homelessness as we commence National Homelessness Week. Let's  pay respects to the traditional owners, standing on Cadigal Land of the Eora Nation.

As I've said, this week is National Homelessness Week. And, ‘Everybody needs a home’ is  the theme of this week. Here we're at the Matt Talbot. For over 80 years, the Matt Talbot  has been the scene of the provision of shelter to those who are homeless on the streets of  Sydney. COVID-19 has changed many of the realities for people who experience chronic  homelessness and street sleeping. At one level, it's provided an opportunity. But the  pandemic has created a greater vulnerability in our community and the threat of  homelessness to more and more people. There's over 116,000 Australians who are  homeless each night or at risk of homelessness, sleeping on the streets, in cars, on  someone's house or an overcrowded accommodation. For many of the residents here at  the Talbot this is a place of the first step in the change process to move from extraordinary

vulnerability to a shelter, and then to accompaniment as they change their aspirations for a  home, their right to home, and a sustainable and secure housing solution for them. The St  Vincent de Paul Society throughout New South Wales knows the desperate need for an  investment in social and affordable housing. By the end of this year, we will have finished a  three-year program of building 502 houses. For each year for the next decade, New South  Wales needs at least 5,000 new social and affordable houses to take care of the existing  homeless challenge, but to also meet the increasing risk of homelessness to people as  they survive the terrible burden of the pandemic. Whether it's unemployment, domestic  violence, the great vulnerability in our community now because of anxiety and mental  health challenges, the issues of homelessness are on the rise, rather than on the  decrease. Five thousand new social affordable houses each year for the next decade will  be a crucial step to take care of the issues confronting people in regard to homelessness  throughout this state. And more needs to be done nationally. We welcome the initiatives of  state governments, but we also need to see the nation build together something that brings  justice and housing to all. So, let me welcome Tanya Plibersek, the Member for Sydney  and Shadow spokesperson for Education to address you. Welcome, Tanya.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, MEMBER FOR SYDNEY: Thank you so much, Jack. And it's my  pleasure to welcome Anthony Albanese, the Leader of the Opposition, to my electorate,  and our Shadow spokesperson for Housing and Homelessness, Jason Clare. The Matthew  Talbot holds a very special place in the community here in Woolloomooloo. It's been here  for many, many years and has supported thousands of very needy Australians at the time  when they've been most desperate in their lives. Supported them with accommodation,  with a meal, with health services, but also with a sense of community and friendship. I think  the Matthew Talbot, like many homelessness services, proves that we can reduce and  even end homelessness if we set our minds to it. And this period during COVID-19 has  been an extraordinary example of what can be done if we are determined. When Labor  was last in Government during the Global Financial Crisis, we were presented with a  similar problem. And we worked towards housing people who were homeless at that time  very successfully. In fact, the extension here was funded out of our White Paper on  homelessness. It was opened by Prime Minister Kevin Rudd in 2008 as one of the many,  many commitments we made to reducing homelessness at that time. During the Global  Financial Crisis, we spent $5.6 billion on building new social housing. We built more than  21,000 new social housing dwellings and fixed up another 80,000. We supported about 80  new homelessness services. We committed to 100,000 National Rental Affordability  Scheme dwellings. All of that came to a screaming halt when the Liberals came into office  Federally. We want to see a renewed commitment to helping homeless people leave  homelessness behind forever. Thank you very much. I think we're going to hear from  Anthony now.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Well, thanks  very much, Tanya. And thanks to Jack for welcoming us here at Matthew Talbot. And  thanks to those people who we've had an opportunity to speak to this morning as well -  people who are doing it tough, people who rely upon the compassionate and committed  service provided here for decades. When I was a much younger man, going to school up  the road here at St. Mary's Cathedral, I and my fellow students used to volunteer here and  help with meals and help to do our bit. It was a part of our commitment to Catholic social  justice principles. And that is what this institution has done - looking after vulnerable  Australians. At a time like now, with the pandemic, there are more Australians vulnerable  than perhaps any time in our lifetime. And governments need to step up to the plate. We  need to make sure that people aren't left behind during the pandemic, and that they're not

held back during the recovery. And one way that we can do that is by investing in social  housing. It isn't enough for the Government to encourage those people who have a lazy  $150,000 sitting around to renovate their home to make a contribution. What we need to  do is to provide that support which would create jobs, which would create skills while it's  happening, and leave a lasting legacy, as Labor did with Tanya Plibersek as the Housing  Minister during the Global Financial Crisis. This should be an absolute no-brainer to invest  in social housing, when we have over 100,000 Australians homeless in a country as rich as  we are. And we've seen during this pandemic, with people housed in hotels and temporary  accommodation, that if need be, we can step up. It shouldn't take a pandemic, or the  hosting of an Olympics, for us to provide support so that people aren't sleeping rough. It  should be something which, as a relatively wealthy society, we can do. Because the  economics of it are also very clear. If you invest in social housing, provide people with  opportunity, there is a cost to the Budget of construction, but that produces an asset. But  there's also a reduction in costs, in health costs, in the justice system, in so many areas if  we actually don't just leave people behind. So, I think today, it's very important that we do  that.

I had the opportunity this morning to once again speak to Daniel Andrews about the  Victorian situation. And our hearts and our thoughts are with our Victorian friends who are  doing a tough, who are going to have to endure more restrictions over the coming weeks.  And what that means as well is that the Government, when it comes to the economy,  needs to do two things. One, it can't withdraw support too quickly by either withdrawing or  reducing JobKeeper and JobSeeker so that it creates more hardship and in the long run  means that the economic downturn is longer and deeper. We need to make sure that we  have a flexible approach to these issues and that it's tailored towards the economic  conditions as they are rather than as we want them to be. That means, for example, that a  range of businesses that have seen their revenues increased in the short-term in June, but  with the increased lockdown have seen that decrease, and we'll see that decrease further  into September, need to be given support. It means the businesses that weren't suffering  before, but are suffering in the coming period, need to be given support. We need to keep  that relationship between employers and employees, that is the heart of the wage  subsidies behind JobKeeper, going as a necessary. It means also, though, that we need to  look forward to the future. We need to look forward to what mechanisms are necessary so  that we leave a legacy. One way to do that is by investing in infrastructure. One part of  infrastructure isn't just investing in roads and railways, it's investing in social infrastructure.  Investing in the childcare centres we need, the aged care centres we need, the  homelessness services we need and the social housing that we need.

I'll just say one final thing about the Prime Minister's backflip when it comes to Western  Australia. Labor has been consistent during this pandemic. We have not sought, at any  stage, to have dual messages of saying that it's up to the states on the one hand, but then  to be critical of the decisions which states have made. The Prime Minister has been  critical, whether it be of Annastacia Palaszczuk's decision to close Queensland borders, or  Mark McGowan's position on Western Australian borders, or referring to outbreaks as  somehow being about Victoria, rather than about 'We're all in this together as a nation'. On  Western Australia, Mark McGowan is right and has been right from the beginning. The  Prime Minister needs to explain why it is that he joined with Clive Palmer in a legal  challenge to the closure of those borders because he said that was just a matter of course,  but then has withdrawn that support today. Both things can't be right. Of course, it was  always opportunistic for him to join Clive Palmer who was so supportive of the Liberal  National Party during last year's election. And it's opportunistic today for the Prime Minister

to get the message that Western Australians have been doing the right thing under the  leadership of Mark McGowan, and that's something that has the overwhelming support of  people in the West. I ask Jason to make some comments.

JASON CLARE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS: Jack,  thanks for inviting us to be here today. And thank you to your whole team here at Matthew  Talbot for all the work that you've done, all the work that Vinnies has done over decades  here to help people who've fallen on tough times and help them get back on their feet,  changing lives. And we're also glad to be here to support your campaign to build more  social housing. Because by doing that, by putting a roof over the heads of more  Australians, we can change even more lives. And I have got to tell you that you have got  two politicians here in Albo and Tanya who get it. There's not many political leaders who  understand the importance of putting a roof over people's heads more than Anthony  Albanese. He grew up in a social housing flat not far from here. And there's not many  politicians who have done more to build social housing than Tanya Plibersek. Tanya  mentioned it before, but she's too modest to say that there aren't many politicians since  Chifley that have done more to build housing and put a roof over people's heads than  Tanya. More than 20,000 homes built, and more than 80,000 rundown and dilapidated  social housing dwellings renovated and repaired that changed lives. But there's more work  that we need to do. And here on the eve of Homelessness Week, it's important that we say  that something good has happened. In the grip of the pandemic, thousands and thousands  of Aussies that normally sleep on our streets and in our parks have been provided with a  bed and a roof over their head. They've been put into empty hotel rooms and empty motel  rooms. It should tell us something. If there's enough will, we can fix this problem of  homelessness. We can get rough sleepers off the streets and transform lives. Just like you  do every day here, Jack. We're at a crossroads, though, at the moment. What happens in  the months ahead? Do people after the pandemic get forced back onto the street and back  into the park? Or do we fix this permanently? Do we provide a permanent home for  people? State governments around the country are doing some really good things here.  Dan Andrews made a big announcement only last week about providing more funding for  accommodation for rough sleepers. But the National Government needs to provide some  national leadership here as well. That's why we've been calling on the National Cabinet to  step up, look at this problem, and provide a long-term solution. And one really practical  thing that the Federal Government can do is put more money in to build more social  housing. It would be a win-win. It would create more jobs for tradies and more homes for  people who really need it. But the economy shrinking at the moment, and unemployment is  growing. More than 240,000 Aussies are expected to lose their job by Christmas. And we  need a jobs plan. This could be part of it. This should be part of it. Building social housing  and repairing old dilapidated social housing. It would create jobs for tradies and homes for  homeless Australians.

ALBANESE: Thanks very much, Jason. Happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: Victorians are going to really struggle in eight weeks' time. Do you think  that the $1,500 payment as it is should be extended after?

ALBANESE: Well, quite clearly, the Government will be receiving some updated economic  figures on Tuesday. The Government needs to deal with it as it is. And the early withdrawal  of support will mean a deeper downturn and more intense than it needed to be. What we  need to make sure is that the economic recession that we're experiencing, the first in 30  years, is not longer than it needs to be and is not deeper than it needs to be. And the logic

of JobKeeper, keeping those relations between employers and employees, is absolutely  essential. It needs to be at the heart of the economic response. So, we need to deal with  that. But we also need to look further ahead as well. And the problem for this  Government's response is that, frankly, the economic updates, the statements in the  Parliament from Josh Frydenberg in way back in May, have had nothing to say about the  creation of jobs. So, we need to make sure that JobKeeper and JobSeeker are at  appropriate levels and available for an appropriate level of time. But we also need to have  JobCreator. And one way we can have job creation is through social housing investment.

JOURNALIST: What do you think of paid pandemic leave? Do you think there is an urgent  need for it?

ALBANESE: There is an absolutely urgent need for paid pandemic leave. The time for  discussion is long gone. Labor absolutely believes that the Government should step up  wherever there are gaps in paid pandemic leave. Because we know that what is happening  is that if you are a worker who's casual, who's relying upon turning up at work to put food  on the table for your family, then you're under enormous pressure to do that. And the  Government needs to step in here. A number of private companies are paying paid  pandemic leave, and they deserve congratulations and thanks for doing that. But the  Government needs to acknowledge that this has been a huge gap. In the long run as well,  what this is identifying is the weakness in the labour market due to the casualisation of the  labour force, whereby so many Australians work in insecure work without sick leave,  without holiday leave, without the sort of conditions that people in permanent work have  got and have had for a long period of time. So, these vulnerable Australian workers need  to be looked after. Because if someone is put in that situation, it's a health risk for them,  but it's a health risk for everyone they come into contact with as well. And it's about time  the Government stops saying that they're looking at this and actually act. Because they  know that this is at the heart of the problem.

JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister is obviously supportive of the stage four restrictions in  Victoria. How do you feel about that?

ALBANESE: I support the actions of the Victorian Government, which is based upon  health advice. And I have been consistent about supporting the health advice. I spoke to  Daniel Andrews this morning. And I speak to him regularly and get updates, as I do with  other leaders. And this is unfortunate, but it's necessary. What the Federal Government  needs to do, though, is not just say they're supportive of it, but to respond to the economic  response that will be required of increased support as a result of these restrictions having  an impact on the economy. So, it's not good enough in this case to just say, 'Yes'. It needs  to be, 'Yes, and it requires a Federal Government response'. Just as the Federal  Government needs to step up on the issue of aged care. The Federal Government has  responsibility for aged care. It can't continue to just pass the buck. It needs to be prepared  across the nation on these issues. The Federal Government's responsible for regulating  aged care. In Newmarch, here in New South Wales, sent a big loud message to the  Federal Government. And unfortunately, Scott Morrison wasn't listening and didn't  respond.

JOURNALIST: Do you think the Federal Government has done enough on aged care?

ALBANESE: Well, quite clearly, the Federal Government has responsibility for aged care.  What's important is that now we had Newmarch months ago, we've then had outbreaks in



Victoria and other places as well, it must be said, and the Government needs to have in  place a national plan and response on these issues. Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053









