Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.







The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health

Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Public Service and Cabinet

The Hon. Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology

JOINT MEDIA STATEMENT

30 March 2020



INCREASED FLEXIBILITY FOR PRODUCTION OF HAND  SANITISER TO BOLSTER SUPPLIES

The Australian Government Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) has cut the red tape on  the manufacturing of hand sanitiser, whilst maintaining strict safety requirements, to bolster  supply in Australia.

Currently, there is high demand for hand sanitiser in Australia’s health care system and  hospital networks - particularly in rural and regional parts of the country.

The TGA has introduced an urgent legislative instrument and guidance to make it easier for  local businesses to manufacture hand sanitiser.

This includes sanitisers for use in health care facilities - such as hospitals, aged care and other  residential facilities - as well as for general consumer use.

Production of hand sanitiser can now proceed without the requirement of TGA approval or  notification, provided one of the two recipes developed by the World Health Organization and  endorsed by the US Food and Drug Administration are used.

Furthermore, if these recipes are used, food grade alcohol, which is cheaper and available in  larger qualities than medical grade alcohol, can be used to manufacture the hand sanitisers.

Strict safety requirements have been placed on the labelling of these products. Manufacturers  must also test the alcohol concentrations of each batch, manufacture under sanitary  conditions, and maintain records of production to maintain consumer safety.

Companies wishing to manufacture or import new high-end hand sanitisers with different  recipes for use in health care facilities will still require TGA approval. But as per other  products related to the COVID 19 pandemic, the TGA will prioritise these applications and  review them as quickly as possible.

These changes will make it easier for Australian businesses to produce and supply hand  sanitiser to meet rising demand caused by the COVID-19 outbreak.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



The TGA’s actions will not only ease supply pressures, it will also provide opportunities for  Australian businesses.

Wineries and grape-growers affected by smoke damage caused by the recent bushfires, and  boutique distilleries that have lost passing tourist trade, are turning to manufacturing alcohol,  the key ingredient in sanitisers.

These changes follow a roundtable between Minister Andrews, the TGA and key players in  the hand sanitiser supply chain last week. A follow up will be held this week.

Further information is available by ringing 1800 020 653, emailing  otc.medicines@health.gov.au, or from the TGA website.

-ENDS-









