Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health

Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Public Service and Cabinet

Alison McMillan

Australian Chief Nursing and Midwifery Officer

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

2 April 2020

Training more nurses for critical care

The Australian Government will fund up to 20,000 new online education places to enable  Registered Nurses (RNs) to develop knowledge enabling them to assist in the delivery of care  in intensive care and high dependency units across Australia.

The online training will allow experienced RNs to be used to maximum effect in the national  response to the COVID-19 pandemic.

This will support a doubling in the number of intensive care beds in Australian hospitals, to  meet the projected demand caused by COVID-19.

Up to $4.1 million will be provided to e-learning provider, Medcast to provide the critical  care education program free of charge to participants.

The e-learning platform will deliver online learning modules that will assist currently  employed RNs’ to develop their knowledge, so they can assist in high dependency and  intensive care units.

Registered nurses comprise the largest health care occupation. In 2018, there were around  276,000 RNs in Australia.

Despite swift action by Australian governments, the number of COVID-19 cases will  continue to grow. It is likely that unprecedented demand for hospital care will strain our  health system and health workers, who every day are saving and improving lives.

RNs interested in undertaking the training should visit https://medcast.com.au/surge-critical-care or contact Medcast by phone on 1300 652 046.

The Australian Government has also funded an online refresher course to allow RNs who are  not currently in clinical practice to update their knowledge to re-join the health workforce.  See www.acn.edu.au/education/cpd-online/refresher-program-for-registered-nurses for further  information.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.

We thank and acknowledge all of Australia’s nurses for their ongoing commitment and  dedication to providing Australians with the health care they need during this unprecedented  time.

The Government has been consulting extensively with key nursing and midwifery  organisations to ensure our health system can cope with the challenges of COVID-19.

The critical care education program has been endorsed by the Australian College of Critical  Care Nurses and the surge workforce strategy is strongly supported by the Australian Nursing  and Midwifery Federation.

-END-



