SENATOR TIM AYRES

LABOR SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2NZ INVERELL

MONDAY, 2 NOVEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Queensland election result; Federal ICAC; Melbourne Cup.



MONTE IRVINE, HOST: I've now been joined on the phone by New South Wales Labor

Senator Tim Ayres. Good morning, Senator. How are you this morning?



SENATOR TIM AYRES, LABOR SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES: G’Day Monte,

I'm good. Good morning to your listeners.



IRVINE: Now Senator, let's get jump straight into it. Queensland, the Queensland election

happened over the weekend. The Labor Party must be very happy with the result that's

come from that.



AYRES: Yeah, we're very pleased with the result. Obviously, it's an outstanding victory for

Queensland Labor and Anastasia Palaszczuk. Three wins in a row. Lets make three broad

observations about the election and why it matters. The first thing is that Anastasia

Palaszczuk stood up to the bullying from Canberra. There was a pretty sustained

campaign of abuse and bullying towards her. She focused on, apart from putting the public

health focus first, so protecting people from the virus first, she also had a strong focus on

jobs and particularly in manufacturing in regional Australia and those seats, those regional

Queensland seats that the support for Labor lifted considerably, and the One Nation party

vote in particular collapsed in those areas.



The second thing is, the Queensland election demonstrated that Australians, particularly

Queenslanders, don't like being told what to do by Canberra and they didn't like Scott

Morrison coming up to Queensland to campaign for the LNP up there. In fact, everywhere

that Scott Morrison went the LNP vote fell - so he was a net negative for the Coalition vote

in Queensland.



And the final observation I'd make is, the only seat that the Liberals and Nationals took off

Labor was South Brisbane and they gave it to the Greens. The strategy of the Liberal

National Party in working with the Greens on preferencing the Greens Party has delivered

a Labor seat to the Greens. And I think that there's got to be some reflection inside the

Liberals and Nationals in Canberra, about whether they are going to learn the lessons from

that, or whether they're going to go back to preferencing the Greens and working with the

Greens to try and deny Labor a majority. I think most people in Queensland are pretty

angry about the Liberal National Party deal with the Greens.



IRVINE: It does seem rather ideologically apart, there's a massive chasm. When you think

about the LNP and the Greens when it comes to policies it does seem strange for them to

be preferencing the Greens party to give them a seat against the Labor Party, when

realistically the Greens traditionally voted along the Labor Party lines anyhow.



AYRES: Well the preferences strategies have to have some principle to them. There has

to be some political principle and I think people in Queensland saw through what was

going on. The Liberals and Nationals were prepared to ditch their principles in order to try

and damage their real political opponents im the Labor Party. And if that meant giving a

seat to the Greens, they were prepared to do that. That's what they did. And you know that

they are going to have to reflect, your local Member Mr. Joyce and others, are going to

have to work out whether they are for preferencing the Greens or against it.



IRVINE: It is very, very interesting. Now speaking of preferencing, and if you like spoiler

campaigns, we've seen all, you mentioned the One Nation vote had collapsed, but the

other one is Clive Palmer. Now Clive Palmer seems to enjoy injecting himself into political

parties and political elections. And again he did that in Queensland, but we saw his support

100%, - well not 100% - but significantly collapse in this election as well. Do you think

people are sort of waking up to what Clive Palmer is up to that it's more self-interest rather

than the interest of the Queensland electorate and the people of Queensland? And do you

think that'll translate nationally at the next election?



AYRES: Well, Clive Palmer spent more than $60 million in the last Federal Election,

remember all those yellow billboards everywhere? He didn't achieve much in terms of a

vote for Clive Palmer but he did do enormous damage to the Labor Party campaign and

that's what he's effort was designed to do, that's what it was all about in Queensland too.

He spent, I think we'll find out, an enormous amount of money to deliver 0.6% of a vote to

him. I think people have seen through Clive Palmer. It would be far better if he spent those

tens of millions of dollars that he spent in elections paying his workers entitlements

properly, and actually trying to run a business that was capable of securing jobs and

paying Queenslanders entitlements. I think his record speaks for itself.



IRVINE: Federally, the Labor Party federally, you’re looking now down the same path as

what the Queensland Labor Party did - focusing on jobs, and I know that it has been a

focus, focusing on jobs, focusing on how creating jobs is going to help the economy and

help us get out of a recession. Is that going to be the main focus of the Labor Party leading

up to the next federal election?



AYRES: Well, it's really a strong endorsement of the approach that Anthony Albanese and

the Federal Labor Party have taken. Look at seats like Maryborough in regional

Queensland where Labor's commitment to building trains locally and to revitalising regional

manufacturing has seen a resurgence in support for the Labor Party in that seat and

across regional Queensland. Well, that's the message that Anthony Albanese has been

talking about, right across Australia. So we do take some encouragement that Australians

are likely to support a Labor Party that's focused on jobs, and in the interests of regional

Australians. A Labor Party that’s focused on issues like aged care and health. And, a

Labor Party that's determined to focus on making sure we keep Australians safe, whether

it's from this virus or from bushfires.



We do take we do take some encouragement from the result. We've got a long way to go,

a lot of work to do. I see Scott Morrison announced the other day that he's he wants to go

full term and have an election in 2022. Well, I don't believe anything a politician says about

election timing.  He will go to an election some time over the course of the last half of 2021

or in the first half of 2022. And we've got to be prepared to fight an election because it's

just so important for Australia's future. And I think I'm more convinced than I ever was after

this Queensland result that Anthony Albanese is in a position to, to you know offer, a very

strong alternative, and to be the next Prime Minister of Australia.



IRVINE: Moving on, you've just finished two weeks of very intense questioning and some

startling revelations coming out of Senate Estimates. And last week, what I know we've

talked about this the last couple of weeks and last week, in particular, the whole of the

Labor Party was calling yet again, for a National Integrity Commission, a Federal-style  ICAC.  Is this something that the Morrison government should just suck up and go,

‘right, we'll table that legislation. We'll get it going and happening’? What do you think the

Morrison government is scared about for not putting this out there and putting this federal

body in place?



AYRES: Well the case, which I think had already been made by the sports rorts affair by a

series of these other controversies, all of the controversies that seemed to hang around

Angus Taylor. But in estimates itself, the Leppington triangle, you know, Badgerys Creek

airport purchase where the Commonwealth Government bought a property worth $3 million

for $30 million. Over a million dollars in Commonwealth Government money allocated to

Liberal mates to do polling work that's thinly disguised political work clearly directed

towards the Liberal Party's political interests. And this emerging story about Mr. Maguire,

Daryl Maguire, the Liberal Party MP from New South Wales who has been selling, you

know visas for cash. That just makes the case so strongly that we need a Federal ICAC.



Now Scott Morrison's had the legislation for a federal ICAC in the bottom drawer drafted

ready to go since before Christmas last year. But he’s held it back. Plenty of other complex

legislation has made its way to the Parliament this year, some of it some of the very

unpopular. The legislation to lift university fees for students - a very complex piece of

legislation. Well, that made its way through the Parliament through some very difficult

debate. There is absolutely no reason why the federal ICAC legislation should not have

come through the parliament this year. And it's very strange that the Prime Minister Scott

Morrison has refused to table the legislation. Now what on earth is he waiting for?



IRVINE: And even if even if there are members of his party that could be in jeopardy from

an ICAC that may be forced to resign or something like that he's got enough seats for him

not to worry about that realistically, until the next election anyhow. So I don't see why he'd

have to be that concerned about it. When the majority of Australians I think we'd like to see

a Federal ICAC set up so that we don't have to always turn to royal commissions and

those sort of investigations to get to the bottom of things.



AYRES: Well, the only people I've heard been prepared to tell me that they don't support a

Federal ICAC are Liberal Party backbenchers who for some reason or other, Liberal and

National Party back benches, who for some reason or other, are very hostile to the idea of

an Independent Commission Against Corruption. If you go down the main street of any

country town or into the shopping centre in any suburb, you won't be able to find a person

who doesn't support a Federal Integrity Commission. But the Prime Minister's just got to

get on with it, bite the bullet and get on with it. But he appears very reluctant to table this

legislation and its high time that he did.



IRVINE: And when you’ve got that sort of real opposition that fierce opposition, you start to

wonder ‘what do you guys got to hide’?



AYRES: Well, that's the question every Australian is asking. We all know the legislation’s

there. We'll have to see when the legislation arrives whether it's strong enough to do the

job that Australians want a Federal Integrity Commission to do. But there is no excuse for

not tabling this legislation. But it's a government that's mired in scandal. And a real

characteristic of what came out of the estimates process is, number one, this guy is a

government that makes announcement but never follows through and never does the

delivery. Number two, there is constant scandal, it's self-interest and political manipulation

that's been going on and we need a Federal Integrity Commission to clean that up.



IRVINE: Absolutely. Well, moving on to something a little bit less heavy, depends I

suppose if you're a punter or not, Melbourne Cups tomorrow. Senator you got a tip for us

for tomorrow's Melbourne Cup?



AYRES: Its come up awfully quickly the Melbourne Cup.  It’s going to be a strange old

Melbourne Cup without a big crowd there. And I did notice, you work your way through the

list and despite Coronavirus, this emerging theme that there's much more horses from

overseas in the Melbourne Cup than there are local horses is still very strong. A lot of

horses from Great Britain and from Ireland and despite my reservations about that, I'd put

a sneaky few dollars on the nose on Prince of Arran. Yeah, okay, I'm going to give that a

go - it's not a tip that I'm holding out there for people across the New England, you

wouldn't pay any attention to my tips, but that's where I'll be putting the lazy $10 on the

nose.





IRVINE: Well, he's sitting at 10 to one at the moment so he's not a favorite but he's an

outside chance by the looks of things at ten to one, the bookies have him at that. Of

course, gamble responsibly if you are going to put a tip on the Melbourne Cup. But 10 to

one Prince of Arran. You've heard it here first, number 12 Prince of Arran. Nice, nice

colours too for the jockey.



AYRES: It's a good opportunity for people to get together in their workplaces or around the

country and get together and have a bet and have a laugh. The Melbourne Cup is a great

Australian institution. So I hope everybody out there has a good time tomorrow afternoon.



IRVINE: Absolutely. Senator, thank you so much for your time. It's great talking to you.

We'll talk to you next Monday.



AYRES: Good on you mate, chat to you next week.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JOE MCKENZIE 0431 377 319



