

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

Senator The Hon. Marise Payne  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women

The Hon. Alex Hawke MP  Assistant Defence Minister  Minister for International Development and the Pacific



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE



Saturday 10 October 2020

50TH ANNIVERSARY OF FIJI’S INDEPENDENCE

Australia joins the Government and people of the Republic of Fiji in celebrating 50 years of Fiji’s  independence. On 10 October 1970, Fiji took its place in the international community as an independent  state.

Since that time, Fiji has made its mark - globally and regionally - as a strong voice for sustainable  development, a valued contributor to peacekeeping and a formidable force on the sporting field.

While COVID-19 is keeping us apart physically, we stand in spirit with our Fiji vuvale to celebrate this  milestone, which also marks 50 years of diplomatic relations between our two countries.

The Australia-Fiji relationship is one built on strong political, security, economic and people-to-people  links, and one that continues to grow stronger through the Fiji-Australia vuvale Partnership and  Australia’s Pacific Step-Up.

It is a relationship marked by mutual respect and mutual regard; as we have shown during this testing  year, Australia and Fiji are there for each other.

Australia is deeply grateful for the support provided by Fiji’s Bula Force to assist communities affected  by bushfires earlier this year.

We have been proud to support Fiji’s response to COVID-19 and Tropical Cyclone Harold, with urgent  medical and humanitarian supplies, and with budget support to assist Fiji in these unprecedented times.

Australia looks forward to the next 50 years - and beyond - standing with Fiji and forging an even  stronger future in our Pacific.

[ENDS]

Media Contacts:  Prime Minister’s office: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  Minister Payne’s office: David Wroe, +61 429 531 143, Melanie Ruiz, +61 427 888 392  Minister Hawke’s office: Wade Laube, +61 409 193 057  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney



