

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

The Hon. Stuart Robert MP  Minister for the National Disability Insurance Scheme  Minister for Government Services

The Hon. David Littleproud MP  Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE



Friday 23 October 2020

PANDEMIC LEAVE DISASTER PAYMENT FOR QUEENSLAND WORKERS

Queenslanders who can't earn an income because they must self-isolate or quarantine, or are caring for  someone with COVID-19 can now access support with a $1500 Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment.

The Australian Government has extended Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment arrangements to include  Queensland following agreement with the Queensland Government.

The $1500 lump sum Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment is already available in Victoria, Tasmania, New  South Wales and Western Australia.

If an individual is instructed by a health official to self-isolate or quarantine, and has used up all  appropriate leave entitlements, including any special pandemic leave, they may be eligible for the  payment. They may also be eligible if they’re the parent or guardian of a child aged 16 or under who has  been instructed to isolate as they are a close contact or has tested positive for COVID-19, or they are  caring for someone with COVID-19.

In line with arrangements with other states, Queensland workers will not be eligible for the payment if  they are receiving income, earnings or salary maintenance from work, receiving JobKeeper Payment or  other forms of Australian or Queensland Government income support.

To date, more than $15.5 million in Pandemic Leave Disaster Payments has been paid for some 10,300  granted claims since 6 August.

The fastest and easiest way to make a claim is over the phone by calling 180 22 66. Please do not visit a  service centre.

More information is available at www.servicesaustralia.gov.au/disaster.

[END]

Media contacts:  Prime Minister’s office: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  Minister Robert’s office: James Larsson, 0427 100 431  Minister Littleproud’s office: Brett Chant, 0477 744 614  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

