

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE  SENATOR FOR THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RADIO CANBERRA BREAKFAST  WEDNESDAY, 7 OCTOBER 2020

SUBJECT: Federal Budget.

ADAM SHIRLEY, HOST: Senator Katy Gallagher is Labor Senator for the ACT, Chair of  the Select Committee on COVID-19. And this is a COVID-19 response Budget clearly,  Senator Gallagher, thank you for your time today. Thanks for being with us.

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER: Thanks for having me on Adam.

SHIRLEY: Mass support in the form of broad tax cuts across every tax level, depending on  what you earn. Big spending to encourage businesses to employ people currently out of  work. How important is it that the Opposition support this Budget?

GALLAGHER: Look, we'll work constructively where we can with the Government. So as  we've done right, throughout this pandemic, to support the economy, to support jobs and to  support people, so you will see that same approach. You're right, it's a huge spending  Budget, trillions of dollars of debt, and deficits as far as the eye can see. So I think from  our point of view, we need to make sure that many of the announcements that are being  made in the Budget actually deliver the outcome we want, which is, you know, to get  people back to work and to help put food on the table during, you know, a really deep  recession.

SHIRLEY: And your side of politics has shown, during the GFC, but in principle, but there  is a place for government to intervene, step in when a lot of people are struggling through  a mass, well, problem and difficulty such as COVID-19, how much do you applaud the  Federal Government for doing that in this federal Budget?

GALLAGHER: Well, again, budgets are all about choices, Adam, and, you know, I know  that from putting budgets together. The Government had no choice but to invest in the  economy, because the private sector isn't. And you know, we've seen mass job losses,  and business failures. So the Government had no choice. But this Budget is about choices,  they've chose to back a business led recovery, remains to be seen whether that'll actually  do what we need it to do. But they've certainly made choices as well to leave people  behind. So you know, failing to give a permanent increase to JobSeeker. Not having  anything beyond March on JobKeeper. There are millions of Australians relying on those

payments to make ends meet. And I think it's, you know, the Government said to them  today, we've made choices, but we've chosen not to help you out beyond March, or for  JobSeeker, beyond December.

SHIRLEY: But they've extended the low and middle income tax offset for those on lower  incomes, how much does that bring people forward and acknowledge the troubles they  might be facing right now?

GALLAGHER: Yeah, we certainly welcome that, that'll be welcome money for people who  are really struggling. And it's an important part of the tax package, which is why we've said  we will support that. But I think, you know, for many, when you're looking at what the tax  cuts, give, if you look for an average worker, for example, they'll get perhaps $50 a week,  you know, when you look at what the tax cut, what the cut to JobKeeper is, and we've got  three and a half million workers on JobKeeper. There'll be $250 down. So you know, it's  the all of the answers aren't found in the tax cuts, that's for sure. And many, many families,  millions of families, there's, you know, 2 million people relying on the Corona Supplement,  and three and a half million on JobKeeper, will see significant reductions in the money that  they'll have to live on.

SHIRLEY: Do you agree with some of the assumptions implicit within this Budget,  including that a COVID-19 vaccine will be available on mass sometime next year, and that  the majority of the tax cuts that come through to people's accounts will be spent in small  and large businesses?

GALLAGHER: Well, again, you know, will remains to be seen whether the tax cuts will be  spent, I think in the previous tax cuts evidence to the COVID Committee was that they  haven't all been spent much of it has been saved. But again, we'll have to wait and see  how that rolls through. You know, I think again, when we look at this budget, there are  some significant gaps, some real holes in the Government's response, and they're big  ones that have come before my committee, so aged care, childcare, social housing, there's  no investment in those areas. And that's going to hit families I think, as people try to get  back to work or manage, you know, homeschooling and some of the other pressures that  have particularly hit women over the last seven or eight months.

SHIRLEY: So if those areas are holes, in your words, where would the money be  reallocated from that the budget has currently put money into to pay for it? Because as you  say, this is big spending, and there just can't be ongoing spending for all the areas that  need it.

GALLAGHER: Well, this is a huge spending Budget, and you're right, the deficits are out  for as long as the eye can see. And we've got a trillion dollars of debt. So I guess our point  of view is, we're in this position where we know we've got a trillion dollars of debt, we know  it's going to be there, you know, in 2030, the budget papers say, but we've still got high  unemployment. We've still got, you know, many people left behind and we've got no plan  for the future. So that's whether you know, the choices in this budget actually deliver the  outcomes we want. Now we're not the Government, we didn't get to make the choices. So  our position a day after is to say, look, these are some of the things we would have  focused on. And whether they've got the balance right, in some of the incentive programs  they've put in place at the expense of others missing out remains an open question, and  obviously something that we'll explore through the estimates process.

SHIRLEY: But if you identify things like aged care, childcare, more support for women as



obvious holes in your eyes, where should've the money come from, where shouldn't it  been put to then fund those areas further?

GALLAGHER: Well, yeah, I guess it's about the size of some of the programs, isn't it? Like  there are, you know, there's over $30 billion going into business incentives, you know,  thinking some of the other areas, you know, like aged care, it's got a very, very small  amount. So, you know, is that balance right? We've only got this Budget in the last 12  hours or so, 24 hours. So we need to work through some of that. We support a whole  range of measures, we support investment into the private sector. But we are worried and I  think legitimately worried and fairly raising some of these issues about the people who  haven't been supported through this Budget. And you know, if there's ever a time to  support areas like social investment and investing in people and particularly low income  people, I would have thought this Budget, when you are borrowing hundreds of billions of  dollars a year, you would have found space for a bit of them.

SHIRLEY: ACT Labor Senator Katy Gallagher with us on ABC Radio Canberra, five to  eight. Dan Bourchier with us in a moment for what's coming up on Mornings.  There is a lot  of money for ACT infrastructure over $150 million promised. Should the Government get a  tick for the major road funding that has been put forward?

GALLAGHER: I think we'd always welcome investment into the local community,  particularly infrastructure, it will help jobs. I guess the issue there is, you know, about half  of this money falls outside the forward estimates period. So there's a bit of a delay in terms  of getting that money into the economy and supporting it right now, which I think everyone  would accept is what we need. So I'm a bit worried about the timing. But you know, being a  former ACT Chief Minister, you'd never say no to infrastructure money from the  Commonwealth because it doesn't come very often and when it does, we should welcome  it.

SHIRLEY: Senator Gallagher, we appreciate your initial reaction as a key representative of  the government and as an ACT Labor Senator. Thank you for your time.

GALLAGHER: Thanks, Adam.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: PAT CRONAN  0432 758 224









