



The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology  Federal Member for McPherson



TRANSCRIPT

Doorstop - SeaSim, Australian Institute of Marine Science

23 November 2020

Topics: SeaSim expansion, COVID-19, US Election

E&OE:

George Christensen: Well, thanks very much for coming along here this morning to  the Australian Institute of Marine Science here at Cape Cleveland. It's great to have  Science and Industry Minister Karen Andrews here with us, and thank you to Dr Paul  Hardisty and his crew here at the Institute, the premier, leading, not only national but  global institute for marine science, proudly owned and funded by the Commonwealth  Government. And today, Karen is announcing $36.5 million to expand the SeaSim  program that we've got here at the centre that is doing cutting state-of-the-art  research in marine life. It provides not only a benefit to the marine environment, but  also to marine industries, including our ports and our resources sector, as well as  fishing sector. But some of the state-of-the-art research I know that Karen and Paul  are going to touch upon, but real big research that's being done in how to ensure that  coral is hardier to withstand some of the impacts on it, impacts that end up [indistinct]  seeing at the moment, coral dying. So, this is more research that we're going to be  pumping through here at the Institute. But Phillip Thompson and I have been very  keen on this project going forward and very keen on this $36.5 million being laid  down, because what it means is hundreds of local construction jobs, and we know in  the past that when money is being spent here at the Institute, it's gone to put on  Townsville workers. And on top of that, something like, I think, 29 extra technical  people on site, researchers and others doing work full time. So that's a real big boost  for local jobs here in the Townsville region as we come out of this pandemic, and it's  absolutely desperately needed right now. So, the money is very welcome. The work  that's going to happen here at the Institute is very welcome. I'll hand over now to  Science and Industry Minister Karen Andrews.

Karen Andrews: Well, thank you very much, George. It's an absolute pleasure to be  back here at AIMS once again. It really is one of my favourite science agencies here  in Australia. Paul Hardisty, as CEO, thank you so much for having us back here  today. It's a very important day in the history of AIMS as we start on the expansion of  the SeaSim, the Sea Simulator. So what this will do is effectively double the size of

the Sea Simulator that's currently in place, that's been here for about five years now.  Work will commence almost immediately. During construction, we envisage there will  be about 300 people directly employed from the surrounding community. And of  course, when the system is operational, there will be an extra 29 full-time permanent  staff, scientific staff working here. Now, this is a great example of industry and  researchers working together. So, the simulation work that is done here is so  important as we look at restoration of the reef, and of course, particularly for North  Queensland, the Great Barrier Reef provides so many jobs to our community. Now,  understanding that tourism has been seriously impacted because of COVID, but we  want to make sure that we are doing the right thing by the reef, that we are  supporting those tourism jobs. And as we come through the COVID crisis, we will be  making sure that we have a very strong and vibrant tourism sector here in North  Queensland.

But that's not the only part of the industry research engagement that comes through  this facility. Many of the mining organisations from across Australia, quite frankly,  use the Sea Simulator to look at what the impact of dredging are going to be, what  the impacts are of various contaminants in the water, what the thresholds are for that  level of contamination. So this work is so important on so many levels. Now, the  Morrison Government has made it very clear that as we come through the COVID  crisis, it will be an industry-led recovery. We want to make sure that our scientists  and our scientific communities are enabling that recovery. So, today's announcement  of $36.3 million to double the size of the Sea Simulator here certainly locks in AIMS  as the world leading marine research facility. So congratulations to AIMS. And I'll  invite CEO Paul Hardisty to say a few words.

Paul Hardisty: Thanks Minister. Well, thank you, everybody, for coming. Welcome  to AIMS. Thank you, Minister Andrews. Thanks, George, for coming down, our local  member. We're absolutely delighted with this announcement, of course. What this  does is really provides the basis for AIMS to continue to do the world-leading work  that it does. And what you see behind you here is already acknowledged as the  world's most sophisticated research aquarium complex, and this expansion will  simply go to help expand on that and really cement, as Minister Andrews said,  cements our position, as AIMS, as one of the leading research organisations in the  world for tropical marine science. The other thing it does is it really provides critical  infrastructure for us to deliver on our core mission, which is to help provide the  science and the research and the understanding of the marine environment to help  the environmental, social and economic development of coastal industries and  communities, traditional owners across northern Australia. So it's an important  mission and this is an important part of that.

And finally, I'd also just like to mention that with the expansion here of SeaSim today,  we are really providing the basis for the effort to underpin the Reef Restoration and  Adaptation Program, which the Federal Government has significantly invested in and  which is a five-year world-leading effort to help protect the Great Barrier Reef and  other reefs, coral reefs, around the world from the effects of climate change, to help  it adapt and recover to the effects of the warming oceans. Thanks very much for  coming, everybody. We really appreciate it.

Karen Andrews: Well, thank you very much and we're happy to take questions on  today's announcement.

Question: When you say that construction will start almost immediately, like, have  we engaged a construction company?

Karen Andrews: Well, the process is actually starting now. As you can imagine, a  lot of work needs to go into the preparations for that. I’ll actually invite Dr Hardisty to  provide more of that detail for you, but the process starts now. And, of course, we  are very keen to make sure that as many locals as possible are employed in that  process as well. So, yes, the planning will commence and we will be shovel ready as  soon as we possibly can for the process. Paul would you like to add to that?

Paul Hardisty: Thank you, Minister. Yeah. Thanks for the question. Actually, the  design process and the master planning is already underway. So, there's already  significant work being done on that in anticipation of the announcement, so that we  can get going as quickly as possible. That's part of the deal. We are anticipating that  within 18 months, the facility will actually be, we hope, finished and operational. So,  we’re looking forward to inviting you all out again and hopefully in less COVID  affected times and in sometime in 2022, which is our 50th year anniversary to open  up this next stage of SeaSim.

Question: And is it 29 extra staff members, like, science sort of people?

Paul Hardisty: Yes. 29 technical staff. So, SeaSim, actually you can see when  you're walking through, we've got all kinds of people who have to run this and build  the experiments. They're working Craig Humphrey's team. So, we've got aquarists  and marine technicians and plumbers, electricians and programmers because it's all  computer controlled. So, there's a variety of high quality, quite significant jobs that  have to come to just keep this thing operating.

Question: What we saw today, where does that actually end up? The coral that we  saw today where- I know you guys have been replanting some of it, but where does  it go, kind of thing? Like the little things that you saw -

Paul Hardisty: [Interrupts] Yeah, so it depends. But, basically, there's a couple of  different scenarios. Some of the things that you saw there, quite a few of them  actually are multiple generations spawn here, spawn, grow up here and have babies  and so on. So, we've got multiple generations of corals that we have grown here.  Some of the ones you saw earlier that were heavily pregnant, ready to spawn, those  have come from collection sites out on the reef. And with our traditional owner  colleagues, we actually recognise that that's traditional owner sea country. Even  when it's here, for instance, there's some Wapabara people corals from a Keppel  Islands. They're still part of the Keppel Islands when they're here, we recognise that,  and when they're finished doing their thing, we put them back out in the Keppel  Islands to re-join their ancestral mates and friends.

Question: And I know it’s in the release, but physically how much bigger will this  facility be?

Paul Hardisty: As the Minister said, it’s going to be about twice the size.

Question: And is it going to be onsite? Are you building new out-buildings and that  kind of stuff?

Paul Hardisty: In fact, this section here with this small aquarium rooms that you may  have seen, this is going to push out all the way to the road there and the back part  where we're looking at the Tritons, that's going to push out another hundred metres  or so down in that direction. So, it'll just be basically added on to the existing facility.  And I should also mention that one-third of the facility would be open access. So,  anybody in Australia can come and use it on a merit basis and it's paid for as part of  the funding, which is another great thing. But I shouldn’t be hogging the -

George Christensen: [Talks over] I think there was another part of the question that  was asked there. So, I think, can you elaborate just a bit on the planting of coral and  the hardier species, and I think that was what you might be getting that, the ultimate  aim of some of this.

Paul Hardisty: Yeah, so-

Question: So, what’s the ultimate aim of the research? Obviously it’s good to have  the science there, but what’s the aim of the research?

Paul Hardisty: The ultimate aim of the science is to help the reef recover from  disturbances. So crown of thorns, cyclones, other disturbances including climate  change, and also adapt to warming waters. So, some of the hybrid corals you saw in  there are an attempt to find the hardy hybrids that are actually more resistant to rises  in temperature. So, that they can survive better in the warming conditions that we  know we're going to come [indistinct], you know, helping the reef out here adapt.  That's one of the things I'll stress, is that often in the media you'll hear two stories:  the reef is dead or the reef’s all fine. And actually, the truth is somewhere in the  middle and that's where we fly. It's nuanced. There are parts of the reef that are  incredible, that look as good as that tank that you saw down there with Nemo. And  there are parts that have been really, really badly damaged by this variety of  stresses. It's a complex, giant ecosystem, it's incredibly resilient. We have to do  everything we can to help it stay healthy and resilient for the future.

Question: I’ve got some questions for Minister Andrews. Minister Andrews, do  masks and lockdowns work to control the spread of COVID-19?

Karen Andrews: Well, as a Government, we have been very clear on the need to  follow the health advice. So, there are quite different circumstances, for example,  particularly in Victoria at the height of the COVID crisis, compared to here in North  Queensland. In relation to mask wearing, where the view is generally if you cannot  socially distance, then you are encouraged to wear a mask. But where there is no  real risk, there is very low risk of there being community transmission, then it is not  recommended to wear a mask. But I can say, for example, that last night on my flight  up to Townsville from Brisbane, the recommendation from the airline was that we  should wear masks. So, I did.

Question: And what message would you have to those who are spreading  misinformation about this on Facebook?

Karen Andrews: Well, let's understand that there are always going to be different  perspectives on every single situation. I think that what's important is that as  Australians, we focus on doing the right thing, doing the best thing that we possibly  can. We have managed to steer a pretty reasonable path through COVID, we cannot  be complacent. The risk is not gone yet. We do remind people that they need to  make sure that they are social distancing, they are washing their hands, sanitising  their hands, following all of the guidelines. That have kept us reasonably safe here in  Australia and that's the advice that people should be following.

Question: So, yesterday, Mr Christensen said on Facebook that masks and  lockdowns don’t work. You’re Minister for Science, why do you allow this information  from a Coalition MP?

George Christensen: I’m happy to answer that Karen. Thanks very much. Well,  thank you ABC for coming to the SeaSim and asking questions about something  else. So, anyway, that's your journalistic prerogative to do that. What I can say is that  I referred to on my Facebook last night, an actual scientific study that was published  in a medical journal that actually involved the US Marine Corps which had heavy  lockdowns and still showed that despite those heavy lockdowns, there was  transmission of COVID-19. Not my opinion, a fact. And so, there is now a question, I  guess, given that over the efficacy of complete and utter lockdown. So, I’ve got to tell  you, there's a question over the democratic right and human rights when it comes to  lockdowns and whether governments, such as in Victoria, should have done what  they had done. I think what we're seeing out of that is an issue. But I can give you  like the unity ticket here from the Australian Government, of which Karen Andrews is  the Minister for Science. The Health Department's Infection Control Expert group has  a paper on this, and they refer to the World Health Organisation. The World Health  Organisation gave a statement on 5 June that said: at the present time, the  widespread use of masks by healthy people in the general community setting is not  yet supported by high quality or direct scientific evidence, and there are potential  benefits and harms to consider.

Question: I’ve just got another question for you Mr Christensen, if that’s alright.  Another unrelated topic, but do you still believe that the Democrat vote fraud cost  Donald Trump the election?

George Christensen: I think that there's a lot that's going to play out in the US,  there’s legal cases and all the rest of it. So, we'll see what happens; at the end of the  day, it gets declared by, um, their institutions over there, their Electoral College. So,  just let it play out.

Question: Do you recognise Joe Biden as the President-elect, now?

George Christensen: If the Electoral College elects him as President, he’s President.  That’s a fact. So, the Electoral College is yet to meet, and they’ll do that, and then he’ll  be essentially President-elect at that point, and then he goes on to be inaugurated, if  that’s what happens. But that plays out mid-December.



[ENDS]



Media Contact: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846 / Jen Jennings 0435 121 347

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD



