JULIAN HILL MP

DEPUTY CHAIR, JOINT COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS AND AUDITS

FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BRUCE





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2SM MARCUS PAUL IN THE MORNING

TUESDAY, 9 DECEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Parent visas; partner visas; cashless welfare debit card; Bridget Archer;

Robodebt; Regional Jobs Program; Sports Rorts; Joint Committee of Public Accounts

and Audit.



MARCUS PAUL, HOST: The Joint Committee of Public Accounts and Audit’s lengthy inquiry

into the controversial $220 million Regional Jobs Package and the $100 million Community

Sport Infrastructure Program has called for sweeping changes to taxpayer grant schemes.

Well, about bloody time! It’s been going on -this pork barrelling - it’s been going on since

Adam was a boy, and I think the general public are sick of it…As you know I am a big fan of

our following guest on the program. And his performance, I have to say, in Parliament has

been outstanding. Here’ one of his greatest hits:



JULIAN HILL, DEPUTY CHAIR, JOINT COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT;

FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BRUCE: (Played excerpt from Parliament Speech 3/12/2020)

“…But even for them, I reckon the biggest scam they’ve perpetrated is Robodebt. They used

the power of the state, the full power of the Commonwealth Government, the Commonwealth

logo, and put it on fake debt notices and sent it to 430,000 Australians.



They sent these fake, illegal debt notices that were ruthless and impersonal and reversed the

onus of proof. Apparently, elsewhere in Australia, you actually have to prove there's a debt

before you send an invoice to someone and say they have to pay it. But not if you're the

Government. You just get the Commonwealth logo out, send it the most vulnerable people and

say, 'Hey, you've got to pay this.' 'But I don't owe this money.' 'Bad luck, got to pay it.'



It's the kind of thing which would make you ring up ASIC and say, 'I've had a scam perpetrated

on me.' You'd ring the Government and say, 'Save me from this scam.' But they are the

Government. That's the disgrace of it.



They used the power of the state to extort vulnerable people. I will quote Alan Jones for a

moment. As he said, it only stopped when the hot breadth of the court was on their throat—the

largest class action ever in Australian history: $1.2 billion. No wonder they want to get rid of

class actions and make it harder for poor people with no access to justice. They just had to pay

out the largest class action in Australia's history.



The Minister, though, still pretends it wasn't illegal. If what you were doing wasn't illegal, why

did you pay $1.2 billion? Maybe it was because they didn't want their ministers cross-examined

in open court on what they knew.



PAUL: Julian Hill MP, as we know, Robodebt was supposed to save our economy some $2

billion, it ended up costing you me and everybody else at work today $1.2 billion. They are

wonderful economic managers. Morning Julian, how are you?



HILL: Good morning Marcus, I am super, how are you?



PAUL: Yeah, ok. Look, if this Robodebt wasn’t bad enough, tell me about this situation you’re

trying to pressure the Government to change on visas - people are being forced to fly in and

out of the country - what’s the story here? I just don’t understand the logic behind any of this,

mate.



HILL: It’s astounding, but over the last few months I’ve discovered this affects thousands of

Australian families right across the nation in every community.



The migration rules are forcing people who are already safe here in Australia - and

overwhelmingly these people are the partners of Australians - so, they’re someone that an

Australian citizen of any age has fallen in love with, they’ve come here and they’re waiting for

their visa. Or, they’re the parents of Australian citizens and they’re waiting for their visa. So,

they’re waiting here safe in Australia, they may have been here for years, waiting for their visa.



The migration rules are forcing these people to fly overseas - to take a risky and expensive trip

overseas - and then come back and take up a quarantine place, just so the computer will spit

out their visa. It’s madness.



PAUL: Hang on. Is there not still a pandemic across the globe that’s going on, Julian? Have I

missed something?



HILL: Well, you and me both. And I think your listeners would understand. I mean, this defies

common sense. We are in a global pandemic. Now, we should just be able to grant these visas

on shore. So, I have been campaigning on this for a few months, and about ten days ago the

Minister finally caved in. On a Saturday night he had a panic because I was introducing a Bill

into the Parliament on the Monday. He didn’t want the debate, he was sick of the negative

media, so he said: “alright I’ll change the rule next year for partners.” So, that’s going to save

thousands of families from having to be separated and waste a quarantine spot and untold

thousands of dollars and risking COVID-19 overseas.



PAUL: Just before we go on to the next bit, because it gets more interesting, importantly for

those not affected this, overall, affects us all in this country.



If we are sending people over seas and then bringing them back - and if they do have COVID

and they have to quarantine anyway - even with or without COVID-19, it’s costing taxpayer

dollars at the end of the day. Because, even though we are forcing some people to pay for

their own quarantine, they still need to be looked after in relation to security and all the rest of

it, and the Government subsidises a whole range of things.



So, it just defies logic. So, tell me, we have 39,000 Australians still wanting to come home.

You’ve been campaign on this, as you say, for months, on Saturday the Government caved in

on partner visas. But they’re still refusing to not let elderly parents stay here in Australia.



HILL: Exactly. The Minster, when I put this to him, and people spoke up in the media in the

last week or two - the Minister’s response was that parents aren’t immediate family members.

I mean, this is madness.



If there was anything like the Pub Test, that wouldn’t pass the Pub Test, and your listeners

would understand this. I mean, parents are part of the family, and in a global pandemic if

you’re an Australian citizen and your parents are here and they’ve paid $50,000 each for these

visas, roughly. They’ve waited for four or five years, they’re safe here in Australia.



To force elderly parents of Australians, just before Christmas to fly overseas, risk being

stranded, risk a COVID-19 infection, risk getting stuck, and then come back and take a

quarantine place. I mean, this is insane. It’s really just the sort of thing that should be changed.



I don’t understand why Alan Tudge, the Minister, isn’t using common sense. I mean this guy

was elected on a platform of family values, but he says that parents are not family members.



PAUL: Well - and I don’t expect you to comment on this - but given the recent revelations in

the media, I don’t think Alan Tudge should be commenting on anything to do with families.



HILL: Well, yes, it’s madness. And I mean, how many quarantine places are going to be

wasted before Christmas that should be used for a stranded Australian coming home? The

Prime Minister has got to take responsibility for this.



PAUL: Mate, where are we on this cashless welfare card? I know it’s moved to the Senate,

you’re a little closer to the action - perhaps you’re not in a position to comment on it - I just

thought I’d check.



We know this move to a cashless welfare card faces its final hurdle with the Government’s Bill

heading to the Senate, its fate is still up in the air. The card itself holds 80% of a recipient’s

welfare, ensuring it can only be spent via debit on items deemed essential by the Government

- alcohol, gambling obviously not allowed.



But there has been a lot of evidence - both anecdotal and written evidence and very clear and

plain evidence I have to say Julian - that says this is effectively looking toward a privatisation,

if you like, of our welfare system. And, I cant believe we have a Prime Minister that looks at

pensioners around Australia and calls the pension a welfare cheque. It’s not. There are a

number of issues here that I just don’t understand.



HILL: The cashless welfare debit card is a nasty, cruel piece of legislation. I hope it dies in the

Senate. We’re waiting to hear what Rex Patrick, the independent Senator, will do.



It passed the House by one vote. There was a Liberal MP who gave a sterling, passionate

speech against this legislation, but when push came to shove, she did not show up and vote

against it, or it would’ve stopped there.



PAUL: That was the Tasmanian Member for Bass, Mrs Archer. Apparently, yeah, you’re right.

And this is how silly I felt - I played that audio when we talked about the issue last week.



We had lobbyists on talking about how this card is no good, how it effectively does give a

Government a greenlight down the track to effectively privatise our welfare system. We played

what Mrs Archer had to say, I expected her to be the saving grace and vote this thing down

earlier in the week. But she abstained, if you like. It’s a bit of a cowardly way of not fronting or

facing or standing by your convictions, Julian.



HILL: Absolutely, and it was terrific speech and I was in the Chamber. I just wish she’d had the

courage of her convictions.



I represent a very socio-economically disadvantaged community, many ‘poorer’ people. I

mean, they would be traumatised by this card being introduced. You wouldn’t be able to go

and shop with cash at the market. You wouldn’t be able to buy your cheap second-hand things

off eBay and Gumtree. It’s how people in everyday life save money.



It stigmatises people, it’s discriminatory, and as has been said clearly its also racist in the way

it’s being rolled out because it overwhelmingly affects Aboriginal people. So, I hope it dies in

the Senate, Marcus.



PAUL: Julian, let’s hope so. We have to get you on this program more often. I quite often play

a number of your speeches that you make in the Chamber. I wish they were more widely seen.

Quite often, sadly, it’s like you’re making them to an empty Chamber, and I just don’t think

that’s right. Mate let’s talk further, please!



HILL: Thanks Marcus, great to be with you and wish you and everyone a happy Christmas if

we don’t chat in the next couple weeks.



PAUL: Look, let’s try and do it before Christmas. I want to hear from you at least once more,

and well done on your outstanding work of trying to hold Government to account, we

appreciate it.





HILL: Thanks. Have a great day.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: CAM GREEN 0406 507 727



