

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T

Monday 7th December 2020

Minister Littleproud IV Sky News

TOM CONNELL: Let’s return to the situation in Queensland with that fire burning out of  control on Fraser Island. David Littleproud, Emergency Management Minister at a Federal  level joins me now. Just on this situation, we know there was a bit of back and forth on  Commonwealth aerial water bombing capability. Would a bigger capability at a Federal  level help right now in Queensland?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No. Look, I’ve spoken to my Queensland counterpart and they  have all the assets they require at this stage, in fact New South Wales has sent one of  their assets up to Queensland to support them in this effort. You’ve got to appreciate this is  a little bit of a unique fire because the landscape is basically predicated off sand, so it  means you’ve got to dump a lot more water to have the same impact you normally would  in another environment. I mean, effectively they normally would dump around 100,000  litres a day on a fire of this scale - at the moment, they’re dumping around a million litres.  So, hence is the scale of this predicated primarily on the typography of the land and the  landscape being sand.  So, they have what they needed, and the Minister himself has said if they require assets  from a Federal perspective he’ll obviously call straight away, but they are confident that  they are doing all they can within the constraints of the weather and the environment to  maintain this. And they’re obviously trying to protect Happy Valley as we speak, and  they’re confident that with the assets coming from New South Wales that that will be  achieved.

TOM CONNELL: Yeah. We have a situation at the moment where at least the country’s  not stretched, so that’s a bit less of an issue right now. Just on the Queensland  Government though, they have said there’s an issue with using a lot of the very close fresh  water because of biosecurity and cultural concerns with the Indigenous community there.  Is there a sense that when this needs to be, unfortunately, overridden? Are you sort of  getting briefings on how the juxtaposition or the contradiction between wanting to make  sure you can have those respects around those areas, but also threats to life, property and  land as well?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah. Well, I think originally most of the management, as I  understood, of the fire was taking place at a national parks level, then when it hit a certain  juncture the Queensland Emergency Fire Service took over. They’re still confident, in fact,  there’ll be retardant that will be dropped today in supporting the efforts on the ground. So,  obviously they’re moving through this, understanding the local environment, but when the  trigger points need to be pulled, they do pull them - and that's an important point to  understand that the emergency service personnel that we have around the country are

Transcript



T R A N S C R I P T

well, well equipped and well- and have planned well for these types of events. And  particularly when you look at unique environments, about how you can actually intersect  that with protecting lives and the environment itself.

TOM CONNELL: I wanted to talk about agriculture. Output is certainly booming, thankfully  - we’re not out of the drought full stop, but a much better situation. Exports though, in the  last financial year, hit $3.5 billion - a drop overall - this seems to be mainly because of  trade tension with China. What's the Government's plan to get things back on track with  China?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, that's not actually correct, Tom. The reduction primarily has  come around the higher end value added products, like meat, being reduced in terms of  our export quantities, and that's because of the drought. The national herd is at a 40-year  low and we’re slowly rebuilding it, so there's been less cattle that have been processed  through a lot of our abattoirs. We, in fact, hit our China free trade agreement quota with  red meat in July, when we'd normally hit it around November, such is the demand.   But we just simply haven't had the quantities because our farmers have had some rain and  they're restocking - so that restocking takes time. You need to get progeny up to a point  where they're ready for sale, and that's going to take a little bit of time. So in essence,  that's where a lot of the downfall in terms of export has come from, rather than trade  tensions - we continue to have market diversification…

TOM CONNELL: But down to- That might come then, I suppose, so I take your point on  those elements. But the hits coming, isn't it? I mean, it's already being felt somewhat in ag,  if you look at wine and so on. So, what's the plan to get that relationship back on track? Is  there a plan? Or are you just going to have to sit there and wait until China cools off?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well yeah, we’ll be consistent and patient. They understand,  we've been very clear in making it clear to China that we are not going to turn our back on  the relationship; the best way to resolve any issues is through dialogue. And so, our hand  is out ready to start that dialogue, but it’ll be up to them when they wish to restart it. And  that’s the mature thing to do, the solution…

TOM CONNELL: So, that’s the plan? That- Wait for China to come to us and open up  dialogue - that's the extent of the plan at the moment?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, you need to make sure that it's very clear to the- to China  and to any other entity that we may have issues with - we want to engage with dialogue to  rectify any issues outstanding. But we will not, we will not compromise on our sovereignty  and that's what the Australian people would expect of us. That's what we’ll continue to do,  we’ll be consistent, we’ll be calm, we’ll be patient, we’ll be there, we'll never turn our back.  We're going to make sure that we'll be there when they're ready to start that dialogue. I'll  be the first ready to take the phone call or even meet in person if needed, to make sure  that we can continue on with trade that benefits both China and Australia.

TOM CONNELL: What happens if China doesn't approach Australia? Is this- we just wait?  Is there not- is there a plan B? I mean, is there something else being worked on? Because  at the moment they seem pretty keen to freeze us out.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, there's always been plan B’s - that's why there's 13 other  free trade agreements that are in place. There's countless market access to countries

Transcript



T R A N S C R I P T

around the world. And in fact, if you look at the ABARES report, it does show the  diversification of many of our agricultural commodity markets…

TOM CONNELL: Right. But there's no Plan B with China then?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, to resolve any issue, you need to have dialogue, and  dialogue is a two-way street. And that's why we'll continue to make sure that there's  consistency in our language, about making sure that we're always open to having dialogue  at any juncture.

TOM CONNELL: Okay. Llew O'Brien is coming back to the Nationals Party room. Did you  encourage him to come back?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yes, of course I did. I mean, Llew was elected as a National Party  member, he's a passionate advocate for Wide Bay, and in fact, I mean, if I was living in  Wide Bay I’d be damn proud to have Llew O'Brien as my local member because he's all  about his local community.   So he sits within the values and principles of the National Party. We only look after  regional Australians, and that's what we're proud of. We're not worried about what  happens in metropolitan Australia - we'll leave other parties to do that. We're only worried  about the bush and regional Australians, and that's what Llew does and personifies in his  leadership in his local community.

TOM CONNELL: He's outspoken, already wanting the Government to pull out of the Paris  Treaty because of COVID to make the Australian economy the priority. Do you agree?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, this is where you got to be careful. While he has that view  and I respect that, we've got to understand that we also have a standing in the global  community we've got to uphold - particularly when it comes to trade. And these these  issues are being linked continually, so we've got to make sure that we don't disadvantage  regional rural Australians by a philosophical view. But we can still achieve, and I think what  we as Nats want to achieve, is the commitments we've made globally - and which we have  in terms of Paris, we will meet that.   And but going further, we have to understand who's going to pay for it, how you get there -  and that's the challenge and I think that's really the consensus of the National Party party  room. While we made these commitments, someone's going to have to pay, and you  should back yourself with technology rather than having a philosophical view of just taxing  the economy out of submission. We can prove that - coal capture storage is the perfect  example. You can reduce emissions in coal fired power stations by up to 90 per cent, in  fact, I've got one of my own coal fired power stations that are starting that in Queensland.  That's exciting, that's about meeting our international commitments but keeping energy  prices down - that's just common sense…

TOM CONNELL: Yeah. But on the Nationals, there is not a consensus view quite clearly.  We've had Matt Canavan already today on the program agreeing we should be out of the  Paris Treaty, and we should not be using Kyoto carryover credits. We've got strong words  as well by Barnaby Joyce. There is not a unified view on climate policies within the  Nationals.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Specific details, there'll always be varying degrees of views  whether it be the National Party or any party…

Transcript



T R A N S C R I P T

TOM CONNELL: Those are big details.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: I think in essence, where the National Party broadly sits is that we  want to see common sense. We want to use technology, back ourselves, rather than just  taking the lazy option of a philosophical view for the sake of it without actual practical  outcomes…

TOM CONNELL: But isn’t that what’s happening with philosophical view? You've got Matt  Canavan saying we need a new coal fired power plant regardless of what the states think,  let's just build one in New South Wales and override them. We need coal somewhere. Isn't  that a philosophical view?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I think you can do both, I think you can do both, Tom. I'm in  the camp of you can do both - you can live up to your philosophical views of continuing to  invest in coal fired power technology. In fact, I'm on the record as having asked the  Queensland Government, who owns all- most of the assets, I should say, within  Queensland generation assets. They could duplicate Kogan Creek at Chinchilla and  basically add to the supply, and reduce emissions while they're doing it - but they won't,  because their business model doesn't allow that. They're taking $1.8 billion a year in  dividends, that is effectively taxing everybody, because they don't want to add to the  supply.

TOM CONNELL: Okay. Couple of quick issues. Still on Llew O’Brien - Vikki Campion is  working for him. She wrote a scathing column about Darren Chester over the weekend  about a lack of support for SAS and troops. Is that a view shared by you or anyone in the  Party room?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No.

TOM CONNELL: And is it appropriate for a political staffer to be taking shots at her boss’  colleagues in the media?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, look, this is a contractual matter that Vikki Campion has with  The Daily Telegraph, and I would suspect that that's predicated on the fact of frank and  fearless opinion. And that might be her personal opinion but that's not the opinion of the  Party room.

TOM CONNELL: But is that appropriate to have someone working for a Nationals MP and  writing a scathing opinion piece in the weekend about one of their colleagues who’s a  Cabinet Minister?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, that's a matter for Miss Campion to consider with respect of  what she writes in those articles. I [audio skip] I’ve read the article, so I can't comment on  the veracity or the tone of it. So I don't- I'm not afraid for anyone to call out my  performance in any way, shape or form, and I'd be happy to, to actually be able to stand  up for my performance if those that want to criticise me do…

TOM CONNELL: Would it be better for the Party if someone in her position wasn't writing  these opinion pieces, though?

Transcript



T R A N S C R I P T

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: We're not afraid of, of being held to account. The National Party  never has, no member ever has. Were- That's how we operate. We're prepared to have  those conversations and to be open and transparent about it.

TOM CONNELL: Just finally, you're spoken about as the person who could run and topple  Michael McCormack by some of your colleagues. Do you fully support him in the job?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yes, I do.

TOM CONNELL: And should he go unchallenged to the next election?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yes. If Michael wants to run to the next election as the leader, I  think that was settled back in February. And I think the mood within our Party room is we  just got to get on with the job. There are far more bigger issues surrounding regional rural  Australia than the leadership of the National Party - it's more about the recovery out of the  drought, the fires, the floods and COVID-19 than it is about ourselves.

TOM CONNELL: David Littleproud, appreciate your time today. Thank you.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks, mate.



Media contact  Douglas Ferguson, 0455 448 985

