SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE

SENATOR FOR THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS CAPITAL HILL  WEDNESDAY, 2 DECEMBER 2020

JADE MACMILLAN, HOST: Well time now for our political panel and I'm joined by Nationals' Senate  leader Bridget McKenzie and Labor frontbencher, the Shadow Finance Minister, Katy Gallagher.  Welcome to both of you. Bridget McKenzie, first to you, we've seen a number of positive signs in the  economy today, but as Jim Chalmers said, a number of Australians are still struggling. Is it too early  to be celebrating these figures?

SENATOR BRIDGET MCKENZIE, LEADER OF THE NATIONALS IN THE SENATE: Well, thanks  Jade. It's great to be with you. I think the figures speak for themselves. And I think they are  testament to our swift response as a government - instigating programmes like JobKeeper,  JobSeeker, other programmes to support small to medium enterprises to keep employees  connected and to keep the economy going. JobKeeper alone actually saw over 700,000 Australians  stay in work and that's actually a really, really positive outcome. So yes, when you compare us to the  rest of the world, both on the health and the livelihood figures, we are doing better than most, which  is great news. But there's no point in complacency. This virus is with us for time to come and our  economic health is very much tied to our ability to stay COVID safe going forward as individuals and  as a border community.

MACMILLAN: Katy Gallagher - part of Australia's economic recovery will rely on Australia staying  open. We know that, particularly, in Labor states of Western Australia and Queensland, there have  been tough border restrictions. They have started to open up but how can people be confident that  those borders, for example, will stay open, particularly over the Christmas period? And what could  that do to confidence levels?

SENATOR KATY GALLAGER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE: Hi, and thanks for having me  on. Look, I think today's numbers are welcome. They're unsurprising in many ways, because  restrictions have come off, as you pointed out. One of the keys to the economic recovery going  forward is managing the health crisis. And to the greatest degree possible, the states have done an  incredibly good job at that. They have managed the health response, which in turn, has allowed  restrictions to come off earlier than expected and allowed some of this recovery to happen. So, I  think one of the things we've noticed with border restrictions, because it does create some  uncertainty is the kind of the lack of leadership that's been provided by the Commonwealth  Government to be able to facilitate national agreements on hotspots and also to ensure that they're  not sort of demonising state decisions. I think these decisions have been made in the best interests  of the individual states. But that in turn, has helped us as a nation, be able to deal with the health  crisis and therefore allow these restrictions which have fed into these better numbers today coming

forward.

MCKENZIE: But I think also Katy, you've got to acknowledge border restrictions aside, the failure of  the Victorian state Labor government to actually handle the health aspects, the quarantine aspects,  the contact tracing et cetera, early in the COVID-19 response has meant that that state has seen  unprecedented economic damage. I mean small and medium businesses - the biggest job losses in  the country in that state as a result of the hard lockdown undertaken by Daniel Andrews' government  because they didn't handle the health response appropriately. So, whilst some state governments  have done a good job, in the home state of Victoria, it's been an appalling response by that state  government to handle the health response and the economic impact is atrocious.

MACMILLAN: Bridget McKenzie - the RBA Governor...

GALLAGHER: Sorry, can I just respond to that? I think she's had a good crack at me. My response  to that Bridget is this is the whole problem is we're all in this together until everyone starts pointing  the finger and the federal government starts beating up the states and trying to demonise decisions  they've taken. What happened to we're all in this together, and we have to move forward as a  country when that kind of political point scoring happens. Victoria had a second outbreak. It's been  managed...

MCKENZIE: Because of the mishandling of the quarantine system.

GALLAGHER: ...They've now virtually eradicated the virus. And we all beneficiaries of that now.  And our economy is a beneficiary of the good decisions that have been taken by all state leaders,  Liberal and Labor, to manage whatever this virus has thrown at them. And we should all take a bit of  what the Prime Minister says - that we're all in this together. I actually think that he's how we should  approach management of the health crisis and the economy and not engage in this kind of thing -  Well, it's all it's all so and so's fault, because it's politically convenient to do so.

MCKENZIE: Well Katy, with respect, we've got mental health issues going through the roof -  increases of 30 per cent of presentations to our emergency wards in Victoria, because of the hard  lockdown. So, I agree we are all in this together but when the governments can't do - I live there and  so I know how tough that's been. And when there's tens of thousands of Victorians who are no  longer employed, there are people presenting at emergency rooms because of mental health  impacts, not because some fairy dumped COVID-19 on that state, but because the state  government failed in its basic duty to handle COVID-19, quarantine and contract tracing. That's the  source of the problem. And to say we're all in this together so no one should ever point that out, or  ever have to be responsible for their governance, I think misses the whole point. And for my home  state, their still dealing with it.

GALLAGHER: I understand how hard it has been in Victoria.  The government in Victoria has being  accountable.

MCKENZIE: Not well. No, they haven't.

GALLAGHER: Do you think this helps Bridget? Do you think it helps the economy? Do you think it  helps confidence?

MCKENZIE: They could not. They could not.



GALLAGHER: Do you think it helps the recovery? It doesn't.

MCKENZIE: Katy, we held an inquiry. Nobody knew who made the decision. Minister after minister  presented to that inquiry and didn't know who made the decision that put security guards in charge  of our quarantine system. I mean, so you can sort of revise history if you like, but it's all there on the  public record.

GALLAGHER: I am not trying to revise history.

MACMILLAN: I just want to ask you both about another topic. Bridget McKenzie - while the signs  might be more positive today, the RBA governor made the point that there is still a lot of economic  uncertainty. Is it too soon to be winding back Coronavirus support measures, the JobSeeker  supplement, for example is due to drop again, just in a few weeks’ time.

MCKENZIE: I think what our government's been able to do right throughout this global pandemic is  adjust our response according to the situation circumstances domestically as required. Extending  JobSeeker, extending JobKeeper, changing the settings as we've needed to and that's really, really  been able to assist small to medium enterprises stay engaged in the economy as much as they can  and assist households as much as possible. I mean, we've put over five hundred billion dollars into  the economy and it is working. Now, I think that's the same approach we should be taking - to keep a  flexible approach to these measures because as we've seen in Europe, as we've seen in America,  this virus is highly contagious. And we would hate to see another wave enter Australia and that  would again, obviously, require us to change the settings again. So, I think the flexible approach  we've adopted is working and I'm sure the government will continue to approach a response like  that.

MACMILLAN: Katy Gallagher - Labor wants to see the JobSeeker base rate permanently increased.  Why won't you put a figure on that, what you would like to see it continuing, beyond March?

GALLAGHER: Well, we've been calling for that for some time, Jade, as you say. We are worried  that on the current policy settings, the JobSeeker slash NewStart rate will go back to forty dollars a  day at the end of March. We've been consistently saying that's not enough for people to live on, and  we're not the only ones. I mean, most of the business community, the community sector, everyone  acknowledges that it's an inadequate rate. We haven't put dollar figure on it. One because we don't  have access to the Treasury that the government does, in terms of being provided with advice on  specific costings and modellings of putting a figure on. But also, we've been wanting to give the  government room to come, be the responsible government and come and say look, this is what we  think is a permanent increase should look like, this is how much it costs and this is how it will allow  people to live a dignified life while they're searching for work. We've given the government room,  they've chosen not to take that option up and at the moment, we are very worried that 1.5 million  Australians,  expected to increase to 1.8 million Australians by the end of the year according to  government numbers, will be told that they're going back to a living on $40 a day at the end of  March. It's not adequate and it's not good enough and the government should fix it.

MACMILLAN: I want to fit in one other topic. Bridget McKenzie - a senate inquiry into the so-called  sports rorts scandal has criticised the government saying it's obstructed its ability to scrutinise that  programme. You're the former Sports Minister, why won't you appear before that committee?

MCKENZIE: I have made a very, very comprehensive submission to the committee. I've been  engaged in the process from day one. And I continue to do that. I've been very genuine and open  with my submission. It's comprehensive and I don't have access to, obviously now no longer being  the Minister, documents et cetera from that time in the ministry. So I've been as helpful as I can in  my submission and I continue to engage with the committee as they have extended their reporting  data now out till March. So, I understand they've handed down an interim report to the Senate  yesterday. So, I've got nothing more to add other than my comprehensively, publicly available  submission.

MACMILLAN: All right. Bridget McKenzie and Katy Gallagher, thank you very much for your time.

MCKENZIE: Thanks Jade.

GALLAGHER: Thanks very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: PAT CRONAN 0432 758 224

