

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS BREAKFAST  MONDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; Sports Rorts; Coalition infighting

MICHAEL ROWLAND: We are joined now by the Deputy Opposition Leader Richard  Marles in the Breakfast studio. Good morning to you.

RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR  PARTY: Good morning, Michael. How are you?

ROWLAND: Are you confident that everything that could be done is being done to help  these Australians?

MARLES: I think we feed to be making sure that the government is telling its story clearly.  It is really important that they are acting in on the best medical advice. Big decisions have  been made and I think it is important that the government is conveying to the Australian  people exactly the medical advice they are receiving, which is leading to those  decisions. But we are not about to second guess that right now. This is a very big issue  that is going on in the world and it certainly is above politics.

ROWLAND: There is serious concern, though, about the impact on the economy of this,  especially if the virus continues for several weeks, if not months. How serious could that be  in your view?

MARLES: Well, there is no doubt that closing the border and the way in which the  government has, is going to have an impact. And I suppose, the answer to that question in  part lies with how long the border remains closed.  But I think it is really important to  understand this, Michael, well before the coronavirus, well before the bushfires, the  economy in Australia was flatlining. We had record low wage growth now for years. We’ve  had record low interest rates, much lower than what existed during the Global Financial  Crisis. Really, since May we have got a Government that found itself surprised to be sitting  on the side of the Parliament that it is and has absolutely in plan to get the economy going.  So, if the coronavirus and its economic impact turns out to be big, what that actually means  is the inaction of the Government last year on the economy is put into much starker relief.

ROW:LAND: So, just carrying that forward, do you believe, therefore, the planned Budget

surplus should now become secondary to the Australian Government doing all it can to  help people caught up in this virus outbreak and also, importantly, those affected by  the bushfires?

MARLES: First, the Government absolutely needs to be doing everything it can in relation  to both of those issues. There is no doubt about that. The Budget surplus is a test that the  Government set for itself last May, indeed the Government announced that it had already  achieved the surplus last May. So it is for the Government to explain all of that.  But, ultimately, we have got an economy which was flat lining well before the fires started,  well before the coronavirus occurred and the Government had absolutely no  plan whatsoever to do anything about it. If it turns out that these are very big impacts on  the economy going forward, and who knows, that only puts into starker relief the complete  inaction of this Government last year.

ROWLAND: Okay, Bridget McKenzie has quit in the wake of the sports rorts affair. The  Labor Party would be happy she's done the right thing?

MARLES: We are not happy about any of this. This is a very sorry and tawdry tale.  But  there is a whole lot more now that needs to come forth. We need to actually get  the Gaetjens Report so that is transparent, so the Australian people can see that. We will  be seeking to establish a Senate Select Committee to look into this in more detail-

ROWLAND: Have you got the numbers at this stage for a Senate Inquiry from  the crossbench?

MARLES: Ultimately, we will do everything that we can in terms of working with the  crossbench in order to achieve that. But we need to know what is going on here. This is  much more than just the question of Bridget McKenzie being in a gun club. We have got a  whole program with $100 million, which is very clear was being distributed on the basis,  not of merit, not on where the best buck could be spend in terms of community sport, but  on the basis of electoral politics; spreadsheets which set out the marginality of seats and  that being the basis on which people are getting their grants. We have got emails from the  Prime Minister's Office- we need to understand exactly how much up to his neck in it the  Prime Minister is in. There is a lot more which needs to come forth here.

ROWLAND: The Government argues - and we have the Trade Minister Simon  Birmingham on the show earlier - he argues that this document, this report by the head of  the Prime Minister's Department, can't be released because it is a Cabinet document,  making the point that no Government, Labor or Liberal, releases these sort of documents.  What do you make of that?

MARLES: If the Government think they don't have an issue here, they frankly have their  head firmly stuck in the sand. I mean, they need to be explaining to the Australian people,  given all that has come out here, exactly what basis these funds were distributed. Now,  whatever excuse it wants to come up with in relation to that report, it can. But all  the Australian people are going to see is a Government continuing to try and hide away  from the Australian people what is an evident truth about the way in which this money was  distributed. I mean, this is an absolute disgrace. The Australian people have a right to  know about it and they absolutely have a right to know exactly where the Prime Minister  was at in relation to all of this and the extent to which he had his hands on it.

ROWLAND: Okay. Just before we go; things are moving pretty quickly in Canberra in



morning. We have just heard the Deputy Prime Minister and Nationals Leader Michael  McCormack has scheduled a media conference in about half an hour’s time. Barnaby  Joyce says if there is a spill, he will toss his hat into the ring for the top job. Surely, he's  served his penance, in your view. He can have another run at the top job?

MARLES: Michael, this is a breathtaking indulgence. We have got a national crisis with  bushfires, a global crisis with the coronavirus. The Australian people are looking to its  government for leadership and the Morrison Government, frankly, couldn't give a stuff  about Australians. The only thing they are interested in is themselves. They are utterly self-obsessed. They have come back to Canberra, not with a view to coming up with a plan  for the rest of the country, but they have just come back wearing boxing gloves, ready the  beat each other up. This says everything about the way in which this Government is  imploding and how in a crisis they have gone completely missing.

ROWLAND: Okay, Richard Marles, we will leave it there. Thank you very much for your  time this morning.

MARLES: Thanks, Michael.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363





