

THE HON JOSH FRYDENBERG MP  Treasurer

MEDIA RELEASE

Media contact: Leanne Jones — Office of the Hon Josh Frydenberg MP — 02 6277 7340  The Hon Josh Frydenberg MP | Treasurer | MELBOURNE



23 September 2020



EXTENSION OF TEMPORARY CHANGES TO CONTINUOUS  DISCLOSURE PROVISIONS FOR COMPANIES AND OFFICERS

As part of our economic plan, the Morrison Government will continue to provide regulatory relief for  businesses that have been impacted by COVID-19 by extending temporary continuous disclosure  provisions that apply to companies and their officers’ for a further six months until 23 March 2021.

Given the impact of COVID-19 and the uncertainty it generates, it remains considerably more  challenging for companies to release reliable forward-looking guidance to the market.

The Government will extend the existing relief which temporarily amends the Corporations Act 2001 (the  Act) so that companies and officers remain liable where there has been “knowledge, recklessness or  negligence” with respect to updates on price sensitive information to the market.

The extension will be made under the instrument-making power that has been inserted into the Act as  part of our response to COVID-19.

The heightened level of uncertainty around companies’ future prospects as a result of COVID -19  exposes companies to the threat of opportunistic class actions for allegedly falling foul of their  continuous disclosure obligations if their forecasts in the middle of a pandemic are found to be  inaccurate.

In response, companies may hold back from making forecasts of future earnings or other forward -looking estimates, limiting the amount of information available to investors during this period.

Importantly, evidence to date shows that the temporary exemption has assisted companies to continue  to update the market during this difficult and uncertain time. In fact, Treasury has identified that there  has been an increase in the number of material announcements to the market during the period the  relief has been in place, relative to the same period last year.

So while this temporary measure has not detracted from information being provided to the market, it  has made it harder to bring such actions against companies and officers’ during the coronavirus crisis  and while allowing the market to continue to stay informed and function effectively.

In addition to this extended regulatory relief, the Government is providing an unprecedented level of  support totalling $314 billion to cushion the blow for households and businesses as part of our  economic recovery plan for Australia.

Ends.

