UNOFFICIAL







The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

The Hon. Steven Marshall MP  Premier of South Australia

The Hon. Stuart Robert MP  Minister for the National Disability Insurance Scheme  Minister for Government Services

The Hon. David Littleproud MP  Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE



Friday 23 October 2020

PANDEMIC LEAVE DISASTER PAYMENT FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA

The Australian Government has extended Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment arrangements in place with  Victoria, New South Wales, Western Australia and Tasmania following agreement with the South  Australian Government. The Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment is a lump sum payment to help an  individual during the 14 day self-isolation, quarantine or caring period.

The agreement will see the Commonwealth Government extend the $1,500 Pandemic Leave Disaster  Payment to South Australian workers who cannot earn an income because they must self-isolate,  quarantine or care for someone with COVID-19.

If an individual is instructed by a health official to self-isolate or quarantine, and they have used up all  appropriate leave entitlements, including any special pandemic leave, they may be eligible to make a  claim. They may also be eligible if they’re the parent or guardian of a child aged 16 or under who has  been instructed to isolate as they are a close contact or has tested positive for COVID-19, or they’re  caring for someone who has tested positive for COVID-19.

In line with arrangements with other states, South Australian workers will not be eligible for the  payment if they are receiving income, earnings or salary maintenance from work, receiving the

JobKeeper Payment or other forms of Australian Government income support, or receive a Pandemic  Leave payment from the South Australian Government.

The payment can be claimed again should an extended self-isolation or quarantine period longer than  14 days be instructed by health officials, or their period of caring is extended.

To date, more than $15.5 million in Pandemic Leave Disaster Payments have been paid for more than  10,300 granted claims since 6 August.

The fastest and easiest way to make a claim is over the phone by calling 180 22 66. Please do not visit a  service centre.

Further information is available at www.servicesaustralia.gov.au/disaster.

[END]

Media contacts:  Prime Minister’s office: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  Premier’s office: Ashton Hurn, 0409 199 107  Minister Robert’s office: James Larsson, 0427 100 431  Minister Littleproud’s office: Brett Chant, 0477 744 614  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

