

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO



ANIKA WELLS

MEMBER FOR LILLEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

BRISBANE

TUESDAY, 10 MARCH 2020



ANIKA WELLS, MEMBER FOR LILLEY:  Good morning everyone I'm Annika Wells you're

a Federal Member for Lilly, I’m really pleased to have the Deputy Leader of the Labor

Party, Richard Marles, here with me today in Brighton to really get stuck into an issue I

think is not getting enough attention across the national political landscape at the moment.

That is the issue of the costs of childcare for hundreds of thousands of families right across

Australia. Childcare costs are really encroaching upon the household budget, I know as

someone who has a 3 year old in childcare myself, it has a big impact on our household

budget and that problem has actually gotten a lot worse for us since the LNP have been in

Government. A few years back the now Prime Minister Scott Morrison, but then Treasurer,

overhaul the childcare system and promised families like mine and families like here in

Brighton that there out of pocket costs with the increase they get more money back and

they have to spend less on childcare. But just a few years on those savings have been

entirely absorbed by the towering system. People don't see any of those savings more and

in fact here in Brighton, which is similar to its neighbours suburbs Sandgate and Deagan

there's actually been a 19.1% increase in the cost of childcare just in the past 18 months.

That is obscene, for families to absorb a 19% cost in childcare fees, particularly families

that have more than one child enrolled in childcare, families with young children who are

already facing a very tough local economy here, it's really not good enough. The

Government isn't doing anything about it, the very few pieces of legislation we've seen

through the House since the election have been tinkering around the edges, it hasn't been

about a big fix, it hasn't been about making lives and budgets easier Northside families. It's

something I am extremely concerned about and I'll continue to fight for and that's why it

was so good to have our Deputy Leader Richard Marles with me today to see what it's like

here in Brighton and get stuck into this himself. I'll hand it over to.



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER: Well it's fantastic to be here with Anika

Wells our wonderful Member for Lilley who's doing such a great job in the Federal

Parliament representing this community and it's fantastic to be here at Good Start Early

Learning Centre in Brighton in Brisbane. We've been having a look around at the centre

and seeing the really fantastic job that is being done here in terms of not only looking after

kids but providing kids the beginnings of their education and what we know about early

learning is that in the educational journey of all of us the most important years of the first

year and that's happening right here and it reminds us of how central early learning centres

are, childcare centres are to the way in which we organise our lives now. As a parent of

four we have a relationship, our family with a childcare centre for 18 years. It was

completely fundamental to how we operated as a family and so making sure that these

centres are affordable is really critical. As Anika has just said we've seen enormous price

rises in this suburb since the Morrison Government did its review. But since the Abbott,

Turnbull, Morrison Government came to power in 2013 we've seen a 34% increase in

childcare fees. Now that comes at a period where over that journey we have seen

stagnating wages, the cost of living going up in a whole range of areas. This is becoming

increasingly hard to afford and that's why we need to see responses from the Government

about putting in place downward pressures on childcare fees. It's absolutely critical for how

our society now works and it's really important for how this centre here in Brighton works

and for childcare centres around the country. I'd like to just mention that obviously we are

saying the coronavirus now is emerging as an enormous global crisis. We've raised the

question here, this is a centre which is part of a large company operating 700 centres

around Australia. Obviously very mindful of the Coronavirus they're putting in place

protocols and information for their staff. They're obviously well aware of how to deal with

viruses and diseases coming into their centre but that's going to be really important that



centres like this are able to provide leadership within our community and continue to

operate during this crisis. I think what we need to be seeing right now as the Government

prepares its stimulus package is a Government that is providing leadership in relation to

the Coronavirus so that we do not see any complacency in the way in which this issue is

handled. We need leadership in respect of the very big decisions that are going to need to

be made because our country cannot afford complacency on the part of our Government

when it comes to the handling of it. What that means in terms of the stimulus that is being

put forward by the Government is that it must be sufficient for the task. This is going to

have an economic impact, we've seen the Government be complacent in relation to the

economy last year before the bushfires and before Corona emerged. It's going to be very

important that as we go forward the Government reacts to this in a way which

demonstrates leadership and is not complacent.



JOURNALIST: If the Labor Party was in Government what would they be doing differently

to the Morrison Government?



MARLES: Well what's absolutely critical is that in a global crisis such as this, that we see

leadership on the part of our Government. Back in 2008 when the Global Financial Crisis

hit, you saw leadership from the then Rudd Government and Treasurer Wayne Swan in

making the big decisions that needed to be made which meant that Australia was one of

only two countries in the developed world which got through the Global Financial Crisis

without going into recession. It took big decisions and it took leadership, that's what we

need to see now because our country cannot afford any complacency on the part of this

Government.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363



