PETER KHALIL MP

MEMBER FOR WILLS





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS FIRST EDITION WITH PETER STEFANOVIC

WEDNESDAY, 14 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Mental Health; Tax Cuts and COVID-19 Lockdown.



PETER STEFANOVIC, HOST: Joining us live now is Labor MP Peter Khalil. Peter it’s

good to see you, thanks for joining us. There is some statistics coming out from the

government today that are quite alarming. A million Australians have needed help for

mental health issues since the COVID outbreak. But also there’s been quite an uptick in

Victoria. There’s been a 30 per cent increase just over the past four weeks alone. Is that

being mirrored in your own electorate?



PETER KHALIL, MEMBER FOR WILLS: Yeah I’m not surprised by these statistics at all. I

think the mental health strain on Victorians in my electorate has been immense. We’re in

Mental Health month actually and 1 in 5 Australians experienced mental illness before

COVID-19. The restrictions and the pandemic and everything that’s happened to all of us

this year, particularly in Victoria has only exacerbated those strains. You see it with

parents, with small business owners, you see it with students and young people. You see it

with singles, people who live alone. Even the elderly who are more isolated. We’ve had to

do grocery drop offs and things like that. Just call them up on the phone just to have a

chat, just to keep connected with people. The good news is that schools back, so that’s a

big relief for parents frankly. But there is a real strain on people’s mental health during

these restrictions.



STEFANOVIC: So, what does that say to you? You’ve got to get people back outside,

back outdoors and try and get things back to the way they were.



KHALIL: Absolutely Pete. And look, your lead story on the restrictions in Victoria, setting

aside all the politics - this is not about politics now - it’s about good public policy. I think

the Victorian Government are obviously responsible for the Hotel Quarantine, I’ve raised

issue as constructively as I can about the fact that there hasn’t been capacity or good

enough capacity on contact tracing, raised issues around the restrictions and inconsistency

around some of those restrictions, so it’s not a partisan thing. Its about good public policy

and they are trying obviously to bring down this second wave so that we don’t have the

health system overwhelmed but you’ve got to make, obviously, decisions on the cost to

people’s health, mental health as well as other health issues. Cancer screening has

dropped because people have been scared to go and get tested. Things like that need to

be assessed in all of this. And I would say, frankly, once we get contact tracing up to a

capacity that is really good, you really want to be able to localise your response to

outbreaks. Like the ones we’ve seen in Shepparton and in part of country Victoria. You

localise that response, you don’t lockdown the entire state because of a break out in

Shepparton for example.



STEFANOVIC: The Premier is now suggesting, Daniel Andrews is suggesting that the

current number are as good as it gets. He’s not going to be able to get to his level of 5 and

then easing restrictions, so is that another example of the goal of elimination being

impossible?



KHALIL: The State Governments have said they’re not trying to get to elimination



STEFANOVIC: Well Jenny Mikakos would disagree.



KHALIL: Yeah, well that’s a good point. It was a very strict form of suppression which, you

know, it’s all a bit semantics isn’t it.



STEFANOVIC: Yeah strict suppression or elimination. That’s the same thing.



KHALIL: Technically, if you look at New Zealand for example, they had outbreaks even

after they had supposedly eliminated the virus from the country. So, I think we’re stuck with

this virus, everyone knows that. That’s why the response has to be, there has to be a quick

fire and localised response. The contact tracing has to be really on top of its game and

very strict, if you like, at a local level. So you don’t collectively shut down the rest of the

state or the city or the economies there and try to get back to what the Premier has called

“COVID Normal”. And they’re working through all those figures, I’m not privy to all the

figures and I’m not a medical expert. But politicians and leaders have to make tough

decisions. How much risk are we prepared to take visa vis the mortality rate, with the virus

and the capacity of the health system and the ICU capacity. Now right now in Victoria

we’ve got, I think, 25 or 23 people in hospital with COVID-19, the ICU capacity is a couple

of people on ICU, but we have about 800-900 beds. How much are you prepared to take of

that? You look at the UK, Boris Johnson’s had to go back to a partial lockdown.



STEFANOVIC: Yeah that’s right.



KHALIL: Because the health system is now being overwhelmed, or the ICUs are being

overwhelmed. So it’s about getting that balance right.



STEFANOVIC: Well, Trump’s gone the other way.



KHALIL: That’s right. And there’s been a lot of criticism for that. I think politicians around

the world have struggled. You’ve got one end of the spectrum that’s like it doesn’t really

matter. And the other end of the spectrum, obviously a much stricter, a much more

concern around having any of the virus get out of hand. It’s somewhere in the middle that’s

Covid Normal, until we get a vaccine, if we ever get a vaccine. And we have to actually

face that reality.



STEFANOVIC: Just finally Peter, we’ve got eyes on Josh Frydenberg at the moment. He’s

about to attend a door stop.



KHALIL: Oh, I’m more important than Josh aren’t I?



STEFANOVIC: There’s the live pictures now. So when we start hearing from Josh we’ll

bring that to you live folks. But just finally, you brought up the economy, I’d like to ask you

about that Pete, Because there’s a report in the Financial Review this morning that

suggests that Antony Albanese is likely to scale back stage three tax cuts if he wins office,

rather than revoke them. What would you like to see on that front?



KHALIL: Well last year, I argued very strongly we should support the tax cuts for stage

one and stage two. I didn’t agree with the stage 3, never have and Labor, the caucus never

agreed with stage three because 80 billion dollars that would go to high income earners,

people earning over $200,000



STEFANOVIC: But that doesn’t change. People earning over 200k, there’s no change

there. They were at 45 per cent.



KHALIL: Well we’re looking at amending elements of the package so that the stage three

tax cuts don’t go, or the 80 Billion doesn’t go to tax cuts. It can be spent on schools, on

roads, on hospitals, on manufacturing, on job creation. And people who are low income

earners, they spend their tax cuts. The evidence is there, the economic evidence is there.

They’ll spend it in the economy and that’s a good thing. That’s why we supported stage

one and stage 2. So I think we’ve settled on a very good position, and I think the

Government is being a bit suborn on this frankly. Because they know that those stage

three tax cuts, that 80 billion can be spent better elsewhere.



STEFANOVIC: So would it be your plan to scale back or revoke? Just to be clear, you’d

revoke it completely?



KHALIL: Well, I don’t know. We’d have to look at stage three. With the caucus, we’d have

to look at stage three tax cuts at the time. Look at the economy at the time and assess

what kind scaling back or -



STEFANOVIC: Because there’s a lot of people in that bracket.



KHALIL: Over 200,000?



STEFANOVIC: Under.



KHALIL: Yeah, but if you’re amending something, you want to make sure that the stage

one and stage two tax cuts - and I think you’re talking about stage three impacting people

who are low- and middle-income earners. Of course, we’re going to look at that because

what we want, is to ensure that low- and middle-income earners are getting all of their tax

cuts even if some of it flows from stage three. Now technically how we do that with

amendments bill, if we win government, it’s all hypothetical right, but if we win government,

that’ll be the work that we would have to do. The principle, Peter, is making sure that the



money flows to low and middle income earners, under $200,000, but the high income

earners are not getting 80 billion in tax cuts or there abouts. That that money is spent on

education, on schools, on hospitals and so on.



STEFANOVIC: Okay. Pete good to chat. We’ll talk to you soon.



KHALIL: Thanks Peter.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JESS BRENNAN 0421 334 918



