



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au

19 September 2020

FURTHER SUPPORT FOR AUSTRALIAN SEAFARERS

The Liberal and Nationals Government is continuing to support Australian seafarers affected by the  COVID-19 pandemic with a further automatic extension to their qualifications.

Earlier this year the Government announced an automatic extension for international and domestic  seafarer certificates and today’s announcement extends this arrangement until 31 January 2021.

This means that if a seafarer’s certificate expires between 26 March 2020 and 31 January 2021, they  will automatically receive an extension at no cost and with no application required.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the Federal Government recognised many people working in the Australian  commercial maritime industry were doing it tough.

“This latest measure is about backing our Australian maritime sector, from a small commercial  tourism operator, to an exporting commercial fisher, right up to a seafarer aboard a massive  container ship,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“This further extension to certificates means one less thing to worry about for Australian seafarers.

“We recognise the important contribution the commercial maritime industry makes to our country  by putting food on the table and ensuring the continued movement of people and vital freight.”

Australian Maritime Safety Authority (AMSA) acting Chief Executive Officer Sachi Wimmer said this  assistance balanced management of safety risks in the marine environment with the need to support  seafarers and maritime business through COVID-19.

“There is further assistance available for vessel operators through exemptions, temporary crewing  permits and suspension of a certificate of survey to name just a few.”

More information on AMSA’s support to the maritime industry during COVID-19 is available online at  https://www.amsa.gov.au/news-community/campaigns/advice-maritime-industry-covid-19.

Ends.

Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Jo Williamson 0418 475 668 / Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  AMSA - 1300 624 633 | media@amsa.gov.au

