



SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women

STATEMENT



AUSTRALIA’S SUPPORT FOR SOUTHEAST ASIA’S COVID-19  RECOVERY

13 September 2020

Australia will expand our COVID-19 regional development pivot with additional support  for Southeast Asia’s health security, stability and economic recovery.

A new $60 million package of initiatives will support the Association of Southeast Asian  Nations (ASEAN) under the Partnerships for Recovery program. This package  complements the significant funds already pivoted under Australia’s existing aid  program to support the region’s most pressing priorities in response to COVID-19.

On health security, we will embark on a new partnership to help the Mekong sub-region  enhance early detection of COVID-19 using Australian technology to monitor  wastewater.

New research to be funded under Partnerships for Recovery will help inform how  ASEAN’s COVID-19 recovery plans support the specific needs of women and girls. We  will extend our funding for the Disability Rights in ASEAN (DRiA) initiative and support  development of the ASEAN Enabling Masterplan 2025. These measures will support an  inclusive approach to regional recovery, including for vulnerable people and  communities.

A further investment in ASEAN’s economic integration and digital connectivity will take  forward concrete cooperation under the ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific.

This investment, a successor to Australia’s flagship economic cooperation program with  ASEAN (AADCPII), will support economic recovery through cooperation in connectivity,  digital transformation, responding to the fourth industrial revolution, and private sector  development.

Further to our commitment to support ASEAN-led health responses at the Special  ASEAN-Australia Foreign Ministers’ meeting on 30 June, I am pleased to confirm  Australia will contribute $1 million to ASEAN’s COVID-19 Response Fund, to help  ASEAN purchase medical supplies and equipment, support research cooperation, and  build capacity for frontline health professionals.

I had the opportunity to discuss Australia’s latest commitments with my ASEAN  counterparts on Thursday evening as part of the ASEAN-Australia Ministerial Meeting.

For Australia, ASEAN regional architecture is central to a stable, open, inclusive and  resilient Indo-Pacific. Australia’s health security and economic recovery are closely  connected to those of our Southeast Asian partners.

Australia’s ASEAN cooperation complements our significant bilateral work across the  region. Our development partnerships in Southeast Asia, which totalled about $1 billion  in overseas development assistance in 2019-20, will reduce COVID-19 impacts and  support our shared health security, stability and economic recovery.

Media Contacts  David Wroe: +61 429 531 143  Melanie Ruiz: +61 427 888 392

