

BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR SCIENCE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  MEMBER FOR GORTON



TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING  MEMBER FOR SYDNEY



GO8 REPORT HIGHLIGHTS VULNERABILITY OF RESEARCH CAPABILITY  UNDER GOVERNMENT

A report released today by the Group of Eight universities warns that funding cuts and  research job losses will make it harder for Australia to recover from the recession.

The report, Enabling Australia’s Economic Recovery Through Supporting Research  Excellence, shows that increasing threats to Australian research jobs under the Morrison  Government will significantly hamper the development of industries that could give our  economy a boost and get people back into work.

Warning that Australia faces the loss of nearly 10,000 researchers to other nations, and  emphasising the insecure nature of the work of many quality Australian researchers, the  report states:

“It is this workforce which leads to new products and discoveries, and which, in turn,  creates the jobs and the productivity vital to Australia’s post COVID-19 future.”

The report emphasises the need for collaboration across industries to promote innovation  and exposes the devastating impacts of the loss of university funding to our research  capability.

In order to boost productivity in strategic areas such as healthcare, advanced  manufacturing, transport, infrastructure, energy and defence, then Australia needs to back  our research capability.

What we are sadly seeing under the Morrison Government is the opposite.

We are relying on researchers to develop vaccines and treatments for COVID-19, but  those researchers can’t rely on Scott Morrison to protect their jobs.

At a time when it is more important than ever to listen to our scientists and researchers, the



Morrison Government is presiding over a decline in research and development, and is  failing to adequately commercialise science.

This Government has been silent when it comes to increasing concerns from scientists and  professional researchers that they are facing job cuts, insecure work, and wage freezes.

Undermining science has taken various forms under Liberals, including cutting staff at the  CSIRO, the very organisation now testing vaccines for the coronavirus, and sending them  to the Centrelink queues.

They have refused to give universities any support during this crisis, despite up to 30,000  jobs estimated to be slashed.

Despite the obvious importance of research and development in the race to establish,  manufacture and distribute a vaccine, this Government remains committed to slashing  nearly $2billion from the R&D Tax Incentive, hurting Australian researchers and  manufacturers in the private sector.

Federal Labor believes in the importance of listening to and respecting our experts,  particularly in response to COVID-19. The Government’s anti-science agenda is clear.

Cuts to research and development will only hamper Australia’s long-term economic  recovery from the Morrison Government’s recession.

WEDNESDAY, 9 SEPTEMBER 2020

MEDIA CONTACT: ERIN SMITH (O’CONNOR) 0458 950 010









