

JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

SUNDAY, 23 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Morrison Government’s failure in aged care; JobSeeker and JobKeeper rates;

state borders.



JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS: This week in

Federal Parliament, what we need to hear from the Prime Minister and his

Minister is them to accept responsibility for the debacle in aged care and the

crisis that is happening in Victoria today. Sadly, we have more deaths overnight

in Victoria related to aged care. This is an absolute tragedy for every family and

their loved ones, and I extend my sympathies to their families and loved ones.



The Prime Minister and the Government were warned in the middle of April

after what happened in New South Wales with Dorothy Henderson Lodge and

Newmarch House, the Government knew what could happen and it seems to

have been ill-prepared and behind the eight ball every step of the way. The

Australian public expects the Prime Minister and his Minister to accept

responsibility, to apologise for what they didn't do or didn't do soon enough in

relation to aged care in Australia. What the public expect is people to accept

responsibilities for what went wrong and to fix it. And what we need to know this

week from the Prime Minister and his Minister is, are they actually going to fix it

and the Australian public need to have confidence that they've learned their

lessons from what went wrong in New South Wales and now in Victoria.



We have too many older Australians, their families and their loved ones

concerned right now about what is happening in aged care and the

Government and the Prime Minister need to accept responsibility for where we

are today and what has happened in aged care in Australia.



JOURNALIST: There were a couple of practical things that you think that they

should do as priority, what are the things that most urgently need to be done in

aged care?



COLLINS:  Well the Government has had a report on its desk for almost two

years now into workforce. We saw in reports today that all they've done to date

is set up a committee about workforce. The government was warned on nearly

all of the issues. Can the public now have the confidence that they will actually

be able to fix this? When they were asked, when the Minister was asked in

the Senate on Friday to table his workforce strategy, he didn't even have a

document. We don't even know if there is one. It is simply not good enough.

And the Australian public needs to have confidence that the national aged care

coordination response, as suggested by the Royal Commission, is actually

going to happen, that the aged care response centres in each state and

territory are actually going to happen, that aged care workers are appropriately

trained in infection control and protection gear, and that people are actually

ready for these outbreaks to occur in other states and territories.



But we need to know that the Australian Government is ready for this to occur.

We lost months. The Government wasted months between April and where we

are today. We cannot have that happen again.



JOURNALIST: Julie the aged care coordination centres that are being established

in each state, they'll only stand up as there is a certain outbreak or a trigger of

community transmission. Is that acceptable or would you prefer to see them

fully operational for the duration of this pandemic?



COLLINS: Well, it took the Government weeks to scramble to get the aged care

response teams set up in Victoria. What the Australian public needs to know is

if there are outbreaks in other states and territories, that this will happen within

days, not take weeks. We cannot continue to be behind the eight ball in

responding to outbreaks in aged care facilities around the country.



JOURNALIST: Ms Collins, just sort of looking more broadly at these things,

Federal run aged care has been controversial for decades. And this pandemic

has again exposed the flaws. Do you think there is a broader argument just to

restructure the whole sector, and take the Feds out it all together and letting

one level of Government deliver the service by the states?



COLLINS: The future of aged care in Australia is really a question that the Royal

Commission is looking at. What we need is for the Royal Commission to do its

work. The Royal Commission is due to report in February. There was an

extension due to COVID, which is understandable and a further extension due

to the death of one of the commissioners. And the commissioners are really

getting to the nub of some of the issues. But what we need in the meantime is

for the Prime Minister and the Minister to actually outline to the country that we

are ready for further outbreaks in aged care in Australia today while we wait for

the Royal Commission's report about what the future of aged care in Australia

should require.



JOURNALIST: Just on the minister, we just wanted to clarify Labor's position in

the wake of the Minister's performance at a parliamentary committee on Friday,

is it your view he should be sacked?



COLLINS: Clearly, the minister's response on Friday was completely inadequate

and frankly embarrassing. And if I was one of those families, I'd be very

concerned that the Minister didn't know basic facts in his own portfolio. But it's

up to the Prime Minister to give the Australian public confidence that he and/or

his Minister can actually fix the problems in aged care. We've seen to date that

that has not been the case. We've seen the Government behind the eight ball

and the Minister and his Department behind the eight ball every step of the

way. We need to get ahead of this response in aged care due to COVID.



JOURNALIST: Do you think he should resign though?



COLLINS: Well, that's a decision for the Minister and the Prime Minister.



JOURNALIST: Kristina Keneally has a pretty hard line on this, she thinks he

should be sacked. So just on Jonathan's question, which is it, should he be

sacked or should resign?



COLLINS: Well, the Prime Minister needs to assure the Australian public that his

minister and his Government can actually fix the problems in aged care. What

we've seen from the current minister is, is that there have been delays, that

things have not been done in a timely manner. And clearly, his responses on

Friday were totally inadequate or embarrassing and really show that he's not

across the portfolio when he should be.



JOURNALIST: So should he be given a second chance basically? Is that what

you're saying, he should be given another chance?



COLLINS: That's a decision for the Government and the Prime Minister.



JOURNALIST: Can he redeem himself in any way in your eyes?



COLLINS: What we've seen from the Government, from the Minister and the

Prime Minister is they were not ready for this outbreak. Now, who is responsible

for that is a decision that the Minister and the Prime Minister need to come to.

Frankly, the Government and the Prime Minister are ultimately responsible. He

should accept responsibility for where we are today. I'd like to see an

unreserved apology to the families and the loved ones for the mistakes that

have been made. And we need the Government to fix it. The Australian public,

need confidence that they are recognising they're responsible, that they're

recognising they've made mistakes and that they're going to fix them.



JOURNALIST: How much should that the current problems in aged is down to a

lack of a properly trained workforce large enough to do the job?



COLLINS: Well, clearly, it's been a significant issue in terms of workforce. The

Government's surge workforce capacity has been extremely limited. The

government was warned after what happened in New South Wales that up to

100 per cent of staff could be furloughed as close contacts or because of

infections. The Government should have been better prepared for the loss of

staff that we've seen both in New South Wales and Victoria in these outbreaks.

In terms of staffing generally, we've had Professor Pollaers' report sitting on the

Minister's desk for two years, 14 recommendations, only one of them partially

implemented and all the Government's done is establish a committee. I mean,

frankly, it's not good enough. Australians with loved ones in aged care expect

them to be getting the best possible care. They expect the workers to be well

trained, well paid. Labor has consistently said there aren't enough staff and

they're not paid enough.



JOURNALIST: On another issues, the Government obviously has to legislate, if

it's going to step down JobKeeper and JobSeeker. What's the Labor Party's

view on that, given what's happening in Victoria, should JobKeeper and

JobSeeker stay a the levels they're set?



COLLINS: Well, obviously, the Labor Party fought really hard for the JobKeeper

wage subsidy and we were glad to see the Government actually implement

that. And we said for a long time that the JobSeeker payment was too low,

particularly during what has happened. But the decisions made to the rates

were made prior to the outbreak in Victoria. It is up to the Government to

consider whether the new rates are sufficient or not. And the Government

needs to make some decisions about whether or not the changes that it's

making are suitable in light of the outbreaks in Victoria.



JOURNALIST: Doesn't Labor have an opinion on this because it's clear now

that the September quarter is the earliest that you could get rid of level four,

these payments are going to step down at the end of September. So does the

Labor party have a view on where it should sit?



COLLINS: Well what we've said is that the Government needs to be flexible to

deal with emerging situations. The Government itself has said it needs to be

flexible to deal with emerging situations. So what we need from the

Government is a decision about whether the decisions it made prior to the

Victorian outbreak are suitable or not, or whether or not the Government's

going to be making any changes to any legislation, we might see before the

Parliament. We'll make our decision when we see what the Government's

proposal actually is.



JOURNALIST: Well they've said they're not going to change it so will you be

prepared to try and move amendments in the House and the Senate?



COLLINS: Well we think the Government should look at it in light of what has

happened in Victoria, as it said it would, and respond to emerging situations.



JOURNALIST: Ms Collins just on another issues, you come from a state, which

has walled itself off from the rest of the country because of the rona, including

some states which don't pose much of a threat. Do you see any messages out

of the NT election with Michael Gunner being marked down, losing a couple of

seats?



COLLINS: Well, first of all, I want to congratulate the Northern Territory Labor

team for the result over the weekend. They've done a tremendous job over the

weekend and in the months prior dealing with the COVID outbreak in the

Northern Territory. Congratulations to Michael Gunner and all of the Labor team

in the Northern Territory. When it comes to borders, Labor has been pretty

clear that we expect the state premiers to make decisions based on their health

and medical advice, that is what they are doing, that's what they told us they're

doing. What I personally would like to see is some more transparency around

those decisions and decision making.



JOURNALIST: On the Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission, as of last

week, since March, they only conducted 235 unannounced visits to aged care

homes nationally. Is that acceptable to you, given that they do have almost 300

inspectors across the country that work for them doing these site visits, that

effectively amounts to less than one per employee doing the visit.



COLLINS: I think what we've seen in relation to the aged care outbreaks is that

the regulator clearly doesn't have the resources necessary to do the job they're

doing or doesn't have the powers they need. I was very clear when the new

Quality and Safety Commissioner for Aged Care was established that I didn't

think they had enough powers, or resources to do the job they're being asked

to do. I think, sadly, we're seeing the failure of the regulator and the

Government for doing their job in Victoria and in New South Wales.



JOURNALIST: So you think it is a resourcing issue even though they do have a

large staff?



COLLINS: I think they need to beef up the commission generally.



JOURNALIST: Sorry Ms Collins, just back to what you said about the

transparency thing. In that vein, do you welcome the National Cabinet decision

on Friday to put out this national definition of what is a hot spot, a medically

defined definition so Premiers and Chief Ministers have to explain to the people

why they're doing what they're doing?



COLLINS: Look, we're supportive of the premiers making decisions based on

their health advice, they need to be transparent about what that advice is and

how they're implementing it with the Australian public in particular, you know,

with their local states and the people within those states about how they're

making them. What we're seeing from the state leaders is, that they're aware

that there are some issues along the borders and that they're trying to deal with

those.



JOURNALIST: Are you frustrated with the timing of Joel Fitzgibbon's public

statements about Labor failing to or struggling to appeal to working class and

progressive voters? Is it a distraction heading into the sitting week?



COLLINS: Well, I've clearly been focused on the issues around aged care. I am

very concerned, as you probably heard today, that the Government didn't do

enough and didn't do enough soon enough when it comes to aged care and the

crisis we're seeing in aged care in Australia today. I think it's a tragedy for the

families and their loved ones that we're in the position we're in and we all

expect the Government to do better.



JOURNALIST: The question was about Joel Fitzgibbon, so do you think that Joel

Fitzgibbon is right to suggest things like underwriting new gas projects, new gas

pipelines? Is that something that you're open to? Or do you think that he is way

out of line?



COLLINS: What we've seen is the usual internal debate in the Labor party that,

you know, we have said our policies are up for review post the election, that's

what happened. I am focused on what is happening in aged care, and I've been

very focused on it and I'll be really focused on it this week as we question the

Government and the Minister about their failures when it comes to aged care in

Australia.



JOURNALIST: So is it a helpful time for navel gazing then?



COLLINS: I'm focused on aged care and what's happening in aged care at the

moment.



JOURNALIST: There's a number of different rules and guidelines when

Parliament comes back, use of masks in common areas, that kind of thing. Do

you think that they're appropriate and should people have confidence that

politicians will stick to those rules?



COLLINS: Certainly everybody I've spoken to, other politicians and staff

absolutely want to do the best thing to keep people safe. I'll be listening to the

medical advice about what is required, and I'm sure that other people will be

doing so as well.



JOURNALIST: Just before you mentioned about the need to fix the aged care

system and for the Minister and the Prime Minister to be able to show that they

can do that. Is Richard Colbeck the right minister to try and fix aged care in

your view?



COLLINS: I think what we've seen from the Minister and the Prime Minister is a

lot of announcements and not a lot happening and what we need to see is

actually some action when it comes to delivering on aged care and fixing the

issues in terms of COVID and what we're seeing today. And then there are

concerns, I guess, around the recommendations of the Royal Commission on

whether or not we're going to get those implemented and implemented quickly.

What we saw from the last interim report from the Royal Commission is the

Government still hasn't fully implemented those three recommendations. And I

think the Australian public will express concern that the current Minister and the

Government and the Prime Minister are not committed enough to actually

implementing the changes required.



JOURNALIST: So should he stay or should he go?



COLLINS: That's a question for the Prime Minister.



JOURNALIST: Should the portfolio be elevated to cabinet?



COLLINS: On Labor's side, of course, it is a Shadow Cabinet position and has



been for a decade, in Cabinet and Shadow Cabinet.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119







Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











