

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE  SENATOR FOR THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RN BREAKFAST  FRIDAY 9 OCTOBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Budget reply speech; childcare; energy; NSW-Qld border measures.

HAMISH MCDONALD, HOST: The federal opposition is making a direct pitch to families  promising an extra $6 billion in cheaper childcare to try and drive high female participation  in the workforce. The daycare pledge was the centrepiece of Anthony Albanese's budget  reply last night, which also included a $20 billion plan to overhaul the electricity network,  and a made in Australia guarantee to employ more local workers on big infrastructure and  defence projects. Katy Gallagher is the Shadow Finance Minister. Good morning to you.

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER: Good morning, Hamish.

MCDONALD: The Prime Minister says Labor is seeking to divide at a time when we  should all be working together. He says you're setting young people against older people,  women against men. Is that sort of thing going to win you the next election, do you think?

GALLAGHER: Well, I completely reject that. It was a very positive speech by Anthony  Albanese. Last night. It was about outlining a vision for the future about dealing with some  of the really significant economic challenges we have facing the country and mapping out a  plan to get there. I just, I completely reject that accusation from the Prime Minister.

MCDONALD: Is it true to say that women were left out of this budget, the Government's  been at great pains over the past 24 hours to, to talk through all of the spending initiatives  that will clearly include women?

GALLAGHER: Well, certainly when I was in the budget lockup, I went searching for that  women's statement. And I found it in a glossy brochure, it was two pages about, you know,  a number of very small programmes around leadership seminars and, and things like that.  It didn't deal with the really significant issues facing women. And it didn't acknowledge that  the recession requires a different response in terms of driving some of the support that  women need, and particularly childcare. I mean, there's been report after report written  through this pandemic, around the recovery plans and childcare features in virtually every  one of them. And we've picked that up, we think it is important, it's an important lasting  economic reform to help women, not just those who want to work, but those who are  currently working, and who aren't able to afford to pick up an extra day because the

childcare system works against them.

MCDONALD: So explain the detail of this plan you've got for childcare, what would the out  of pocket cost be for an average family with a child in care?

GALLAGHER: Well, the way it would work, and it is very complicated the funding system  for childcare, it's got a different range of subsidies and, you know, type rates and things  like that. But at the moment, families on low incomes have 85% of their costs covered, this  is moving that to 90%. And increasing, or, or supporting them better in terms of how the  taper rate works. So we know that for about over a million families, they would save at  least $600 a year, but potentially up to almost $3000. So it will help a lot of families with the  cost of childcare. And we know that is one of the most significant costs on family budgets  when you take out other essential services. So it has that feature, but it also tries to, by  removing the cap that's in place, it takes away the disincentive that exists at the moment  for the second parent, mainly women to not pick up extra days of work.

MCDONALD: But how do you justify going to the electorate and saying that a family, a  couple that’s earning over $500,000 a year, half a million dollars a year, needs the  taxpayer to foot 90% of their childcare bills.

GALLAGHER: So I think the important thing there is when you look at how the all the  different measures work, for those on lower incomes, they will still receive four times the  amount of support in terms of costs being met, than those on higher incomes. But it does  bring in those currently between about $360,000 and $530,000 into the system to get  some support. And our response to that is this is not a welfare measure. This is an  important economic reform. And when we look at other supports that we have accepted  that should be provided universally, Medicare, the NDIS, public schooling. We don't take a  view that if you are on a higher income, that you shouldn't have access to that kind of  support. And we are putting childcare on the path for university - sorry for universality -  that, it's a similar position we're taking. The you know, early childhood education and care  is important for children, it's important to families and we should look to make it as easy as  possible for families to access that and for it to support women's participation in the labour  market.

MCDONALD: But to be fair, if you're saying that this is about the disincentive for the  second parent to go back to work more than three days a week, are you seriously saying  that that disincentive exists when the household is already earning over half a million  dollars a year?

GALLAGHER: Well, it certainly exists for many women. Hamish. So I think you only have  to ask any woman with children.

MCDONALD: I'm asking about those people that are included in your policy that are going  to get this support from the taxpayer. Just wondering if that that disincentive is genuinely  there when the household's earning half a million?

GALLAGHER: Well, the disincentive to work is certainly there. There are a number of  women through the income scale, who as perhaps the second income earner in the family,  who, if they pick up an extra day, this fourth or fifth day at work, will work for nothing in  some instances. So there is a very strong disincentive not to work there. In terms of your  focus on those on higher incomes. Again, I would say to you, we have acknowledged that  this is an important economic reform. There are other services that we provide across the

community that governments and the community have accepted, should be provided  because of the good they provide more broadly, whether it be to the economy or to  individual families, and we are saying childcare needs to be part of that. And that's why  we've outlined the policy as it stands last night with Albo.

MCDONALD: So where does the money come from? This is a structural change to the  system. We've already got a $215 billion deficit, that national debt is barrelling towards a  trillion dollars. Where does this money come from?

GALLAGHER: Well, we'll certainly be outlining all of our costings in the lead up to the  election, Hamish, I understand completely the need to be responsible, to outline how  you're going to do it, how the costs are going to be met. And we will do that, as we've done  in previous elections. But I would say, you know, the government, on the government's  own numbers, you know, the challenges as we head into the next election in terms of  deficit and debt, face all, all of us equally, there are challenges there, we do need to be  responsible, and we need to outline how we're going to pay for it. But we also have to  accept that we need to deal with some of these challenges. And I think that's what was  missing in the government's budget, there was no reform, no long term plan. And the  difference you saw last night was Albo putting down markers saying we accept these are  significant challenges, we need a plan for reform and this is our priority list going forward.

MCDONALD: But Senator isn't it all a bit hollow unless you can actually explain where the  money's coming from?

GALLAGHER: No, I don't think so at all, I don't think it's hollow at all. It's a very clear  commitment. We've outlined how much it costs, we outline why we want to do it. And as  we do in every term of government, and we will go forward with a clear costings document  about how it all fits together. I don't think that's hollow at all. I think it's responsible, we're  going out we are saying what we want to do. And we will clearly outline how it all fits  together and how those costs will be met before well before the next election.

MCDONALD: Labor's also promising an NBN style corporation to rewire the country's  electricity transmission network to link up renewables with the national grid. Is it necessary  to rebuild the entire system? Why not focus on a specific project that AEMO, the market  regulator has recommended, things like the Marinus Link interconnector to Tasmania.

GALLAGHER: So that's what I think, that's the approach the government has taken,  they're doing things, you know, I think they have a much smaller project where they are  going to be picking individual ones, we've taken the view, again, with the opportunity of  really moving forward with a plan for the future that picking up the work that the AEMO has  done, picking up their plan, which clearly outlines a number of projects, and putting in  place governance arrangements that's going to drive that is clearly the best way to bring  about the changes, but also to make sure that electricity is provided to consumers and  businesses at the lowest possible cost. And this model does that. It's a corporation. It  doesn't require a rate of return from that Corporation. It's got to meet its costs. But part of  the issue in terms of prices on people's bills is what's built-in as the rate of return for the  companies that are providing the electricity and putting a model in place like this. And not  requiring any profit to be made off it means that households will get the access to the  lowest electricity possible. And we think that's a really important measure.

MCDONALD: I want to put a question to you about COVID and borders. We've been  speaking this morning to Brad Hazard, the New South Wales health minister, he's furious



with the Queensland premier. He sort of launched a verbal tirade, here's what he said.

"I've had to be on the phone, arguing with them to try and get doctors to be able to cross  back and forth across the border. At one stage we had Tenterfield in New South Wales,  who didn't have a GP because she decided that any doctor crossing back and forth had to  go back into quarantine for two weeks. This is a completely reprehensible, uncaring and  cruel approach by the Queensland premier.”

Brad Hazard says he's sick of it. You're the former chief minister of the ACT, do you have  some sympathies for what New South Wales is going through?

GALLAGHER: Hamish, it’s hard sort of being out of the state and territory sphere and  looking back in, you know, I think COVID has presented us with a whole range of  challenges that I can, you know, would be frustrating on any level for any government  trying to, to manage their way out of it. But equally, I think in very early days, we accepted  that the health advice should guide governments. I mean, that was one of the first  decisions of the National Cabinet. And, you know, I think that's what Queensland is doing.  As far as I can see, they're getting health advice about how to manage and keep their  community safe, that may conflict with what NSW wants to do. But I think it's very difficult  to pick and say you know, to change and say, well, we're not going to take the health  advice any longer. I just, I think it puts the premier of Queensland in an impossible position  when that is clearly what the National Cabinet decided to do many many months ago and  to be fair, has kept Queensland in pretty good shape over the last seven months.

MCDONALD: Katy Gallagher, thank you very much.

GALLAGHER: Thanks, Hamish.

MCDONALD: That's the shadow finance minister there.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: PAT CRONAN  0432 758 224







