







The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology  Federal Member for McPherson

MEDIA RELEASE

NEW GUIDANCE TO SUPPORT INVESTMENT IN RESEARCH AND  DEVELOPMENT

4 November 2020

The Morrison Government has strengthened its commitment to supporting  companies to invest in research and development, releasing refreshed R&D Tax  Incentive (R&DTI) guidance today.

The guidance follows the Government’s investment of a further $2 billion into the  incentive, which provides a tax offset to support Australian companies to undertake  additional research and development activities.

The refreshed Guide to Interpretation offers straightforward and accessible advice  for companies accessing the R&DTI, making it easier to find the information they  need.

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said the Guide is just  one of the ways the Government is supporting businesses.

“We’re focussed on getting the economic conditions right so Australian businesses  can thrive, which is crucial to our recovery from the COVID-19 recession,” Minister  Andrews said.

“By giving greater clarity to the scope of eligible activities under the R&DTI  legislation, we’re supporting more Australian companies to self-assess their R&D  activities against the criteria and offset some of the associated costs.

“Alongside reforms announced in the recent Budget, providing clearer guidance  material helps give companies the confidence and certainty to invest in the kinds of  R&D that boosts our economy and creates highly skilled jobs right across Australia.

“We know that companies that conduct R&D are often more successful and  contribute to economic growth at a higher rate.”







The Guide, refreshed in consultation with business and tax agents, features plain  English, less duplication, and helpful diagrams and examples, together with content  aligning with recent Federal Court and Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)  decisions.

Companies are encouraged to use this resource and the range of helpful guidance  available at business.gov.au to self-assess the eligibility of their R&D activities.



Media Contact: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846 / Jen Jennings 0435 121 347

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

