

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

TRANSCRIPT

Friday 4th September 2020

Minister Littleproud iv 5AA



LEON BYNER: The Agricultural Minister - whom we'll talk to in a moment - has made  another plea for common sense to prevail in regards to border restrictions to clear a path  for agricultural producers to navigate Australia's close states. Let me explain this a little bit.  The Queensland Minister accused state politicians of making coronavirus restriction  decisions around capital cities and not taking into account the impact on regional  communities, which have so far escaped the brunt of the pandemic. Now the Minister  wants farmers to have freedom of navigation for agricultural production, which would allow  them to cross closed state lines. Now, New South Wales and South Australian border  closures to Victoria created issues, as has the closure of the Queensland borders with  New South Wales. Now here's something else that you probably don't know, you might  assume, oh Leon, there's no issue here, they are an essential traveller, they can get a  permit. Can they?

Let's talk to Minister Littleproud. David, thanks for coming on today. I've got to say on this  one, I'm totally with you.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah look, this is just plain insanity. The reality is we are allowing  freight transport companies to let truck drivers in COVID hot spots in Melbourne drive right  across the country without any worry at all, they get a permit and off they go. But a farmer  who has a farm on one side of the border cannot go up to tend to his animals or tend to his  crops even though he's outside a COVID hot spot just because unfortunately, we've got  bureaucrats in capital cities making arbitrary decisions predicated on capital cities, not  understanding this thing called common sense that regional Australia is a little bit different.  We're not asking states to tear down their borders restrictions in any way sense or form.  We're just asking a fair go like that given that the transport industry.

We're just saying you can do the same with agriculture in a safe way, but we'll continue to  allow food to be put on your plate and clothes to be put on your back. That's all we're  asking for. If you don't do that, you are going to see that there will be pressure on prices,  because if farmers can't get to it, and they're about to have a bumper year, after so many  hard years of the drought, and now this is another kick in the guts, where they simply just  can't go and tend to animals. And there's actually some very serious animal welfare issues  that are playing out on this, as well as health issues. And right across the state, I've come  up with a code that now our Chief Medical Officer of the Commonwealth of Australia has  given written approval too, that he believes will keep us safe, that will allow agriculture to  keep going keep going, so it’s now up to the Premiers.

TRANSCRIPT



TRANSCRIPT



LEON BYNER: So why would other medical officers say no to our Chief Medical Officer  just because, well, they think differently?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well this is the thing that frightens me, I think it's down to politics.  And in times of crisis, your system of government is tested. And over a hundred years ago  we created this thing called federation and we drew lines on a map. Well, modern Australia  has outgrown most of those lines. We're an integrated agricultural system and society right  up and down, particularly the eastern seaboard and into South Australia. So we've got to  understand that our society has evolved past those arbitrary lines and we need to use  some common sense, particularly when the Prime Minister is trying to create a hot spot so  that you can use science. And what we've learnt to evolve with this virus is that how do we  trace it and how do we treat it quickly? And that's been through tracing, and you can  create bubbles, you can create hot spots and say, we locked those down, whereby you  can't go in. Even the outside there's a bubble in which you can work and have freedom of  movement.

If we don't learn to live with this, we're going to shut down our economy. And let me tell  you, while it might seem as though those that still have jobs at the moment it's all okay, I  can tell you, we're going to have to pay this back. This is going to take this nation a long  time to pay this back. It's not free money, and it is going to be a lot of hurt. And this is why  we've just got to use our smarts and back ourselves and understand that we can achieve  this, but particularly for regional Australia that hasn't had the cases. You've just got to get  out of their lives. Protect us, yes, but get out of our lives and just use some common sense  in some of the protocols that we've put forward, that even science and medical profession  is now telling me is safe to do.

LEON BYNER: Alright so are you telling us today that there are some health bureaucrats  who will not let farmers cross their orders on their property? Is that what you're telling me?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: That is correct.

LEON BYNER: But why can't they get a permit like others? Because you could argue their  work is essential. So why can't they get a permit?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well unfortunately this is this thing. We have announcements for  announcements sakes by some of these states. And there's been bubbles off across  borders and then you can go and apply for a personal exemption. So the problem then  comes down in the practical application of it. The arbiter of this is normally a health official  and in fact I've got a number of cases where we've got contract harvesters that have rung  up the health officials, who are the ones that decide, and they say I'm a contract harvester,  I'm outside the bubble, I want to go across the border because I've got work up there.  They don't even know what a contract harvester is. And so they say no.

LEON BYNER: See now here is a principle of government. The bureaucracy enacts  policies the government tells them, not the other way round. So isn't this really up to each  premier to get on with it and give consistent rules so that everybody is treated fairly? Is  that not the case?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: That is all we ask for and that's not a huge ask. And that's what  we've taken to National Cabinet today. An AG workforce code of conduct that mirrors the  freight one, that- you're allowing people in COVID hotspots to actually cross borders to  come in and out of, but you won't let a farmer that's nowhere near a COVID cases some

TRANSCRIPT



TRANSCRIPT



hundreds of kilometres. We've even got the insane situation in Queensland where- I will  grant you they have done some good but they've only allowed it out to 22 September and  then they're going to reassess it. And we've got the situation, not only with AG workers but  health and education. I mean we've just allowed 400 AFL executives to swan around a  resort in the Gold Coast to be up here for the AFL grand final. But we've got teenage  boarding school students that will not be allowed to go home and see their parents, see  their parents in the next school holidays. They won't see their parents until the end of the  year. Now they're going out into north west New South Wales where there is no cases, but  the Premier sees it fit to allow entourage of AFL people to come up and swan around but  won't allow and look after these kids. This has just got to stop. We're better than this.

LEON BYNER: Now here is the big problem David Littleproud, Agriculture Minister, it's  this. It seems as if I know that the Prime Minister and the National Cabinet of which you're  part, they want to see a consistent definition of what is a hot spot. It appears that there are  some health bureaucrats who will not want this. Well I don't think the public care what they  want. What they care about is that these people are supposed to work for them not the  other way round. If you can't get agreement on this what's going to happen then? Because  the Prime Minister and the Federal Government have some sway. Are they able to use  any to give some sense kicked into the backsides of these people?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, and this is exactly the challenge I put down to the premiers  yesterday. Come with the clinical evidence to prove that I'm wrong, come with it. Because  I've got the Chief Medical Officer of Australia that says I'm right. So you bring your Chief  Health Officer-

LEON BYNER: You know as well as I do that all this now has become deeply political.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah.

LEON BYNER: And that is not what this state of emergency was ever about. And I think  that's got to be challenged at the highest level because I just don't think we are being-  David, we are being defederated before our eyes with this nonsense. It's got to stop. It's  got to stop.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well this is exactly right Leon. This is the issue that I say in times  of crisis your system of government is tested. And the system of federation, where  constitutionally the power and responsibility given to the states which was set over 100  years ago, we need to continue to understand: is that fit for the future? And not be afraid to  have a mature conversation as a nation about what and how we should look. And I think  the Prime Minister's trying his hardest in terms of National Cabinet and he hasn't given up  on that. And in fact he'll be trying very hard today to make sure that there's some practical  outcomes out of this.

LEON BYNER: When will we know?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: This afternoon we will know. I think the National Cabinet sits in  about now and we'll know about 2:30-3:30 this afternoon. In fact, he's called a cabinet  meeting this afternoon for us in the Federal Cabinet so obviously we'll know more this  afternoon. But I can tell you, he's committed to this because he can see it. He can see that  these lines on a map that were put there over 100 years ago are holding us back at the  moment because our society's evolved past it. And we respect the sovereignty of it but  we've got to understand that we're in trying times and in these times we've got to work

TRANSCRIPT



TRANSCRIPT



together and not isolate ourselves as states, but to think outside the square. Think outside  that line on a map and think about how we can achieve the same outcomes of keeping  Australians and keeping those within their states safe. But do it working together. That's all  we ask.

LEON BYNER: Alright. David Littleproud, thanks for joining us.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks for having me mate, anytime.

LEON BYNER: That's the Federal Agriculture Minister talking about a very important issue.



Media contact  0455 448 985

