

CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS AFTERNOON AGENDA

WEDNESDAY, 2 DECEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Australia behind in vaccine queue; easing of restrictions; Labor

and the suburbs.



KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: Let’s bring in the Shadow Health Minister now Chris

Bowen. And we've seen Mr. Bowen, the restrictions continue in New South Wales

easing that is, and I guess that underpins the GDP number today, in a sense,

because the health story provides that confidence that is flowing into the broader

story.



CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Very much so Kieran and

as we've said all along, we don't see it as a choice between health and the

economy. Get the health settings, right, that's the best thing for the economy.

We’ve said that consistently, and that's why we were disappointed earlier in the

year when the treasurer and others were really second guessing the calls made by

premiers. We in the alternative government have supported every move by every

premier Labor or Liberal, both in terms of what they thought was necessary to

ensure the good health outcome, and of course, as we come through it on the

other side, their cautious loosening of restrictions. And you know, we say that

about Gladys Berejiklian, as much as we say that about any other Premier. This is

good news. We're both from New South Wales. This is great news for New South

Wales, but it's because of those cautious approaches taken by respected premiers

earlier in the crisis that we've been able to make this progress.



GILBERT: Let's have a look at these numbers. These are the national figures of

active cases, it's now about 60, I think 61. Have a look at the active cases of

COVID-19 around the nation. There's the map, and it's 61 nationwide now. And

majority, vast majority hotel..



BOWEN: The vast, vast majority in hotel quarantine from overseas arrivals.



GILBERT: So have we really eradicated this thing in this country in terms of I

mean, obviously hotel quarantine is always a risk, because in terms of community

transmission



BOWEN: In terms of community transmission, yes. Now, that doesn't mean we

can be complacent. As we know, this virus can circulate beneath the radar,

because you can have COVID-19 asymptomatically. So we do need to maintain

our caution. We can't be complacent. But nevertheless, it's a remarkable national

achievement, yes.



GILBERT: So as a starting point then, you look at that, that map we just saw going

into a cycle of where vaccines are starting to roll out, we should be feeling pretty

positive about 2021?



BOWEN: Well, we can certainly, we can certainly hope it’s going to be much better

than 2020.



GILBERT: Wouldn’t be hard.



BOWEN: It's a low bar KG. But yes, there are signs for optimism. Again, you know,

you compare where we are in Australia to many other countries in the world, of

course, that's remarkable, again without being complacent. That's why we said,

you know, while there’s temptation to ease everything immediately, and to just, you

know, completely take our eyes off the ball, that's not the approach the premiers

are taking on either side of the political equation, and they should be supported in

the steps that they take. In relation to the vaccine, of course, that is that is also not

a silver bullet. I'm sure we can talk about the vaccine in great detail, whichever

vaccine it is, there’s great distribution challenges in Australia.



GILBERT: When you say it's not the silver bullet. Why is that? Explain that for us.



BOWEN: Well, because there's, well, there are a number of challenges. Obviously,

firstly, again, the world's researchers should be congratulated. I mean, normally, a

vaccine like this takes 17 years to develop. The fastest in world history is four

years. So this is a remarkable achievement. Now, we're not quite there. But there

are very encouraging signs when it comes to vaccine, whether it be Pfizer,

AstraZeneca, or Moderna. We don't quite know which one will be, you know, first

off the blocks, but they are quite efficacious, and the stage three clinical trials very

encouraging. Now, there's some way to go, we won't have vaccines in Australia

until March based on the government's own projections. I've given bipartisan

support to the government's efforts on vaccines. We have suggested and called for

them to do more. So for example, we have four deals in place. I think best practice

would be five or six, and we will quite slow to the table when it comes to those

deals. Other countries in the world were way ahead of us when it comes to a deal.

So when the prime minister said we're first in the queue, that wasn't true, then and

it was it's not true now. But we will hopefully have a vaccine by March now then

there are distribution challenges depending on which vaccine it is, because Kieran

vaccines don't save lives, vaccinations save lives. So we need to get the vaccine

to Australia, and then distributed across the country and administered. Now It

depends which vaccine it is as to how challenging that will be. Some of the

vaccines only require to be distributed at zero, others are minus 70. That's a much

much bigger challenge.



Now, of course has been progress made there, but we have to be honest with

people and say there is some way to go yet.



GILBERT: It’ll take some time.



BOWEN: It takes time. The government's own figures say if we start in March, it'll

be the end of 2021 before it's fully..



GILBERT: The other thing is to factor in I guess and you can explain this for

viewers in a bit more detail, but it's the take up rate.



BOWEN: Yeah.



GILBERT: So it's not just the timing to roll it out. It's how many people, actually,

the percentage of the population that actually take it up. When do you hit that

figure, that magic figure of basically immunity that we need?



BOWEN: Well, you know, you need a very solid majority of the population having

had the vaccine. Of course they’re two dose vaccines. So one and then another

one. And you need, you know way above 60% of the population before you can

start to say that we're getting there in terms of the spread of the vaccinations we

need. So that's quite a big challenge, when you consider just how many millions of

the vaccine we're going to need. Now, again, depending on what vaccine it is

depends how much we have access to. The government, in conjunction with the

state governments have laid out priority areas for the vaccine, in relation to

healthcare workers, the elderly, of course, that's sensible. But you know, we can't

assume that come March, everything's okay. That's my message. And, you know, I

would, I would say…



GILBERT: So it goes to the elderly, goes to those at risk groups, goes to frontline

health work.



BOWEN: Yes, that's right, first, and then you know, to the rest of the population as

and when the vaccines become available.



GILBERT: And if you look to the particular vaccines, as you spoke about the

temperature requirements for AstraZeneca versus some of the others.



BOWEN: Pfizer, yes.



GILBERT: Some of them are easier than others to roll out?



BOWEN: Yes.



GILBERT: Do we have access to the most promising vaccines? I know you’re

critical of the scope of the current project



BOWEN: To be fair, this is about risk management. Okay, so it was appropriate for

the government to take some risks, i.e. have some advanced supply agreements

with vaccine producers before we know 100% whether that will be the vaccine that

works. Because we've got to get Australian’s access. So we've got access to the

AstraZeneca vaccine, the Pfizer vaccine. For example, we don't have direct access

to the Moderna vaccine, we only have that indirectly through the COVAX facility.

We don't have a deal on the J&Jvaccine, for example. So ideally, we'd have more

access to more vaccines.



GILBERT: Are they safe? Are they confident that they're safe?



BOWEN: Well, I have full confidence in the TGA. You know, so as far as I'm

concerned, if the TGA which is our regulator, all Australians can have confidence

in our TGA. That's got to be the message from all of us in Parliament House. I

understand the concerns, but the stakes are too high for second guessing our

experts. The TGA are the experts. I have confidence in them, and Australians can

have confidence in them



GILBERT: On some other politics, Joel Fitzgibbon’s talked a lot about how the

regions are important to Labor's prospects, you gave a speech recently, where you

said, look, the key to our success are the suburbs. How does that fit in with the

broader message in terms of you know, that divide between the regions and the

cities that Joel keeps arguing?



BOWEN: Well, the point I'm making Kieran, is one, the suburbs have great

challenges. You and I both grew up in the suburbs not far from each other in

Western Sydney. And the suburbs have great challenges going forward. Great

opportunity, great challenges, I talked about some of the big themes of the

suburbs, the impact of casualization, the gig economy, insecurity on the suburbs,

you know, we see it with Uber rates, and people hanging around trying to get $5 to

deliver a meal. That's a real concern to me, for the future of our society. And the

future of those individuals. The impact of the hollowing out of manufacturing and

sucking of economic activity into the inner cities, is a challenge for the suburbs.

You know, it's very different from when we were growing up when manufacturing

was the core of suburban employment. And then the growth of the suburbs further

and further out now with the lack of infrastructure, both hard infrastructure,

transport, infrastructure and soft infrastructure, health, childcare and education to



follow. So I was pointing out the suburbs have great challenges, and it's the role of

the federal government to be concerned about that, and the role of the Labor Party

to be concerned about that. And so I did express the view that this is not some sort

of zero sum between the inner cities and the regions. The millions of voters live in

the suburbs, millions of our citizens live in the suburbs, and the Labor Party needs

to be well connected to those people in suburbs and needs to be pursuing that

agenda. I do think there's a zero sum game there in terms of the debate, it’s not

just about that, I was adding a different perspective into that, because there are

real opportunities for the federal government and the alternative government to

care about how our cities work, in terms of the broad expanse, the suburbs, and

the quality of life of the people who live in the suburbs.



GILBERT: If the polls don't improve for Anthony Albanese have you still got the

leadership, have you got one, you know, the baton in your knapsack?



BOWEN: Anthony Albanese will lead the Labor Party the next election. We're all

committed to putting our best foot forward at the next election. I'm determined to

ensure that we are as competitive as we can be at the next election under

Anthony's leadership.



GILBERT: Chris Bowen, thanks.



BOWEN: Thank you.



GILBERT: Appreciate it.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ELIZA MITCHELL 0413 410 931





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













