









SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment



THE HON DAVID LITTLEPROUD MP  Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management

MEDIA RELEASE

10 December 2020

New push to urge young Kiwi’s to take a working holiday this summer

Young New Zealanders are being urged to take a working holiday in Australia this summer and  enjoy opportunities in our agricultural, tourism and hospitality sectors, particularly those in regional  areas, which offer real job opportunities as a result of COVID-19.

A new campaign launched by Tourism Australia today aims to lure young New Zealanders across  the ditch by showcasing the many adventures and experiences they can have while working and  travelling in Australia.

Tourism Minister Simon Birmingham said with travel from across the Tasman back in play, this is  an opportunity to entice New Zealanders to take a longer stay in Australia and experience jobs  within sectors that usually rely on over 300 000 working holiday makers every year.

“The necessary closure of our international borders has been critical in the fight against COVID-19,  however it has meant that industries that are usually reliant on seasonal workers or working  holiday makers are struggling to fill thousands of jobs,” Minister Birmingham said.

“Whilst our priority is always getting Australians to fill jobs, the reality is that many businesses  within our agricultural, tourism and hospitality sectors are still battling to find enough workers.

“This campaign aims to encourage young Kiwi’s to take a working holiday in Australia this summer,  which will not only provide a tourism boost but also help fill some of the current workforce  shortages that some businesses are facing, particularly those across regional areas or in our  popular tourism destinations.

“We want young New Zealanders to cross the ditch, have a cracking time exploring our incredible  country, earn some cash, spend that cash, and support our farmers or tourism operators at the  same time.”

Agriculture Minister David Littleproud said the New Zealanders that come for a working holiday and  also lend a hand on Australian farms will be greeted with open arms.

“There are plenty of agricultural jobs just ripe for the picking in regional and rural Australia this  year, and our farmers will be forever grateful for the helping hand from across the Tasman,”  Minister Littleproud said

“In the bush our Kiwi cousins have a reputation for being fun loving and hardworking and we will  welcome them to come and enjoy our country hospitality, have a go and make a quid as well.”



As well as filling critical workforce shortages, working holiday makers are major contributors to our  tourism industry as they usually stay longer, travel further and spend more than other travellers,  injecting more than $3.2 billion a year to the economy and supporting local jobs.

Tourism Australia’s ‘Big Overseas Experience’ (The Big OE) latest PR and social media campaign  will kick-off tonight in New Zealand and also feature a ‘Jobs Board’ tool to help New Zealanders  find work in sectors that need it most, as well as a series of content and factsheets on  Australia.com which address practical elements of embarking on a working holiday.



Media Contacts  Benn Ayre: +61 428 342 325 (BIRMINGHAM)   Doug Ferguson: +61 455 448 985 (LITTLEPROUD)





Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.

