

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  MEMBER FOR SYDNEY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC AFTERNOON LIVE  WEDNESDAY, 19 FEBRUARY 2020

SUBJECTS:  St Kevin’s; housing policy; older Australians; Coronavirus.

PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST:  I'm joined now by the Shadow Education Minister Tanya  Plibersek. Tanya Plibersek, welcome.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Hi  Patricia, how are you?

KARVELAS: Thank you so much for joining us today. Do you welcome the resignation of  St Kevin's Principal Stephen Russell over these revelations, he gave a character reference  for a coach convicted of grooming a student?

PLIBERSEK:  Look, I think the allegations that were aired were very disturbing indeed.  And it's important to see individuals and the school taking responsibility for what really  appears to be a complete mishandling of these very serious allegations. I hope if the Royal  Commission has taught us one thing it's that the first consideration always has to be the  best interests of the child and the safety of children. Not institutional reputation, not  friendship or sympathy we might have for perpetrators but always the best interests of the  child and from what's been reported that wasn't the consideration of the school at the time.

KARVELAS:  The board of the Edmund Rice Foundation which oversees this and other  private Catholic schools signed off on that character reference, should they resign too?

PLIBERSEK:  Look, I don't want to go into an individual  analysis of this, the school and  exactly whose responsible, and what action each one of them should take. I think it's  important to keep this, because there are bits of the story that I'm not familiar with, keep it  to general principles. Schools have to be safe places for children and if the leadership of  the school is not providing that safety or has turned a blind eye to this sort of behaviour  they have to take responsibility for that. I'm very pleased to see that the Victorian  Government has ordered continuing investigation into whether that safe environment was  provided. I think it's important that we've seen the principal and leadership of the school  beginning to address this now, but again I have to say what we must learn from the Royal  Commission is that no cover up, no minimisation is ever acceptable in these  circumstances. Children have to be protected, they have to be believed, they have to be

supported when they're giving evidence. I have to say that the victim in this case and the  person who gave evidence in support of him are very brave for coming forward, as are all  of those who gave evidence to the Royal Commission. Very brave in telling their stories.  To think not only that we had the school offering character support for the perpetrator but  also that the victim has said that he was unsupported during this process is shocking  indeed.

KARVELAS:  Four Corners revealed a series of cultural problems at St Kevin's around  attitudes to women and a failure to protect students. Would female leadership make a  difference in these sorts of contexts?

PLIBERSEK:  Look, I don't think it's fair for me to focus on the individual school but what I  will say is every school should be engaged in respectful relationships education, there's  some fantastic programs for teenagers out there teaching them about respectful  relationships, and look, I saw these allegations I think it's important to address them front  on. Not because, you mentioned before the reputation of the school - PR disaster, that's  not, that's actually not my biggest concern. My biggest concern is there are kids going to  this school who don't feel safe, who perhaps weren't safe and we are turning out young  men who need to understand that their relationship with the world has to respect the rights  of others.

KARVELAS:  Let's move to another topic because you launched a book today on housing  policy in Australia and you talked about the measures Labor introduced when you were  Housing Minister, what measures...

PLIBERSEK:  The good old days, Patricia. You know people love to hear a politician talk  about the good old days when they were in charge, nothing more interesting than that.

KARVELAS:  I recall interviewing many times as you developed those policies. What  measures should we be looking at to improve housing affordability?

PLIBERSEK:  Yeah, well you know we're going through all of our policy development  processes at the moment so I'm not going to talk about what Labor policy should be, I'll talk  about that inside the Labor Party. But we do have an absolutely critical problem with  housing affordability in this country and I'm proud of what we did to address these  problems when we were last in government. You see fewer first home buyers able to get  into the market, you see extreme pressure on rents in some parts of Australia, we gave up  on our target to half homelessness. It breaks my heart that we did that. So we need to look  at our whole housing market to make sure whether you're talking about young first home  buyers, whether you’re talking about renters including long term renters, or whether you're  talking about people who are marginally housed or homeless that our housing system  works for all of these groups of people. Housing is a really important part of peoples'  attachment to their community, their feelings of security, their wealth accumulation.  Anthony today was talking about retirement incomes in peoples' old age, we know that  owning your own home is really critical to whether you feel financially comfortable after  retirement. Our housing system isn't meeting these objectives at the moment.

KARVELAS:  Let's talk about that speech because Anthony Albanese's fourth headland  speech today was focused on older Australians as you say, particular a positive ageing  strategy. How does your education portfolio fit into that?

PLIBERSEK:  Well we know that actually there's quite a large number, I think it's over  170,000 Australians who are over the age of 55 who are on unemployment benefits, for  example, instead of being retrained and redeployed in the workforce. Josh Frydenberg  called these people and ageing Australians more generally an 'economic time bomb', we  certainly don't see it that way. We see mature, responsible workers who would make a  fantastic contribution if they are given a hand back into the workforce. But more broadly  than that, Anthony was talking today about seeing the benefits of our ageing population,  making sure that we understand the economic value of older Australians - the volunteering  they are doing as well as the paid work. The wisdom they have acquired over their lives  and our ability to deploy that in our workplaces as well as more broadly in our community.  And making sure, of course, that we are meeting needs like a decent retirement income,  like a good health system and ageing system when people retire - not seeing this as a  negative or a drain on our community, but as an opportunity.

KARVELAS: Just onto your portfolio, universities are frantically looking for ways to cut  costs in the wake of the Coronavirus. Revenue from international students makes up, of  course, 25 per cent of their revenue or more. Does the Government need to step in, given  how prolonged this crisis is?

PLIBERSEK: Look, it's yet to be seen how long this crisis will last. We, of course, are  hoping that this health emergency will be over quickly and we will be able to welcome  overseas students back to Australia. International education is a huge important part of our  economy. It is worth about $33 billion dollars a year, about 130,000 jobs. But very  importantly, it's also a really important part of our relationship building with nations in our  near-neighbourhood and around the world. People who come and study here go home  with good impressions of Australia and lifelong friendships and business contacts, so we  need to restore this very important part of our economy. I think it's certainly true that  universities have become increasingly reliant on income from full-fee paying international  students. We have been critical for some time of the fact that this Government has cut  billions and billions of dollars out of higher education and so universities have become  increasingly reliant. But the extent to which they'll take a hit from this current emergency is  really yet to be seen.

KARVELAS: And if the Government falls into - I mean, in terms of the budget  consequences of all of this - if the Government finds it troubling or difficult to deliver a  surplus, would you have sympathy with the Government?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I think the Government is already lining itself up to say “the figures look  bad because of the Coronavirus and the bushfires”. And these have been significant  events, but the budget numbers were going south well before anybody had ever heard of  Coronavirus and long before the bushfires started in September last year. Throughout the  term of government of the Liberals, we have seen the doubling of debt. We've seen wages  growth flat lining. We've seen, for the first time ever, labour market productivity going  backwards. We've seen consumer confidence plummeting. We've seen business  investment at historic lows. All of these numbers were bad before these bushfires, before  the Coronavirus, and so I don't have much sympathy for a treasurer that has presided over  flat lining wages, declining living standards, plummeting business confidence, plummeting  consumer confidence and then wants to look around at the last minute and find something  to blame, other the lack of plan that this government has had.

KARVELAS: So, if the Government can't deliver a surplus or if we look at the figures



finally, when they are of course announced and they are as negative as perhaps we are  getting prepared for, Labor will go hard against the Government for not delivering on its  promise?

PLIBERSEK: Well that's a test that the Government set for itself. That’s not the test that  we set for them. It will be up to them to explain to the Australian people why they have  failed the test, if indeed they do. But Patricia I really want to emphasise this fact: all of  these numbers we're bad well before the bushfires and well before Coronavirus and the  Government shouldn't use these terrible events to cover up its own economic  mismanagement. If you look at last year, the year before, the year before, we've had  estimates of wages growth written down. We have seen estimates of economic growth  continually too optimistic, being written down again and again by Treasury. We have seen  the Reserve Bank have to write-down it's predictions for growth in the Australian economy.  These are all because this government has no plan to encourage business investment. It's  got no plan to encourage business confidence. It's got no plan for wages, the money that  ordinary Australians get in their pocket that they then go and spend, creating jobs for  others when they buy a cup of coffee on the way to work, or take the kids out for a pizza on  a Friday night. This government has no plan for any of that - that well and truly precedes  these very substantial events.

KARVELAS: Just returning to international students, efforts to provide Chinese students  with online courses are running into problems because the Chinese Government won't  allow access to online content from Australia. Are there ways around this?

PLIBERSEK: Yes there is, and I have been thoroughly briefed by a number of universities  that are working very cooperatively with the Chinese authorities to provide online course  material. Online course material is one approach, delayed start dates are another  approach, universities are doing their very best to offer flexible learning options to students  who are caught overseas. Many of those of cousrse are first year students but the larger  majority are students are caught in the middle of their education. They're second or third or  fourth year students and for those students this is particularly distressing because they  have gone home for a quick holiday thinking ‘oh I am six months off finishing my degree, or  a year off from finishing my degree’, they absolutely are desperate to come back and  complete their studies. And so, I know the universities are working very hard to make sure  they are able to do that.

KARVELAS: Tanya Plibersek, thank you so much for joining me.

PLIBERSEK: It's a pleasure Patricia. Any time.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350







