



SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women

MEDIA RELEASE

$40 MILLION FOR PROJECTS TO SUPPORT WOMEN

19 November 2020

The Morrison Government is continuing to support women through the COVID-19 pandemic as  part of our Economic Recovery Plan for Australia.

Organisations are invited to apply for $40 million in grants under the Women’s Leadership and  Development Program.

The grants will support projects that create jobs and employment opportunities for women,  including women from diverse backgrounds, over the next four years.

This funding is part of the Women@Work measure announced in the 2020 Women’s Economic  Security Statement and like the Australian Government’s JobMaker Plan, is focused on the  re-opening, recovery and reform of Australia’s economy.

Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Women, Senator the Hon Marise Payne, said the  funding would be provided to boost women’s employment opportunities and set Australian  women up for future jobs.

“The Women’s Leadership and Development Program has helped many women reach their  goals in the past, and I strongly encourage organisations large and small to apply for a share of  $40 million in new grants,” Minister Payne said.

“It will target projects to improve outcomes for Australian women across five key areas: job  creation; economic security; workforce participation; leadership; and safety.

“As Minister for Women I am pleased to provide additional support for this important program to  support a new generation of women to fulfil their potential, especially as Australia looks to build  its way out of the economic challenges of COVID-19.”

The open competitive grants process, which opened today will close at 11:00PM AEDT on  Wednesday 9 December 2020. For further information on the grant opportunity, visit  GrantConnect.

Media Contacts  David Wroe: +61 429 531 143  Melanie Ruiz: +61 427 888 392

Authorised by Senator the Hon Marise Payne, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Women

