

JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC BRISBANE DRIVE

MONDAY, 17 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: State borders; Early access super; Aged care; Paid pandemic

leave; Youth unemployment.



STEVE AUSTIN, HOST: Jim Chalmers, welcome back to the program.



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: G'day, Steve. Thanks for having

me back on.



AUSTIN: Not sure if you heard the headlines there but the Premier has

announced that the borders of Queensland could well stay shut until past

Christmas unless community transmission stops in Victoria and New South

Wales. Is that reasonable?



CHALMERS: Certainly. I think it depends so heavily on developments in other

states, and how and whether they're able to get on top of some of the

transmission that we've seen, particularly in Victoria. It would be strange I think

if the Premier was making those sorts of decisions in isolation from seeing how

the situation develops down there. The other thing I'd say about it is that

Annastacia Palaszczuk has been bang-on throughout this. She gets a lot of

free advice about -



AUSTIN: The jury's still out on that. I mean, given what we don't know, the

jury's still out on that, isn't it?



CHALMERS: So far she's been right, she's been resolute, and if she'd listened

to some of those who were urging her to open the borders too early, then that

could have been catastrophic for lives and for jobs here. We need to recognise

that too. We don't know how it will play out from here. We need to be careful

and cautious. We need to make sure that whatever decisions are being taken

here are being taken on the basis of the best medical advice. The best medical

advice needs to be based on what's happening elsewhere.



AUSTIN: The best medical advice was that we were going to flatten the curve.

A number of my listeners are pointing out that no one's signed up to an

eradication program. The whole of the emphasis, even at National Cabinet, was

to flatten the curve. That's happened. I don't know any medical advice that says

we are going to eradicate it, yet this now seems to be shifting. We're almost at

an eradication phase. Yet New Zealand and other places would indicate that

that's not possible. How do you see it?



CHALMERS: Certainly we've been expecting outbreaks of some kind because

of the nature of the virus. Ideally you would be avoiding the spread that we've

seen in Victoria and to a lesser extent New South Wales. But in Queensland

we've done a really good job of getting on top of this, not quite eradication but

pretty close at least for the time being - touch wood. That's because Annastacia

Palaszczuk, and Stephen Miles, the Health Minister who's been doing a good

job as well, have been cautious about it. They've been taking the right

decisions based on the right advice. That's going pretty well here. That could

change. Until we get vaccinations done on a broad scale, then we need to be

vigilant but so far it's been a pretty good strategy here in Queensland.



AUSTIN: The public health emergency declaration has been extended until 2

October, extraordinary powers and very strong, restrictive controls over what

we would normally regard as ordinary human rights. What's our oversight of

something like this? I know other states are doing it. Can you speak to that at

all, Jim Chalmers?



CHALMERS: Only to the extent that governments are accountable at the ballot

box for the decisions that they take. In Annastacia Palaszczuk's case, she's

accountable quite soon in the election in October. There's legal oversight

obviously, there's the Parliament, there are all kinds of accountability

mechanisms. My sense is that even in Victoria where things have been really

difficult for some weeks now there have been some positive developments in

the sense that the numbers are coming down gradually. People will make their

assessments about the actions that governments have taken. They'll be

accountable in the usual ways for those decisions.



AUSTIN: My guest is Jim Chalmers. Jim Chalmers is Labor's Shadow Treasury

spokesperson. Also the Labor member for Rankin here in Queensland. I just

want to make sure I understand your position. If Federal Labor was in

government nationally, what would you do differently if anything with the

Coronavirus management here in Queensland, Jim Chalmers? We're all aware

of the Victorian scenario but in Queensland, anything?



CHALMERS: Absolutely. Let me give you two obvious examples of really

pressing issues. The first one is in aged care. We need to extend the crisis

arrangements that exist in Victoria to the other states because aged care still

troubles us. Even in states where developments have been positive, we need

to make sure that we are ahead of the game there. One of the reasons why

aged care has been such an issue is because there has been a lack of

preparedness at the federal level. That's one thing that we would do differently.

We'd be far more vigilant in aged care.



The other one's really important too. I think people understand this. It's the

issue of paid pandemic leave. One of the problems in Victoria is that people

were making a decision between doing the right thing by their loved ones and

putting food on the table, versus doing the right thing by their co-workers.

People couldn't afford to stay home. They didn't have sick leave so they did the

wrong thing and they went to work when they were sick. We need to avoid that.

That's why Anthony Albanese, Tony Burke and other colleagues have been

really pushing the Government to have a national system of paid pandemic

leave because you need to prevent that workplace transmission, not just come

in after there's been some unfortunate passing of the virus.



Those are at least two examples of what we'd do differently even here in

Queensland which is travelling reasonably well.



AUSTIN: 4:42PM. Jim Chalmers is my guest. I'm not sure it's actually been

released today but APRA was due to release their update on how much

superannuation money was accessed in the second round. This is the

emergency access to superannuation data. On AM this morning with Peter

Ryan we learnt that 38 per cent of Australians who accessed superannuation

actually had no drop in their income during the crisis, and 21 per cent had their

income increase, which is gobsmacking to me. How do you see that data?



CHALMERS: I think the way that this early access to super has rolled out has

been a debacle. It's meant that a lot of people have been raiding their

retirement incomes unnecessarily. That's a pretty confronting; four in 10 people

had no drop in income. I don't know if your listeners are aware this Steve, but

you can actually access super without anybody checking whether you're

actually in hardship. This tells me that this from the Morrison Government's

point of view isn't actually about hardship. It's about undermining super. They're

using this crisis as an excuse to do that.



AUSTIN: But people have to have some personal responsibility, though, don't

they, Jim Chalmers? Surely, the data showed that people were spending

money not on essentials, but on what you might call non-essentials or luxuries.

38 per cent of people saw no drop in income and 21 per cent had an increase,

and they still accessed their money.



CHALMERS: It's very concerning, Steve. You're right. Something like two-thirds of the money spent was spent on non-essentials. That teaches us that

this hasn't been a program about genuine hardship, which is what the

Government's been pretending it is. Our issue isn't with people accessing this

scheme. This scheme changed and people have taken advantage of it, rightly

or wrongly. Our issue is with the Government who have been looking for ways

to undermine super and along comes the Coronavirus, and now they're using

that as an excuse to do that. That's going to have devastating consequences

for people's retirement incomes.



AUSTIN: But people knowingly did it. In other words, they don't seem to care.

My fear is that Australians think, oh that's alright, the government will bail me

out when I'm 60 and give me a pension anyhow so I might as well spend the

money now. Extraordinarily reckless.



CHALMERS: One of the consequences is that the Commonwealth will have to

spend more on pensions because people will have run down their

superannuation. Something like 600,000 people have totally eliminated their

super. It's not hard to imagine the way that this can is going to be kicked down

the road. It's a real problem. It's a real debacle Steve, because people aren't

being checked to see whether they're in genuine hardship, most of the money

is not going on essentials, and there's a heap of people who are accessing it

even though their income hasn't dropped. The Government's not especially

troubled about this because their aspiration here, their objective, is to

undermine the superannuation system. The last point I would make about this

Steve is that the amount of money that's coming out of super is heading

towards $40 billion. That's around the same amount of money that the

Government is spending on the JobKeeper program. They like to talk about

how big a program JobKeeper is, and it is tens of billions of dollars, but as it

stands right now people are pumping around the same amount of money into

the economy from their own superannuation. That will be really costly into the

future.



AUSTIN: This says to me though that Australians just think that they'll always

be bailed out. It's not clear to me that the Australian Government's trying to

destroy super. The Australian Government's position is that they're trying to

give people choices because they're the best managers of their own money.

But on the basis of the data, they either don't care about the future or think that

someone else will pay for them down the track.



CHALMERS: All the language around choice is basically a marketing exercise.

It's the sort of spin that your listeners don't typically enjoy. It tries to obscure the

fact that even before Coronavirus the same Government was looking for ways

to freeze the Superannuation Guarantee, change the way that you could

access your super  in all of these various ways trying to diminish

superannuation. The truth is they've never really believe in it. They've always

looked for ways to undermine it. They're using this crisis as an excuse to do

that.



AUSTIN: They say they look for ways to give Australians more choice over

what happens to their money.



CHALMERS: It's just spin, Steve. It's just marketing. They don't like super for

ideological reasons. They don't like that it was a Labor creation of Paul Keating,

in terms of compulsory superannuation. They're not into it. Now they're

pretending they have these high ideals when it comes to super. Occasionally

the masks slips and they fess up in one way or another that they're trying to

fundamentally change the system of superannuation, which isn't just about

looking after people in retirement. That's the most important objective but it also

means trillions of dollars of investment into our economy, into local jobs and

into growth in our economy. That's another reason why it shouldn't be

undermined.



AUSTIN: Before I let you go, Jim Chalmers, a couple of my listeners are asking

when was the last time you visited the Gold Coast? They're saying that it's a

ghost town. Given the unemployment situation here in Queensland, youth

unemployment is nearly at 20 per cent, just below that, equal highest in

Australia. As the Shadow Treasurer in Australia, when was the last time you

visited the Gold Coast?



CHALMERS: I'm not sure as Shadow Treasurer, but I went there as a dad two

Saturdays ago to try and support the local economy by buying too much ice

cream for my kids!



AUSTIN: Was it a ghost town?





CHALMERS: It was pretty quiet, yeah. Yeah, it was pretty quiet. Not totally

dead, but quiet. It was troubling. That's because one of the hardest hit

industries are tourism, accommodation and the like. It's very troubling. But I do

get to the Gold Coast a lot. I like to think I understand the issues there. Youth

unemployment clearly in pockets of Australia is going to be a problem for the

foreseeable future. We don't want to see a lost generation of workers. That's

why we have to get not just JobKeeper but also training, labour market

programs, and all of the rest of it right if we want to avoid pockets of extreme

intergenerational disadvantage.



AUSTIN: Thanks for your time.



CHALMERS: Thank you, Steve.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











