

THE HON ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

PRESS CONFERENCE

SYDNEY

FRIDAY, 31 JANUARY 2020



SUBJECTS: Government's energy announcement; sports rorts;

coronavirus.



ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR

PARTY:  Good morning. Today’s announcement by the Commonwealth on

energy is no substitute for a national climate policy or a national energy policy.

This Government has neither. They have no plan to deal with actually driving

down our emissions. They have no plan to deal with driving down energy

prices.



The fact is that there is another report today that has confirmed that renewable

energy and investment has fallen by half under this Government. The other

thing is that when gas replaces coal, that’s good for the transition towards clean

energy because it results in lower emissions. But, when we’re seeing

renewable energy investment falling, and if gas replaces renewable energy as

new forms of production, then that is bad for our emissions.



The fact is, also, that Scott Morrison has confirmed today that taxpayer funding

is still on the table for a new coal fired power station. He can’t be taken

seriously when that is the Government’s national policy. There’s no doubt that

the Government had to come up with something though. But it’s also the case

that Angus Taylor wasn’t at the announcement today because he’s an

embarrassment for the Government. And as Parliament comes back next week

after weeks and months of ongoing scandal regarding Angus Taylor and the

Clover Moore so called travel expenses affair, with the dodgy document. How

long does it take for the Government to recognise that Angus Taylor, who of

course has been misleading Parliament since the day he was elected since his

first speech, misled Parliament last year. His position’s untenable which is why

the Prime Minister is embarrassed to have him standing up at announcements.

But of course earlier on in the week, we had a drought announcement without

Bridget McKenzie. And it’s no surprise that she is also such an embarrassment

to the Government that her ongoing presence as a Minister is untenable.  We

were told that the Prime Minister’s former chief of staff was conducting a review

into Bridget McKenzie, and we were told that that review would be finished by

the end of this week. Well, it’s now Friday, that review wasn’t necessary of

course, because we’ve already had an independent review. It was conducted

by the National Audit Office and it condemned Bridget McKenzie’s actions as a

Minister.  It drew into question the legitimacy of her intervening in that process

and it pointed out the politicisation that had occurred in the grants process.



We since have had exposed by the ABC the colour coded chart of how grants

were done on the basis of who held the seat and their marginality. And we had

yesterday at the National Press Club, or the day before, Scott Morrison refused

once again to answer questions on this affair. He of course has come up with

new ways of avoiding questions: now it’s not the bubble, now it’s not just

commentary or gossip. Now it’s 'thank you for the editorial you’ve given' he

says to journalists before not answering the questions.



He went on to speak about the importance of women’s change rooms in sport

and indeed that is an important issue as there’s greater participation in sports

like football, cricket and AFL amongst women in the population. But the fact is,

as has been reported today, there are twelve, no less than twelve applications

that received high rankings from Sport Australia for women’s change rooms

that did not get funding. And at the same time a project got funding for rugby

sports changing rooms for women for a rugby club that doesn’t have a women’s

team. This is a farce. It’s about time that Bridget McKenzie resign her position

and if she won’t do that the Prime Minister should sack her. The only thing that

could possibly be holding that back is the direct involvement of the Prime

Minister’s office in this tawdry rort that has seen legitimate sporting clubs miss

out in favour of this political process.



Happy to take questions.



JOURNALIST:  Some of the aspects of this report was the bias in the issue of

grants, do you think that projects in any non-Coalition seats had a chance?



ALBANESE: Well quite clearly, some of the projects that missed out, missed

out illegitimately. It’s interesting that the way that the Ministers all give their

responses to this, whether it’s the Prime Minister or anyone else is to speak

about eligibility. Now I like to play tennis. I’m eligible to play as someone

registered with Tennis Australia in the Davis Cup next time it comes round,

chances are I won’t be picked, because it’s merit that counts. And it’s such a

farce for the Government. And here we have a club across the harbour here,

Mosman Rowers gets half a million dollars. Does anyone think that that’s not

related to the fact that Tony Abbott’s seat was under threat from an

independent candidate. I mean they could have raised half a million dollars by

putting the hat around on a Sunday afternoon. But they didn’t do it and a whole

lot of clubs in regional areas and our outer suburbs, and right around the

country missed out on grants that were ranked higher. That is why Sport

Australia has responsibility here. They went through the process, they had

ranking, it was objective. This Government thinks that it’s use of taxpayer funds

are just for its own largess, for its own political purposes, and a definition of

corruption is taking public funds for personal or political gain, and that is what

we’ve seen here.



JOURNALIST: The Government looks like it could be launching another round

of sports grants, is that something you’d support?



ALBANESE: Well it depends whether it goes through the Liberal Party

Secretariat or whether they have colour coded options. I’m not against funding

of sports infrastructure. When I was a Minister, the regional local community

infrastructure programme, during the economic stimulus, funded projects right

around the country. Every single local Government area benefited from that

programme, every single one.  And it was done through the formula of the

Commonwealth Grants Commission, it was done with a proper process.  The

problem here is not the existence of a grants programme, the problem here is

pretending that there was this process, having individuals and volunteers spend

hundreds of hours of their own time making submissions for grants and missing

out because of the politicisation of the process.



JOURNALIST: On the energy plan, the need to lower our emissions is a

(inaudible) quite some time, and the Government just now announced a deal.

By the time those projects are done and ready to be in place, is it too little too

late?



ALBANESE: Well this isn’t really a plan, and that’s the problem here.  We have

a national Government, I’m not sure what it is about Scott Morrison, but there’s

a bit of a pattern here. When they need an announcement, they announce a

deal with New South Wales. Remember the compensation, the economic

compensation for volunteer firefighters was  a one off deal for New South

Wales and then they remembered that there were other States, and said well

they can apply as well. This isn’t a national energy plan, it’s not a national plan

to deal with climate change. All of the detail of course is still rather vague on

some of this plan. It’s unclear whether some of the funding, for example, will be

the funding that was all a part of Tony Abbott’s direct action plan, that remains

to be seen, and we’ll try to flush out that level of detail. But this is wholly

inadequate to deal with the challenge that we face.



JOURNALIST:  What would Labor do?



ALBANESE:  Well what Labor would do, you can look towards what Labor has

done in the past, which is, I was the Shadow Minister who established the

commitment for 20 per cent renewable energy target by 2020.  That is primarily

the single most important thing that we have done in this country to drive down

emissions and to support renewable energy. Of course that target was met

early and therefore what we’ve seen since the RET essentially peaked is that

renewable energy investment has collapsed because there’s no certainty. So

what you need is certainty. You need a plan that drives change through the

economy that increases supply and that therefore in doing so decreases costs

on energy prices at the same time as it’s decreasing emissions, at the same

time as it’s creating jobs. That’s what was happening up until 2013. The

Government dismantled Labor’s plan, they tried to dismantle every bit of

it.  They tried to abolish the Clean Energy Finance Corporation, they tried to

abolish ARENA. They tried to abolish all of the architecture that was around

that. In some cases, they weren’t successful thanks to the Senate blocking that.

But what you need is a comprehensive plan. We will go to the next election with

that.



JOURNALIST:  Would you concede though that this new deal is a step in the

right direction, that it could bring down power prices and it could lower

emissions?



ALBANESE:  Look it’s a step in the right direction in terms of the increased use

of gas and the issue re the interconnectors is a step in the right direction but

what we need is not a step, what we need is a framework.  We actually need a

plan and we don’t have that.



JOURNALIST: What do you make of community concerns that to be able to

get all this gas the Santos project might be approved and some farmers are

raising concerns that could affect their ground water and perhaps lead to

contamination?



ALBANESE: Well that’s yet to go through the final approvals in Narrabri, that’s

pretty close to that point though.  It’s important though that those environmental

processes proceed. But once that occurs, if it is approved, and my

understanding is the State Government supports that occurring. The issue of

gas as well, it important, isn’t so much to assist individual households, it’s really

to assist manufacturing is what is necessary in this State and that’s every

important in terms of employment.



JOURNALIST:  Just on coronavirus, the Queensland Premier came out pretty

strongly this morning about Government not doing enough for the country, what

are your thoughts?



ALBANESE: Well I saw the Queensland Premier’s statement this morning and

I have had a discussion with her this morning and I reiterate her concerns.

They’re legitimate. We, myself and Chris Bowen, our Health spokesperson,

have been very mindful to not try and politicise what the World Health

Organisation has now called a global emergency. But we need a national

response to this issue and the Queensland Premier has said that whilst it’s

good to talk about quarantining and looking after Australian citizens who are

currently in Wuhan and around that province, coming back to Australia. What

the national Government is not doing is providing for Queensland, and I’m not

sure about other States, but certainly for Queensland, the information for those

people from those provinces who have come here in recent weeks.  Now we all

know that when you fill in your entry card you have details of where you’re

staying, you have a contact number available. That is for a reason. That is

information that is only available to the national Government and I’d say to

them that they need to make this information available to Queensland and other

State Governments so that it’s one thing to quarantine people who are in China

now coming to Australia back but surely and perhaps an even more significant

issue is those people who are here now who may well have had contact with

this virus, who may well be carrying, and ensure that proper safety measures

are put in place. I think providing that information to the State Governments is

not too much to ask and Premier Palaszczuk has been quite right and quite

responsible in pointing this out.



JOURNALIST:  Labor has been raising concerns about the cost of the flight

back from China, isn’t it just standard policy?



ALBANESE: Well is it standard policy, but we want to also make sure that no

one is prevented from doing that on the basis of they can’t afford to do

so.  Common sense has got to apply here and no one in this country, we have

a basic principal that no one misses out on healthcare, it’s a foundation of

Medicare. No one misses out because of their income and that principal should

apply here. So yes, if people can afford to pay, there is standard procedures



that have been place for some time whereby there’s a recouping of those

funds, but at the same time no one should miss out or be excluded because

they’re not in a position to pay those funds.



Thanks very much.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053



