

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RADIO BALLARAT  WEDNESDAY, 19 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus in regional Victoria; Aged care.

STEVE MARTIN, HOST: I did talk to him about aged care and where to from here with this  inquiry going on. But I started the conversation with Richard Marles about the Greater  Geelong district, which again takes in that South Eastern corner of our listening area is  going at the moment. This is what Richard Marles had to say this morning.

RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: I think  people are hurting and I think particularly small business. I mean people are looking at  their life's work go up in smoke and in some cases and I think there are big questions that  are being asked of a whole lot of those small businesses, not just about how long they'll be  closed, but whether they'll ever be able to open again. So, this is a really terrible time  where people are absolutely hurting. I think there is a sense of community, which is one  silver lining to this cloud, there is a sense in which we are all in this together and getting  through it together. And actually if you look at something as sort of simple as wearing  masks, and there was a bit of a psychological hurdle I think to get over in order to wear  masks, people are now absolutely doing that, they're buying into the necessity of doing it,  they see it as part of what it is to be a member of the community and to play your part. And  I think that's an example of what people are doing but there is a lot of pain a round. There's  no question of that.

MARTIN: Can we talk about the federal political sphere for a moment? Richard Marles, I  want to ask you about aged care, it's become a hot topic because of the case numbers in  Victoria. It's also for the most part federally administered and it's also something that cuts  across both sides of politics over quite a number of years leading up to this. So where  aged care is at, at the moment and changes that are needed, has Labor come to a clear  position yet?

MARLES: Well ultimately the management of aged care through this crisis is in the hands  of this Government. I mean we're not going to be in a position of governing Australia for  another couple of years if we are to win the next election. So right now the question is how  is this Government handling the crisis. We knew from the outset, before COVID really  came to Australia, that the aged care sector was the one which was most vulnerable to the

impacts of COVID. We were being given those warnings very early on. And as it's played  out in Victoria, I think for those of us who have loved ones in aged care, it is the single  most terrifying aspect of the pandemic. It's obviously impacting on us in terms of our ability  to see our loved ones, but I think everyone is terrified about how their loved ones are going  to cope in the midst of a situation where it is now about something in the order of 100 aged  care facilities around the State that have cases being reported in them. Now earlier in the  year we saw this play out differently Newmarch in New South Wales and that should have  been a wakeup call to what needed to be done. From what we're hearing from the Royal  Commission into aged care, is that in the aftermath of that, rather than putting in place  plans for dealing with this going forward, the Government was engaging in self-congratulation and hubris- and they are not my words they’re words that came out of the  Royal Commission itself. And that's happened with tragic results as we're now seeing the  virus go through so many aged care centres. And this is the way in which it's playing, I  guess in it’s most lethal way in Victoria right now.

MARTIN: So do you have confidence that the corrections have been made to the way the  system was not operating adequately, have been sorted out and that we won't see these  sorts of problems again?

MARLES: Well not really because you know what we're actually seeing from the  Government is, from the Commonwealth Government is an attempt to avoid responsibility.  I mean we've seen it today, in terms of the Prime Minister trying to play down the  Governments, the Commonwealth Government's role here. I mean the Government is the  regulator of the aged care sector, but the Commonwealth Government is also the buffer  and ultimately if it is for the Commonwealth Government to come up with plans around  infection control, plans in relation to surging of staff where that's required. And I mean  there's reports in the media today about the fact that very early on that there was warnings  being given that if there were to be an outbreak in an aged care facility it might create a  situation where all the staff were required to self-isolate and so there needed to be plans.  When this is put to the Prime Minister, he says this is a completely unforeseen  circumstance, and yet it's not. I mean it's precisely and specifically what was being warned  by those experts in the field.

MARTIN: Is Labor making calls on the Government to implement specific changes or not  so?

MARLES: Oh no, absolutely. We want, as I say, we want to see the Government come  forward with plans in relation to all the-

MARTIN: Do you have any plans or suggestions of your own though is what I am asking?

MARLES: Yes, but ultimately it is the government who are in the seat here. I mean there is  a Royal Commission right now which is in play, which is putting in place all the warnings in  relation to this. We need to see plans from the Government about how there is going to be  effective infection control in relation to aged care. We need to see what are the plans to  make sure that those funds that have been made available for the surging of staff are  actually put into place so that there are adequate staff. These are the specifics that we  need to be hearing from the government right now. Instead what we've got is a Prime  Minister who is busily trying to point the finger in every other direction and saying that this  actually isn't his responsibility, well it is. It absolutely is.



JOURNALIST: That is Richard Marles the Federal Member for Corio and the Deputy  Labor Leader.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363









