TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY



MATT THISTLETHWAITE MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR THE REPUBLIC

MEMBER FOR KINGSFORD SMITH



SENATOR TONY SHELDON

SENATOR FOR NSW





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

TWU QANTAS EVENT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

THURSDAY, 3 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECT: Qantas.



MICHAEL KAINE, NATIONAL SECRETARY OF TWU: Good morning, it's Michael Kaine

National Secretary of the Transport Workers Union here today with Qantas workers.

Qantas workers whose jobs last week were announced by Alan Joyce as being replaced.

The work that they do for Qantas, have done for decades, is still available. That’s still work

that needs to be done. And despite the fact that we have a community compact put in

place by Scott Morrison back in March, the community compact called JobKeeper, a

community compact to keep workers connected with their employer. Despite the fact that

Qantas has received $800 million worth of community money during this crisis, Alan Joyce

made the decision to sever those jobs. Jobs that still exist, and send them to third-party

operators with questionable safety and very questionable standards who’ve been dragged

through the court for months.



Today I'm going to hand very soon to Tanya Plibersek. We have Parliamentarians here

supporting these workers, they have to be back in Parliament very soon. So I'm going to

call shortly on Don Dixon a Qantas worker to speak , and then Tanya Plibersek. First I

want to announce that today the Transport Workers Union on behalf of these Qantas

workers, these 2,500 workers who are being replaced in echoes of the waterfront, the

Transport Workers Union is lodging its first tranche of legal action against this move.

These workers are being told that they have to bid for their own jobs. They've been given

but a few weeks to put that together across dozens of ports across the country.



It does not seem genuine in any respect. How can it be genuine to sever these workers

from their positions when JobKeeper is in place? How can it be genuine to ask these

workers to bid for their own jobs in circumstances where the company is also asking for

$80 million worth of capital input - new equipment for these workers to somehow provide?

And how can it be genuine when they're given but a few weeks to put together

sophisticated bid? A bid for their own jobs. This is a warning to Scott Morrison and it's an

alert to the Australian community. Tomorrow this could be any worker in Australia. A

secure good-paying job in aviation, something that's sought after for decades in our

community, has been severed by the spiteful corporate dictatorship headed by Alan Joyce.



Let's not make this the norm in our Australian community. Let's make sure secure

Australian jobs are the norm. We’ll be fighting hard, fighting hard in the courts, fighting hard

in the community. Scott Morrison, it's time for you to step up and take control of this

situation. Alan Joyce, it's time for you to step down. I’m going to a call on Don Dickson, a

worker to explain his situation, Don.



DON DICKSON, TWU MEMBER: Morning everyone, thank you Michael. First of all, I want

to congratulate everyone who works for Qantas. All these beautiful workers behind us who,

most have travelled from Sydney, so we left very early this morning to make this trek down

to the Nation's Capital. We're here today mainly to bring our position to the Prime Minister,

other members of the Labor Party and anyone else who wants to listen to our plight. This is

not a fight just for Qantas workers, this is a fight for all workers in Australia that your job is

unsecure, you can be replaced like they're trying to replace us. We are hoping that not only

Qantas, but the Members of Parliament will take reasonable steps to listen to this, it's a

ridiculous proposal and get back to Australians doing Australian’s jobs throughout the

country.



It's really a disappointing position to be in. Especially how most of us have been there 20

years plus, being loyal to the company and you know what, you don't get promised to work

forever, we understand that, but when you're getting replaced it certainly leaves an empty

hole in the stomach. So we're hoping today that we're going to get some positive feedback

from the politicians and the country's leaders, and that we’ll probably have more to say

after we hear from them. So thanks for supporting us. Thanks.



TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Thanks

very much Michael, and thank you to your union members who have travelled so far to be

with us today. Qantas is a company that has a really special place in the heart of many

Australians. A lot of us have had that experience of being overseas and you walk onto the

Qantas jet, and you hear the Australian accents and it's actually a really good feeling. It's a

feeling like coming home. And the reason that Qantas has had such a strong positive

feeling for Australians is because it's been one of our biggest and most successful

Australian companies. Its employed thousands of Australians over the years and one of

those was my dad.



My dad worked for Qantas for more than 20 years, in fact I brought his 20 year certificate

Michael. I got my brother to send a photo of this. This is hangs in our home. My dad

worked for Qantas for longer than 20 years, but when he worked there for 20 years he got

this certificate and it's in a little frame in my mum's house. My dad died years ago, but

we've still got this hanging on the wall. It was a real sense of pride that my dad had in

working for this big Australian company. He was a plumber and a gas fitter and he worked

on the jet base at Mascot and he didn't just work there himself, he was the leading hand so

he managed the other plumbers on the on the jet base. And there was a bunch of them

that worked there then, they had apprentices in those days too. It was a company that

didn't just employ Australians, it trained Australians and it was a job that was secure, that

was predictable. You always knew that you would have a pay check and my dad took it

really seriously. He would always be there an hour early to work out who is going to do

which jobs during the day, so that he could manage his crew. He took it really seriously

and he loved working at Qantas. But that was a different Qantas to the one that we're

seeing today. That was a different Qantas because they had a secure workforce that had

predictable jobs and they knew those jobs were going to be there tomorrow. The Qantas of

today is a workplace that's not training and investing in its staff and that is taking the jobs

of people like these, the people who are behind me today - two and a half thousand of

them - and saying, ‘we can do it cheaper’. That's all they're saying ‘we can do it cheaper’.



‘The loyalty that you have shown this company over years, in some cases over decades,

doesn't matter. We're not going to return that loyalty because we think we can find people

who'll do the same work as you cheaper’. They're not saying they can do it better, they're

not saying they can do it more efficiently, they're not saying they can do it more safely.

They're just saying you can do it cheaper.



I think that most Australians would be incredibly disappointed by that attitude, especially

when we've put hundreds of millions of dollars into programs like JobKeeper so that we

keep Australians employed. These are the worst economic times we've seen since the

Great Depression in the 1930s. The most important thing we should be doing right now,

every Government, every business working together, is to keep Australians employed. To

keep them in jobs, because those Australians insecure jobs spending money will create

work for other Australians. That's how our economy works. That's what demand and

confidence in our economy requires. So these people behind me deserve to keep their

jobs that they are committed to, that they have done loyally, that they have done well for so

many years. They don't deserve to be replaced by a cheaper workforce, but particularly at

a time like this.



I just need to say this one last thing. We have a Prime Minister that is quick to take credit

but slow to take responsibility. He should take responsibility for making Qantas and other

big companies, that have been recipients of JobKeeper payments, he should ensure that

they keep their workers employed. Having taken that payment they need to repay the

investment of Australian taxpayers in their businesses by keeping Australians employed.



So can I just congratulate the union on the campaign that they're running, highlighting the

unfairness of this decision by Qantas and tell you and tell all your members that I'm right

with you.





KAINE: Thanks Tanya. I know that MPs have to get back. I'm going to call on Matt

Thistlethwaite who's very close to this in his electorate as well. Thanks, Matt.





MATT THISTLETHWAITE, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL

SERVICES: Thanks, Michael. Like Tanya my father worked for Qantas for 34 years. It was

a good stable job that kept our family. He was very, very proud of the fact that he worked

for Australia's national airline. Like many of these workers behind us and those that do the

job for Qantas. They're very proud of the fact that they're working for our national airline. I

spoke to my father yesterday about what's gone on at Qantas over the last week. He's

certainly not proud of what Qantas has become today and what Qantas has done to these

workers and their families and their 2,500 co-workers who have been left on the scrap

heap by Qantas this week.



It's bad enough for the national airline to sack people during a pandemic and a recession.

It's bad enough for them to pocket JobKeeper which is meant to protect these workers jobs

and then sack them. But what's the ultimate insult is that they're going to bring in another

company, a foreign company most likely, and employee these guys’ jobs on lower wages.

Now that's corporate immorality at its worst. That's not what Australians expect from our

national airline. Now this government, the Morrison Government say that they're all about

jobs. Their slogan at the last election was 'jobs and growth'. Well, they want to start

walking the talk, because you're not for jobs if you stand by and allow our national airline to

sack 2,500 of their workers and replace them with a foreign corporation on lower wages

and conditions. You're not about jobs if you cut workers penalty rates, for some of the

lowest paid workers in the country, so that they take home less pay to their families each

week. And if you're the party that introduces WorkChoices and puts people onto individual

contracts and takes them out of their unions, you're not the party of jobs. It's about time the

Morrison Government was held to account on this issue and stood up to, and if you're

about jobs protect those workers and their families.  Get a plan for aviation in this country

and get a plan to get Australians back to work because that's what this workforce here, and

that's what the Australian public, expects of this government. Thanks.



KAINE: Thanks Matt as many people know Senator Sheldon has been involved in aviation

for many, many years. He's guided us through some really difficult times like the Ansett

collapse, Tony Sheldon, please.



SENATOR TONY SHELDON, SENATOR FOR NSW: Thanks. Thanks very much. Thanks

very much Michael and to the workers of Qantas. But also this is a question for all

Australians.



This government has a responsibility to make sure that families can be fed, they can be

protected and they can be nurtured. This government does not have a plan for jobs and

they're allowing Alan Joyce and the Qantas Group to turn around and destroy 2,500

families in this country. Is that their job plan? Because that's the only plan they've got for

aviation. I saw Alan Joyce over nearly a decade ago when he shut down this airline, and

the fight then with Alan Joyce and Qantas was about outsourced labour being paid lower

rates of pay, people being replaced by foreign companies at lower wages and being

exploited.



We have a situation right now that Qantas is putting bids out to foreign companies. Dnata -

if any of these workers go to work for Dnata on lower rates of pay, they'll also not be

getting JobKeeper because the Government, along with millions of other Australians, have

abandoned the aviation industry and those 5,000 workers in aviation.



This Government needs to turn around and be held to account. What's particularly

appalling is that many of these workers at Qantas and Jetstar live in the Prime Minister's

electorate. He talks about being a Shire guy. Well, how about he stops being so shy about

standing up for the community in his own electorate? Stand up for fellow Australians, stand

up for the families in your own electorate, or stand with a multi-millionaire boss who's

decided to undercut their jobs and then they use that money?



This is not about the survival of Qantas. This is about a $100 million war chest to do what

Alan Joyce said: to be the last airline standing when we come out of COVID-19. These

workers are a sacrifice for that ambition for this company, to be the last airline standing,

and the Prime Minister is sitting on his hands and allowing it to happen.



Well, I'll say this directly to you, Mr Prime Minister and I’ll say to your government and

every government across every state in this country: you should be using your

procurement power, the money you spend, to turn around and say unless you save these

jobs, money will not be spent with Qantas. This money should be spent for State

governments and this national government, which is the biggest buyer of airline seats, to

turn around and make sure these jobs are saved. Scott Morrison you have the power to do

it - use it.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DANIEL DORAN 0427 464 350



