

THE HON SHAYNE NEUMANN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR VETERANS’ AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE

PERSONNEL

MEMBER FOR BLAIR



COAG DISCUSSION OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN SUICIDE SHOWS WE

STILL NEED A ROYAL COMMISSION



The Morrison Government needs to show leadership and good faith with our

defence personnel, veterans and their families, and establish a genuinely

independent Royal Commission into Defence and veteran suicides.



Labor acknowledges putting this issue on the agenda at the recent Council of

Australian Governments (COAG) meeting has helped to give it the attention it

deserves, however it only highlights why we still need a Royal Commission.



The communique from the COAG meeting only went so far as to support the

establishment of a National Commissioner for Defence and Veteran Suicide

Prevention, with the final arrangements to be settled later.



This so-called agreement represents little more than in-principle support by

states and territories for a vague proposal, subject to more detail being

provided.



Indeed, we are yet to see any enabling legislation or Terms of Reference for

the National Commissioner, so we still cannot be sure it will have all the powers

of a Royal Commission as the Government claims.



Labor is concerned that the Government’s push to shut down Parliament for

several months due to the COVID-19 health emergency will only further delay

scrutiny of the legislation.



Many veterans are increasingly sceptical that the National Commissioner is

little more than a marketing exercise because it lacks the urgency, resources

and the institutional autonomy from government to ask the hard questions.



We know that only a Royal Commission will provide closure, healing and

restorative justice for the defence and veteran community, just as it has in

many other areas, such as mental health, child sexual abuse, aged care and

disability services.



What many parents of veterans who have taken their own lives have said is

that a Royal Commission will allow them an opportunity to have their say and

be heard, while providing a powerful voice for their children.



Importantly, it provides an opportunity for us as a community to listen to them

and assure them in a public way that we are doing everything possible to

prevent these tragic deaths from happening in the future.



Only a Royal Commission will deliver this; otherwise, the Government’s

proposed National Commissioner runs the real risk of being little more than a

glorified coroner.



The Government should do the right thing and establish as soon as possible a

full Royal Commission with a clear start and end date, so we can get to the

bottom of Defence and veteran suicides and deliver real justice for the families.





To fail to do so would be a missed opportunity for the nation.



TUESDAY, 24 MARCH 2020



MEDIA CONTACT: CHRIS CONDON 0422 018 616



