



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham  Minister for Finance  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Leader of the Government in the Senate

Senator for South Australia



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au



9 December 2020

CABRAMATTA LOOP CLOSER TO CONSTRUCTION

The Australian Rail Track Corporation (ARTC) has released the design and construct tender for the  Cabramatta Loop Project, which will play an important role in meeting Sydney’s future freight  demand.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the project involved constructing and operating a passing loop on the eastern side  of the Southern Sydney Freight Line between Cabramatta and Warwick Farm stations to allow trains  to pass at a key juncture.

“This transformative project will help increase the share of freight moved by rail in New South Wales  and create up to 220 jobs during the construction phase which is scheduled to start in 2021,”  Mr McCormack said.

“Downer EDI, Fulton Hogan and John Holland Group have been shortlisted for the design and  construction work for the Cabramatta Loop, which will help accommodate the expected increase in  containers moved by rail to and from Port Botany on the Southern Sydney Freight Line.

“The Morrison-McCormack Government has committed $400 million to the Port Botany Rail Line  Duplication and Cabramatta Loop projects, which will increase rail freight productivity through Port  Botany.

“The Cabramatta Loop will aid the national supply chain by building upon the benefits of other  capacity improvements across the ARTC network and by enabling freight trains up to 1,300 metres  long - travelling in either direction - to pass each other.

“The increase in rail capacity will create greater reliability for freight customers and improve  operational efficiency and flexibility.

“Rail is playing a critical role in our $110 billion infrastructure plan, which is laying the foundations for  economic recovery following the COVID-19 pandemic.”

Minister for Finance Simon Birmingham said the delivery of the Cabramatta Loop was important to  meeting the freight demands of Sydney as well as linking our regions with one of Australia’s largest  ports.

“Australia’s freight flows are set to experience significant growth over the coming decades and  demand for further capacity on the Southern Sydney Freight Line is expected by the mid-2020s,”  Minister Birmingham said.

“This is part of the Australian Government’s investment to increase the safety and efficiency of the  national freight network to ensure Australian businesses remain globally competitive and deliver  their products to markets in Australia and overseas with more ease.”

Ends.

Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Jo Williamson 0418 475 668 | Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Minister Birmingham - Benn Ayre 0428 342 325

