MATT KEOGH MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE INDUSTRY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WA RESOURCES

SHADOW MINISTER ASSISTING FOR SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS

MEMBER FOR BURT





URGENT ACTION NEEDED TO SECURE AUSTRALIA’S FUEL SUPPLIES



Back in 2011, Australia had liquid fuel reserves well over the 90-day International Energy

Agency requirements.



But over the last 10 years, three of Australia’s seven fuel refineries have closed and now the

largest remaining refinery has announced it will close its doors next year.



Three years ago, with Australia’s reliance on imported fields increasing and about 45 tankers

on their way to Australia every day, the Turnbull government announced that it would start

meeting its IEA obligations through stock holding agreements with foreign entities (ie: field held

or available offshore).



But concern was felt by many in the Parliament that this approach was leaving Australia

vulnerable to supply chain shocks.



COVID-19 has demonstrated that such supply chain disruptions are not just a theoretical

possibility. Unfortunately, the solution offered up by the Morrison Government was to acquire

fuel reserves stored in the United States. Understandably, Australians widely condemned such

a solution as ineffective.



In September this year, the Prime Minister and his Energy Minister, Angus Taylor, announced

they would design a system for a production payment that recognises fuel security benefits

that would improve our sovereign onshore refinery capacity and secure the viability of the

industry.



To quote him directly, the Prime Minister said, “Fuel security underpins our entire economy.

Not only does it keep Australia moving, the industry supports thousands of people across the

country and this plan is also about helping keep them in work. Like all sectors of the economy,

the COVID-19 pandemic is having an impact on Australia’s fuel industry. The events of 2020

have reminded us that we cannot be complacent. We need a sovereign fuel supply to shield us

from potential shocks in the future.”



I couldn’t agree more, but the Government’s proposal was already being criticised as too little

and too late. By October refiners were voicing their concerns that the process was taking too

long and Ampol began to consider permanently closing its Brisbane refinery.



So it turns out, of all the photo-op but no follow through policies of this Government, fuel

security has had the shortest shelf life, with BP announcing late last month that it would be

closing Australia’s largest remaining refinery in Kwinana early next year. And it may not be the

last.



This highlights the Morrison Government’s utter failure to deliver fuel security for our nation. It’s

a failure to ensure adequate fuel reserves, a failure to secure refining capability and a failure to

protect Australian jobs.



Given the ongoing dialogue between the Morrison Government and refiners for months now

about securing their ongoing viability and our nation’s fuel security, there is no doubt the

Government has known about the pending closure of the BP Kwinana refinery for some time.



So why hasn’t it done something to try to fix it?



The BP Kwinana refinery holds a special place in the hearts of West Australians.



When it was built more than 65 years ago, the WA Government also built a town site to house

construction workers and plant operators — that became the Kwinana town centre that we

know today.



The refinery was the catalyst for the Kwinana strip that is now home to many essential WA

resources and bulk handling businesses which contribute so much to our economy today. A

community that started because of BP, is now being left high and dry by its decision.





There are more than 600 jobs at stake here, but it also must be noted that even now with BP

still in the market, Australian refineries already only provide 40 per cent of Australia’s fuel

needs, with the rest being imported.



The Federal Government must act now to save these jobs and shore up our fuel supplies in

our national interest. It should be working with BP to find alternatives to enable the refinery to

continue to operate under it or another party.



Fuel security is a responsibility of the Federal Government.



This is yet another example of the Morrison Government making an announcement with no

follow through.



This opinion piece was first published in the West Australian Newspaper on Tuesday 10

November 2020



MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHANIE MATHEWS 0430 595 700

