

BILL SHORTEN

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE NDIS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT SERVICES

MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS FIRST EDITION

FRIDAY, 28 FEBRUARY 2020



SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; Vanishing Budget surplus; Robodebt; Zero emissions.



LAURA JAYES, HOST: Shadow Minister Bill Shorten joins us. Thanks so much for your

time, Mr Shorten. This is a health crisis as stated by the Prime Minister, when it comes to

the Coronavirus, not an economic one. Was the Government right here to declare a

pandemic, seemingly ahead of the rest of the world?



BILL SHORTEN, MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG: Well, I think you'll find that what the

prime minister announced yesterday had been online since February the 18th. But I think it

is sensible to take precautions. Labor, both Anthony Albanese and Chris Bowen have been

constantly briefed. I congratulate the work of the chief medical officer. It is sensible to take

plans. I mean, the big challenge with the Coronavirus is once it jumped the Chinese

border, and it clearly has, that means that the potential for spead is real. It's a highly

contagious disease, is more lethal than the flu, but it's not as lethal as other diseases

which we've seen in recent times, like SARS. So people should be confident that the

Parliament is working on prevention. We've got a good health system, a great health

system, but this is a challenge and the sensible plans do need to be put into place.



JAYES: We've seen these cards yesterday outlined by the Prime Minister, he says they

are scalable, again, saying this is a health crisis, not an economic one. But do you

acknowledge that this is going to have an economic impact, and therefore affect the

government's budget?



SHORTEN: Well, first and foremost, it's about keeping people safe. There must be some

economic consequences if there's a reduction in tourism. If foreign students aren’t coming

to our universities, we've seen the share market hit in the last few days. But what I also

suspect is that it will pass eventually, it will be difficult, but it will pass. In terms of the

budget bottom line, their budget bottom line was already dodgy before Coronaviruses and

before bushfires. So what I wouldn’t want to see is the government using Coronavirus as

an excuse for their own lack of delivering on promises because the fact of the matter is

their budget was shaky before Coronavirus appeared on the horizon.



JAYES: So you don't think Coronavirus is the one reason that the government can stand

behind to say (inaudible) surplus at all



SHORTEN: No, I think the problems in the Australian economy have been there for some

time. Wages growth is in the toilet let’s be honest and consumer confidence is down. But

there's no doubt the Coronavirus will make a contribution just as the bushfires have. But

fundamentally, this government's been raiding the National Disability Insurance Scheme

for the last couple of years to prop up its numbers, for example.

So anyway, today what people are concerned about is Coronavirus. There’s a plan which

has been out for the last ten days. People should be, in my opinion, confident that all that

can be done is being done. In terms of their budget and those matters, well, excuse me for

being a bit cynical but this Government is not going to waste a crisis to try and cover up for

their lack of financial management.



JAYES: Let's talk Robodebt because I know you’ve certainly been on the case here.

Government lawyers say the Government doesn't owe a duty of care to Centrelink

recipients. That's the view expressed by Government lawyers. I know there’s a class action

underway but is there going to be compensation on the horizon, or are you perhaps

encouraging some false hope there?



SHORTEN: Well, first of all, Robodebt was the use of a computer algorithm where a

Centrelink recipient might be eligible that particular fortnight for a safety net benefit

because they're unemployed. But what happens is that the Government's tried to average

their income over a year and just got the wrong answers. So it's been found to be an illegal

scheme and hundreds of thousands of Australians were unlawfully levied money that in

many cases they didn’t owe the Government. Now what the Government's done is file a

defence against a class action being run by Gordon Legal - 11,000 people in the class

action now and it's growing. The Government's bizarrely said, ‘Oh, yeah sure we might

have had an unlawful scheme. But, by the way people, we don't owe you a duty of care.’ I

know the Morrison Government doesn't believe in big government. But the idea that you

don't owe citizens a duty of care is ridiculous. And in Question Time this week, the Prime

Minister no less contradicted his own Government lawyers when he was asked the

question, ‘Do you owe a duty of care to people?’ He said, yeah of course we do. And yet

his lawyers in court are saying the direct opposite. So this is a Government covering up its

incompetence and its illegality.



JAYES: Can I talk to you about emissions now. Labor has now supported a 2050

emissions reduction target - zero net emissions by 2050. You’re not alone, many countries

around the world have done this including the British Government and we see states right

around Australia doing the same thing. To what extent do you think this was a factor in

Labor's election loss? And what do you think needs to change in terms of the messaging if

this is your policy?



SHORTEN: Ok, well there's three points in that. I'll try and deal with them each quickly.

Labor has said that we want to get to zero net emissions by 2050. This is not a radical

statement, despite the squeals of horror from the climate deniers in the Government. Did

you know and I don't know if every Australian knows this, but every state and territory is

committed to zero net emissions. So when the Government says that the Opposition's

wrong to commit to that target, why didn't they say that when the Liberal states at the state

level committed to an identical target? So I think what's happened is the Government’s had

a horror summer - from sports rorts to the Prime Minister’s handling of bushfires.  So what

they want is to re-fight the last election. Going to your second point, they’re trying to

weaponise a not-particularly radical emission target, a sensible emissions target and

say  ‘Oh look at this, this is terrible.’

Well the fact of the matter is, what is really terrible is - if we don’t take action, if we don’t set

a target for 2050, the world’s temperatures is going to increase by 3 degrees. Now that is

terrible. There’s a tremendous cost and this Government would rather play cheap games.



JAYES: Sorry to interrupt you, but that argument was prosecuted at the last election, not

just by you but by the entire Labor frontbench, that the cost of doing nothing was far more

than the cost of acting on climate change. You’ve got to look at the result here and think

well that didn’t work, so what needs to change?



SHORTEN: Well I don’t think that’s why the election was lost, but I do think that one thing

we need to do - because the Government ran a crude and thuggish and ignorant argument

against taking sensible steps to take action on climate change - I think what we need to do

is explain to people the jobs’ benefits, the jobs that will be created by a result of a having a

better renewable energy industry. I think we need to explain the consumer benefits, for

example the Government ran an absolutely ridiculous campaign saying that electric

vehicles meant the end of the weekend.



JAYES: But scare campaigns aren’t new are they?

SHORTEN: That doesn’t make them right, does it?



JAYES: No that doesn’t make them right, but they are probably going to re-prosecute

some of the same arguments if they think it worked last time around.



SHORTEN: We’ve now had a terrible season if bushfires and climate is not the only issue,

there’s fuel reduction and other issues.



JAYES: So do you think that that has changed the whole political landscape?



SHORTEN: I think a bit, but I’m not saying that the bushfires were solely triggered by

climate change, there’s fuel reduction and plenty of other factors, but the world is coming

to grips with the fact that if we don’t reduce our emission the consequences are going to be

devastating. More extreme weather events, more strain on our farmers, higher insurance

bills, rising water levels. At some point in Australia, the Government needs to move beyond

just saying ‘If we can use this as a stick to beat Labor, we’re not going to worry about the

future, we’ll just worry about the next 5 minutes, not the next 30 years.’ How did we get

ourselves into a situation in Australia that science is just viewed as another argument as

opposed to being the fundamental evidence? If the Government is going to propose that



we have more technology to help improve our response to climate change, that’s a good

thing. But I sort of laugh to myself yesterday when we had poor old Angus Taylor, their

misnamed Emissions Reduction Minister saying we’re going to have a technology based

approach on climate change, yet you’ve got ‘Scotty from Marketing’ at the last election

saying that an electric vehicle means the end of the weekend. You can’t have it both ways

and I think one of the reasons why people hate politics is because they get a sense the

politicians are just engaging in partisan, tit-for-tat and they don’t seem to be thinking about

the people or the future. So I think our emission reduction target is sensible, I think it’s

entirely consistent with what every thoughtful Liberal and Labor person is saying in

Australia, and 73 countries around the world, Rio Tinto, and the business industry. We are

not the radicals here. The radicals are the Government, they’re the ones who are trying to

pretend that you can not plan for the future and just go on as you are.



JAYES: A much longer conversation perhaps required.



SHORTEN: By all means.



JAYES: Bill Shorten, thank you for your time.



SHORTEN: Thanks.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM HOULIHAN 0438 366 400





