

NITA GREEN

SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

WEDNESDAY, 4 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Sport rorts; coronavirus.



NITA GREEN, SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND: Hello, my name is Nita Green. I’m a

Senator for Queensland and I live in beautiful Far North Queensland. It is much sunnier

than Canberra today, but that’s okay because we have a very big day ahead in Senate

today. Today Senate Estimates will hear from Sports Australia once again about the

revelations that the Prime Minister was deeply involved in the sports rorts saga. Now we

know that it was revealed by the audit office in Senate Estimates that the Prime Minister’s

office was sent the colour-coded spreadsheet the day the election was called and those

conversations continued after the caretaker period. That is a deep concern that this was

going on in the Prime Minister’s office all the way up until the election.



This is on top of revelations already that 136 emails were exchanged between the

Minister’s office and the Prime Minister’s office on this subject. That wasn’t 136 emails over

a long period of time, it was over 122 working days. That is a flurry of emails going back

and forth between the Prime Minister’s office - several people in that office and several

people in the Minister’s office. We also learned yesterday in communications

estimates that the Prime Minister also felt the need to intervene in an article published by

the ABC. A member of the Prime Minister’s staff made a direct complaint to the Managing

Director about an article relating to sports grants delivered in his own electorate.



Every single day that this scandal continues to go on without the  Prime Minister coming

clean on his involvement in the sports rorts scandal, we learn more and more information

about how deeply involved he was. And I will say this, it is a grave concern that the Prime

Minister can not be trusted  at a time our country desperately needs trust and leadership in

government. I am concerned the Government continues to push this issue aside when

Mums and Dads in regional places like Queensland, where I live deserve answers about

why their grants weren’t delivered  - even though they deserved the change rooms they

were guaranteed by this Prime Minister. It all comes down to trust, and today the Prime

Minister has another chance to come clean with this Parliament.



JOURNALIST: Your Queensland constituents must be asking these days with not just

sports grants under fire, can they trust any sort of grant procedure from government?



GREEN: I think the sports grants are of particular concern, and I’ll tell you why. The Prime

Minister guaranteed this program was to deliver girls change rooms for people who were

getting dressed in tents and sheds. And in places like the Innisfail local community in the

Kennedy electorate, an electorate that wasn’t going to win the Prime Minister the election,

we still have a club that applied for a sports grant that achieved a score well above the 75

mark from Sport Australia and was told their application had a lot of merit - and we still

have girls getting changed in tents and in the dance hall behind the club. That is because

they missed out on funding because even though they scored a result from Sports

Australia, that result was changed in a colour-coded spreadsheet by this Prime Minister

and this Minister to make sure places like Innisfail missed out and places that would win

them the election would get those grants funding. There are some other concerns about

rorts that were raised In Senate Estimates this week. We certainly have concerns about

the environment grants program and I asked some questions to the department about that.

And we are looking to get a lot more information. I certainly think the Australian public will

be scrutinising very deeply any grants process here-on-in because they know what matters

to this government, is not delivering the services or change rooms, it’s about winning and

keeping themselves in the job.



JOURNALIST: If Scott Morrison does take responsibility, what are you hoping the

outcome will be after that?



GREEN: Well, we have seen the Prime Minister fess up today in regards to Brian Houston



and making that representation on behalf of him. It really begs the question why he didn’t

fess up in the first place. I really have to wonder what goes on in this Prime Minister’s mind

when he knows the facts behind this sports rorts scandal, he would have the brief and be

going into Question Time, understanding fully his office was involved in this scandal all the

way up and after the caretaker period commenced and yet standing at the dispatch box

and denying that is the case. We need to make sure this Prime Minister is held to account.

Australians at this particular time deserve someone they can trust and they can’t trust this

Prime Minister.



JOURNALIST: Do you have any good news for the people of Queensland today?



GREEN: Queenslanders are feeling the extreme pressure of the coronavirus, because

particularly places like Far North Queensland are very dependant on international tourism

and domestic tourism. So unfortunately, no good news on the horizon and we have seen

today confusion from the local member Warren Entsch about funding that was supposedly

ripped out of bushfire funding and delivered to Far North Queensland to build tourism

markets there but unfortunately we don’t have the information we need and we are asking

questions today about why that funding wasn’t on the radar of the National Bushfire

Recovery Officer and we are also asking  why Warren Entsch seems to think its ok to

announce funding that wasn’t additional to bushfire funding but was part of that Bushfire

funding package. What I can say to people all across the country is we do need you to

holiday in places like Far North Queensland and plan ahead to support our domestic

tourism market. Far North Queensland is a beautiful place to visit, a wonderful place to

bring your family and we have so much wonderful indigenous culture to share with you. I

do encourage people to consider travelling there, I don’t think the Government is doing a

good enough job to make that happen, so I’m here to ask people to really consider coming

to Far North Queensland for their holidays.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JACOB WILSON 0457 961 596



