



The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology

Senator the Hon Linda Reynolds CSC  Minister for Defence

The Hon David Littleproud MP  Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

JAPAN’S HAYABUSA2 SPACE CAPSULE SUCCESSFULLY FOUND  IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA

6 December 2020

Japan’s space agency, with support from Australian officials, has successfully found  its space capsule in remote South Australia carrying samples from a 4 billion year  old asteroid.

The Australian Space Agency and Department of Defence have supported the Japan  Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) with the return of the Hayabusa2 capsule in  the Woomera Prohibited Area (WPA).

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews congratulated JAXA  on the landmark event, which she said strengthened Australia’s position as a desired  partner for future international space missions.

“I extend a huge congratulations on behalf of Australia to the entire JAXA team on  the successful landing and discovery of the Hayabusa2 sample return capsule,”  Minister Andrews said.

“This is an incredible accomplishment for science and space and builds on our  strong working relationship with JAXA, while also highlighting Australia as a nation  with the trusted expertise to support international space missions.

“The return will also enable scientists to gain insights into the origin and evolution of  the solar system through studying rock, organic matter and water from the surface  sample - helping us further understand our oceans and life here on Earth.”

Minister for Defence Senator the Hon Linda Reynolds CSC highlighted the  opportunities in sustaining future collaborations in space.

“Science and technology collaboration is a priority for both our countries, as I  recently agreed with my counterpart Minister Kishi during my visit to Tokyo in  October. We agreed to drive bilateral space cooperation in areas of mutual benefit,”  Minister Reynolds said.

“It has been Defence’s privilege to work closely with JAXA’s Hayabusa2 project team  to support their planning and rehearsal activities for today’s successful capsule  re-entry within the WPA.

“Along with Minister Andrews, I commend the Japanese Government for JAXA’s  accomplishments and look forward to future collaborative opportunities.”

Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management David Littleproud said  the sample will give us scientific evidence of any biosecurity risks from asteroids.

“Our biosecurity officers have been working with the Agency, JAXA and NASA to  ensure the Japanese and US support personnel arriving into the country comply with  our biosecurity requirements,” Minister Littleproud said.

“After the sample is retrieved, JAXA will return the sample to Japan.

“The best minds on the planet will then analyse whether there are any space  invaders, as far as biosecurity is concerned, on asteroids.”

Australian Space Agency Head Dr Megan Clark AC said the Agency was pleased to  be able to support JAXA's successful return.

“Our team helped coordinate efforts across the Commonwealth and South Australian  governments to plan for the Hayabusa2 re-entry - amidst pandemic restrictions -  while also implementing our regulatory role to support the safe and successful return  and recovery of the sample capsule in Woomera today,” Dr Clark said.

JAXA President Dr Hiroshi Yamakawa said over the course of six years of its  mission, he was very proud and honored to be able to face this important moment  together with the people of Australia.

“Accomplishing the capsule re-entry, landing and recovery operation in a safe and  sound manner, couldn’t have been done without the support and understanding from  the Australian Government, Department of Defence, the Australian Space Agency  and people in Australia,” Dr Yamakawa said.

“Under the difficult situation due to the COVID-19 epidemic, we are sincerely thankful  that the JAXA Hayabusa2 recovery team was granted permission to enter the  country and allowed to set up their operation base in Woomera, South Australia.

“Researchers in Japan and from all over the world will analyse the precious samples  collected on the asteroid Ryugu, and we look forward to reporting the results to all  the supporters in Australia.”

The Hayabusa2 mission launched on 3 December 2014 and saw the mission’s  spacecraft to reach the asteroid Ryugu and extract two samples, before heading  back to Earth on 13 November 2019.

For video and stills associated with Haybausa2 return, including video footage of key  spokespeople and the capsule separation, re-entry and recovery, visit the following:

Video: https://innovatehub.sharepoint.com/:f:/s/mediahub/Eph-iFtiOEBKj8NAa05gTwcB1eP0jEd1IrIGeGqTFFNr1w?e=frGcvW

Stills: https://images.defence.gov.au/s20203722

JAXA Footage: http://www.jaxa.jp/press/kit/hayabusa2/



Media contacts:

Minister Andrews’ office: Jen Jennings 0435 121 347  Minister Reynolds’ office: Nicky Hamer 0437 989 927  Minister Littleproud’s office: Douglas Ferguson 0455 448 985

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD



