TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY



EMMA MCBRIDE MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR MENTAL HEALTH

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR CARERS

MEMBER FOR DOBELL





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORTSTOP INTERVIEW

CENTRAL COAST

WEDENSDAY, 18 NOVEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Apprentices; Liberals’ TAFE cuts; Australians looking for work; Labor.



EMMA MCBRIDE, MEMBER FOR DOBELL *audio cuts in* …would like to bring on

young people, they’d like to take on apprentices, but they've found that there just isn't the

training available to be able to bring on a young person, get them the skills they need, so

that they can be qualified and have a good start and a steady career right here on the

coast. We know that on the coast unemployment, particularly for younger people, has often

sat higher than the state and national average. We know that young people on the coast

wanted to live here and work here and contribute to our local community, and they need to

be given the best chance to have the best start locally to get the skills they need to start a

steady career and be part of our community. We don't want to see them having to go to

Newcastle or Sydney, to be able to get the skills they need. So Ray and Leanne are going

to talk about their business, they employ 24 local people, and they really are keen to take

on an apprentice, but they need the support to be able to do that. So Ray and Leanne if

you would like to come up and just let us know a little bit about your business and what you

do here at Ausiports and what you like to be able to do with the proper support.



RAY DAVIDSON, AUSIPORTS: Thanks Emma. Thanks for coming along. Thank you,

Tanya, for your time this morning. We really appreciate it. As Emma said we are a locally

owned company, family-owned business, that’s been operating for about 32 years now.

We do employ 24, 25 local people as well as the number of subcontractors, and the

biggest issue that we've had is that there is no set trade for what we do. There's are a

number of trades that cover it. There's carpentry, there's roof plumbing, but it's really a

combination of both. And not every carpenter can be a good home improvement, or patio

installer, and not every roof plumber can do that either. So it's really hard to actually create

our own type of tradesperson that we need. It would be great if there was a TAFE course

that we can put these guys through to be able to learn the skills required to build these

things, and then have a trade at the end of it. So that's the reason I actually contacted

Emma in the first place, and why Emma recommended that Tanya come along and have a

chat with us today.



TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING:  Terrific,

thank you. Well, thanks so much for coming up today. And I want to first of all thank Ray

and Leanne for having us as Ausiports. It's wonderful to see their family business. It's

grown and thrived under their leadership, and it's terrific to hear them talking about what

they'd like to see for this business in the future. I also want to thank my wonderful

colleague, Emma McBride. We walked in the front door here and the ladies at reception

said “oh everybody knows Emma”. That's what I love to hear. I know she's such a

committed and active local member, and from even before her time in Parliament, when

she was serving people as the pharmacist at the local hospital, everybody knew Emma. It's

great to be here with you today.



Australians are really doing it tough. A lot of people are worried about their future. They

don't have a job. They're worried about keeping their job. They're worried about hours at

work. We've got close to two and a half million Australians who want a job or want more

hours of work. What Australians want for themselves and their families is secure work, they

want opportunity, they want the knowledge that there will be a job for them next week, and

next month. And here we have this fantastic local business Ausiports, it's been around for

three decades, family-run, they already employ two dozen people. They want to expand,

you'd think that would be a good news story. Particularly on the Central Coast where youth

unemployment, as Emma said, has been high, it was high even before the Covid-19 crisis.

Isn't it a shame that our TAFE and training system is letting down the people who could

take on those jobs, and businesses, like Ray and Leanne's, that want to expand. We know

that more than $3 billion has been cut from TAFE and training since the Liberals came to

government. We know that there are a 140,000 fewer Australian Apprentices today than

when the Liberals took over. Here on the Central Coast it's 1,200 fewer Australian

Apprentices than when the Liberals came to office. We want to see a TAFE and training

system that offers people the opportunity of a job. You've got businesses that want to

expand but say they can't find the skilled staff they need. You've got unemployed

Australians desperate for work. What we need is a training system that makes sure that

those unemployed people are trained for the jobs that are available. Instead all we've seen

are cuts from the Liberals that means that TAFE is struggling and there are fewer

apprentices than ever. Any questions?



JOURNALIST: How would Labor address this problem that’s been identified?



PLIBERSEK: We have to reinvest in TAFE, as a start. You can't keep cutting TAFE. We've

seen more than $3 billion of cuts in TAFE and training, and the results of that are

everywhere to be seen. Course closures, campus closures, people who'd love to do a

training course, but can't find a place, courses that used to be offered that you can't do

anymore. We need to reinvest in TAFE and strong public TAFE needs to be at the centre

of that.



JOURNALIST: Were you aware of concerns about workplace culture inside Anthony

Albanese's office, as is being reported at the moment?



PLIBERSEK: I saw that that Sabina Husic has said she is moving on, and I wish her all the

very best. She is a very experienced, very hardworking person, and I wish her all the best.

But the last thing I'm going to do is start commenting on staffing issues in one Member of

Parliament's office - doesn't matter who that Member of Parliament is. We need to provide

a safe workplace, but my focus, Anthony Albanese's focus, the focus of all of our

Parliamentarians needs to be on the 2.4 million Australians that are looking for a job or

looking for more hours of work. We're in the worst recession we've been in for almost a

century. We know that there are Australians who are desperate for security, for

opportunity, for hope for their kids. That's our focus. That has to be our focus.



JOURNALIST: I note that you wish Sabina Husic all the best, but do you welcome her

resignation?



PLIBERSEK: I just said I'm not going to be focusing on staffing issues in one

Parliamentarian's office when we're in the middle of a recession. Of course Parliament

house has to be a healthy, safe, workplace like every other workplace in Australia. But our

focus has to be on ordinary people who are worried about losing their job, who've lost their

job, who need more hours of work. We've got close to two and a half million Australians

who want a job or more hours of work. That that has to be our focus.



JOURNALIST: Does the Labor Party need to better articulate its vision for Australia?



PLIBERSEK: I think we've got a very clear vision for Australia. I think Anthony Albanese's

Budget Reply speech was a terrific opportunity to talk about our investment in childcare,

making early childhood education and care much more affordable for families. I never want

to see someone say no to an extra day of work because they can't afford the child care.

Anthony also articulated a really important investment in electricity transmission, our grid,

that would take the extra renewable energy - cheaper, cleaner renewable energy that's

being generated around our country and make sure that that's available to businesses, to

homes so that you see family bills more affordable, you see businesses able to do more

manufacturing like this, as their electricity bills come down. We also heard from Anthony

during his Budget Reply that large government funded projects, like big infrastructure

projects, would see one in 10 of the new jobs created on those projects going to

apprentices. We've just heard from Ray and Leanne how they would love to expand if they

could have the trained apprentices and the TAFE support to do that. And Anthony

articulated a vision for that in his Budget Reply as well.



JOURNALIST: Is your commitment to the parliamentary party long term?



PLIBERSEK: Is my commitment long term? It certainly is. I love my job, and I love being

able to work with my colleagues to make this a better country. I'm a very proud Australian,

but it doesn't stop me wanting to see, in particular for young people, more opportunity.

Really top quality affordable TAFE education. Later on we're going to the Ourimbah

campus of the university. Right now in the middle of a recession you're hearing that you

can't get the TAFE qualifications you need and on the other hand the Liberals have more

than doubled the cost of thousands of university degrees and made it harder to get an

enabling place at university, made it harder for people who’ve struggled in education

previously to get their foot in the door of university. What a crazy time to be making it

harder and less affordable to get an education, when we've got the highest unemployment

and underemployment that we've seen in generations. We should be making it possible for

people who aren't earning to be learning, so that they're ready for the jobs that will

hopefully be created as our economy recovers.



JOURNALIST: It's been a rough couple weeks for the Labor Party, do you think they are

match fit for an election next year?



PLIBERSEK: I think it's been a rough couple weeks for the Government too. We are

absolutely focused on what we need to do for the next election, whenever that will be,

which is reassure Australians that our top priority, always has been, and always will be

jobs. At a time like this in Australia, where we've got close to two and a half million people

who are out of work or need more hours of work, that has to be a 100 per cent our focus,

and it is.



JOURNALIST: Just going back to the adviser who has resigned, are you disappointed that

she resigned due to the anonymous letter she received?



PLIBERSEK: I don't know how many times I have to say it, and how many different ways I

have to say it - I'm not going to get drawn in to commenting on one employment

relationship, in one office, when we've got two and a half million Australians who are

looking for a job or looking for more hours of work. How self-indulgent would it be for me to

be standing around talking about us, again, when people are crying out for a job, or more

hours of work, who are worried that they've gone to a zero hours contract, who don't know

if they're going to have a job next week or next month, or who for the first time in their lives,

for the first time in decades in the workforce have found themselves unemployed? That is

my focus.



JOURNALIST: Are you worried about when JobKeeper finishes possibly in March next

year what will happen to the employment rate?



PLIBERSEK: I'm very worried that this Government will withdraw support from our

workforce too early. We know that the first decrease in the support for unemployed

Australians or underemployed Australians, that the first cuts have already seen



unemployment increase. We know that when supports are cut again in March, it's very

likely that unemployment will increase again. I fear that this Government is withdrawing

support too quickly. The Australian economy is not back on its feet. We've still got too

many people who don't have a job or don't have enough hours of work. This recession will

be longer and deeper than it needs to be because this Government is withdrawing support

too quickly.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350



