JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES

MEMBER FOR HUNTER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SUNRISE

MONDAY, 27 JULY 2020



SUBJECTS: Coronavirus in Victoria; Bunnings customer refuses to wear mask.



DAVID KOCH, HOST: Well, now the 459 Coronavirus cases have been recorded in

Victoria and 10 people have lost their lives in Australia's deadliest day of the pandemic.

There are now over 4,000 active cases in that state and more than 200 people in hospital.



NATALIE BARR, HOST: Questions are being raised about the leadership of the Victorian

Government during this crisis, with some commentators suggesting the Federal

Government should be in charge of future outbreaks, not individual states. Let's bring in

Nationals MP, Barnaby Joyce, and Shadow Resources Minister, Joel Fitzgibbon - morning

to you both. Barnaby, let’s start with you. Would the situation in Victoria be any different if

the Feds had been making these decisions?



BARNABY JOYCE, MEMBER FOR NEW ENGLAND: Probably be better coordinated

across the nation. Obviously some of the issues, such as the arbitrary nature of borders,

could be dealt with in a more pragmatic and realistic way. Obviously Mr. Andrews had -

unfortunately the results of this is people are dying, so I’m even going to be flippant about

it. If it's beyond his capacity to look after, he has to be honest and say, you know, the

Federal Government with greater resources should be able to step in. It's not good. It can't

go on the way it’s going.



KOCH: Joel, what do you think? Should the Feds have stepped in and taken charge? The

Victorian Government was slow to bring in the army for the quarantine in hotels - sort of

quarantine hotels in Sydney, were run by the army and the police. He was a bit slow to ask

for Defence Force help when they had to come in to help with the lockdowns. Don't the

Feds need more say?



JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: I've long been an advocate for the

abolition of the states you might know, Kochie. We're not going to do that anytime soon

and our Federation is what it is and still the states our best placed to manage our state

health systems. They have all the resources and the architecture in place. But certainly

there is more the Federal Government can do but of course it can only do it at the invitation

of the states.



BARR: Yeah I know it's hindsight, but Barnaby, we watched the opening statements of that

inquiry last week and we watched a lawyer stand there and say we think that every case in

Victoria will probably be traced back to that hotel quarantine where, as Kochie said, the

army and the police were rejected and private contractors were brought in. This is horrific.



JOYCE: Yeah it was, and just so your listeners know, the private contractors were in some

instances too close, vastly too close to some of the people who were staying there and that

gave the mechanism for it to break out. That was a debacle and it was a debacle that cost

lives. I hate to say it, I agree with - I agree with Joel. The role of the states, I don't know if

they're as relevant as they are in 2020s as they were 1901 and we really should at some

stage have a serious discussion about that. But the Federal resources can only be

deployed at the invitation of the states and that confusion, and I hope there's no sort of,

you know, unreasonable pride held by Mr. Andrews. If it's obviously beyond his control,

he's got to do something about it. And that was a total debacle what happened, just like the

Ruby Princess; it was another one of those absolute total debacle.



KOCH: Yep. All right now a Bunnings customer has gone viral with her claim wearing a

mask at Bunnings infringes on her freedoms under the 1948 Universal Declaration of

Human Rights. Take a look.



*AUDIO OF PHONE FOOTAGE*

BUNNINGS CUSTOMER (KAREN): I can have you sued personally for discriminating

against me as a woman.



BUNNINGS EMPLOYEE: We're not discriminating against anyone...



BUNNINGS CUSTOMER (KAREN): You are. It's not.



…



KOCH: Joel, are you surprised that some people are simply refusing to accept the health

advice in Victoria. Joel, yep.



FITZGIBBON: Sorry. Yeah Kochie, one thing that's been reinforced in my mind in my

many years in Australian politics is that you can't legislate against stupidity. And I just don't

know what we do these people. Complacency is on the rise, but worse stupidity is on the

rise, and we're best to just ignore these idiots. Sometimes you just don't know whether to

be angry at them, or just to feel sorry for them.



BARR: Yeah, Barnaby, it's like a competition online, isn't it? They're all posting it and

everyone's reposting it saying they're idiots. What do you think we do?



JOYCE: How do you get sued impersonally? That's the first thing. Her opening statement

- you know what's going to happen next is just complete and utter rubbish. This is - and

she filmed it. I mean most people when they are stupid keep it to themselves, but she put

on national television - it's great. I don't think - I've just got great admiration for the staff.

They were so cool and so reasonable for someone who's, you know, just completely off

with the fairies. You're in their premises. It's their private property. You know if they want

you to wear a hat, you got to wear a hat. You know, and this is a health issue. I mean, you

are dealing with other people's lives and you know, these no-vaxxers, no viruses nutcases

really got to understand that dealing with other peoples' lives.



KOCH: Yep, absolutely. All right, Gents, thank you for that. Barnaby, good to see you

getting a bit of rain out there too.



JOYCE: Yeah, I know it's great. Obviously, crops going to grow out west. We're going to

get a bit of money pumped around the place. That's what we want.



KOCH: Yeah. All right, guys. Thank you for that, see you next week.





FITZGIBBON: Thanks team.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641



