TRANSCRIPT

Wednesday, 16 September 2020

Minister for Education Dan Tehan address on ‘The future of Australia’s higher  education sector’, CEDA

Dan Tehan: Thanks for your sponsorship of this event, and can I also acknowledge Catriona,  Margaret and Atilla. And, it’s great to be joining you today for the panel discussion, which will  follow after our presentations.

Can I just start by saying that the future is bright for the Australian higher education system.  There are currently challenges, and they’re large challenges, but the foundations on which  the sector is built on are very, very solid, and I think the sector has a very, very bright future.  This year has been a year like no other. It was, I think, about seven and a half months ago,  when I was in a paddock in Lexton in the northern part of my electorate, with the head of the  International Student Association repairing fences, so that we could send a message out to  the broader international student community saying that, even though we’d had devastating  bushfires in Australia, Australia was a safe place to come and study. And, as a matter of  fact, you could come and study in Australia, and help the nation repair the damage that had  been brought by the bushfires. And, doing that work, I received a phone call summonsing  me to go to Melbourne, because there was an important Cabinet meeting which was taking  place that afternoon. And, for the first time, we realised the potential impact that COVID-19  was going to, was potentially could have on the globe, and on our nation. And, that,  obviously, has presented, since then, an enormous amount of challenges across many  sectors, but including the higher education sector. And, in large part, it has led to us  responding to ensure that we will have a very successful higher education system into the  future.

So, what did the Government do to ensure that we put ballast into the sector this year? Well,  the first thing we did was underpin our funding for domestic students, by guaranteeing $18  billion to the sector this year, and by making it very clear it wouldn’t matter what happened  with regards to domestic student load - that the sector would be guaranteed that $18 billion  of funding. We also sought to move quickly on reforms that we’d been looking at, by  introducing microcredential courses - short courses - and we now have 55 providers  providing courses in 300, 400 different areas in microcredentials, or short courses. It’s in the  Australian Qualifications Framework now until the end of 2021, and the Government’s aim is  to cement microcredentials, or short courses, into the AQF forever, given the success that  we’ve already seen from the sector in taking up those microcredentials. And, what we also  saw from the sector itself is its professionalism, its ability to innovate, and its ability to meet a  challenge. The way it was able to move seamlessly to conducting courses online, tutorials  online, and making sure that the day-to-day practices that were required from a university  was still able to continue through COVID-19, I think, really did show how much of a world-leading sector we have here in Australia in our higher education sector.

But, it just wasn’t on the domestic front that we saw the challenges. We were able to -  through working very closely with our border officials - ensure that we got over 80 per cent  of our international students in this year. And, that was incredibly important. And, a lot of  time and effort went into that, because there is a real understanding of the importance of the

international student market makes to our nation. For every three international students that  come in, one job is created domestically - 250,000 jobs all up are there as a result of our  international student market. $40 billion in national income in 2019 as a result of our  international student market. So, we were able to get 80 per cent of the international  students into Australia this year. But, the challenge as COVID-19 has continued, and,  particularly, we’ve seen the second wave in Victoria, is what will the international student  market look like next year, and the year after? National Cabinet has agreed that we will try  and get pilots up and running as soon as possible. But, obviously, with internal border  restrictions, and with caps on returning Australians coming back to the nation, we have to  work through some of those issues before we can commence those pilots. But, South  Australia, the Northern Territory, are very keen to work with the Commonwealth Government  to get those pilots going as quickly as possible.

But, without those international students, what we’ve also learned is the cross-subsidisation  that was going on from that international student market into our research capability, has  been struck at a real blow, and one that will require us to ensure that we can continue to  underpin research in this nation. And, that’s why the Government has set-up a joint working  group with a group of Vice-Chancellors to see how we can do this, understanding that  research will very much lead us on our economic recovery out of COVID-19. It’s played a  key role in helping us deal with the pandemic, in helping us be able to provide both medical  expert advice but also modelling in other areas, for us to be able to deal with COVID-19, and  continue to deal with COVID-19. But, also, we know, in terms of creating new industries, new  technologies, and driving the nation out of the pandemic, research is going to be absolutely  vital.

So, that is why, at the moment, from the Government’s point of view, we have very much a  two-pronged approach to the future of the higher education sector. One is, we now know,  sadly, that youth unemployment is going to grow, and is growing as a result of the pandemic.  And, that means that we need to open up more places when it comes to higher education.  That’s why our Job-ready Graduates legislation, which is before the Parliament at the  moment, will create an additional, up to 20,000 places next year, and over 100,000  additional places in the years to come. It will also create stronger linkages between  universities and industry, something else that we see as absolutely vital to ensuring we grow  our economy out of this pandemic. And, it’s also why we are looking at what we need to do  to, to ensure that we have the investments that are required to help our research sector,  while we wait for the international student market to recover.

So, it’s been quite a challenging year. I don’t think any of us expected to be confronting what  we did in the higher education space. But, my view is, by putting more domestic places into  the sector, by creating stronger linkages between industry, and making sure that we have  that ballast in our research, then, capability, then we will be able to ensure that the sector will  be one of the drivers as we come out of this COVID-19 pandemic. And, it needs to be one of  the drivers, because the future of our nation, given the shape of our economy, the reliance  we have on services to drive economic growth, having a higher education system which can  produce the students that we need, the technology that we need, and the know-how that we  need is going to be absolutely vital.

So, I’ll leave it there Tim, and happy to take questions after we hear from the rest of the  panellists.

