

LINDA BURNEY MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND SOCIAL SERVICES  MEMBER FOR BARTON

ANDREW LEIGH MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR CHARITIES  MEMBER FOR FENNER



FOOD RELIEF SERVICES GET FOOD TO THE MOST VULNERABLE NOW  THEY’RE AT TIPPING POINT

Food banks and emergency relief services are at tipping point as the COVID-19  challenge depletes food supplies and squeezes supply chains.

Food banks provide a vital service in our community by saving excess food and  getting it to vulnerable Australians.

Food is donated by supermarkets, wholesalers, manufacturers, farmers and  restaurants among other businesses. Food banks only get limited government  funding to purchase some staples.

Normally transport companies are able to deliver these donations through  backloading or using spare space.

In recent weeks however, panic buying at supermarkets has severely depleted  supplies of excess food.

This surge in demand also means transport companies are running at capacity  and don’t have space to donate.

With further economic uncertainty moving forward, this means the thousands of  Australians may need to rely on emergency relief for the first time.

Food banks are already seeing a surge in demand, in part caused by affordable  food selling at at stores - and are being forced to ration and limit what is  available.

No one should be turned away from help when they need it.





Labor is calling on the government to step in - with two vital but reasonable  measures:

1. Provide the additional funding necessary to fill gaps in supply for food relief  services; and

2. Prioritise a place for food relief in supply chains to get the food to where it  needs to go.

“Along with healthcare and the economy, food security represents a major, and  very visible and immediate component of the COVID-19 challenge”, said Linda  Burney, Shadow Minister for Families and Social Services.

“We need to see the same level of commitment to food security in this crisis,  that we do for healthcare and the economy.”

“Food relief services provide a vital service at the best of times, and Australians  are only going to become more appreciative of the job they do in the coming  weeks and months”, said Andrew Leigh, Shadow Assistant Minister for  Charities.

“The government needs to back them in now to cope with this challenge that  will last into the foreseeable future.”

Labor has also called on the Government to ensure food supply for remote  communities and small towns, who are most vulnerable to supply chain issues.

SUNDAY, 22 MARCH 2020

MEDIA CONTACT: DARYL TAN 0422 028 222









