

JOSH BURNS MP

MEMBER FOR MACNAMARA





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS, FIRST EDITION WITH PETER STEFANOVIC

WEDNESDAY, 29 JULY 2020



SUBJECTS: Aged Care crisis; Victorian COVID-19 cases; AUSMIN talks; South

China Sea.



PETER STEFANOVIC, HOST: Well let's go live to Melbourne now. We are joined by Labor

MP Josh Burns. Josh good to see you. Thanks so much for joining us this morning. So I

just want to bring to your attention, I'm sure you're aware of it already. The front page of

The Herald Sun this morning, fresh claims that residents in aged care homes have starved

for days they've been unwashed, left in soiled sheets. That's just one story. What your

reaction to that?



JOSH BURNS, MEMBER FOR MACNAMARA: Pete, good morning mate. It's obviously

really disturbing to hear some of those stories coming out of aged care providers. I think

that this is a crisis and this is a really stressful time for families. I've got a family member in

residential aged care and and to hear those sorts of stories you know I know for those

families would be would be really stressful. What's important now is to make sure that

these services get the care and the expertise and the attention that they deserve and

unfortunately this is something that is really disappointing but not that surprising. We've

known for a long time that the care in many of our aged care services is inadequate and

that's why the Prime Minister himself in 2018 called the Aged Care Royal Commission.

This is something that has been around for a while and we need to fix it and we need to fix

it quickly.



STEFANOVIC: It feels like we haven't learnt the lessons of Newmarch House though, 19

people dying - 19 elderly residents dying I should say - in the first spike of this outbreak

and yet here we are again. It's the same problems isn't it? Have we not learned the

lessons?



BURNS: Well you're spot on Pete and it's not just Newmarch it's also right around the

world. Unfortunately this Coronavirus affects older people in a far more severe way and

throughout the United States, throughout other countries where there's been significant

breakouts that the people that have suffered the most is in our aged care services. And so

I think the warning signs have been there. I think that the Federal Government has

probably known for a while that more action needs to be taken to support our workers and

our staff who are in many cases completely overrun and underpaid and we need to make

sure that every support possible is given to our aged care services and to our residents in

them.



STEFANOVIC: Is there a problem now emerging I mean you bring up a fair point there and

it's a common point that's being shared too, that many workers in the sector are underpaid.

Now the workers in aged care are going to be getting paid pandemic leave to take some

time off if they're not feeling well, they might have the virus, but that creates another

problem doesn't it because then there's not enough staff members to look after the

vulnerable?



BURNS: It does. But the most important thing is if someone's unwell, we can't have them

walking into these aged care services. That has to be the priority and unfortunately the

organisational task of trying to get people to replacement is you know is difficult but it is

necessary and we need to make sure that workers are not walking into these services

because if they do it, it is a disaster as as we can see.



STEFANOVIC: So does that highlight the point Greg Hunt referred yesterday to a crack

team a crack medical team now who's going into these aged care centres to kind of help

out, is that too late?



BURNS: Look, I don't think that pointing the finger is particularly useful what we need is is

to fix this issue and to make sure that these services have the resources that they need

and as I said to you before Pete, this is something that we've known for a while. This is

something that Scott Morrison himself admitted when he called the Royal Commission into

aged care services because of the inadequacy of care, the inadequacy of expertise, the

inadequacy of training. These are long systemic issues in our aged care services that fall

within the responsibility of the federal government. So I would just say that you know, right

now we need to deal with it, there are families that are stressed and devastated by the

treatment of their loved ones. You know I haven't seen my grandma in almost six months,

it is really difficult for families. And we need to make sure that we fix this, fix it quickly and

the longstanding issues in our aged care sector are dealt with as quickly as possible.



STEFANOVIC: And you're right. Well I mean it’s the State Government, Daniel Andrews,

pointing the finger at the Federal Government and Greg Hunt pointing the finger back at

the State Government yesterday for the quarantine breaches at the hotel so what does that

all say to you?



BURNS: Look it's obviously a stressful time. There's no doubt about it this Coronavirus is

testing everyone and testing everyone's patience. I think that the Victorian Government

has and especially the Premier has done a stoic job of standing up in front of the media

every single day and making sure that not a question that wanted to be put to him doesn't

get answered and doesn't get his accountability on. Now obviously the Health Minister is,

he's been working hard as well and I absolutely acknowledge that and I think what people

want to hear and what people have been impressed with so far is the collaboration

between different levels of Government and and we need to we need to take a big deep

breath and get back to that as quickly as possible.



STEFANOVIC: Josh, are any of these aged care centres where there have been

outbreaks in your electorate?



BURNS: Not as yet I don't believe, Pete. And you know we're hoping to keep it that way.

It's not just aged care services that I'm you know, really focused on and nervous about, we

do have a lot of public housing as well, a lot of vulnerable people in those high-rises as

well. So we've been in constant contact with the Department of Health and Human

Services in Victoria, we're distributing sanitiser this week, we're really trying to be as

helpful as we can to make sure that people locally get all of the support and protection that

they that they can.



STEFANOVIC: I know you don't want to point the finger and you're obviously a supporter

of Daniel Andrews as well. But should he have you know cancelled elective surgery earlier

to free up staff to be sent to be sent into these aged care centers?



BURNS: Look I don't have the request in front of me. It wasn't made to me. You'd be

surprised that Scott Morrison doesn't run these things past me. I'm happy for him to but he

doesn't.



STEFANOVIC: (Laughs) But broadly speaking?



BURNS: Look my understanding is that the request was made early Monday and that it

was acted on by Tuesday, so that's that's a pretty good turnaround. Obviously these are

issues that have been canvassed for a long time in the aged care sector. I think, you know,

instead of getting lost in this sort of pointing the finger saga what we need to do is make

sure that the people who are in residential aged care get support. We need to focus. We

need to be focused on saving Victorian lives. I think the Victorian Government has been

doing that remarkably so far and trying to put downward pressure on this really slippery

virus. We're seeing it pop up all around the country, after weeks of no new cases in

Queensland today there's a new case, and this is a really difficult thing to manage and we

need to just make sure that we're focused on saving lives.



STEFANOVIC: Just finally a complete change of topic Josh but the AUSMIN talks. You

know there's an interesting debate that's emerging here. At the moment the Ministers, our

Ministers, not necessarily going there today but whether we should be venturing to within

12 nautical miles of these disputed areas in the South China Sea. Should we be doing

that? We just heard from ASPI, Michael Shoebridge, who said we should because it will

halt their territorial advances. What's your position on that?



BURNS: Yeah good question Pete. I mean I heard the Defence Minister give a briefing this

morning and some of the specific requests weren't made public by the Defence Minister so

it's sort of difficult for me to comment on some of the specifics that were asked or

discussed between Marise Payne and her counterpart Mike Pompeo. I would say that

broadly, Labor has for a long time supported the principles of freedom of navigation and

freedom of movement especially in trade routes. We need to be engaging with China, we



don't have a choice. It is the biggest player in our region and we need the United States to

be doing its part as well and I think that yesterday when Penny Wong spoke about what we

would like to see from these discussions we absolutely acknowledged how important they

are that this opportunity is crucial. But we also wanted the United States not just to have a

military presence in our region but also to have an ongoing political presence as well. And

that can take shape in things like the rollout of a potential vaccine of this Coronavirus, it

can take place in making sure that trade discussions between nations are as fair as

possible, including for Australia. So these are complicated issues these are ones that the

Labor Party will  come back to formally throughout the day, especially around the specifics

of the South China Sea. But I think in principle we need to make sure that there is freedom

of navigation, freedom of movement, especially in trade routes. And it's absolutely in

Australia's interest to be engaging with all parties to ensure that.



STEFANOVIC: Complicated issues in quite complicated times, it's fair to say. Josh thank

you so much. Good to get your thoughts. We'll talk to you soon.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DEAN SHERR 0423 394 949









Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













