



The Hon Stuart Robert MP  Minister for the National Disability Insurance Scheme  Minister for Government Services

MEDIA RELEASE





Authorised by S. Robert MP, Canberra



Friday, 28 August 2020

Update on NDIS participants and COVID-19

Below is the daily update on NDIS participants and workforce and COVID-19 for Friday, 28 August 2020.

The reporting will ensure accurate and timely information is being provided to the community. The data is  collated through reporting mechanisms of the NDIS Quality and Safeguard Commission and compiled by  the Commonwealth’s NDIS Critical Response Group.

Visit www.ndis.gov.au/coronavirus for more information.

COVID-19 cases notified to the NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission as at 10.00 - Friday,  28 August 2020

National Positive COVID-19 Case Notifications

Cumulative since March 2020 Current Active Cases

Participant 96 (-) 35 (-)

Worker 174 (+3) 58 (+2)

Total 270 (+3) 93 (+2)



Current Active Positive COVID-19 Cases by State and Territory

NSW VIC QLD WA SA TAS ACT NT

Participant - 35 (-) - - - - - -

Worker - 56 (+2) - - - - - -

Total - 91 (+2) - - - - - -



Notes:   - Data only includes cases of COVID-19 in NDIS funded supports and services notified to the NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission by registered  NDIS providers. NDIS supports and services include those provided to people with disability in their own homes, or in disability accommodation supports under  the NDIS. Infections may not occur due to the provision of NDIS supports and services and include acquired infections in the community.    - Data does not include: reports of people with disability who manage their own supports in the NDIS, as they are not required to report; all NDIS

participants who may be residing in residential aged care where their providers are not required to be registered NDIS providers; and in-kind supports or other  services that are under the jurisdiction of any other state and territory government, which may include Supported Residential Services, public housing, social and  community housing.   - Active cases are determined by advice from providers to the NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission. In order to protect individuals’ privacy, active  cases are not specified in jurisdictions where there are low reports of infection.

Media contact:   Minister Robert’s Office (02) 6277 7200

