

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC AFTERNOON BRIEFING  MONDAY, 5 OCTOBER 2020

SUBJECTS: The Morrison Recession; possible tax cuts; Australian Labor  Party; people being left behind; Government’s failures on infrastructure;  Treasury estimates based on existence of vaccine; Donald Trump; China  relations.

PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: Anthony Albanese is the Opposition Leader  and my guest this afternoon. Anthony Albanese, welcome.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY:  Good afternoon, Patricia.

KARVELAS: You keep referring to this as ‘the Morrison Government's  recession’. Is it really the Morrison Government’s recession? Isn't it really a  recession based on a global health pandemic?

ALBANESE: So was the global financial crisis was a global issue. You have  referred to, I'm sure, the Keating recession a number of times. People refer to  who is in government at the time. I don't see it as controversial at all. Scott  Morrison not only is the Prime Minister, he was the Treasurer before he was  the Prime Minister, before he helped remove Malcolm Turnbull, and he has to  accept responsibility for leading the Government.

KARVELAS: OK. But ultimately, do you think we would be having a recession  right now if COVID-19 didn't exist?

ALBANESE: Obviously, Patricia, that's, with respect, a rather strange question  to ask.

KARVELAS: Not really. No. You do think there would be a recession?

ALBANESE: The pandemic's occurred. Because what I do think is that

of course has had a major impact on our economy. It's had a major impact  on our health. We, of course, were arguing, Patricia, early on for issues like  wage subsidies when the Prime Minister was dismissing them. We were  arguing for a cautious approach on borders when the Prime Minister was  saying it was OK for people to come into Australia without so much as a  temperature test when they arrived at Sydney and Melbourne international  airports. The fact is, though, that we entered this period from a position of  weakness. Last year wages were stagnant, the growth was below trend,  consumer demand was low, productivity was going backwards, business  investment was in decline, and that's the context here. We entered it very  weak. The Government didn't have a plan and was relying upon the Reserve  Bank's multiple decreases in interest rates to stimulate the economy. It is  the Government that said, of course, the Budget was back in black. We know  that wasn’t the case.

KARVELAS: It's been reported Stage 2 of the tax cuts will be backdated to July  1 this year. Will you back that?

ALBANESE: We, of course, argued last year that Stage 2 of the tax cuts  should be brought forward. So, there will be nothing surprising if we took  a position consistent with that. But, of course, we will wait until the Budget's  actually brought down as opposed to these selective leaks to friendly  journalists.

KARVELAS: Until, of course, the Budget comes down tomorrow night, we  won't know all of the details. We know some things. The Treasurer has done  now a range of interviews where he's outlined some of the directions  they're moving in. The Stage 2 and 3 tax cuts were finally supported by  the Labor Party last year, after the Government put them into what is an  omnibus Bill.

ALBANESE: We opposed Stage 3 of the tax cuts, Patricia.

KARVELAS: You voted for the omnibus bill, and clearly they’re looking to do  something similar.

ALBANESE: No, we didn't vote against Stage 1 and 2. But because they came  together, let's not reprosecute.

KARVELAS: Will you take the same strategy this time, which is to argue  against Stage 3, but to ultimately vote for the omnibus bill?

ALBANESE: Well, what's happening with Stage 3, Patricia? You might have  news I don't have.

KARVELAS: If they bring forward Stage 3 as well, is it your instinct to vote, I’m  asking about the strategy. Let’s just go to the strategy

ALBANESE: No, you're asking about hypotheticals. Our strategy last time was  to make it clear we had a choice of being, what we were in favour of we had to  emphasise, or what we were against. We in favour of Stage 1 and Stage 2 of  the tax cuts. We were against Stage 3. They were all together. We failed  to separate Stage 3. Therefore, that was the choice we made. We chose to be  defined by what we were for, rather than what we were against.

KARVELAS: Alright. My question is are you going to take that approach  again this time?

ALBANESE: We don't have anything before us, Patricia. I have no intention of  foreshadowing a hypothetical that may never happen.

KARVELAS: Philosophically, voting for what you're for rather than what  you're against, is that still your position that that's the right thing to do.

ALBANESE: Labor should always be defined by what we're for, rather than  what we're against. I said when I became the Leader of the Labor Party  that we’d be constructive, that we’d be defined by what we were in favour of,  not what we were against. And that wasn't just out of the nature of the Labor  Party being the party that's in favour of changing society for the better  and building a stronger economy. That was also out of a perspective  and watching what happened with this current Government, whereby  Tony Abbott was defined by what he was against, not what he was for.  They achieved government in 2013 and are still wondering what to do with  it. Where are the big reforms from this Government now in its eighth year  on the labour market? They still don't have an energy policy. They don't have  any social policy reforms to point to where they have changed society for the  better, like we did with paid parental leave. This is a government in search of a  purpose and that's why, if you are just negative and are defined by just what  you're opposed to, then I think that helps create a climate whereby you end up  like this Government, in its third term, in its eighth year, where, when it's all  over, people will wonder what the purpose of this Government was. I want to be  the Prime Minister of this country to change the country for the better, not just  to oppose the Liberal and National Parties.

KARVELAS: That's an interesting point you make, that you want to be defined  by positivity on that one. Someone on the minimum wage will get less, I think,  than $100 a year from Stage 2 and nothing from Stage 3. What more would  you like to see for low-income earners?

ALBANESE: What I want to see is a program that doesn't leave people behind.

So, I want to see JobKeeper, for example, support given to people  who currently haven't got support. A whole lot of people, casual, university  workers, people in the arts and entertainment sector have missed out under  this Government. We have got circumstances whereby I want the Government  to say what the rate of JobSeeker will be. It can't go back, surely, to just $40 a  day. We know that isn't enough to live on. We will be examining the Budget to  see how it deals with the issue of fairness. Women and young people have  been particularly adversely affected, disproportionately, by this recession and  we want to examine how it has an impact on lifting up and providing  opportunity for women and young people.

KARVELAS: Why are you doubting that the Government will deliver on its  infrastructure commitments? It's made infrastructure commitments today. It said  it wants the states to get on board and fast-track some of this, because it is  about job creation. You have been casting doubt on this today. Why aren't you  confident that they're going to do it?

ALBANESE: Because their record shows that they don't. The problem with this  Government is it all about the announcement, not the delivery. It is all about the  photo op, not the follow-up. And what we've had from this Government, when it  comes to infrastructure, is, over its first six budgets, $6.8 billion that was  promised would be delivered just hasn't been. So that for programs like the  Urban Congestion Fund, in New South Wales in the previous financial year, it  was supposed to deliver over $200 million of investment. It delivered four. Four.  Two per cent of what they said they would do. And that has characterised this  Government. They make announcements about projects and then forget about  it. ‘That's job done’. It isn't shovels in the ground. You can't drive on a  promise. You can't catch a train on a promise. You have actually got to deliver  on infrastructure, and this Government has shown it is incapable of doing that.

KARVELAS: Economists say record low interest rates mean the Government  should and, in fact, has to spend big to get the economy moving again. Should  debt be a consideration?

ALBANESE: Well, debt should always be a consideration, because it's got to  be paid back. That is why it's the value of the spend that's important. And my  concern with this Government is that they established programs whereby  you have ministers making decisions based upon politics, rather than based  upon productivity or the benefit for jobs, the benefit for the economy, the benefit  for regions. So, that when you have rorted programs, like Sports Rorts, when  you have $33 million paid for a block of land for Badgerys Creek Airport in 50  years' time that is only worth three, when you have programs that they say  have been established to help women's sport participation that actually don't go  into that, go to fix up a pool at North Sydney in the centre of Sydney, then we  are concerned about the capacity of this Government to actually deliver

on proper programs. I mean, we've had a $4.5 billion announcement  that they're going to fix up the NBN by making more fibre part of the  system going to homes and businesses. Who knew that fibre was better  than copper? Everybody. Everybody. But we had an obsolete system that was  already out-of-date before it was built just due to ideology from this  Government.

KARVELAS: Alright. Just on other issues. Big spending measures targeting job  creation, things like a business investment allowance will be temporary,  according to the Treasurer, and withdrawn when unemployment falls to pre-COVID levels. They don't want to bake it into the system, right? That's  the strategy he's outlined. Do you think that's a good strategy? Is it one that  Labor supports?

ALBANESE: Well, it depends on the specifics, Patricia.

KARVELAS: The idea of not baking it in long-term to the budget?

ALBANESE: Well it depends on the specifics. One, if you are about serious  reform, then you are about changing things permanently. So, there is an  opportunity, I think, from this position that we find ourselves in, the recession,  to not just go back to what was there but to think about how we can build a  better future for the long term. That means baking things in. Baking in reform.  But then you have circumstances whereby a range of expenditures need to be  temporary. We haven't said that programs like JobKeeper and others should  be permanent. Not at all. They are obviously for a period of time when it's  needed.

But one of the concerns I have is the apprenticeship announcement whereby  you have 100,000 eligible for this subsidy, joint payment, from government  and from the businesses employing the apprenticeships, but it will only last for  11 months. The fact is apprenticeships are four years. How will that actually  assist the taking on of new apprentices in a way that is permanent and make  sure that they're kept on and receive their qualifications? I'm concerned  about that, given that the context here is there are 140,000 less  apprentices and trainees today than there were when this Government was  elected. And in 2018, Patricia, if you want an example of announcement and  no delivery, they announced a program that we’re going to have 300,000  new apprentices. So, this is only 100,000. 200,000 have dropped off in two  years. Of that 300,000 announcement, there have only been three or four  created. There are less apprenticeship commencements today than there have  been any time for two decades, under this Government's watch.

KARVELAS: OK. Look, just on a few other things. Was it the right call for  Treasury to assume we will have a vaccine by the end of next year?



ALBANESE: Well, it's bold call, isn't it, Patricia? I understand that that's the call  the Government has made. Now, we will examine the detail of the papers, of  course. We don't get access to them. I'm always wary of taking the  Government's spin as fact. That's what we see at this stage in the cycle. But  certainly if it is the case that that's been done in order to make the figures  look better in the out years, then that should be called out. But we will examine  that detail.

KARVELAS: Just on some foreign affairs issue, if you like, before I do let you  go, what did you make of these extraordinary images of Donald Trump in this  car ride outside of the hospital waving at patients? Obviously there were others  in the car, driving it. Did you find that an extraordinary scene?

ALBANESE: I found it one that is not my job to explain. I don't see what the  purpose of that was. I wish the President, and anyone else who's been infected  by this virus, all the best for their recovery, in terms of their health. And I think  that needs to be the priority, rather than any photo ops or other things should  very much come secondary. And certainly that would be my advice, if I was  asked, which of course I haven't been.

KARVELAS: You have been asked by me.

ALBANESE: I have been asked to comment, but it isn't my job.

KARVELAS: I'm aware of that.

ALBANESE: You know, it is up to him what he does. That's a decision for him  really.

KARVELAS: The question is, given it is a pandemic, it's a very contagious  virus, there are other people in the car, does it send a dangerous message  about the virus, given we know the virus kills?

ALBANESE: Well, all I can say on that is that I wish the President and  anyone else suffering from this virus all the best. It's serious. It should be taken  seriously. And people should listen to the advice of health experts and should  always be cautious in this.

KARVELAS: One of China's top diplomats has called for an end  to confrontation and abusive language in what has been described as  these increasingly hostile exchanges between Australia and China, saying the  relationship can be salvaged through better communication. Key to this is  saying that this can happen by both countries. This is Madame Fu Ying,  China's former ambassador to Australia. Do you agree? Should both sides



use different language, not just Beijing?

ALBANESE: What I think is Australia, which has of course almost 50 per cent  of our exports China-bound. We're tied up with China. That is something that is  not going to end any time soon. Obviously it would be better for our economic  position if we had more diversification there. But it's important, I think, the  Australian Government be more strategic and less political in some of  its rhetoric when it comes to China.

KARVELAS: Thank you so much for joining us, Anthony Albanese.

ALBANESE: Thank you very much, Patricia. All the best.





ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053









