Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania









Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck  Minister for Aged Care and Senior Australians  Minister for Youth and Sport



23 September 2020



Youth to have their say on issues that matter

Young people will have their say on the issues that matter to them as the Australian  Government works towards the release of its National Youth Policy Framework.

Young leaders, youth organisations and relevant government agencies are invited to provide  their views ahead of the implementation of the framework which will provide a pathway of  continued support for young people around Australia.

The results of an online survey will help shape the priorities, policies and programs that affect  youth.

Minister for Youth and Sport, Richard Colbeck said this is particularly important as the  COVID-19 pandemic continues to have a widespread impact.

“Many young Australians are dealing with disruptions to their education, sudden  unemployment, mental health issues and economic insecurity within the family,” Minister  Colbeck said.

Earlier this month, Minister Colbeck met with Ministerial colleagues in Canberra to outline  how the Youth Taskforce is in the process of developing a whole-of-government approach to  supporting young people.

“We are now providing young Australians, particularly those aged 15 to 24, with an  opportunity to give direct advice on the development of the framework and ultimately, a  meaningful contribution to the policies that affect them,” Minister Colbeck said.

“Their involvement will be used to create a blueprint that will drive action to improve the lives  of young people now and into the future.”

The month long consultation will help the Government identify any gaps or barriers  experienced by young people which prevent them from fully participating in Australian society.

“The COVID-19 pandemic is putting a lot of demands on young people and they are rising to  the challenge, but together we can do more,” Minister Colbeck said.

Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania





“I look forward to hearing about their ideas through this important and timely consultation.”

The survey can be found here.

Discussions will inform the final draft of the National Youth Policy Framework due for  completion by December.



















































