

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&EO TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS AM AGENDA

THURSDAY, 27 FEBRUARY 2020



SUBJECTS: Sports Rorts; Gaetjens report; Coronavirus; Economy.



ANNELISE NIELSEN, HOST: Deputy Labor Leader, Richard thank you for your time.



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR

PARTY:  Morning Annelise, how are you?



NIELSEN: Good thank you. Now we're expecting some pretty explosive evidence out of

this hearing today which is why we're keeping a close eye on it but we do know 136 emails

from Government, from the Prime Minister's office to Bridget McKenzie's office. Surely

there's more of this story to be told.



MARLES: Well I think there's a lot more of this story to be told. But the important point

which comes from that fact is that what we heard from the Prime Minister at the outset is

that all he did was pass on representations that came to him from various employees-

there is no way that you can maintain that story in the face of 136 emails going back and

forth, colour coded spreadsheets, one in relation to the third round of this program going to

the Prime Minister on the eve of the election being called. What's clear is that this was

using public money to run a party political campaign for the Liberal Party and much more

than that, the Prime Minister was up to his neck in it. I mean, his fingerprints are all over

this. And so you know, he will double down as he does, he will try and avoid questions as

is his practice. But at the end of the day the Australian people know that he has a lot to

answer for and those are answers that he simply must give.



NEILSEN: Now, we heard the Prime Minister yesterday in Question Time saying that this

is exactly the kind of thing Anthony Albanese used to do, that it's both sides do this - that

it's really nothing to see here. Do you accept that?



MARLES: I absolutely do not accept that. I mean, what we hear is the Prime Minister

repeatedly trying to deflect and dodge and then when the ball lands absolutely in his court

he seeks to deny and then doubles down. He said that all he was doing was making

representations. It turns out he's doing a lot more. This is a program that was rolled out on

the basis of the marginality of seats in terms of what were Liberal Party targets, with such a

spreadsheet going to his office the night before the election is called. I'll tell you what, if

you're a National right now and you are looking at the Regional program and you're seeing

that you know basically gold plated pools are being funded out of this in North Sydney

you've got to be wondering what this is all about at this right now. And so the Prime

Minister has a whole lot of explaining that he must do and this has got a long way to go.



NIELSEN: When you talk to a lot of punters who have kind of a cursory knowledge of the

whole sports rorts saga, many of them will say; look isn't this what governments do? They

throw money at marginal seats. Is it really that extraordinary?



MARLES: No, I actually don't accept that- certainly that's not what I'm hearing from people

in my electorate. And in a sense, you know we saw this, in a way we're on the frontline of it

because we had a marginal Liberal seat- as it was then; Corangamite in the southern part

of Geelong- and if you're a sporting club there, you are getting showered with attention and

a whole lot of attention from the Liberal Member. If you're on the wrong side of the river,

you are struggling to get your programs up. And there were so many sporting clubs in my

electorate who were deeply concerned prior to the election about how they could get their

particular programs funded. When they look at what has happened now, what's transpired,

there is total outrage about it.



NEILSEN: Now we've had Jacqui Lambie on the show this morning, she said that the

Government should hand over the Gaetjens Report into this-



MARLES: It should.



NIELSEN: She's saying she's withholding support for Ensuring Integrity. Obviously you

don't support Ensuring Integrity but do you support her making that move to force the

government to hand it over?



MARLES: Well we don't support Ensuring Integrity. But what this is also demonstrating is

this is another example of the Government's relationship with the crossbench breaking

down and Senator Lambie has a fair point in that the Gaetjens report should be made

public. I mean we ought to see exactly what inquiry has been done here in terms of the

Gaetjens report and what the outcomes of that inquiry are. I mean, I can't imagine why it

wouldn't be made public unless there is something to hide. And I think ultimately that's

what we've got to get here; is a sense of transparency about exactly what was the Prime

Minister's office doing in relation to this? I've got no doubt they are desperate not for that to

happen. But ultimately the Australian public is going to demand that we get to the bottom

of what is an appalling scandal.



NIELSEN: So if we get to that point where we get the Gaetjens report, what do you think

it's actually going to reveal specifically that would change the situation from what we know

now?



MARLES: Well it's hard to answer that because we need to see what comes from the

Gaetjens report. But I can't understand why the Government would not make it public

unless they did have something to hide. What we already know is that the evidence that is

coming out is standing in stark contrast to what the Prime Minister was saying at the start

of this, that his only role was to pass on representations. That is now patently

demonstrated as being not true. We need to see exactly what the Gaetjens report finds in

respect of that. And we also need to I guess have a sense of the extent to which the

Gaetjens report engaged in an inquiry of all of this. Like did it actually look at all the

versions of the spreadsheets which were going back and forth between the Minister's office

and the Prime Minister's office?



NEILSEN: If we can talk about the coronavirus threat as well; it's really looming large over

Australia at the moment and the Government's been saying that they've got these

emergency plans in place. Do you think we're doing enough to counter this threat?



MARLES: It's really important firstly that we are listening to our medical advisers and that

the principal source of advice and the principal source of action being derived from that

advice is from them - so that's critical. I think there are concerns now about what economic

impact this will have as we watch this play out around the globe. To me what that does is

actually put into stark relief the negligence of the Government before the coronavirus

occurred and before the bushfires occurred last year, in terms of not acting on what was

then a sluggish economy. I mean we needed to see action then and we were calling for a

range of measures to be taken by the Government at that point to get the economy going. I

think ultimately what we want is leadership, leadership in the moment of a crisis. Now, you

know we didn't see that over the summer, it's critical that we see it going forward.



NEILSEN: Do you accept that it will have this hit on the economy that no one could have

predicted and that might result in us losing the surplus?



MARLES: Well looks, in terms of the surplus specifically, the surplus is a test the

Government set for itself. I mean they were the ones who made the coffee cup saying

‘back in the black’ before they actually brewed the coffee. That's the reality of it. They're

the ones who on Budget night said a surplus is achieved not that they were budgeting for a

surplus, but that it is already achieved. So the Government needs to assess itself against



the test that it set for itself which was that it would be in surplus. Whatever is the economic

impact of corona and if it ends up being a very significant economic impact that just puts

into starker relief the negligence of the inaction and the drift that we saw on the part of the

Government in respect of the economy last year before any of these matters actually

arose.



NIELSEN: Richard Marles, thank you for your time.



MARLES: Thanks Annelise.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











