



THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP  MINISTER FOR POPULATION,  CITIES AND URBAN  INFRASTRUCTURE





THE HON MARK MCGOWAN  MLA  PREMIER OF WESTERN  AUSTRALIA



THE HON RITA SAFFIOTI  MLA  WA MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT







PROFESSOR STEVE  CHAPMAN

EDITH COWAN UNIVERSITY   VICE-CHANCELLOR



MEDIA RELEASE

The Hon Alan Tudge MP, Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure   WANTIRNA SOUTH, VICTORIA



Monday, 16 November 2020

EDITH COWAN UNIVERSITY SEEKING LEAD ARCHITECT AND LEAD DESIGN  ENGINEERS FOR MULTI-MILLION-DOLLAR CITY CAMPUS

Edith Cowan University (ECU) is set to release two highly anticipated Expression of Interest  invitations to the market, seeking a Lead Architect and Lead Design Engineers for its  $695 million ECU City Campus.

The campus is the centrepiece of the recently announced Perth City Deal, which brings  together the collaborative efforts of the Australian Government, Western Australian  Government and City of Perth to help Perth recover from the impacts of the COVID-19  pandemic and position the city for the future.

The project will deliver Western Australia’s first vibrant and engaging CBD university campus  and represent one of the State’s largest and most exciting building projects.

Premier of Western Australia Mark McGowan said the ECU City Campus will be a landmark  project that represents the future of inner-city university education and enliven the city  experience while creating thousands of jobs, and supporting the WA economy.

“The City Deal was only announced in September 2020 and being able to get this project  progressing soon after is testament to ECU’s commitment to education, jobs and vision.

“The city campus, which is expected to open in early 2025, will be built on land adjacent to  Yagan Square, linking Northbridge’s dining and entertainment circuit to the Perth Cultural  Centre including the new WA Museum Boola Bardip, and the retail and commercial hub of the  Perth CBD.

“This project will support more than 3,000 jobs during construction and will support the State in  its efforts coming out of the pandemic to build WA back up and create vital infrastructure for  generations to come.”

Federal Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure Alan Tudge said the ECU City  Campus represents a transformational change for Perth with the economic flow-on to last for  decades.

“Thousands of students flooding into the city will inject more life, vibrancy and dollars into the  city centre and its local businesses,” Mr Tudge said.

“COVID-19 has had a profound impact on all our cities and this element of the City Deal is  exactly what WA needs right now because it means local jobs and a boost to the economy.

The Hon Alan Tudge MP, Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure   WANTIRNA SOUTH, VICTORIA

“Not only will this project create jobs; the campus will bring new life to the city with an  estimated $1.5 billion economic output across the next four years, delivering more than  $7.5 billion to the WA economy in the longer term.”

WA Transport and Planning Minister Rita Saffioti said the Perth City deal is creating exciting  new opportunities in the planning and transport spaces.

“Today’s announcement is a major step forward to the shared vision of the inner city Edith  Cowan University opening in 2025,” she said.

“The university campus highlights what density can achieve and the well planned and vibrant  communities it can create.

“I look forward to working on this exciting vision for Perth’s future, which will support and create  local jobs while returning vibrancy to our CBD.”

ECU Vice-Chancellor Professor Steve Chapman said the university will engage with the  market to identify leading experts with both local and international expertise for the roles.

“Given the level of ambition, combined with the complex and multi-faceted nature of the  project, we expect the Lead Architect will leverage international networks and knowledge to  ensure ECU attracts the best advisors to deliver a project of international significance,”  Professor Chapman said.

“We want this campus to be highly innovative and inclusive, where the transition between the  university and the city is seamless, promoting unprecedented levels of community interaction  and engagement.”

ECU City Campus Technical Architect Geoff Warn said this is an unprecedented project for  Perth.

“The Lead Architect and Lead Design Engineers will be tasked with the responsibility, and the  opportunity, to produce their best work,” Mr Warn said.

“It is the type of challenge that creative practices are trained for and dream about.

“This is the visionary project that Perth city has been wanting for a long time, which will have  definite benefits for both the arts and business, opening up a world of new possibilities.”

ECU City Campus will sit over the Perth Busport and will be located just minutes from the  central railway. It will house the internationally recognised Western Australian Academy of  Performing Arts and invigorate the Perth cultural scene by offering hundreds of performances  across the year.

Both Expressions of Interest will be released Monday November 16, 2020, 2pm WST on  Tenders WA at http://www.tenders.wa.gov.au

For more information on the project, visit the News link on: http://www.citycampus.ecu.edu.au

The $695 million ECU city campus is jointly funded, with the Australian Government  committing $245 million, the Western Australian Government $150 million and ECU  $300 million.

[ENDS]

Media Contact:  Mr Tudge - Michael Bennett 0434 782 923  Mr McGowan - Lannie Le-Patterson 0419 698 504  Ms Saffioti - Caitlin Goddard 0437 234 249  Professor Chapman (ECU) - Claudia Bertorello-Kell 0422 686 897

