JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES

MEMBER FOR HUNTER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2GB WITH DEBORAH KNIGHT

FRIDAY, 30 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECT: Queensland election and borders; ANZ’s carbon lending rules;

Emissions targets; Labor gas policy; Halloween costumes.



DEBORAH KNIGHT, HOST: And joining us, as they do every Friday, Angus Taylor,

Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction, and Joel Fitzgibbon, the Opposition

spokesperson for Agriculture and Resources. Fellas, thanks so much for joining us. I want

to talk first up, borders. Obviously we've had this announcement from the premier -

Queensland Premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk - on the eve of the election. Angus, it’s

disappointing for many, including the tourism sector?



ANGUS TAYLOR, MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND EMISSIONS REDUCTION: It sure is,

Deb. You know, we want to see these borders opening-up. Looks and smells to me like

politics here, night before, day before, an election. Look, you know, so many businesses

are reliant on getting across the borders, so much of the tourism industry in Queensland is

dependent on it. And we need to just need see it opening-up as quickly as possible.

Hopefully this election will be over with and would get beyond the politics and do the right

thing by the people of Queensland and the people of Australia.



KNIGHT: Yeah, you'd hate to be a tourism operator, Joel?



JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: Well Angus can’t have it both ways. He

says It’s a shocking decision and usually shocking decisions are pretty unpopular. Yet he

accuses the Premier of doing it - making the announcement because there’s an election

tomorrow. I rest my case. People are very, very fearful of this virus and consistently

Annastacia has been popular, supported by the community, because she's taken a

minimum-risk approach.



KNIGHT: Hasn't New South Wales, though, proven that you can achieve both with great

contact tracing and with jumping on the cases as they emerge, that you can actually

ensure that businesses can stay open, and that you can stay on top of COVID. You can

manage the health of individuals, and the health of businesses at the same time, can’t

you?



FITZGIBBON: Well again, Deb, I think you said yourself earlier that you thought

Annastacia would win tomorrow, was that you? I hope I didn’t misrepresent you there.



KNIGHT: Well, I think it will be a narrow win with the help of the Greens and a minority

government, that is what I think it will be in the end.



FITZGIBBON: We all want it to open up more quickly, of course we do.



TAYLOR: If Joel is saying these decisions should be made by whatever is popular, I

mean, the job here of leaders is to do what's right for their state and for the country. And

that's what we need here. We have here, you’re absolutely right there, Deb, we've seen

how it works in New South Wales, and we've got it to work. I've seen it in my electorate

time and time again. It's been very effective and it's kept our businesses moving.



KNIGHT: Alright, lots to discuss today. Let's talk about the ANZ. They've been in the

spotlight after their announcement of a climate test for loans, cracking down on loans for

businesses that are big emitters. And David Littleproud, the Agriculture Minister Angus,

he's now threatened to revoke the deposit guarantees for the bank. Is this something that

the Government would seriously consider doing?



TAYLOR: Well what's clear here, Deb, is that when banks are telling customers how to run

their businesses, at a detailed level, that's a problem, and that's why there was a backlash.



KNIGHT: Well, why’s it up to government to intervene? Surely that's up to shareholders?

Businesses, if they're not breaking the rules, they can run the business however they want,

can't they?



TAYLOR: Well, let's be clear here. I don't think farmers take kindly to being told how to run

their businesses, at that detailed level, by banks. It is absolutely inappropriate. And let's be

clear here, you know the whole idea that companies, organisations or countries, tell their

customers how try to run their businesses to reduce emissions - that's not even part of the

Paris Agreement. That's not how it runs. That's not how it works. This is inappropriate.



KNIGHT: Isn't up to the shareholders of these individual businesses, like the ANZ, to, you

know, it's up to them to decide. You're always saying you want government to be - to have

less red tape and to not interfere. I mean, surely, you're talking about not having it both

ways for Joel, you guys are wanting to do the same here?



TAYLOR: Well, I'm saying that customers who think that the ANZ Bank is acting

inappropriately by doing this, should move. I mean I think the customer is the ultimate

regulator, and that is the best way to deal with a supplier like this, a service provider, who

is telling them how to run their business is completely inappropriate.



KNIGHT: And Joel, the ANZ is saying that this policy will not impact family farmers. Is it

virtue signalling? Is it fair enough for the Government to be speaking out against

businesses like the ANZ?



FITZGIBBON: Yes, the bank’s given me that guarantee on farming, too. Look there are

two reasons David Littleproud was going on like a pork chop yesterday. The first is that his

is the only government in the country that doesn't have a commitment to net zero

emissions by 2050. All the banks do, all the resources companies do. So, it’s looking pretty

embarrassing for the Government. The second point is that Dave Littleproud knows that

there's nothing more popular, Deb, than to bash a bank. But let's keep it in perspective: I'm

not particularly happy about it at all, by the way. I think the bank, the board of the bank,

have allowed themselves to be influenced by shareholder activists. I'd like to hear from

some of those quieter shareholders who are today wondering whether they’re going to get

a lesser return on their investment with the bank because of these decisions not based on

economics, but based on views about climate change.



KNIGHT: And Angus, is the government not moving quickly enough on climate change?

Because we've got our biggest trading partners have all set these net zero emissions.

Japan, they've pledged net zero emissions by 2050. South Korea has done the same,

China has committed to carbon neutrality by 2060. Even the Philippines, they’re banning

all new coal-fired power stations. I mean, we've had this issue raised, climate change, by

Boris Johnson, the UK Prime Minister, when he spoke to our PM earlier in the week. He

wants him to take bold action on climate change. Are we not taking bold enough action?



TAYLOR: Well, I'll tell you what Boris Johnson and the Prime Minister agreed on earlier in

this week, is that they wouldn't sacrifice jobs to reduce emissions. And I've spoken to the

PM about this. That was very, very clear. And look, let's be clear here, we set our policies.

Not state governments, not Brussels, not London, not any other country. We set our

policies here. Now, Joel makes a comment about targets. Look, the Labor Party has set a

long-term target at 30 years from now. They have got no 2030 target. Because the last

election they took a 2030 target, which I'm sure is still in the drawer ready to go, that was

going to slash the economy, slash sectors, slash gas and coal and other important

industries to this country. And they haven't been able to fess-up that that's still sitting there

in the drawer ready to go for the next election.



KNIGHT: It's fine for our Government to set its own policies, absolutely. But when you've

got the biggest trading partners taking the policy approach that they are, what does it mean

for our reliance on the coal and gas exports that it's bolstering our economy?



TAYLOR: I think Joel and I can both agree that coal and gas exports are going to be

around for a long while yet. And they're important industries. And they're going to prosper

for many, many years to come. But I tell you what, if you're worried about Japan and

Korea's targets, you should be far more worried about Labor's targets, because that's

directly in this country, not in another country.



KNIGHT: Well, let's talk a bit about Labor because Joel, your party, you've finally gotten on

the same page, it seems on gas. You've all agreed to support new gas projects, have you?



FITZGIBBON: And of course, we support gas, Deb...



KNIGHT: ...Not everyone in the party did.



FITZGIBBON: It's not only used for electricity generation, it's used as a heat source, or a

feedstock in our manufacturing sector. We can't put more renewables into the energy grid

without firming power from our gas-fired generators. So, of course we do. I think we've had

some differences in language in the past. Some of my colleagues like to talk more and

more about renewables and renewables jobs, rightly so. But I want my Party talking just as

much and just as loudly and just as proudly about those workers who are employed in the

coal, coal generation, gas and oil industries...



KNIGHT: ...And how much sway do the unions have on that? Getting all on the same

page, because earlier this week we had the CFMEU, the Workers Union, addressing the

Labor Party saying that you're losing voters over coal and gas.



FITZGIBBON: Well, they were there at my invitation, Deb. And of course, those unions,

who together represent industries who employ at least directly one-point-five million

Australians. Of course, they are on board too in ensuring that we support our traditional

industries, industries which will be critical to getting more renewables into the system and

therefore, critical as we move towards zero net emissions in 2050.



KNIGHT: Now I want to end a light note, fellas, because time is against us. It's Halloween

tomorrow and I noticed in the Oz newspaper today, they have put together a list of how we

can all dress up as politicians. That's enough to scare people, isn't it? And we've got PM,

Scott Morrison, suggested you could wear a Hawaiian shirt and a hammer for a chicken

coop. Two donuts and a North Face jacket for Dan Andrews. Joel, what's your suggestion

if people want to dress up as Angus?



FITZGIBBON: Gee, Deb. Look, I think probably a hessian shoulder bag with a hemp shirt

and some nice leather sandals. Because Angus at every opportunity, says he's going to

meet and beat his climate change target. So, there's no more progressive and committed a

person to climate change action as is Angus Taylor.



KNIGHT: Hello, them’s fighting words. Angus, how should people dress up as Joel?



TAYLOR: Well, I think they should go dressed as Mark Butler if they're trying to be Joel. I

think Joel will be the Labor Shadow Minister for Energy soon.



KNIGHT: Okay, alright. There's a prediction. There's a prediction. You can take that and



run with it, Joel.



FITZGIBBON: Thanks team. Thanks for nothing.



KNIGHT: Alright, Good on you fellas. We'll talk again next week, Angus Taylor there and

Joel Fitzgibbon.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641



