

Major step towards a new research funding system



iru.edu.au



/news/major-step-towards-a-new-research-funding-system



8 Oct 2020



The Innovative Research Universities (IRU) congratulates the Government for



recognising the need for a major investment in research across 2021 to ensure our



research system continues.



The Government’s commitment of an additional one billion dollars to the



Research



Support Program



over the coming year is the major injection of funding that IRU has



called for since Covid-19 hit Australia early in 2020.



Without this step, university research capacity would be substantially damaged.



The investment targets universities’ main research fund where they determine the



directions ahead and the staff and resources needed to achieve them. No Government



has invested so much additional money into that fund since it was created in 2001.



It is the first, if major, step towards a new research funding system. The related



measures to stimulate change with a focus on integrating universities with research



end-users will encourage better outcomes and test out options.



It is one-off. It responds to the immediate challenge.



The Government through its Research Sustainability advisory group now needs to



construct the long term system Australia’s research system requires, that is realistic



about the breadth of inputs from research end-users, Government and international



students paying for university education.



The Budget confirms the suite of minor Job-Ready Graduates decisions made over past



months and further encourages the use of higher education short courses to upgrade



workforce skills.



The interaction of these Government policies still requires work to support the breadth



of universities Australia needs. On current incentives, the best-placed universities are



research strong, moderately involved in international student education, and have a



strong demand for law, business and humanities degrees.



1/1

