MATT THISTLETHWAITE MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR THE REPUBLIC

MEMBER FOR KINGSFORD SMITH





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS

TUESDAY, 15 DECEMBER 2020



SUBJECT: China relations.



DANICA DI GIORGIO: Let's get straight into it, Chinese state media appears to have

confirmed that Beijing has blocked Australian coal imports, Matt Thistlethwaite, the Trade

Minister is still trying to confirm this, how costly is this for Australia?



MATT THISTLETHWAITE, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES:

It’s deeply concerning, Danica, there are literally tens of thousands of Australian workers jobs

who rely on exports to China. And this news from the Chinese government is deeply

concerning, not only for those workers, but for the Australian economy in general. And it fits

with what we've been hearing on the ground, Peabody. the mining company in Wollongong

have told their staff that they will be stood down indefinitely from the 1st of January next year,

and that's because of the shipments of their coal that are held up off the coast of China. So it’s

deeply concerning, but what's more concerning, Danica, is that the Morrison government

simply doesn’t have a plan to fix this big problem for what is one of Australia's largest exports.



DI GIORGIO: Well what does happen next? Should Australia, Tony Pasin, go to the World

Trade Organisation now and begin legal action?



TONY PASIN, MEMBER FOR BARKER: Well Danica, let’s be clear, these are deeply

disturbing reports but I’ll wait for confirmation, but if they are correct and they’re deeply

disturbing because it would be evidence of discriminatory practices, which of course in a rules-based order particularly circumstances where there's a bilateral trade agreement between

Australia and China it’s effectively unlawful concerns and so I share Matt’s concerns,

particularly about the very important nature of the two-way trade between Australia on this

commodity front. But the reality here is we expect other nations around the world to play by the

rules and if  we need to have no doubt, and this is my view, if we need to seek to enforce

those, then that'll be a process. But I must say though, and I know that Matt and other

members of the Liberal Party are seeking to make hay while the sun shines through the very

difficult times for our nation, but I think it's unhelpful for major political parties in Australia to get

into a political spat over this. We should be united in terms of our position, as we've been

addressing the Covid pandemic. This is a real concern for Australians and seeking to find

cheap political mileage I think it's unhelpful. On the one hand, you’ve got the Labor Party who

are effectively anti-coal and now they're suggesting we didn't have a plan for coal and other

opportunities. I mean when you’ve got to come together in the interests of Australian workers.



DI GIORGIO: Well is it now time to start looking at levies, what do you think about what was

suggested by the former Resources Minister Matt Canavan when it comes to iron ore, do we

need to start matching China's tariffs, Matt, with a few levies of our own?



THISTLETHWAITE: Well, Dancia, that’s one of the problems this government has, they don’t

have a plan, the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister don't have a plan. So you've got

backbenchers like Matt Canavan and George Christensen basically freelancing and coming up

with some crazy ideas. A plan like that would see a Australian exports become uncompetitive

in international markets and it’s harking back to the dark old days of protectionism, and we

don't want to see our economy moving to that space once again because as we know it

creates inefficiencies in the systems and workers lose jobs. This government basically needs

to develop a plan to get the trade back on an even keel. And they can start, Tony mentioned

bipartisanship, well for bipartisanship Tony you need consultation and Penny Wong has

pointed out that she's never ever briefed by Marie Payne about this issue. So it's difficult to

have bipartisanship when the government isn’t actually talking to the opposition about these

important issues that relate to our nation.



DI GIORGIO: Matt, China isn’t playing by the rules though and the Trade Ministers has said

that they’ve reached out multiple times but they’re simply not answering Australia's call, what

more can we possibly do?



THISTLETHWAITE: Well there’s a few things I think you can do, firstly you can stop the



backbenchers freelancing which is no doubt causing trouble. You know, the likes of Eric Abetz

questioning Australian people and their loyalty to…



DI GIORGIO: Sorry Matt, I am going to have to interrupt you there. We will have to leave it

there. Let's go live now to Tasmania where the Prime Minister is speaking.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: BEN LEESON 0404 648 275

