



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

The Hon Mark Coulton MP

Minister for Regional Health, Regional Communications and Local Government  Federal Member for Parkes

The Hon Kevin Hogan MP  Assistant Minister to the Deputy Prime Minister  Federal Member for Page



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au



7 October 2020

BUDGET 2020: COMMONWEALTH BACKS LOCAL GOVERNMENT TO  RECOVER AND THRIVE

The Federal Budget has set aside an additional $1 billion to flow through local councils, delivering  priorities and creating jobs in local areas as part of Australia’s road to recovery through the Local Roads  and Community Infrastructure (LRCI) Program.

This builds on the existing $500 million commitment made in May for LRCI which has already seen more  than 1,800 projects approved for funding nation-wide. Other funding commitments re-affirmed include  money for the Financial Assistance Grants program, Roads to Recovery funding and the Drought  Communities Programme Extension.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the Budget confirmed the Liberal and Nationals Government’s commitment to  partnering with the local government sector to rebuild the economy.

“Local governments employ around 194,000 people and deliver a wide range of services in the cities,  regional towns and remote areas of Australia - that’s why we’re backing local government to help map  the economic road back,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“Our community-led recovery plan empowers local governments to deliver roads and community  infrastructure through investment in shovel-ready projects.

“By investing this extra $1 billion in local priorities under the LRCI Program, we are helping to deliver  thousands of local jobs and supporting local businesses.”

Minister for Local Government, Mark Coulton said the Coalition’s support for councils includes both  general funding and project-specific to deliver targeted infrastructure outcomes for local communities.

“The longstanding Financial Assistance Grant program provides support to each council to spend on local  priorities that will create the biggest boost to jobs and small businesses,” Minister Coulton said.

“This year’s allocation of $2.6 billion is the highest ever under the Financial Assistance Grant program and  I also encourage regional councils to take advantage of the Coalition’s $200 million injection into the  highly successful Building Better Regions Fund.”

Minister Coulton said councils are an essential partner in delivering the infrastructure and services  Australians need to thrive and play a particularly important role in regional areas.

“This Budget will once again draw on the professionalism and expertise of the level of government that is  closest to the people it serves, with specific support for local infrastructure, workforce skills and training  and recovery from the economic shocks of natural disasters and the pandemic,” Minister Coulton said.

“I continue to convene the Local Government Ministers’ Forum with state and territory governments and  the Australian Local Government Association to ensure all levels of government are aware of the impact  of COVID-19 on councils and are sharing ideas on how to respond.”

Assistant Minister to the Deputy Prime Minister Kevin Hogan said the Budget would provide support for  local infrastructure, workforce skills and training and recovery from the economic shocks of natural  disasters and the pandemic.

“Backing local government means backing local jobs,” Assistant Minister Hogan said.

“An extra $400 million of funding will support the extension of the Roads to Recovery Program by an  additional year, demonstrating our commitment to this vital initiative.

“The Australian Government looks forward to continuing our long and productive relationship with the  nation’s local government sector as we work together to chart the economic road back.”

Ends.

Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Jo Williamson 0418 475 668 | Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Minister Coulton - Steph Nicholls 0417 314 920  Assistant Minister Hogan - Dylan Butcher 0411 822 990

