

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  SYDNEY  SATURDAY, 5 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: COVID-19, aged care, borders, Craig Kelly.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks for your  patience, everyone. I'll deal with a few issues before taking questions. And if it's  okay I will take questions from journalists who are here and then journalists  who are on the phone.

If Scott Morrison and his Government concentrated on their job of aged care  and health care and not attempting and failing to bully Premiers into opening  their borders before they're ready, Australia would be better off. If Scott  Morrison concentrated on his job of fixing aged care we wouldn't have the  situation that as late as today, there's concerns that the Government's retention  allowance is not good enough to stop people working across multiple age care  facilities, and potentially spreading COVID-19. If Scott Morrison concentrated  on his job, we wouldn't have the situation that two and a half weeks after the  spin and announcement of a vaccine deal, we still don't have a deal. Scott  Morrison said he wanted States to open their borders and he wanted a protocol  to do. And all he got was an agreement in principle to try and do so before  Christmas, which everybody would like to see happen automatically. Obviously,  if it's safe to do so.

Labor backs all our Premiers, all of them, regardless of political party when  they're following the health advice to protect their States. They're accountable  to their states. Steven Marshall is accountable to his State for the border  closures. Peter Gutwein is accountable to his State as are Mark McGowan,  Annastacia Palaszczuk. They all have our support as they make those difficult  decisions. On the other hand, Scott Morrison and his Government are playing  politics with internal State borders to try and distract from their own failings.

Now we've got a Government which has presided over an aged care disaster, a

tragedy in aged care, a Government which still hasn't got a vaccine deal and  they are trying to bully Premiers. Premiers are doing the right thing and  Premiers should not have to put up with the likes of Andrew Laming today, who  launched an outrageous political attack on Mark McGowan, who's doing his job.  Again Labor will stand with all the Premiers, Labor will stand for sensible  following of health advice at every level. Labor will stand for good policy.

The other thing that Scott Morrison should do is haul into line his dangerous  and obnoxious backbencher Craig Kelly. Craig Kelly was the personal pick of  Scott Morrison for the seat of Hughes, he overruled the Liberal Party branch  members to impose Craig Kelly. As well as promoting quack therapies in  Parliament, Craig Kelly has over the last 48 hours three times compared an  elected State Government in Australia to Nazi Germany. A comparison deeply  offensive, deeply offensive to many, deeply offensive to all Australians who find  any comparison of anybody with Nazi Germany deeply troubling. Scott  Morrison and his Government are very quick to complain when others make  reference to Nazi Germany. But when it comes to one of their own, their own  backbencher Craig Kelly, they are struck dumb. Craig Kelly is a disgrace and  Scott Morrison should pull him into line or expel him from the Liberal Party.  They are his choices. Craig Kelly is promoting dangerous health advice and  promoting conspiracy theories and now comparing an elected Government of  Australia to Nazi Germany in a deeply offensive why, and enough is enough

Happy to take any questions. I'll just go journalists who are present first.

JOURNALIST: Mr. Bowen, you're not trying to reverse engineer the situation  here putting all the blame on your political rival which you have to do as part of  your job and looking at aged care the the specific issue here is the border.  Labor prides itself on compassion. The criticism of Annastacia Palaszczuk, is  that it is a nonsensical policy that lacks compassion to open the borders for  border communities to cross.

BOWEN: There are broader issues in relation to border communities not only in  New South Wales and Queensland, but New South Wales and Victoria, South  Australian and New South Wales, I've seen those concerns. And I understand  that and of course with goodwill, Governments can work those issues through  but the answer is not for Scott Morrison - and that's not what Scott Morrison is  trying to do. He's not trying to get a sensible solution for border communities  he's trying to tell Premiers that their State borders should be more open, more  open across the board, and when they are following the advice of their  respective Chief Health Officers. And there's flexibility of course, with  Annastacia Palaszczuk has made it clear in medical cases, for example, that  exemptions will be granted exemptions are granted, everybody understands.  And that's important. Compassion must be applied. Premiers must also be

supported and backed in their tough decisions.

JOURNALIST: Medical experts are saying and we have to listen to medical  experts, doctors. Doctors in New South Wales are saying as has Gladys  Berejiklian that it is totally unrealistic for Queensland to wait until 28 days of no  community transmission to open the New South Wales Queensland border. At  what point to do economics start to play a part in these decisions?

BOWEN: Well, if you want to raise economics, the States with the better  economic figures were those with closed borders in the national accounts  during the week. That's a statement of fact. Because they have closed borders  or tough borders, they're able to operate their economies with a very, very low if  any level of COVID-19 and therefore their domestic economies are stronger. In  relation to Annastacia Palszczuk when Scott Morrison and Josh Frydenberg  and Simon Birmingham, lectured Annastacia Palaszczuk weeks ago that she  should open her borders to Victoria. She was right and they were wrong. Their  track record here is very bad. She is accountable to the people of Queensland  just as the other Premiers are. With due respect to Gladys Berejiklian and we  supported her decisions as well. But with due respect to Gladys, Annastacia  Palaszczuk is not answerable to her. She's answerable to the people of  Queensland.

JOURNALIST: Should there be a more collegial atmosphere on in terms of the  fact that we're talking about all Australians here?

BOWEN: Well, obviously, the more coordination the better. The more good  faith discussions the better. Ultimately, Premiers should be supported in the  difficult decisions they have to make, and Scott Morrison should stop trying to  bully people like Mark McGowan and Annastacis Palaszczuk. And while he's  silent about Peter Gutwein and Steven Marshall, the Labor Party supports all  the Premiers regardless of partisanship.

JOURNALIST: You're saying that the States are responsible for their own  people? I though Scott Morrison was responsible for all Australians? Isn't it in  Australia's interest for the states to work (inaudible)?

BOWEN: Well Scott Morrison is responsible to all Australians for his  responsibilities. For his job. His job includes aged care. His job includes full  responsibility for aged care. His job includes getting a deal for Australia for a  vaccine which two and a half weeks after the announcement he still does not  have. That's his job. I suggest he concentrates on his job and leaves Premiers  to concentrate on theirs.

JOURNALIST: The Federal Chief Health Officer said that borders can open

down the track and that there can be dates that can happen if you were Health  Minister when do you go first, do you listen to your Chief Health Officer or let  Premiers make their own decisions?

BOWEN: Well ultimately the Premiers are going to take advice from their own  Chief Health Officers. And they have the right to do so. The Federal Health  Minister should take advice from the Chief Medical Officer for decisions that are  the responsibility of the Federal Government. In relation to state Governments  they are entitled and indeed obliged to take the advice of their own health  authorities including states health officers.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)

BOWEN: Well, it was crass. It was offensive. It was immature. It was juvenile.  To one degree, that's what we've come to expect from Andrew Laming, but he's  a Government Member of Parliament and for Scott Morrison, to allow  Government Members of Parliament to attack state Premiers doing their job like  that says a lot about the political priorities of the Morrison Government

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

BOWEN: Well, the Morrison recession is going to hit young people very hard,  young people are already doing it tough. And if you're a young person, a school  leaver, a TAFE leaver at the moment, you will find it very, very tough. And that's  why it's important that things like the cuts of apprenticeships of 140,000. While  the Liberals have been in office 140,000 fewer apprenticeships. while the  liberals have been in office hurt even more in tough times like this. So there  needs to be a full commitment to young people's training, apprenticeships to  TAFE. With the public sector at the centre of that, and under the liberals it has  gone the other way. Of course, we'll have much more detailed policies as we  approach the next election but you should expect Labor to be committed to  apprenticeships and TAFE as we always have been.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

BOWEN: I think they're separate issues. And we've been very reasonable in  relation to the international borders. We've supported the international border  closures, including when they were controversial when they first came in, but  we have pointed out that there are plenty of heart wrenching cases around the  world of people trying to get back to Australia and in a sensible and responsible  way more could be done. We are not pretending it's easy. We're not pretending  that everybody can come in, we're not pretending that it can be fixed  straightaway, but there can be sensible measures put in place. And cooperation  with states is important and consistency is important here. We've seen

someone allowed overseas to pick up his yacht, Tony Abbott was allowed to go  overseas to pick up a job in the United Kingdom. And yet members across the  country, Government, opposition, myself and many others would have been  dealing with cases of people who are very genuine in their desire to get home  to dying relatives or to see family or for whatever reasons are very genuine and  valid. So, of course, there's constraints on quarantine, we are not pretending  that there aren't, we've seen some excess capacity in some situations in  quarantine. So what we're saying is that more could be done and sensibly  could be done between the Commonwealth, with the Commonwealth showing  leadership here to help Australians get home in circumstances where they are  compassionate and necessary.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

BOWEN: My understanding is that there are quite strict protocols in place. Of  course, states have to strike a balance. Australians have found the sporting  codes pretty important during this period, even though we can't go to games.  Watching games is pretty important and obviously for obvious reasons, the AFL  has found it very difficult to function in Victoria and other states like Western  Australia and Queensland have had to make allowances for that.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

BOWEN: It was pretty embarrassing for Australia to see Tony Abbott's record  discussed in such terms in United Kingdom in terms which Australians I think,  would understand and remember very well from the Prime Ministership. It's up  to the Government to explain whether Tony Abbott, for example, is regarded as  an agent of foreign influence under the under the rules. It's up to the  Government to explain whether the information and insights which Tony Abbott  had to Australia's trade policies as Prime Minister will be used in his new role  for a foreign country, United Kingdom. I would have thought it's a pretty  extraordinary thing for a former prime minister of our country to be promoting  the trade agenda of another country, which may or may not intersect with our  own interests and collide with our own interests as Australians. I would have  thought former Australian Prime Ministers would be interested in promoting  Australia's trade interests. If Tony Abbott is more interested in promoting the  United Kingdom's. That's a matter for him and the Morrison Government to  explain

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

BOWEN: I do think there's been some hypocrisy at the Federal level in relation  to Daniel Andrews. I mean, for example, liberals at both the Federal and state  levels have criticised Daniel Andrews attempts to extend the state of

emergency. The Liberals have voted against that at the state level and made all  sorts of allegations about what that means yet quietly. On Thursday afternoon,  Greg Hunt extended the Federal period of extraordinary powers by another  three months with the stroke of a pen, as he can under the law. He doesn't  need to go to Parliament. Unlike Daniel Andrews, who does need to go to  Parliament, the Federal legislation gives the Federal health minister the power  to do so without any parliamentary scrutiny. Now, to be clear. Greg Hunt made  the right decision was the right call and a decision I support but they had been  engaging in hypocrisy in criticising Daniel Andrews for seeking legislative  approval for something they've done with the stroke of a pen themselves.

JOURNALIST: What report card would you give the Andrews Government for  how they handled the pandemic?

BOWEN: As I said, we've supported all the states all the state Premiers we  have supported, Peter Gutwein, Steven Marshall, Annastacia Palaszczuk, all of  them and Daniel Andrews in the efforts. Now, clearly, things have gone wrong  in Victoria, Daniel Andrews has taken responsibility for that there's a judicial  inquiry, I'm not going to get into giving any Premier, a report card or a mark out  of 10. Their own state populations can do that Daniel Andrews is accountable  to the people of Victoria, and will answer to the people of Victoria, just as all the  other Premiers will answer to their people not to me or Scott Morrison or  anyone else

JOURNALIST: You're entitled to your opinion. You can still give an opinion on  that. I mean, whether he's accountable to the people of Victoria or not, you can  give an opinion on how you think the pandemic has been handled. Surely the  answer is atrocious.

BOWEN: I just gave you my opinion and my answer.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

BOWEN: Well, this was Scott Morrison's proposal to the Premiers. The  Premiers weren't very keen to accept it. And all the Premiers have agreed to  was an in principle, effort to see border restrictions eased by Christmas. That's  a matter for the Premiers. I completely understand the Premiers being very  concerned about Scott Morrison trying to engineer openings and easings  before the health advice tells them that it's a good idea.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

BOWEN: Look, as I said, ultimately, it's a matter for the states to decide when  they open their borders, when they ease restrictions in any way in relation to



borders. I'm unsurprised by the fact that states found the Prime Minister's  arguments yesterday far less than persuasive. And I find myself in agreement  with the states

JOURNALIST: (inaudble)

BOWEN: Well, as I say, Chris, ultimately, Annastacia Palaszczuk is  accountable to her population, not Gladys Berejiklian. Now Gladys Berejiklian  can give as much friendly advice as she likes to other Premiers. And I'm sure  Annastacia Palaszczuk is happy to hear that advice, but ultimately she'll make  her own decisions. And she'll have our support as Federal Labor as she does.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

BOWEN: I mean, I completely understand a Premier taking the advice of his  medical officials for continued border restrictions, unless and until they are  confident that community transmission in other jurisdictions means that they  can open those borders safely. Okay. I think we have exhausted the issues.  One more coming in?

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

BOWEN: Well, again, if you're a state Premier, and you had advice from your  Chief Health Officer, which you ignored, even if other state Premiers are getting  different advice, you would it would be a very brave state Premier to ignore the  advice coming from your Chief Health Officer, very brave, and ultimately the  state's Chief Health Officer advise their Premier and their Premier alone. The  Premier of Queensland doesn't get advice from New South Wales Chief Health  Officer and vice versa. We have Federation where the state has not only rights  but responsibilities. This Liberal Party used to be a party which believed in  states rights. That's when they believed in something. Now because it suits  them, they believe in playing cheap politics when it comes to state borders to  distract from their own failings, own failings in aged care, their own failings on  the vaccine, their own failings. They should concentrate on fixing those, not on  trying to strong arm Premiers into ignoring health advice. Okay, we are done.  Thanks very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512







