

CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS AM AGENDA

THURSDAY, 27 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: COVID-19; PPE, Aged Care; Government’s proposed foreign relations

powers.



PETER STEFANOVIC, HOST: Chris, good to see you. Thanks for joining us, first of all 44

potentially infected staff members of that hospital and in Melbourne that's a worry, isn't it?



CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Good morning Peter, of course, it

is very concerning when any health worker at all is infected. And it's a very high proportion

of the cases frankly, around the country and in Victoria, who have been health workers and

we must have the national objective, and the Government has agreed with this of having

no health worker die from COVID-19. It would be just unthinkable that somebody who is

putting their service available during this crisis has their health put to such risk. Now, it is

appropriate for governments of all levels federal and state to follow the best health advice

on PPE. I know the AMA has been putting views about PPE and the Government should

take those on board and AHPPC should take those on board but ultimately, governments,

hospitals and health services and primary health care networks should follow the advice,

the best consensus of advice from the chief health officers and CMO about what PPE is

necessary in each healthcare facility.



STEFANOVIC: Well, Anthony Albanese is going to be announcing an eight point plan

today to fix aged care. How different will that be to what's already there?



BOWEN: Well, what Anthony's doing today is recognising that aged care is a federal

responsibility and it's up to the Prime Minister and the alternative Prime Minister to accept

that and not only to accept it - to embrace it with a plan. Now Scott Morrison has had no

plan when it comes to aged care and COVID-19. In particular, but aged care more broadly

apart from cutting funds, apart from continual cuts budget cuts to aged care. Now, Anthony

has a different approach. He's outlining the plan later on today, but it will focus on the key

issues, resources for aged care, training for aged care workers and workforce ensuring we

have the workforce necessary to provide the best care for those who built our nation,

raised us, contributed so much to our country and deserve to have care in their later years

which is reflective of the quality of care that a modern rich country like Australia should be

providing for our elderly.



STEFANOVIC: Isn't it misleading, though to say, Chris, that the Government has cut

funding to aged care when it's actually increased its funding by a billion dollars each year

for the last 10 years?



BOWEN: Well, that's their spin but unfortunately, their budget papers don't reflect that. I

mean, Scott Morrison was Treasurer, he brought down budgets and MYEFOs which had

thing words in them like we're going to provide savings and efficiencies in aged care. Now,

savings and efficiencies Peter, is equivalent to a cut. And when you add those up, they do

come to a very significant amount. It would just be better if Scott Morrison just fessed up

about that and just admitted it and said 'yes, when I was treasurer, we reduced funding to

aged care', and then we could you know, then have a discussion about how we fix that. But

when, when you won't acknowledge a problem. You can't fix it. Scott Morrison won't

acknowledge the aged care cuts so therefore he won't fix them.



STEFANOVIC: But those cuts or efficiencies as they're referred to it, doesn't that stop

some aged care providers from gaming the system?



BOWEN: Well, you can always ensure that you've got integrity in the system. I mean, you

can always look at making sure that your rules and your regulations are fit for purpose. But

that doesn't equal a cut in funding. I mean, I challenge you to walk around some of the

aged care facilities in Australia and say they're over funded. I mean, if Scott Morrison

wants to make that case he can make that case. That's not my experience. And I've spent

plenty of time in aged care facilities from the centre of the Northern Territory to the

Western Suburbs in my own electorate in Sydney to you know, anywhere I visit and there

are people working their guts out in very difficult circumstances, underfunded

circumstances, with you know, people who need the appropriate training to provide that

aged care support to people who are in aged care residential facilities. To suggest that the

answer is somehow to cut funding, I think just beggars belief on behalf of Scott Morrison.



STEFANOVIC: It is a federal responsibility. But doesn't the State Government in Victoria

have to take a share of the blame here too, given that the outbreak was their

responsibility?



BOWEN: Well, the Federal Government's own COVID-19 document which the Prime

Minister waved around in the Prime Minister's courtyard back in February makes it very

clear it says the Federal Government will take responsibility for aged care, the Federal

Government will work to ensure safety standards and infection control. There's nothing in

there about shared responsibility. Now of course, Dan Andrews has accepted his

responsibility in relation to other matters. But when it comes to aged care, there is only one

level of government responsible. Constitution does not share responsibility for aged care

amongst the Commonwealth and the states. I even heard Greg Hunt claim in Parliament

that you know, it was a shared responsibility again. Just be honest, just accept that aged is

a federal responsibility. And then you can deal with the issues and the challenges that

arise.



STEFANOVIC: Just if you wouldn't mind, Chris, step outside your portfolio. Just to wrap

up, I just want to get your thoughts on this news this morning. The Prime Minister is

seeking powers to veto China deals, among others. So the bill will be introduced next

week. Is that something that Labor will support?



BOWEN: Well, I mean, if the Government would like to show us the bill, we'll work through

it. But on the matter, in the substance of the matter, of course, governments have to work

together to ensure our national sovereignty. Minister Payne actually welcomed the

Victorian MOU on the Belt and Road initiative when it was signed. So did Minister

Birmingham so they've changed their tune quite considerably. Fair enough, circumstances

change. But if circumstances do change, I think it would be good for the Federal

Government to sit down in good faith with the Victorian Government and work the issues

through. It is not unusual for states to engage in ensuring that their interests around the

world are furthered. I mean, states have representatives around the world. States have

had agents in London for decades, and states have representatives I know in various cities

in China and Indonesia, pursuing trade deals on behalf of the states. Now, yes, foreign

policy must be the responsibility of the Commonwealth, if the Commonwealth has any

concern about any agreements, and I heard Minister Payne say there is 135 I think she

said such agreements. Then they have a right to ensure that they're consistent, but that's

best done working with the state governments. And I do know also, while we're on the topic

that the Federal Government does have an arrangement under the Belt and Road initiative

that former Minister Ciobo signed, which they still haven't released. So if we want to be,

you know, trying to ensure transparency, maybe the Federal Government could get their

own house in order first, and release that document so that we could see what's in involved

in that.



STEFANOVIC: You would have seen or heard Beijing's Deputy Ambassador his speech

yesterday at the National Press Club. He talks about our relationship with China as like a

feuding marriage. He says he says China's feelings are hurt and doubts whether the

Coronavirus did in fact originate in Wuhan. What did you make of those claims?



BOWEN: Well, look, I think it's important to base comments about these things which can

get emotive on the facts. Now all the scientific evidence points to the fact that the virus did

originate in a wet market in Wuhan. There's conspiracy theories that it was in a laboratory.

And there's people who deny it is from Wuhan. The weight of the scientific evidence says it

was from a wet market. We made the point at the time we supported an international

inquiry. We think it would be better if more diplomatic efforts, it would have been better, if

more diplomatic efforts were put into ensuring support for that inquiry before we publicly

called for it but that's a matter of method not of substance. We supported the concept of an

inquiry. We do think an inquiry about how this eventuated and how could better be handled

in future if such an epidemic starts again, is an important lesson. I mean, this is - the one

thing we know is that there will be more pandemics. And this is not a black swan moment.

And we have to ensure that all countries around the world are learning lessons of what

went wrong, what we got right, what was got wrong. Because plenty of countries have

made mistakes and plenty of countries could have handled it differently. But I do think the

first step is to accept the facts. And the weight of scientific evidence tells us what those

facts are. The facts are as I've outlined.



STEFANOVIC: Yeah, well, I mean, your colleague Joel Fitzgibbon had said in the past that

we didn't need to be out there defending the Chinese or even demonising them. How do

you think those comments have aged?



BOWEN: Well, again, our position is that the inquiry was legitimate, but the normal course

of events would not be to announce the inquiry on a Sunday morning interview, the normal

course of events will be to talk to like minded countries, our allies and friends and indeed

even to communicate with China that this is a matter that we would like to pursue rather

than doing it through the media and with a megaphone and then working to get that result,

that's the position that we've outlined. It's not a matter of substance of substantial

difference with the Government on this. But it is a matter of diplomatic form. And we would

have taken an approach which would have ensured that that was followed.



STEFANOVIC: Well, still on Joel. I mean, he's been vocal recently. Do you endorse him

speaking out on policy issues beyond his portfolio?



BOWEN: Well, I just spoke out on some policy issues beyond my portfolio, because you

asked me the questions.



STEFANOVIC: I do recognise that, but he has been more vocal in recent times.



BOWEN: Well, you know, we're a big party. And Anthony's certainly provided the

opportunity for us all to have our say about some of the big issues that are facing the party

and the country. And I believe that with that sort of discussion that we have, we will take to

the people at the next election a very comprehensive plan. Anthony is outlining plans today

in relation to the big issue of aged care, which is a key federal responsibility, and that's

incumbent on us over the course of the term not only to point out those shortcomings and

the failings of the Morrison government it's plenty to talk about there, but also to provide

our alternative plans and Anthony's beginning that process today relation to aged care.



STEFANOVIC: All right, Chris Bowen, good to get your thoughts. Thanks so much for

joining us this morning. there's plenty on.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













