

AMANDA RISHWORTH MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION AND  DEVELOPMENT  SHADOW MINISTER FOR YOUTH  MEMBER FOR KINGSTON





YOUNG AUSTRALIANS FACING LIFETIME OF INEQUALITY

Research out today has emphasised the immense challenges facing our young people as  they navigate the COVID recession.

The Mind the Gap - the Australian Actuaries Intergenerational Equity Index report  highlights the pre-existing inequality facing young Australians, particularly in economic and  housing measures.

The report found the gap between generations is at a 20 year high, and it is increasingly  likely that young Australians will grow up to be worse off than previous generations.

The research found younger people were struggling with declining incomes and  underutilisation in the workforce pre-pandemic, whilst government support was skewed  towards older generations.

It found home ownership for the 25 - 34 year old age group has fallen from 51 to 37 per  cent over the past two decades, but remained stable for older Australians.

The report commented that these inequalities have persisted during COVID - with younger  people more likely to lose income during the pandemic, but less likely to quality for  government assistance like JobKeeper.

Another report released by the Consumer Policy Research Centre has put into focus the  mounting personal debt being accrued by young Australians.

Surveyed young people were three times as likely to have taken a loan from a payday  lender in July just to get by, and two to three times more likely to have missed a household  bill payment.

Housing affordability was also a significant issue, with around half of surveyed young  renters concerned about their ability to pay their landlords in July.

Both sets of research highlight the monumental uphill battle faced by young Australians,  both in the short and long term.

It is clear that the many interrelated economic and social challenges facing our young



people cannot be addressed in isolation.

If young people are to avoid a lifetime of inequality, the Morrison Government must  urgently provide leadership and a plan for young Australians.

TUESDAY, 18 AUGUST 2020

MEDIA CONTACT: JEMMA SLEVEC 0405 752 923









