SENATOR THE HON LINDA REYNOLDS CSC  Minister for Defence  Senator for Western Australia

MEDIA RELEASE

UNDERLINING AUSTRALIA’S COMMITMENT TO THE INDO-PACIFIC

On Sunday I will travel to Japan, Singapore, Brunei and the Philippines to advance  bilateral defence engagement and discuss regional security challenges.

As outlined in the 2020 Defence Strategic Update, our region is in the midst of the most  consequential strategic realignment since World War II.

I will use my visit to deepen bilateral engagement with these important partners and  friends, who share our vision of an open, inclusive and prosperous Indo-Pacific.

Our partnerships with regional countries have a long history and we are focused on  further strengthening these relationships through expanding defence diplomacy,  cooperation and capacity building activities.

Increased engagement will focus on working with our partners to shape an Indo-Pacific  region that is stable, secure and sovereign and where international rules and norms are  respected.

In Japan, I will hold my first Defence Ministers’ Meeting with my recently-appointed  counterpart, Minister of Defense Nobuo Kishi, to set the direction for the next phase of  bilateral defence and security cooperation in our Special Strategic Partnership. Our  discussions will centre on our joint efforts to address strategic challenges.

Singapore is a close and highly capable defence partner for Australia. In Singapore I will  meet with my counterpart, Minister for Defence Dr Ng Eng Hen. We will review our  substantial defence engagement, which has continued during the pandemic, and  discuss how our security cooperation can continue to make a positive impact on the  region’s stability and security under our Comprehensive Strategic Partnership.

My visit will provide an important opportunity to mark the 30th anniversary of  Singapore’s military training in Australia.

Date received: 17 October 2020

In Brunei, I will meet with Second Minister of Defence Pehin Halbi, ahead of Brunei’s  year as ASEAN Chair in 2021.

Our discussions will centre around positive developments in the bilateral defence  relationship, and important regional issues, including our co-chairmanship of the  ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting-Plus Experts’ Working Group on Military Medicine.

I will conclude my visit in the Philippines, where I will meet with Secretary of National  Defense Delfin Lorenzana and National Security Adviser Hermogenes Esperon.

We will discuss our respective responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, our Enhanced  Defence Cooperation Program, and progressing our defence industry engagement.

All aspects of this visit will be conducted with strict adherence to safety and health  measures to mitigate COVID-19 risks. Upon return to Australia, I will follow all health  requirements, including 14 days’ quarantine.

Throughout the trip, our delegation will adhere to COVID-19 measures in each country  while following protocols that minimise the risk of infection and spread.

These will include: social distancing; use of personal protective equipment, particularly  face masks; sound hygiene practices; and the avoidance of vehicular travel where  possible.

I am grateful to the governments of Japan, Singapore, Brunei and the Philippines for the  conscientious COVID-19 measures put in place to facilitate a safe visit.



Media Contacts  Ben Martin (Minister Reynolds’ Office): +61 447 219 902  Nicky Hamer (Minister Reynolds’ Office): +61 437 989 927  Defence Media: media@defence.gov.au

