

AMANDA RISHWORTH MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION AND  DEVELOPMENT  SHADOW MINISTER FOR YOUTH  MEMBER FOR KINGSTON





E&EO TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW   ABC CAPITAL HILL  TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2020

SUBJECTS: Economy; ASIO; renewable energy targets.

JANE NORMAN, HOST: I’m joined in the studio now by Assistant Minster Zed Seselja and  Labor frontbencher Amanda Rishworth, thank you both for joining me. Now we’ll go back to  the ASIO Chief’s comments in just a moment, but I wanted to start with the Budget surplus  issue today. Zed Seselja you’re actually the Assistant Minister for Finance, so can you tell  us will the Government be delivering its promise of a Budget surplus this year?

ZED SESELJA, ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCE: Look you’ll find out on Budget  night, but we’ve obviously had a number of significant challenges for the Budget, they are  well known. They are challenges to our economy - things like drought, bushfires, they bring  challenges for the economy and for the Budget as we’ve spent in response to the bushfire  crisis. And now the coronavirus is affecting trade and a range of other things, tourism,  education and the like. So these present serious challenges. This is why being careful with  money is very important, it is so we can respond to a number of these challenges. And  that’s been our focus over the summer, our focus of course in responding to coronavirus is  keeping Australians safe. But of course looking to protect the economic fallout as well so  we can protect people’s jobs as well. But it does have a hit, it does have a hit on the  budget and what that hit is will be revealed of course in May.

NORMAN: You say it's why it's important to be careful about money - isn’t it also about  being careful with making such bold declarations like “back in black”? That hadn’t yet been  achieved and now may not be achieved?

SESELJA: I don't think it was an unreasonable declaration at all when you look at how  careful we’ve been with our forecasts. In fact the Budget was effectively in balance in the  last financial year, so we already balanced the Budget and we're projecting to bring it into  surplus. Those figures were of course projected in MYEFO, there was a change in  MYEFO, there will no doubt be updates as we move into the Budget. Because we’ve been  careful with money, we are able to respond to the bushfires without raising taxes, which is  very important, so we can continue to build confidence. The economy is resilient but it's  taking a lot of hits over the last few months and we'll look to respond to that both in a

budgetary sense and of course in underpinning our economy as well.

NORMAN: Alright Amanda Rishworth, I can imagine that Labor will make certainly make  hay with this given it was such a big political issue. But to be fair to the government, no one  could have predicted the series of crises that Australia has been hit with just in the last few  months.

AMANDA RISHWORTH, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION  AND DEVELOPMENT: The first thing I’d say is the Government was very premature in  crowing about the budget surplus. We know that they promised this before the numbers  came in, before the numbers were crunched. But what we also know is the fundamentals  of the economy were weak before we had issues such as the summer of bushfires and  indeed coronavirus. There were questions already brewing about whether the wafer thin  surplus the Government had crowed about before the election was actually going to come  to fruition. So it is a broken promise - the Government shouldn't be using the cover of  coronavirus and the bushfires. The fundamentals of the economy were weak before these  crises happened.

SESELJA: That’s not true, and if you look at what the Reserve Bank has said before,  before many of these crises have played out, they talked about some of the underlying  strengths of the economy and these further hits are hitting it. But Labor only a couple of  months ago was telling us we should be on a spending spree. Imagine if we had taken that  advice and gone on a spending spree, how much more difficult it would've been to respond  to the bushfires, to respond to these challenges with coronavirus. So your record in both  delivering the largest deficits we’ve ever had, but also then encouraging us to blow the  surplus before these challenges, it doesn't put you in very good stead to actually be  criticising our response which we’re able to do because we didn’t take your advice.

RISHWORTH: You've been the Government for six years, close to seven and haven’t  achieved a Budget surplus.

SESELJA: And you have given us free advice which we have chosen to reject.

RISHWORTH: I remember Joe Hockey promising the first year of a coalition government  to have a surplus. We haven't seen that, so I’m not surprised. Wages are flat-lining -

SESELJA: No that’s not true either.

RISHWORTH: - there's serious structural issues in our economy and to ignore those would  be irresponsible.

NORMAN: We know that both sides are completely obsessed with budget surpluses and  have been since the days of a Wayne Swan Treasurer, so that's one issue to put to the  side for now. But do you think it would be politically responsible to deliver a Budget surplus  in this current economic climate, with the coronavirus, which we don’t even know what  economic impact it will have?

RISHWORTH: I'm not the Government, I’m not the one who had posters all around saying  “we're back in the black” and was irresponsible with the promises made to the Australian  people.

NORMAN: But circumstances have changed.



RISHWORTH: Let’s be frank, this is a Government who said they were back in the black  well before the numbers came in. The numbers hadn't come in, they weren't cautious in  any way, they used it as a political tool, and now they are breaking that promise. Now they  need to be held to account for breaking that promise, for misleading the Australian people.  But the key here is - notwithstanding the bushfires, notwithstanding coronavirus, this was  not a strong economy here in Australia and they shouldn't have made that promise in the  first place.

NORMAN: Alright Zed Seselja just to finish up on this topic, putting the same question to  you, as in Government, would it be responsible to be delivering a surplus given we don't  know the full impact of coronavirus? We still have communities cleaning up from the  bushfires, we’ve still got farmers who are suffering years of drought. Would it be a bad look  if you still managed to deliver a Budget surplus in these circumstances?

SESELJA: There’s a couple of things. Most important as the PM said during the summer  is we respond to these crises, and that’s what we’ve been doing. But of course being  responsible with the Budget is absolutely critically important, it’s one of the fundamentals  that enables us to respond to crises just like this. So we will continue to have a  conservative fiscal policy. The actual external hits you can't control, you can control  whether you're careful with money, whether you spend it sensibly and whether you target it  where it's needed. We’ll continue to do that.

NORMAN: Let's finish up on Budget and turn to Neo-Nazis. I was personally surprised by  Mike Burgess's revelation that it's one of the biggest challenges that security agencies are  threatening. Just sticking with this Zed Seselja, do we know much about this? How much  of a threat that Neo-Nazis, right-wing extremists are having in Australia?

SESELJA: The extent of the threat is for ASIO and the intelligence agencies, but when the  head of ASIO raises it we all have to take it seriously. This isn't just something that's come  up this year, this has been around for a number of years. Our position as a Government is  it doesn't matter what your evil ideology is, if you want to do harm to the Australian people  we will fight hard to stop you. And if we need to we’ll put you in prison if you’re going to try  and pursue those ideas. So whether it’s Neo-Nazis, whether it’s Islamist extremists,  whatever your evil ideology is, if it involves doing harm to Australians we’re going to  continue to crack down. We've been tough in terms of strengthening laws, we’ve beefed up  ASIO's resources so they can deal with these things. We’ll continue to do that, whether it’s  Neo-Nazis or anything else we’ll do all we can to keep Australians safe.

NORMAN: And largely this has all been happening on a bipartisan basis. Amanda  Rishworth do you think we've been complacent in terms of this threat? We saw the  Christchurch massacre, Brenton Tarrant, he was an Australian who really put a focus on  right-wing extremism. Is this something we’ve been caught a bit flat footed on?

RISHWORTH: When it comes to violent extremism we have to look to our national security  agencies. I would really commend Mike Burgess for coming out and being so transparent  with the Australian people and for clearly identifying the threats we do face. I’d have to  agree with Zed here - whether it's violent extremism in any of its forms, we need to be  entirely vigilant. We need to have fit for purpose laws, which Labor has worked with  through the security committee. And we have to make sure we stand up against it,  because this type of violent extremism fractures our communities. It fractures our nation  and there's just no place for it here.



NORMAN: As politicians how much of a responsibility do you bear to call out this kind of  language? I’m not talking about violent extremism, certainly One Nation leader Pauline  Hanson has likened Islam to a disease, she has worn a burqa into the Senate which was  called out at the time. But I suppose how important is it to show leadership on those  issues?

SESELJA: I think it’s always important. I’ve always been a big believer in public life that  we have a great responsibility and the responsibility is in our language, is to speak in a  way that doesn’t seek to divide Australians or to vilify particular groups in Australia. Yes, if  they are people doing evil things, we call them out. But I think we've always had a great  responsibility and I take that very seriously as does every member of the Government.

NORMAN: And Amanda Rishworth, do you think we have been calling out these kinds of  comments in the past?

RISHWORTH: I think we have, but we need to do better. I am firmly of the view that  language does matter, what we post on social media matters. We have a really important  role and not just to reflect the views of the community, but to lead the community. And  being leaders involves being responsible with our language and being responsible in our  actions. There's been times when the Senate has come together and condemned  comments by Pauline Hanson, condemned other racist actions, and we need to continue  to do that because we do set an example. It's not just about actions, we do know language  can incite people, can send people down an ideological path. But we also need to combat  that in our communities. If people feel isolated, as we’ve seen in the past, counter-terrorism work done in grassroots communities is really, really important. We need to make  sure programs that are being shown to work continue to be funded.

NORMAN: Just finally before Question Time comes up in about seven minutes, I wanted  to ask you about the energy and emissions debate that’s been going on all week. Just on  the issue of nuclear energy, Peter Dutton has come out to say it should be considered. He  thinks it would lower power prices. The Labor Party is opposed to nuclear energy, but  some unions like the AWU have actually come out in support of it. Why aren't you listening  to those unions?

RISHWORTH: Firstly I'm not sure what evidence Peter Dutton is using to say it would bring  down power prices, all the evidence out there would suggest that it would increase power  prices. We've got an abundance of renewable energy and storage options that have not  been explored. They bring down power prices, they are good for the environment, they  reduce emissions. We need an investment framework that encourages that type of  investment. We don't want to be putting up power prices, which is exactly what reports  have said that nuclear energy would do.

NORMAN: So no nuclear energy for you?

RISHWORTH: No.

NORMAN: Zed Seselja, where do you stand on this? Is this a realistic debate to be having  given he likes of Alan Finkel has said the nuclear power debate is really over?

SESELJA: Unless you get some degree of bipartisanship I think it would be extraordinarily  difficult to deliver nuclear in this country. But I would say the Labor Party has now come



out with their un-costed 2050 zero net emissions plan. It's not a plan, it’s just a target and if  you’re going to put that forward, you’d have to look at everything. But at this stage it looks  like they’re only going to look at a $273 a ton carbon price.

RISHWORTH: That’s ridiculous, that’s not true and you know that.

SESELJA: So they’re going to have to look outside the box if they’re going to deliver this.

NORMAN: The 2050 target, the Liberals have not ruled out adopting a 2050 target. The  Nationals seem very much opposed to it. Do you think it’s something the Government  should be considering?

SESELJA: What we’re absolutely focused on is a 2030 target. We’re delivering on our  2020 target, we’re going to deliver on our 2030 target. Labor’s got a never-never target  they can't articulate how they will actually deliver. We certainly won’t follow that path. I  commend the Otis group for doing their best to try and bring some sense into this, but  unfortunately I think you met at that restaurant and you just surrendered to -

RISHWORTH: I just need to point out I don't usually line up with Boris Johnson, Gladys  Berejiklian, and the BCA, but the Federal Government is the outlier on this 2050 target.

NORMAN: Alright well we’ll see where this all ends up at the Glasgow Conference. Zed  Seselja, Amanda Rishworth, thank you for joining me today.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JEMMA SLEVEC 0405 752 923





