





THE HON KEITH PITT MP

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia  Member for Hinkler

MEDIA RELEASE



Tuesday 24 March 2020

PC DRAFT REPORT A VALUABLE CONTRIBUTION TO FIGHT RED TAPE

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt has welcomed a  Productivity Commission draft report as a timely reminder that all levels of government  need to continue to work to remove unnecessary barriers to the sector’s growth

The Productivity Commission’s Draft report on Resources Sector Regulation has identified  several ways that governments can reduce red tape and other barriers to industry  development and investment.

The Commission is examining best practice regulation of the resources sector across  Federal, state and territory governments to ensure regulations are as streamlined as  possible, while still providing necessary safeguards for Australian communities and the  environment.

Its draft report contains 45 findings and 10 draft recommendations ahead of calls for further  public submissions.

Minister Pitt said the resources sector continued to underpin Australia’s economic  prosperity, particularly during the ongoing Coronavirus crisis, and the draft report was a  timely reminder of the need for government to support the sector by removing unnecessary  hurdles.

“The Australian Government is a strong supporter of the resources sector and we are  committed to finding ways to help improve industry efficiency and Australia’s ability to  compete globally,” Minister Pitt said.

“This will ensure that the industry is well placed to attract new investments that will help  the Australian economy to bounce back following the current disruption.”

The Productivity Commission will call for feedback and submissions on its draft report,  before finalising the report later this year.

“The Government looks forward to receiving the Productivity Commission’s final report,  which is due in August,” Minister Pitt said.





“We will carefully consider the final report’s findings and recommendations, and will work  with state and territory governments through the COAG process to exemplify best practice.

“If our resources sector remains world-leading - both in terms of economic output, and the  environmental, workplace and community outcomes that we model - then it will continue  to compete, grow and thrive to the benefit of all Australians.”

The Productivity Commission draft report is available on the Productivity Commission  website at https://www.pc.gov.au/.

ENDS

Media contacts:

Minister Pitt - Matt Dunstan 0411 535 072

