



The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  SYDNEY, NSW  SUNDAY 15 MARCH 2020

EO&E…

PRIME MINISTER: Good afternoon everyone, today was an historic gathering and I welcome Dr Kelly as  well to be with us here today, the Deputy Chief Medical Officer.

An historic gathering of the first ever National Cabinet, bringing together the Premiers and Chief Ministers  of our States and Territories concurrently, together with myself as a part of the national response, the  coordinated national response to the spread of the coronavirus here in Australia. The many things that  we have to do to continue to contain the spread of the virus here in Australia, it goes across both federal  and state governments. And so ensuring that we're working incredibly closely together, that we are highly  aligned both in the information we're receiving, it’s understanding the actions that we need to take is  incredibly important as we implement the measures that will keep Australians safe into the future, and  ensure that we come through this together.

It's always important to be extremely clear and up front with Australians, and that's certainly what we've  sought to do as a government. I commend Dr Kelly and Dr Murphy, who have been doing an outstanding  job in providing regular briefings to the Australian people about the issues in relation to the coronavirus  and indeed their state and territory colleagues as well. They've been providing that information. As you  know, the National Campaign, Public Information Campaign is out in newspapers and televisions and  things today and social media has already been in place now for several days and we initiated. Several  weeks ago, I announced that we were putting in place and activating the Australian health sector  emergency response plan for the novel coronavirus COVID-19. We've commenced that plan with the initial  phase and today the National Security Committee met before the National Cabinet, and we've moved  now to the next phase, which is the target action stage. And there are major decisions that were taken  today that reflect changing where we are heading. The facts and the science, the medical advice will  continue to drive and support the decisions that we are making as a National Cabinet, as indeed as a  federal Cabinet at the Commonwealth level. But the truth is that while many people will contract this virus  that it’s clear, just as people get the flu each year, it is a more severe condition than the flu, but for the  vast majority, as I said last week, for the majority, around 8 in 10 is our advice, it will be a mild illness and  it will pass. However, for older Australians and those that are more vulnerable, particularly those in  remote communities and those with pre-existing health conditions, it is a far more serious virus, and that

is our concern. Our aim in all of this is to protect the most vulnerable. The most at risk. And I want to take  you through again the decisions we're taking today and we have been taking.

We know that the virus cannot be absolutely stopped. Of course not. No one can do that. But we can slow  the spread and we anticipate that will be what our task will be over about the next six months. No one  can know for certain how long this will run. It could be shorter than that. It could be longer than that. But  the measures that we're putting in place as a government is making those types of assumptions. But that  is being updated on a daily basis.

Now what I have here, this is, there are a range of different scenarios that are pulled together by modellers  around the country and none of them is a prediction, all of them just simply show the possible spread of  the virus and what that could mean ultimately, when we work through things like ICU beds and ED  presentations, and GP’s and so on. If you don't take measures that seek to contain the spread, and  mitigate the spread, then you have scenarios that look like this. You have scenarios where you get a very  severe effect on the spread of the virus. You may move through it much more quickly, but what happens  is the virus reaches more people, and that puts maximum pressure on your health system. And that  obviously has far more drastic implications for the most vulnerable in our community.

Now the extent of that peak depends on the rate of transmission you might see in some countries where  there's a much higher rate of transmission by any one person then the peak would be higher. And the  impact will be more severe, but in other scenarios like this, it is still significant, but it can be less in terms  of how many people it reaches. The job of our plan, the job of working together is what we call a flattening  the peak, and to get this result as opposed to that  result, what we're looking to do is manage the flow so  we suppress the demand on our health systems and ensure that we can continue to provide the care that  Australians need.

In this sort of scenario, which is what we're working to achieve, this means with some changes to the way  that ICU departments are managed and things of that nature. The advice we've had to date and the  excellent work that's being done by the chief medical officer working with the states and territories,  means that that can be dealt with. That doesn't mean there won't be busy times in our hospitals. It doesn't  mean there won't be stresses on the system and there won't be days where patience will be required,  and there won't be frustrations. It's not what it means. What it means is, if we continue to manage the  spread of how the virus impacts in Australia, then we will be able to ensure that we can continue to  provide the services and support, particularly to the most vulnerable Australians who are most at risk  from the Coronavirus. So slowing the spread, you free up the beds. That's what happens when you get  this right and we've seen other countries going down this path. Australia has also been going down this  path and the way we've been managing everything from travel bans to the way we've had quarantine  arrangements in place and self-isolation, these arrangements have been ensuring that the number of  cases we’ve had in Australia up until now, and they are growing now, they have been kept well below  what we've been seeing in many other countries.

We have a first class health system here in Australia, but no hospital system on its own can deal with this  at its most extreme position, whether that's in the United Kingdom or anywhere else. And last night, I had  the opportunity to talk to Prime Minister Boris Johnson and we were talking through these very types of  scenarios and and it was important for us to be swapping notes on those issues as I was with Prime inister  Arden yesterday, as we discussed the arrangements that she put in place yesterday in New Zealand. And  indeed, we've been considering ourselves.

We're going to have to get used to some more changes in the way we live our lives over the next six  months or so, there will be further intrusions. There will be further restrictions on people's movement  and their behaviour. But the point is, you do it in a timely way. You do it in a managed way. You do it in a  careful way. Just because something is not necessary today doesn't mean it won’t be necessary in 3 weeks  from now or 3 months from now, just as something we're announcing today wasn't necessary 2 months  ago.

Today, as the rate of community transmission starts to pick up, then new measures are put in place. And  what you simply do as I’m explaining, as you put these new measures in, as you see these curves unfolding,  then you can flatten the curve as you move forward. Some places, schools, workplaces, others will make  various decisions along the way. And they can work off the best advice that they have available.  Australians are smart people, they're commonsense people. Occasionally, in recent weeks and months,  we've seen some examples, not of that behaviour, and that's regrettable. But for the vast majority of  Australians, they’re commonsense people and we have to rely on their judgment as well. The government  can't manage every hour of your life and tell you what to do every hour of the day, but we can't ask you  to listen to the information and make your best judgments as you care for yourself and your family and  those around you. We're relying on that Australian spirit of looking after each other, as we get through  the difficult months that are ahead.

Today, I now want to move to the decisions that we have taken that were consistent with the plan that  I’ve outlined to you. First of all, the National Security Committee met before the National Cabinet today  and we resolved to do the following things; to help stay ahead of this curve we will impose a universal  precautionary self-isolation requirement on all international arrivals to Australia, and that is effective from  midnight tonight. Further, the Australian government will also ban cruise ships from foreign ports from  arriving at Australian ports after an initial 30 days and that will go forward on a voluntary basis. The  National Cabinet also endorsed the advice of the AHPPC today to further introduce social distancing  measures. Before I moved to those, I just wanted to be clear about those travel restrictions that I've just  announced. All people coming to Australia will be required, will be required I stress, to self isolate for 14  days. This is very important. What we've seen in recent, in the recent weeks is more countries having  issues with the virus. And that means that the source of some of those transmissions are coming from  more and more countries. Bans have been very effective to date. And what this measure will do is ensure  that particularly Australians who are the majority of people coming to Australia now on these flights, when  they come back to Australia, they're self-isolation for 14 days will do an effective job in flattening this  curve as we go forward. Similarly, the arrangements for cruise ships will have the same effect in specific  cases where we have Australians on cruise ships. Then there will be some bespoke arrangements that we  put in place directly under the command of the Australian Border Force to ensure that the relevant  protections are put in place. We're seeking to assist Australians to come home by ensuring that the flights  continue to run, but when they come home, they'll be spending another 14 days in self isolation. And so  I’ve covered also the issue of the cruises.

When it comes to social distancing I want to read to you the key sections of the advice that we've provided  today to the National Cabinet. The AHPPC believes that social distancing measures are now required and  will need to be introduced progressively to reduce disruption. This has the most benefit in delaying  transmission. The AHPPC advises, as we flagged last Friday, that in general non-essential gatherings of  more than 500 people should not occur. They also advise that at this early stage, not to prevent the  operation of essential functions, including schools, universities and workplaces, or prevent the operation  of public transport. However, the principle of social distancing should still apply in these settings. The  AHPPC advises, is for static non-essential gatherings of persons that they should not go ahead, if there are

more than 500 people you'll be in such a gathering. Now what do I mean by that? A static gathering is  when you're sitting as you are here in this room for prolonged periods. That would occur at a stadium, it  would occur in a theatre, that would occur in events such as those where people are together in close  proximity for a sustained period of time. The advice is that those gatherings should not continue at that  scale. The AHPPC advises and Dr Kelly may wish to touch on this, but that includes how you can mitigate  those events, when they are in much larger rooms that obviously reduces the risk. If the gathering is  outdoors in much more open gatherings, well, obviously that reduces the risk.

There are a lot of common sense principles which should be fairly obvious, I think. And the way people  respond to those I think will be very helpful. So what the National Cabinet has agreed today is that we will  adopt that recommendation and we will be preventing non-essential static gatherings of more than 500  people occurring across the states and territories. The states and territories will be moving to put in place  the appropriate arrangements under their state based legislation to ensure that is supported. They’ll be  doing the same thing in relation to the self-isolation requirements of Australians and others coming to  this country by air to support the decision of the National Security Committee. Now that legislation is a  matter for the states and territories. They'll be working on that promptly. But from here on in, from  Monday, it's important that people act in accordance with that advice. Now, the obvious question is, how  would that be enforced? Well, the states and territories wisely are not going to create event police or  social distancing police or things of that nature. That would not be a wise use of police resources around  the country. But the legislation impact would mean that if a person did fail to observe the 14 day self-isolation or if an event was organised, that would be contrary, once those provisions are put in place to  state law, and there'd be nothing preventing I’m sure the states from ensuring that that was dated from  Monday. But they will be specific details that the states will naturally work together on and ensure as  much consistency as possible across their jurisdictions.

A few other things that were decided today, was about the priorities of what we must be addressing as a  National Cabinet in the days and the weeks ahead, having addressed the issue of mass gatherings of 500  persons or more And let me be clear. That obviously doesn't mean, as I said on Friday, it doesn't mean  train stations, it doesn't mean shopping centres. It doesn't even necessarily mean markets like Salamanca  down in Hobart or things of that nature. These are static mass gatherings where people are together for  long periods of time. For large events, very large events like the Royal Easter Show, which has already  been here in New South Wales, cancelled, I mean that is an event which was cancelled, as the Premier  reminded us this morning, to prevent people coming from all around the state into t Sydney and  potentially being exposed to the virus through that type of an interaction and within the Easter Show you  are together with large groups of people for long periods of time. So there will still need to be a lot of  judgement exercised at a state and territory level in relation to specific events. That will include Anzac  Day. We will be putting out specific guidelines working together with the RSL about those gatherings and  particularly regarding the participation of more vulnerable Australians out of our more elderly veterans  community. We had a long discussion about what the most important priority is now having made that  decision about mass gatherings, the first of those is putting in arrangements and restrictions around the  visiting of aged care facilities and the AHPPC is working on that today and they'll be providing us with  further advice about how that will work. They are also doing work on remote communities, particularly  that is going to affect the parts of South Australia, Western Australia, Northern Territory, Queensland  especially. And so they're doing some important work there about the arrangements and protocols that  would need to be in place. They are also doing work on further restrictions on gatherings in enclosed  spaces. And the National Cabinet will meet on Tuesday night and consider that advice so I can stand here  before you on Wednesday and provide you with further announcements in terms of the further decisions  that are made in relation to aged care and gatherings involving enclosed areas.

We also had some wide discussions today about schools, and I can totally understand, as a parent of two  daughters in school here in Sydney, that people are naturally anxious about the issue of schools. As the  British chief medical officer observed just over the last couple of days, the issue of wide-scale closure of  schools, it might be anti-intuitive, but the advice is this could actually be a very negative thing in terms of  impacting on how these curves operate. That happens for two reasons. When you take children out of  schools and put them back in the broader community, the ability for them to potentially engage with  others increases that risk. And that's the understanding we have. There's also issues of herd immunity  that relate to children as well. And Dr. Kelly, might want to touch on those issues. The other issue is the  disruption impact that can have and put at great risk the availability of critical workers such as nurses and  doctors and others who are essential in the community because they would have to remain home and  look after their children. And so while it may seem counter-intuitive, there is very good reason why you  would not be moving to broad scale closures of schools that could actually make the situation worse, not  better. And so the states and territories are not moving in that direction. We will consider this again  further on Friday at our meeting, after Tuesday night, to consider further advice on those issues. So for  now, the continuing practice, which is especially being put in place in New South Wales and Victoria,  where they've had the most experience of this, individual decisions are made on particular schools based  on the cases that are presented there and the circumstances that exist in those communities. And that is  done in conjunction with their state health officers to make the right decisions in those very specific  locations.

So with all of those matters, I think I've touched on all the decisions that we've made today as a National  Cabinet and as a meeting of the National Security Committee, and we will continue to meet regularly.  There was a very strong spirit of unity and cooperation. And again, I want to thank the premiers and  the  chief ministers for their support in bringing together this national cabinet. It has now been established  formally under the Commonwealth government's cabinet guidelines. And it has the status of a meeting of  Cabinet that would exist at a federal level, as does the meetings of the AHPPC and the national  coordinating mechanism, which is feeding up into those arrangements.

So some important changes today. There will be more changes in the future. We'll be seeking to forecast  those for you as much as possible. Remember, when we're taking these decisions, we're taking them to  allow time for people to adopt them. These are not absolute measures that if they are introduced today  then,  if I were introduced the day before, that Australia was put at risk that's not the case. What we're  doing is implementing the measures well in advance of where they might have otherwise been done.  What we've seen overseas with some of the restrictions that you've seen in many of those other countries,  they were introduced when the number of cases and the amount of spread in their communities was far  more advanced than where we are in Australia today. And so what we're introducing today means we're  getting well ahead of where those other countries have been when they've had far greater numbers of  cases. So we'll continue to stay ahead of this. We'll continue to keep our heads when it comes to this. And  we will continue to take the medical advice which will guide what is first and foremost a health crisis in  this country.

One last point I should have made, is the states will also be considering moving their movement to public  health emergency status under their various state arrangements. in some places like Queensland they've  already moved to that some time ago. Now, the other states are now working over the next few days to  make their own decisions on that. That is entirely a matter for those states and territories. And they'd be  seeking to align how they do that over the next few days. And I think that's a productive thing they can  do and ensure we’re getting on a consistent footing. But with that, I'm gonna hand over to Dr. Kelly.

DR. PAUL KELLY, DEPUTY CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER: Thank you, Prime Minister. So that's a lot of  information there. I won’t give too much more, just to reiterate the Prime Minister's statement that what  we are doing and as we've always been doing throughout this, as we've learnt more about the virus, how  it spreads, the effect it has on people's health, and particularly the issues that are pertinent to Australia  as distinct from other countries in the world. This is a proportionate response. And so what we are doing  is the proportionate response, staged and informed by the information as it progresses. So things are  changing on a daily basis. And as the Prime Minister has said, that doesn't mean that it was wrong  yesterday. It was right for yesterday, today is a new day. And the next day will be another new day. We'll  have more information and we'll be able to go forward. The Prime Minister has mentioned the modelling  that is being done. It is continuing to be redefined and and be more accurate as it goes forward. But it is  not, it's not the definite future it is to guide the decisions that are being made, that the graph that we see  on the right hand side, your left, is the graph we see when there is a new virus entering our community  where no one has immunity against that virus. That is the issue with this coronavirus. It's not like flu. It's  not like any other viruses and diseases where we have vaccination. And that important issue of herd  immunity that we talk about a lot in vaccination is exactly the challenge that we have at the moment.  There is no herd immunity. Everyone is susceptible to this virus in Australia. And so that's why these  unusual and proportionate measures that we are taking now to prevent the worst case scenario, which is  that very high peak, is really important. And as we go through, there will be other measures that may  need to be introduced depending on how things work out in the coming weeks or months.

What is different about Australia, of course, is that we're not yet in winter. All of the places where we're  seeing this virus really escalate very quickly now through other parts of the world, are in the northern  hemisphere. They’re in the in the in the later part of the winter months, they have flu seasons as well.  And all of the environmental elements that allow viruses to spread quickly are actually there in North  America, in China, in other parts of northern Asia and across to Europe. We've seen exactly what has  happened there, and in particular, not taking enough action, probably early enough in most of those  countries. And we can see the effects on the healthcare system and the unfortunate death rates that  we're seeing around the world. In Australia, we now have almost 250 cases. That doesn't sound like a lot.  But if you think back just a week, that's quite a few more than we had last week. Next week we'll have  more. At the moment it’s mostly in relation to travel. And so those new restrictions and new measures  that have been put at the border in terms of 14 days quarantine for everyone coming back from overseas,  from whatever country is the next proportionate step to take to decrease those travel related illnesses.  But we are also starting to see, particularly here in Sydney, but also in other other cities and into our  regional areas, some human to human transmission in Australia, not necessarily related to travel. That  will be the next step, more proportionate measures will need to be taken as that develops. So these are  difficult times and the disruption to society is very much felt by us in the health side of government. But  we are continuing to give our measured advice to government and we're very happy that that's being  listened to and put it into account with the other measures in terms of social, economic and other  considerations. So Prime Minister I might leave it there.

PRIME MINISTER: Thank you Dr. Kelly. And just on social distancing also, that means that the social  distancing practices that we're encouraging are being expanded. So there's no more handshakes. That is  a new move we've moved to, and that's something that I'll be practicing, my Cabinet members, that you  expect to see leaders and others now practicing. This was not something that was necessarily a key  requirement weeks ago, but it's just another step up now. It's a precautionary step. And we'll be practising  that. The Cabinet itself will now be meeting more regularly by video, by video conferencing, rather than  all Cabinet members being in one place that will apply to the national security committee, and National  Cabinet, as it did today, met through video conferencing, similarly leaders and other politicians you can

expect to see not travelling as much as they were before. Not engaging as many public events. I’ve  cancelled a number of events for next week. That is just simply to try and manage the normal process- as  you'd expect, too, as we move into this next phase which we’ve agreed to do today. I'll be working  particularly with the Speaker and the President of the Senate to look at the, they've already been working  on that for some time, actually, about the arrangements we’ll put in place, obviously consulting with the  Leader of the opposition on those issues. We have important work to do when Parliament resumes on  Monday week. We can focus on that and get that done in very practical arrangements to achieve that.  Questions?

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how long will this travel, new travel arrangement last this ban?

PRIME MINISTER: It's indefinite. It's reviewed every week.

JOURNALIST: Explain to us how does it work? How do people self isolate? They come off, out of the  airport. They get in a taxi they stay in a hotel room for two weeks? And an Australian goes home and stays  in their bedroom for 2 weeks?

PRIME MINISTER: That's it. And Australian Border Force will be moving over the course of this weekend  to ensure that people statutorily declare that if they're entering the country, that they understand that  that is the requirement. What will happen, Chris, and this is what we've seen in other countries that have  done this, is that the visitor traffic will dry up very, very, very quickly. And it's important that the flights  keep going because they bring Australians home. I should also note that Pacific Islanders who are on their  way home, to their home country, will be allowed to transit through Australia. They won't be allowed to  remain in Australia, they're allowed to travel. Otherwise, they have no way of getting home and that's us  being part of the Pacific family and helping them. New Zealand put exactly the same set of arrangements  in place for Pacific Islanders coming home by New Zealand. The arrangements I’ve announced today are  those that were put in place by New Zealand yesterday, and they in fact will come into effect at the same  time.

JOURNALIST: Will there be a central database Prime Minister, that state authorities can access so they  know who's been overseas. And if they should be self isolating, I just don't understand how it's going to  be policed?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, again, I mean, this has been in place now for many months, for over a month now  in terms of travellers coming from China and other places. And the truth is, the self-isolation has worked  out in practice quite well because Australians have followed the instructions. And up until now, that has  been a voluntary arrangement. There has been no potential sanction that might apply against a person  for not following that requirement. Once state authorities are in a position to give that its legal  enforcement then that will be a change. I mean, so if your mate has been Bali and they come back and  they turn up at work, and they're sitting next to you, well, they'll be committing an offence. And so I think  it's up to all of us to ensure that, we are ensuring this is put in place.

I mean, Australians will exercise common sense. They have been to date, and this provides the backstop  of a legal enforcement but the the idea that there'd be significant resources dedicated to that task would  not be practical, because remember, when you get an overwhelming number of people following that  advice, then you're getting the effect which you want, which is that.

JOURNALIST: What's the penalty for committing the offence of not self-isolating?

PRIME MINISTER: That will be a matter for the states and territories under their own public health  [inaudible].

JOURNALIST: [inaudible] What would would look like though? Would that mean fines or is it jail time?

PRIME MINISTER: Yes. Again, it's a matter for state authorities as to what penalties they place on that.  The National Cabinet ensures that we have some coordination, but ultimately states and territories will  make their own decisions.

JOURNALIST: Sorry, will there be any screening at borders of temperatures or anything like that? Or just  all be self-isolation?

PRIME MINISTER: Yes. No no there will be. And there has been already. And for those for those, for those  persons who come back and present with symptoms, they will be directed through the Australian Border  Force to be given protective equipment. This group that we're now applying this requirement to is low  risk. And we also do think, and the health advice is, is this that to provide the PPE equipment to everyone  who comes through our airports would be an unnecessary depletion of that resource. We know those  resources from our stockpile for health workers, those working in aged care facilities and so on. And so  they will be able to return home. They are at a low risk, is the assessment. But for those who may be  presenting with some concern or symptoms then they'll be provided with that equipment at the airports,  as we already are for those who are coming from Iran or those who are coming from China, from South  Korea and Italy.

JOURNALIST: What measures will the government be taking to prevent the spread by public transport?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, already the state governments have been doing a fair bit of that. And that is a  matter that I know will be sort of worked on through the national coordinator messages which feeds up  to the National Cabinet about what experience and best practice can be shared. The National Cabinet,  yes, it's making decisions on things like I've talked about today to support with legislation, self-isolation  arrangements and things of that nature. But the other thing that the National Cabinet is doing is sharing  this practice information about how state governments are just practically dealing with; whether it's  transport or indeed the very helpful discussion we had with both the New South Wales and the Victorian  Premier sharing their experience about how they're dealing with schools. The Northern Territory Chief  Minister, Michael Gunner, has some very specific issues that he has to deal with about access of essential  services and workers going into remote communities in the Northern Territory. And he's already working  with us. And so the Northern Territory and the arrangements that are there will become the model for  what is done in remote indigenous communities in many other states and territories. So this is a highly  collaborative process and we're all learning from each other and all supporting each other.

JOURNALIST: How will social distancing be instructed to schools and kids in schools. Will schools be given  specific advice to tell their kids or will it be up to schools. How this health, social distancing, as you  mentioned, is going to work?

PRIME MINISTER: The national information campaign is already running with information that will be  available to all Australians, but it's pretty straightforward. A metre and a half. We're about a metre and a  half away. Ensuring that, you know, you refrain from that sort of physical contact, which might be the  handshake or even something a bit more intimate unless you’re with your close family and friends. It's all  common sense. You know, we don't need to tell Australians how to get out of bed in the morning and  how to put their shoes and socks on and things like that. Australians understand. And I'm not making light

of this, I'm not. These are important, normal, common-sense social interaction measures that people can  take. And they are very intuitive. And it's all about reducing the amount of direct physical contact that you  have with others. That's a clear principle, which I think Australians can understand. And I would expect  teachers, or those at preschool, or in churches or wherever. I know I got a message from my church during  the course of the week after Friday and they were putting measures in place and good for the. School  clubs and others are doing the same thing. It's just Australians getting together, working out how they're  going to adjust. See, I really want Australians to get on with their lives as commonly as possible. But there  will be disruptions and they will adjust. Australians, of course, can adjust. But what I hope won't happen,  and I'm sure it won’t, is that we won't lose our sense of Australian-ness in all of this, we will support each  other. If you've got someone who's in self isolation particularly, there might be an elderly person who  might live in your apartment or down the road, and they would be wisely exercising even greater  precautions about their social interactions. So make them a casserole and leave it on the door or things  like this. I think just Australia's helping each other out over the next few months. You know in the shopping  centre aisle, you know, make sure someone who might be a bit more vulnerable than you can get what  they're looking to get as well and I think just being good to each other is the right thing to do.

JOURNALIST: PM on the new travel arrangements, have you had a chat to, I know you said you  spoke to  Boris Johnson last night, but have you spoken to any other world leaders and specifically the White House?  Because we're seeing a lot of cases coming from the US?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah well it’s our major source now coming out of the United States. And yes, we have  had a lot of interaction with the United States and we will continue to, the Foreign Minister was only there  this week. She returned yesterday. And so we've had a lot of interaction with the United States with the  UK. The Five Eyes groups, and New Zealand I speak to the Prime Minister almost every other day. And one  of the things I should mention that I spoke to Prime Minister Johnson about is when it comes to the G20,  I'm also aware that Prime Minister Modi is keen to organise a link up between all the G20 leaders. I think  that's, I think that's a commendable initiative. Australia obviously supports that. I've communicated that.  That's a matter for the Saudi government who’s the President of the G20 this year. But the Prime Minister  and I agreed last night that an even more urgent meeting that could be needed would be a further meeting  of the G20 finance ministers and central bank governors. This is a health crisis, but it has very serious  economic impacts. Those economic impacts have been clearly affecting financial markets. To date, that  has been managed, but we've seen some highly volatile and quite disruptive activity on our financial  markets. We want to be assured through our cooperation, as occurred through the GFC amongst that very  G20 group, that we can make sure that there is no further damage or undermining of financial markets  and the Central Bank Governors and Finance Ministers are the best place to do that. Truth is that they  only had a meeting a few weeks ago and at that meeting, things were at a very different stage as they are  today. And I think that demonstrates I mean, there's a lot of wisdom in hindsight at the moment. But what  we have to realise is this has been a very fast moving event. And so far, the decisions we've taken has put  us in a good position. But you've got to stay in that position by constantly making additional decisions.  And that's what the National Cabinet was set up to do.

JOURNALIST: When it comes to shopping and gathering supplies, what's the advice there? Because  Victoria's Chief Medical Officer said 14 days of supplies are required. The federal chief medical officer said  this morning, two to three days. What is the official advice?

PRIME MINISTER: I refer you, I understand, to the comments of Premier Andrews, made this morning that  the medical officer in Victoria, I understand, has been misrepresented in what he said about that. And  what you've heard from Dr. Murphy this morning is consistent with what the view is around the states

and territories. But I'd refer you to, I understand Premier Andrews brought this to my attention today.  What was said has been misrepresented about that 14 day arrangement. And I mean, people should  exercise common-sense. See, the thing is, the shops are going to remain open. You know, the electricity  companies will still be selling the power. The phones are still going to work. The lights are going to  continue to come on. The schools will continue to come together. The trains will continue to run. The  airports will continue to function. This is not a cyclone or a physical event like that that shuts down parts  of our cities in terms of a physical sense. It is something quite different. This is a biological virus that is  affecting human to human transmission. And so I think we just need to get that into some sort of  perspective in terms of how we moderate our response.

JOURNALIST: The NRL, though, says that it is actually not in that category that is in danger of being closed  down. And they're now asking for potentially hundreds of million in support from your your package. But  is that something you'd entertain?

PRIME MINISTER: Oh, we’ll look at all of all of those issues. I understand that already today, I think over  half a million they’ve put into the clubs, and there’ll obviously be a lot of disruption, whether it's the NRL  or the AFL or any of the large sporting competitions, but equally in the cultural community as well. They'll  be there'll be events that won't be able to go ahead, there’ll be cultural events that won’t be able to go  ahead. And it's important that what we're saying on the banning of gatherings of more than 500 persons,  that is going to be supported by state legislation. So it's it's not an advisory. It's not, there's no discretion.  There'll be requirements. And that has obvious implications for things like insurances, things of that  nature. But we'll deal with those issues one after the other. Right now, though my real focus is on the  further mitigations we have to put in place. The most important, having made this decision about further  isolation of people coming to Australia. That does ensure that we have the strongest borders anywhere  in the world when it comes to these sorts of issues. Australia has always been well known for its border  protection on all matters and it’s certainly the case when it comes to managing this issue. But in addition  to that, it's also about ensuring that as a government, we keep taking decisions which keep us ahead of  the curve.

JOURNALIST: What happens to, people who are going on domestic life, reconsidering that travel is a  domestic flight, one of these static locations that you're talking about?

PRIME MINISTER: That's not our advice. Dr Kelly you might want to talk about flights?

DR. KELLY: Yes. So that wouldn't be the advice at the moment, but as I said before, we'd be looking at all  measures as they go forward. There are both, domestic flights and generally short although there are  some further destinations which are longer.  But at the moment, there is no advice about restricting  domestic travel.

JOURNALIST: When you have a look at those graphs, and the feeling in the community at the moment is,  is one of anxiety, should Australians be afraid?

PRIME MINISTER: Australians should be careful. Australians should be listening to the advice that is  provided, Australians should be exercising their common sense. But the thing I'm counting on more than  anything else to achieve that outcome rather than that outcome, is that Australians be Australian. Now  Australians can deal with this, we can deal with some change to our daily lives. We can deal with the  surprises that may come as we get further information. We can deal with making common sense  judgments every day. We can deal with looking after each other. We can deal with having to show a bit

of patience from time to time. And the odd frustration or disappointment Australians can deal with all of  that. So long as Australians keep being Australian we'll get through this together.

Thank you all very much. Ta.

[END]



Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney



