







SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Finance  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Leader of the Government in the Senate

Senator for South Australia

TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Press Conference        Topics: Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership;  15/11/20  12:49PM

Simon Birmingham: This afternoon, I look forward to signing the Regional Comprehensive Economic  Partnership agreement on behalf of Australia, together with the Prime Minister. This is a huge  accomplishment, especially for the ASEAN nations. The 10 nations of the Association of Southeast Asian  Nations have provided remarkable leadership to bring about this 15-nation trade agreement that will be the  biggest trade agreement of its type globally. What this does is provide a common set of rules and approaches  in terms of trade across some 15 nations that account for 30 per cent of the world's population and around 30  per cent of global GDP.

This is an incredibly important agreement in terms of the timing for when it occurs. Symbolically, we see huge  pressures globally on the trading system and of course pressures that Australia faces, too. This agreement  signifies that our region, which has been the most economically dynamic region of the world in recent  decades, is still committed to openness and to trade and that we will use that as a platform and a springboard  for recovery in the post-COVID era. Australia is a country where one in five jobs relies upon trade, and we  know that better access for our farmers and businesses means more jobs for Australians overall. That’s why  our government has consistently pursued trade agreements since we came into office, securing agreements  with Japan, Korea, China, the Trans-Pacific Partnership that gives us better access into Vietnam, Canada,  Mexico and others, our agreement with Indonesia that came into force recently, the PACER Plus agreement  with Pacific Island nations, and the negotiations we continue to pursue with the European Union and with the  United Kingdom.

The RCEP agreement includes nine out of Australia’s 15 top trading nations. These are our biggest trade  partners, and that's why having more common rules and better access into those markets is going to be great  news for our businesses, our farmers, and for jobs of Australians in the economic recovery of Australians.  Right now, Australia does have different trade agreements across all of the other 14 nations in this RCEP  agreement. There are in fact 10 different trade agreements that businesses can currently access to be able to  export into these markets, and that's been great news in terms of lowering tariffs and providing better access  and driving growth across the nations of RCEP. But it has meant that for business there’s been a more  complicated range of processes - that you may have different terms to be able to access markets in Japan  compared with the Philippines, compared with Korea or China or Singapore or other RCEP nations. What  RCEP provides is an agreement of all 15 nations are some common rules, common rules that lift the bar in  relation to digital trade that’s become so important during the COVID era. Common rules in relation to the  treatment of intellectual property that is so important for Australian businesses when we head out into this  region. It also provides the better market access, especially for so many of our services industries. Those  services industries across financial services, healthcare, aged care, education services - these are all crucial  sectors for which Australia has got a huge economic footprint at a domestic level, but traditionally, our exports  have been dominated by trading goods. For most of these markets, we've seen goods barriers such as tariffs  eliminated or phased down under existing agreements.

RCEP is going to provide the platform for us to be able to actually have better growth in those services  sectors as well. They will have more opportunities to do business from Australia in RCEP nations or to open  up in those RCEP countries. The positive news across the board - and this is a key part of our ongoing plan  for economic recovery post COVID - RCEP has been eight years in the making. It’s taken determination and  drive by the ASEAN nations and enormous leadership by them to bring the parties together. We are  disappointed that India is not part of the final agreement, but we do see this as a huge platform and pillar upon





which we can keep driving trade growth for Australians, deliver more exports, which means more jobs for  more Australians in the future.

Question: Minister, it’s no secret there’s been escalating trade tensions with China. Are you hoping that  this deal will open dialogues with your Chinese counterparts and perhaps maybe even facilitate a face-to-face  meeting in the future?

Simon Birmingham: I welcome the fact that Australia and China have been able to continue as partners in  the RCEP agreement. It’s an important sign of our willingness to continue to work in regional cooperation and  regional economic partnership. There are difficulties at present, and I am deeply concerned by the fact that in  a number of areas, Chinese regulatory actions have disrupted trade flows. I urge all parties to the RCEP  agreement to engage in implementing not only the letter of it, but also the spirit of it, and I hope that it will  provide a platform for ongoing economic and dialogue between all of the parties across the region.

Question: How important is RCEP to diversifying our reliance on Chinese trade, allowing us to not be so  subject to [indistinct]…

Simon Birmingham: RCEP is crucial because it has the 10 ASEAN nations at its core. ASEAN put  together, is Australia’s second largest trading partner. It includes some of the most dynamic economies in the  region, such as Vietnam and Indonesia, notwithstanding the current disruptions of COVID. It includes some of  our oldest trading partners as well, such as Thailand, Malaysia, and Singapore, and those 10 RCEP nations  with enormous diversity are central to the strategic relationship that Australia has with our region. That’s why  we’ve celebrated and worked so closely with the ASEAN nations in terms of their leadership and their drive to  deliver this agreement. We see the opportunity for huge economic growth and trade growth between Australia  and the nations of ASEAN, but also for integration of supply chains that can give Australians businesses  easier and better access and greater diversification over time amongst those countries.

Question: Keeping in regards to China, its Foreign Ministry spokesman last week accused Australia of  having poisoned the relationship and noted speaking out on issues like Hong Kong and Taiwan as part of the  problem. Is Australia willing to refrain from speaking out on issues like that, particularly democracy in Hong  Kong, to get the trade relationship back on track, or is it going to continue to stand by it’s issues or principles  on these matters?

Simon Birmingham: Australia’s position in relation to matters of human rights or matters of democracy and  the hand-over of Hong Kong, as it was, at the time of the hand-over, has been a long-standing and consistent  position. Australia has not deviated throughout the years from our position in terms of advancing and  expecting nations to respect human rights in terms of the consistency with which we have expected the legal  agreement and treaty that enabled the hand-over of Hong Kong to occur, to be upheld and to be implemented  and honoured. Our position is a consistent one up until this point, and it will remain consistent into the future.  But out position has also been one of consistently welcoming and wanting to pursue mutual engagement in  areas that are mutually beneficial between Australia and China. That’s what’s enabled Australian businesses  and Chinese businesses, Australian people and Chinese people, to grow a strong economic relationship and  partnership over a long period of time now. We remain committed to that partnership with the same type of  consistency, just as we remain consistent in all of our other policy positions.

Question: You’ve said before that it’s important for trade to have the planes coming in, because then  they can fill up with Australian goods and go out. The PM’s talking with Daniel Andrews tomorrow. How soon  do you think we can get international flights back to Melbourne and how important is that, not just for getting  Australians home but for our exporters?

Simon Birmingham: Look, anything that sees extra international flights coming in and out of Australia is  good news for our exporters, but it can only happen where it is safe to do so, and our government’s been  consistent about that all along. We’ve stepped up with additional assistance for freight-specific flights out of  Australia - hundreds of millions of dollars that has kept more than $1 billion worth of Australian exports  leaving Australia and hitting the markets overseas, and that’s been a crucial support to many thousands of  Australian farmers and exporters of premium but time-critical produce to be able to get out to markets. The big  gain that will happen if we can see Melbourne Airport again welcome international arrivals and quarantine  them safely is that it will provide a huge uplift in terms of additional capacity for returning Australians. That  remains our number one priority, and we will keep an intense focus there and hope that Victoria can again  play its part.

Question: Minister, are you anticipating any interim tariffs on Australian wine from China next week after  we’ve handed back our submissions to the anti-dumping inquiry?

Simon Birmingham: We remain deeply concerned about the anti-dumping investigation that China  launched into Australia’s wine industry. Australia is clear that our winemakers are not subsidised by  government, and they do not dump their product in overseas markets. And there is no justification for any type  of interim duties to be put in place, and that is what we would hope the findings of China’s investigations will





settle on, given the evidence that has been provided to date. However, given the track record this year of  adverse regulatory decisions, we are deeply concerned and hope, though, and urge China to focus on the  evidence. And if they do look at the evidence and stick to the appropriate processes in analysing that  evidence, they will find that Australia’s wine industry operates according to commercial market practices, and  there’s no justification or grounds for tariffs to be applied.

Question: What improvements to access Australian services markets will this give RCEP nations? And  will any changes be required to legislation or programs here in Australia?

Simon Birmingham: So, RCEP has been carefully negotiated, and what we have is, of course, an  agreement here, as I said before, that layers over the top, if you like, the existing network of 10 agreements  that we have across the 14 other nations who are party to RCEP. It gives a more common set of rules and  standards and a higher ambition in areas that are important to Australia, like intellectual property and digital  trade and commerce. In terms of for Australia, there are no requirements for us to make changes in relation to  labour market testing rules or the like. There’s no new application of ISDS provisions, so some of these types  of factors that have been raised as concerns or scare campaigns by some of the opponents to trade  agreements are not part of the RCEP agreement. We will work through the normal ratification processes in  terms of it being thoroughly scrutinised by the Joint Committee on Treaties, and of course, any legislation that  is necessary to implement some of the technical aspects of RCEP will then proceed through the Parliament in  the usual way.

Question: Can you give more confidence that the US will come into more global trade discussions  generally with a new administration?

Simon Birmingham: I look forward to the opportunity for Australia to have new and fresh dialogue with a  Biden administration around trade policy when they take office. We certainly worked hard as a government to-  under Malcolm Turnbull’s leadership to keep the Trans-Pacific Partnership in place and to make sure that it  entered into force and that provides a door that is always open and that Scott Morrison has reinforced publicly  remains open to the United States to join the TPP, which is one of the most advanced trade agreements in the  world in terms of the standards and terms that are set within it. We would warmly welcome the US to the table  there, but we in no way are pressuring them to do so as well. We recognise that a new administration will  have much on its plate, but economically and in a trade sense, just as in a security sense, we encourage US  engagement in the region, and the TPP would be one basis for doing so. We also look forward to cooperation  at the World Trade Organization, where the US has remained an important partner in discussions such as  those on ecommerce negotiations, and we hope that a Biden administration can continue that momentum but  also work to resolve some of the difficulties at the WTO, such as around the appellate body and its appeals  processes.

Question: What types of businesses in what types of industries are set to benefit from this agreement?

Simon Birmingham: Look, the real benefits here are twofold. One is, for our farmers and exporters, they  get a more common set of rules across all 15 nations. The other is, for our services export industry, they get  significant new access across financial, banking, aged care, healthcare, education, and other types of  services industries, right into provision of architectural or engineering and planning services. This is about  making sure that we have the opportunity for that part of our economy, the services industry, to be able to  grow and get the same type of uplift in trade benefits across the region that our goods exporters have had  over recent years.

Question: Just on India, why is it such an important market? And why did it not sign up?

Simon Birmingham: So, India is the second largest population centre and has huge growth potential in  terms of the way in which we see our region. India had been a valued part of the RCEP negotiations for most  of the eight years under which they were undertaken. Regrettably, India chose not to proceed in the final year,  and that diminishes some of the value for Australia, particularly given India would have been the one RCEP  partner with whom we did not previously have any type of FTA. However, the value of RCEP is still there; it’s  still clear in terms of especially the opportunities for those services exporters, and the door remains open for  India to rejoin RCEP at a later time. And there will be a clear statement, I expect, made by leaders in RCEP  countries acknowledging that we would welcome India back to the table at any time in the future.



Media Contacts:  Benn Ayre: +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs: +61 417 097 644

Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.

