

The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

The Hon Andrew Gee MP  Minister for Decentralisation and Regional Education  Minister for Assisting the Minister for Trade and Investment  Federal Member for Calare



The Hon Nola Marino MP  Assistant Minister for Regional Development and Territories  Federal Member for Forrest

MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au

7 October 2020

BUDGET 2020: BACKING OUR REGIONS

The 2020-21 Budget locks in more investment, jobs and a secure future for our regional communities,  ensuring they remain a great place to live, work, invest and raise a family.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said this year’s Budget would provide support for regional Australia as it continues to drive  our nation’s economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic.

“The Liberals and Nationals in Government have supported regional Australia through recent drought,  bushfires, floods and the COVID-19 pandemic,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“It’s more important than ever that we continue to back our regions through targeted support, boosting  community infrastructure, local leadership and industries seeking a new home in regional Australia and  that’s exactly what we are doing.”

Minister for Decentralisation and Regional Education, Andrew Gee, welcomed $41 million in funding for a  Securing Raw Materials Program and a Research and Development Program that will broaden the  Australian Government’s approach to decentralisation and create regional jobs.

“This Program will deliver real results on the ground for country Australia, driving closer collaboration  between businesses and tertiary research organisations, while also delivering practical solutions to enable  the growth of important industries for the regions,” Mr Gee said.

“Importantly, this work and research will be delivered by people who are on the ground in the regions,  who understand first-hand the issues primary producers and material suppliers face.

“We want businesses across all industries to see the many benefits moving to regional and rural Australia  can bring and that’s why this Budget continues to invest in our nation’s decentralisation agenda.”



Assistant Minister for Regional Development and Territories Nola Marino said the Budget delivered  initiatives to support regional Australia and the nation’s territories.

“We are providing an additional $22.7 million for a sixth round of the Stronger Communities Programme,  because it is an initiative that makes local economies stronger and boosts community organisations,”  Assistant Minister Marino said.

“These grants of between $2,500 and $20,000 reach across the country to all 151 federal electorates,  backing projects that make a real difference to local communities.

“The Budget also invests $55.8 million in critical services to Norfolk Island and the Jervis Bay Territory,  including support for bushfire management in an area particularly hard hit by last summer’s tragic  bushfire crisis.”

These new announcements build on support for regional and rural Australia, including $200 million for  Round 5 of the Building Better Regions Fund and $100 million for a Regional Recovery Partnerships  initiative to target economic recovery and diversification for regions especially hard hit by COVID-19.

Ends.

Media Contacts:  Deputy Prime Minister - Jo Williamson 0418 475 668 | Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Minister Gee - Gabi Phipps 0400 917 405  Assistant Minister Marino Â¬- Sophie Beeton (02) 6277 4293

