

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T

Wednesday14th October 2020

Minister Littleproud media conference with   Senator Davey Singleton, NSW.

PERIN DAVEY: Good morning. Senator Perin Davey, New South Wales Senator for the Nationals,  and I am so pleased to be here in Singleton with Minister David Littleproud to announce funding for  the Singleton Bypass. As you can see from the road behind me, Singleton is a very busy little town.  Over 26,000 vehicles go through Singleton every day, nearly 4000 of which are trucks. Just this  morning, we had the whole street pull to the side as a haul-pack truck was transferred through  town.

Singleton and the community have been lobbying very hard for this bypass for a number of years.  And the Nationals in Government are so proud to be delivering this project to get that freight safely  to where it needs to go, without having to block up the town and the businesses of Singleton. It's  going to be a benefit to the community here in Singleton, it's going to improve the traffic flow  through town, it's going to improve freight flow around town, and it's going to allow the businesses  the freedom to move and get about their business. So, with that introduction, I'd like to invite the  Minister to come and explain the project to you. But congratulations to the community of Singleton.  Your advocacy efforts have been well-rewarded and this is great news. We'll have this bypass built  because we are the government of building. We'll have it built by 2026.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks, Perin. And can I say? Last Tuesday night was about an  infrastructure budget, about empowering the regions to get us out of this COVID recession. And so  today, the Federal Government is announcing $560 million to build the Singleton bypass, a $700  million program that we're partnering with the New South Wales Government, to make sure that we  get people through Singleton safer, we keep the people of Singleton safe, and we get our freight  moving quicker and more efficiently, making sure that our economy is moving with the right  infrastructure.

This'll create nearly 1400 jobs during the construction. So, you've got to understanding that this is  not just about creating jobs in its creation, but also in its operation. Because we're also going to  build efficiencies and productivity into our economy, the agriculture and mining sector particularly,  here in Singleton, it has a rich history. So, this is an investment in the people of Singleton, in our  national economy. What a significant, significant investment of $560 million by the Australian  Government - it is locked and loaded, it can't be taken away. We have it in the forward estimates  and now it's about state governments making sure they get the planning right. We'll lose six sets of  traffic lights and, as Perin said, 26,000 car movements and 4000 truck movements through the  main street here every day, is something that needs to be fixed.

So, this is just common sense. This just makes sense for us to make this investment, investing in  this community, investing in rural and regional Australia. These are the arteries that help New  South Wales deliver their products to the world, and world-class products, indeed. So, I'm proud to  say that my National Party colleagues and I have been fighting hard for this and the Deputy Prime  Minister, in particular, is the one that made sure that he, the signature on the bottom line to make

Transcript



T R A N S C R I P T

sure that New South Wales came with us. And this is about to happen, so to the people of  Singleton - congratulations. Your hard work and tenacity in fighting for this has been heard at the  highest levels. The Deputy Prime Minister has heard you and now the New South Wales  Government has heard you. And the National Party is proud to be standing with you every step of  the way, until its final construction. So, congratulations.

Any questions?

QUESTION: [Inaudible question]

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, we'd like to think so. But we'll work with New South Wales State  Government. The planning has to be finalised. They believe that the first sod should be turned  before 2023 but they obviously have to consult with the community. And obviously, while there's an  issue of plans that have been laid down, we need to make sure final consultation with that  community takes place. But the money is in the forward estimates, it can't be taken away from the  people. This is locked and loaded. And I need to say that the New South Wales Government, we  rely on their expertise in terms of engineering prowess to be able to help us and assist us. But we  are prepared to cut the check as quickly as we possibly can, and that's been what we've said  through this budget. It is either use it or lose it, but for this case we are saying let's use it and use it  quickly.  To think that we can get so many jobs running around in this community over the next three or six  years is just something that I think the people should be very, very excited about. Local businesses  should be excited about it, but it's also going to keep them safe, get them home safer and quicker,  but also build that productivity and profitability into our local economy.

QUESTION: On jobs, how's the Government going with verifying reports from China yesterday  regarding the discouragement of buying Australian coal?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, this is something that happens from time to time. It's a demand  driven process, and obviously, their economy is going through different phases and as the demand  increases so too does our coal. I don't think it's going to take away from the fact that they will  continue to want our coal, as they do with agricultural products. Even though we've had some  issues around beef, we hit our beef quota under the free trade agreement in June this year, when  it's normally done by November. So, business-to-business relationships are still very strong. We  are continuing to have our hand out, continuing to want to engage with the Chinese in  Government. The best way to resolve any differences is through meaningful dialogue, and that's  what we are prepared to continue to do as the Australian Government. But I don't think people  should be jumping on shadows - this is something that has happened before, and will happen  again. Not just for coal, but for other commodities as well.

QUESTION: But do you understand the concern in this region? And has the Government been  able to make contact with Chinese authorities yet?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, obviously we're very concerned. As I flew in today, you can see the  importance of the coal sector to this part of the world - as it is in my own part of the world in  Queensland. And that's why the Australian Government's been very supportive of the mining  sector and the role that it will play, not just in our exports, but in generating our own electricity and  energy here in Australia. It's part of the mix and will always be part of the mix, as far as I'm  concerned. So, we will continue to work with our Chinese officials in Beijing through our post. And  obviously, we'll also be continuing to work with other markets, providing opportunities for our coal  exports to go around the world. We've got the best coal in the world, so there is an appetite for it. I  think you'll find we'll continue to open up those markets through free trade agreements and market  access.

QUESTION: Have you asked the Northern Territory to allow workers entering Australia on their  seasonal worker trial to quarantine on farms, rather than Howard Springs?

Transcript



T R A N S C R I P T

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No. That is that is the decision of the Chief Medical Officer in the Northern  Territory, and I just wish that the Chief Minister in Northern Territory might want to pick up the  phone and talk to the Chief Medical Officer there, because they are the ones that set the  conditions, not the Commonwealth Government. All we do is approve the visas. We are approving  the visas. The Queensland Government has come to us asking for visas to be approved to allow  people to isolate on property and work at the same time - they will be approved. It's up to the  Northern Territory Government to do this and I just wish that the Northern Territory Chief Minister  would actually understand the responsibility. It's quite embarrassing that he actually hasn't quite  understood what happened in National Cabinet. Either he was having a dream and wasn't actually  listening or he simply doesn't understand. I think it's probably a mixture of both. But this isn't time  for him to try and shirk his responsibility. This could be done by the stroke of a pen by his own  Chief Medical Officer sitting up there in Darwin. He could pick up the phone, talk to them straight  away, and that could be fixed. There's nothing the Commonwealth Government has around this.  We will simply approve the visas. That's all our role is. The health quarantine arrangements has  always been held by the states. And that's quite prevalent by the fact that Queensland's doing  something different. We've seen something very different in Victoria. And so now the Northern  Territorians have their own opportunity to do what they wish, with respect to quarantine. And so-  you know, it's just sad and it's quite embarrassing and scary that the Northern Territory  Government doesn't understand their own process.

QUESTION: So they are allowed to quarantine, undergo a trial on farms?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: If their Chief Medical Officer, the Northern Territory Chief Medical Officer  says that that is okay, it's okay with us. We approve the visas. But the medical arrangements  around quarantine have and always pertain to the states. As we saw in Victoria where they were  quarantining in hotels. And I'd say well thanks to Daniel Andrews, as we are now seeing in  Queensland, where they are asking for a different arrangement because their Chief Medical Officer  wants to sign off on a different arrangement. The Northern Territory can do exactly the same. So  Michael Gunner is asleep at the wheel. Incompetent and probably, he doesn't understand his own  process.

QUESTION: On the regional investment cooperation, are you satisfied with the approval times  there?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No. And I've made that clear to the board, and I'm holding them to account  to fix it. I've invested a further $50 million into making sure that there are resources, appropriate  resources there, to make sure that those times around processing around the RIC are brought  down to a KPI that I agree with them around 65 days. It is far too large at the moment. So we have  invested $50 million to actually streamline that. We've got to actually, in defence of the RIC, we do  have to acknowledge the fact that when the RIC was set up, it was set up to actually process  around 300 applications a year. We are doing- we're having probably more than that every month  for the last six months since we put in place the interest free, repayment free drought line. That has  since been finalised. So we suspect the numbers that are coming in will actually reduce. But the  RIC has to get itself in order, and I've told the board they are on notice to get this in order. They  have been given every resource to be able to do it. And they need to do it quickly.

QUESTION: So what do you make of 670 days, that [indistinct]?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, that was one individual case. That's not acceptable. But I don't know  the individual circumstances. I don't understand the complexity. I do understand that within those  number of days also is reliant on the customer themselves providing that information that is  required, and that's relying on third parties like accountants and valuers, lawyers getting trust  deeds, so I'm not aware of the individual circumstances but the average days are way too long.  And I acknowledge that and I've but the board on notice that they must fix it. That's what they've  given the resources to do. That's what they'll be charged with the responsibility to achieving that.

Transcript



T R A N S C R I P T

QUESTION: On drought things. Probably looking a lot more green than last time you were here.  How optimistic are you? And with a La Nina forecast, even better news, I guess?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Cautiously optimistic. I just come from Queensland. And I think we've  done better down here than they have in Queensland. It's important we understand that it's going  to take two or three average years for us to get back up on our feet to repair cash flows. And that's  why we introduced that interest free, repayment free drought lines through the RIC for up to $2  million. I mean that's over $120,000 a year we're taking out of our big banks' pockets, including  farmers' pockets, to help them there. And they can borrow that to replant, restock. So obviously,  the forecast is one we're obviously hopeful of. But until it's in the gauge, I never get too excited.  And I'll just put on my other hat, as Emergency Services Minister, can I say we do also need to be  prepared to pivot from bushfires into flooding and cyclones. If it is a La Nina that emulates that of  2010, '11, then we need to be concerned, we need to be prepared. And we owe it, not only to  ourselves and our families, but also to the emergency service personnel, many of whom are  volunteers who put their lives on the line for us to actually be prepared, have a plan, and act on it  as soon as they ask you to.

QUESTION: [Indistinct question]

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, the first and foremost is the instant asset write-off. And that's not just  farmers, that's the local community. And I just say, whether they be small businesses or farmers,  that effectively if you're going to take advantage of the instant asset write-off, take advantage and  buy locally. Go into the local machinery dealer, the car dealer, the bike shop. And if you spend a  quid locally, it actually compounds through the local economy and creates the jobs. And so- I mean  that is a huge opportunity to create investment, to supercharge investment in local communities,  and bring productivity and efficiency into a lot of those businesses. Think infrastructure, that is $2  billion extra in hard cash for water infrastructure to plumb the state, and over $1 billion in extra road  funding going to local councils. And again, they've been told: use it or lose it. Unless we see rollers  and graders moving, it'll go to the council next door. It's up to you to get these projects moving,  because this is what we're doing. We're pulling the levers about what will get us out of this covid  recession. And the Government won't get us out of this, the Australian people will, the businesses  will. And that's why we're pulling the levers to empower them and are saying to them: if you go out  and take this and get moving straight away, that we will see ourselves come out of this covid  recession quicker. We won't be wasting money on pink batts that burn in people's homes. We'll be  creating infrastructure that creates jobs in building it and operating it.

QUESTION: [Indistinct question]

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, look, tourism has been significant in diversifying our economic base  during the drought. I think that's been one that we continue to see through the Building Better  Regions Fund, where we continue to have parts of that aside within the BBRF round, set aside for  regional tourism. And I think you'll see that diversification has got many communities through the  drought and then through the bushfires, and will help tha recovery. But we acknowledge that  COVID has, and the fires particularly have intersected in regional New South Wales and Victoria in  particular, where we need to make sure that we invest money in the tourism sector, not only in  terms of JobKeeper, but also in terms of building our product. And I think our product is becoming  even more mature, right across regional Australia. And I think what's happened is there's been an  awakening by metropolitan Australians since they can't travel overseas to go and have a run out  into the bush, and they're actually quite surprised at what they see, the maturity of our tourism  product and our lifestyle. And I think they're starting to realise that our lifestyle is one that probably  they've missing out on for some time.

QUESTION: [Indistinct question]

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yer Wallumbilla in my electorate, yeah, yeah, yeah, it's a Queensland.

Transcript



T R A N S C R I P T

QUESTION: Can the landholders refuse to [indistinct] pipeline [indistinct] go all the way to  [indistinct]?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: So you'd appreciate a pipeline is underground, whereas as the gas wells,  which in my part of the world through the [indistinct] basin dotted across the landscape. It'd be the  landholder's ability to manage the land. So that's why we in Queensland have quite loudly said, a  land holder should have the right to say whether the gas company should come on. There is  technology where they can actually still get into the gas and not go across paddocks. So that  obviously is a decision for the landholder but when you are going underneath the ground and you  are out of the amenity of the farmer in which to be able to produce food and fibre, then that  becomes a community benefit and national interest, and one in which they should still be  appropriately compensated for. And I know in the Strat basin, those farmers that didn't take up  wells on their properties, but still had gas- had the gas pipeline go through their property were  compensated appropriately for the inconvenience of that pipeline going through. So this is where a  bit of common sense should prevail. I understand quite clearly that there are some farmers who  have and aversion to having gas wells on their property. They should be compensated. We should  have the science to make sure that it can be done safely. They should have the right to say no. But  when you're talking about pipelines linking the eastern sea border that is around community  benefit, broader community benefit.

QUESTION: Even though it’s privately owned?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, it's going well underneath the ground. In fact, it's some 12 to six feet  underneath the ground and well underneath- in fact landholders actually under the law in most  states actually own. So this is where you've got to appreciate this will be a matter for the New  South Wales Government in terms of planning, but when you're talking about pipelines it's different  to actually having wells placed all over your property.

QUESTION: Obviously, the Singleton Bypass investment isn't going to hurt the coalition's chances  in the next federal election in the seat of Hunter. Last federal election, the seat of Hunter went  down to the wire between Labor and One Nation. Has the collation got any hopes of taking the  seat of Hunter at the federal election?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well we never take anything for granted, any seat for granted. But we are  also very mindful of the fact that we believe the seat of Hunter probably fits better within the  National Party than any other political party in the country. We represent the regional sector and  agriculture sector from Queensland all the way through. So if the people of Hunter were able to be  given the opportunity to vote for the National Party again at the next election, then obviously we'll  be - which you will - we'll be very strongly contesting this seat. We believe it is a better fit for the  National Party than the Labor Party. The Labor Party still can't- I mean Joel Fitzgibbon even said  when we debated just before the last election, that he lied, not only to the people of Hunter, but he  lied to the Australian people when he said he didn't actually believe in Labor's energy policy. And  now he's not sure whether he believes in it or not. I mean the guy hasn't told the truth from the  start. You want someone that's actually going to stand by the values and principles of your  electorate. And the National Party believes in the resource sector. We believe in the agriculture  sector. So with all due respect, Joel's been here a long time and he's been playing politics for a  long time. It seems that the people of Hunter, it would appear after the last election, that that's all  he's been doing. He hasn't been representing but he's prepared to sell their jobs from under them  and Joel really hasn't necessarily represented their values, their principles and the way he should  in Canberra.   So the National Party will be fielding a candidate quite strongly and you'll see a lot of National  Party senators and ministers through here as we have in the past to make sure that we really  articulate to the people of Hunter, the values and principles of the National Party and how they  align with them.

QUESTION: What are the infrastructure [indistinct]?

Transcript



T R A N S C R I P T

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: The issue about One Nation, let me tell you. What you get when you vote  for One Nation as a minor party is a warm fuzzy feeling for the first five minutes and then all you  get is professional complaints desk. They don't cut the cheques. They weren't in the room when we  decided to put over $500 million into the Singleton bypass. Never heard from them. They wouldn't  even know anything about it. So with all due respect to them, they are fringe dwellers and they  don't necessarily get to make the decisions when we do. So while we respect their right to this  thing called democracy, it's a beautiful democracy that we have here in this country. We respect  their right to run. Obviously we will run on our values and principles which is predicated around the  resource and agriculture sector. One Nation can do what they like.

QUESTION: One of the regional projects we've missed out of in the infrastructure budget was the  upgrade of the Newcastle Airport runway, $65 million. It's got wide support throughout the region.  The Prime Minister was on local radio on Friday saying that the project's not dead but didn't get the  [indistinct]… six months. Have you got any insight into how that [indistinct]?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Obviously the Deputy Prime Minister and the National Party Leader is  obviously looking at that and obviously we aren't saying its dead. It's something that we're  obviously looking at to see the investment through the Hunter and the opportunities that lie there. I  mean as I say, it's going to be the regions that get us out of this COVID recession. If we're going to  make investments on behalf of the Australian taxpayer, we need to make sure they're going to get  a return. And when you're investing in a seat like Hunter and particularly in Newcastle, you're going  to get a return on investment for the Australian taxpayer. So I think you'll see that there's further  discussions there to be had. The Deputy Prime Minister as the National Party Leader will continue  to have those. There will be further discussions and deliberations in the near future.

QUESTION: [Indistinct] that that project will get up in the next…

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I think it'll be assessed on its merits as I say I think if you look at  what the project is and the opportunities that lay there for not just the Hunter region but also for  regional New South Wales and in Australia, I think there is merit in further discussions and that's  why the Deputy Prime Minister, the Leader of the National Party will continue to have those  discussions.

QUESTION: David, just got some questions in regards- for Nine Darwin. Back to the issue on the  seasonal workers, isn't it the Government's right to make that call to quarantine them on farms  then- especially given the vulnerable population of the territory?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: It is the right of the Chief Medical Officer in the Northern Territory to make  that decision not the Commonwealth Government. They make their own individual arrangements in  each individual state. We have seen that from the start of this pandemic. And for Michael Gunner  to go off script now, is really just bizarre. Really no one can understand what he's trying to achieve  here. I think he's just been caught out not understanding his own protocol. The Chief Medical  Officer in Darwin will make that determination, as they do in Brisbane, as they do in Melbourne, as  they do in Sydney. We simply provide the approval of the visas. It's as simple as that. It's not  rocket science, it's as simple as that. I'm not trying to cut corners or to say anything other than  what the arrangement is that was achieved out of National Cabinet because the states own the  health. They own the medical professional in each of those states. They own the quarantine  arrangements in each of those states. That's why they vary from state to state because. If it was  our call as a federal government we would simply say, well, there's one arrangement right across  the country, but we have this thing called federation. And even Michael Gunner missed that in  grade six or he simply doesn't understand his own job.

QUESTION: So saying this, how big of an impact would that have on the mango farmers?  Considering we're already halfway through.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: They're buggered. Let's be honest. I mean, they've been flitting around  with this, the Northern Territory Government for so long and they've been playing the mango

Transcript



T R A N S C R I P T

producers along for so long, saying, yes, yes, we understand what we're doing. Then when they  are caught out not understanding their own protocols they're simply running for cover. They're  running for the hills. I mean, just be honest with people. And if you were serious, pick up the  phone, talk to the Chief Medical Officer in Darwin and say do what Queensland is doing. Let them  isolate on the farms. If they can do it safely, let them pick from tomorrow. It's up to Mr Gunner. And  if he's going to do it, he better do it soon.

QUESTION: But just quickly, on another issue, the Waugh family who lost their daughter in a horse  accident a few years ago, they've been advocating for a horse register. Just wondering any  comment on that, where we're up to. What's…

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah. And look, I met with Mrs Waugh only last month to have further  discussions around this and I acknowledge the passion and the commitment that she's put towards  this. It's something that we've now got a consensus amongst all the states. It has to be one that is  harmonised right across the country. And so Queensland and Victorian governments to their credit,  are leading the establishment, the protocol, and we are going into the final round tables around  what that will look like. Once we've got that that'll be presented to the Ministerial Council of Ag  ministers. They will then provide us with an opportunity to finalise that. And make investments in  making sure that that can be achieved. I mean this has been a long fought battle and I  acknowledge the work that Mrs Waugh has done. We are obviously working as quickly as we can  but as I said to her last month is what we want to do is to maintain that legacy and to make sure its  sustainable. That we have all the states lined up, they all agree, and that it simply something that  will go on in perpetuity that we can give confidence to the community and give confidence to her as  a champion of this.

QUESTION: Just to be clear on the quarantine issue, under the trial approved by your government  they can quarantine on farms and work at the same time.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well the Queensland Chief Medical Officer has approved those  arrangements. So we've approved the visas for workers to come into Queensland. In fact, I think  some are turning up next week in the Emerald. I spoke to a producer up in the Emerald only just  yesterday. From what I understand is the arrangements with the Chief Medical Officer in  Queensland is that they will be allowed to go and isolate on farms and work at the same time.  Because the farmer's been able to provide the Chief Medical Officer in Brisbane with the comfort  that they will have the accommodation and the distancing protocols appropriate for Queensland.  That could be done in the Northern Territory. Michael Gunner just needs to pick up the phone to  his chief medical officer and get the same outcome.

Thanks guys.



Media contact  0455 448 985

