

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC NEWS AFTERNOON WITH PATRICIA KARVELAS

TUESDAY, 11 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECT: University Fees; COVID-19.



PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: Federal Education Minister Dan Tehan has

released the draft exposure plan for changes to university fee structures. Now,

the changes would see students pay more for degrees in humanities, in law,

accounting and economics but less for degrees in health and STEM

subjects. But the Coalition's junior partner, the Nationals, are ready demanding

wholesale changes to the plan. The Minister for Decentralisation and Regional

Education, Andrew Gee, says the subject classifications will exacerbate the

shortage of mental health services in the bush. Tanya Plibersek is the Shadow

Minister for Education and Training and also my guest this afternoon. Tanya

Plibersek, welcome.



TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND

TRAINING: Hi Patricia, how are you?



KARVELAS: Good. What do you make of the Government's draft exposure

plan for changes to university courses?



PLIBERSEK: Well, this package is pretty friendless. And the reason it's

friendless is because overall students will pay more. They will pay 7 per cent

more on average for a university education. So, at a time with extraordinarily

high youth unemployment, we should be making it easier and more affordable

to get an education, instead we're making it more difficult and locking people

out of universities. And I'm not surprised that the Nationals' Minister, Andrew

Gee, is critical of this package. Most people are. What's surprising is that

Andrew Gee and Dan Tehan are two Ministers who share a Department that's

drafted this legislation and they haven't talked about it beforehand. Instead,

they're having this public fight. So, instead of focusing on how to help people

get an education and ultimately how to help them get a job, they’re fighting

each other.



KARVELAS: Do you agree with the Nationals that some of these changes

could exacerbate the shortage of mental health services available in the bush?



PLIBERSEK: Yeah, of course they will. I mean, we actually making it more

than twice as expensive to get a social work degree. Many of the clinical

psychology, for example, and other types of psychology subjects will increase

in price quite substantially. There's a whole range of problems with this

package though. I mean, the Minister has tried to focus, Dan Tehan, originally

tried to focus on the courses that were going down in price, but there are many,

many courses that are going up in price, including some that more than double

in price. The Minister said that he wanted more clinical psychologists. The

course cost of a clinical psychology degree will increase by well over $20,000

dollars. He's putting up the price of a social work degree, as I said, by about a

hundred and thirteen per cent and we know that across Australia we are

desperate for people like child protection workers who do such important work.

Why on earth would we be putting up the cost of these courses when we can't

find enough people to fill these positions in the first place. You mentioned

earlier STEM subjects - science, technology, engineering and maths. And of

course, I hope people do study STEM subjects. But what the Minister's not

saying is that government funding for those courses will also decrease so

students will pay less and the government will pay less. Universities are already

saying they can't afford to offer places under those conditions. So, instead of

encouraging more people into these courses, there’ll be fewer places

available.



KARVELAS: Okay. Is Labor opposed to the idea of charging humanities

students more for their degrees on principle, or do you see room here to

negotiate?



PLIBERSEK: We think it's a real shame to be charging students more for a

degree. And you know, we were very happy when the Minister said he was

dropping the cost of some courses, but you know, like most things this

Government does, you get the headline one day and all the nasty detail the

next. The nasty detail here is that courses including humanities, commerce,

arts, as I said social work are going to more than double in price - about a

hundred thirteen per cent increase. Now these jobs, these courses actually for

the most part have pretty good graduate employment prospects. So, the

Minister's reasoning that he wants more people to study in areas where there

are jobs just doesn't hold true. And truly, I mean what a shame it is to be

looking at doubling the cost of going to university for any student at a time like

this when hundreds of thousands of people are joining the dole queue when

students - I mean, just one more point Patricia. Think about those final year

high school students this year. The ones in Victoria at the moment who are

remote learning again - kids all over Australia who have struggled through their

final year at school with the intention of studying social work or commerce, or

you know, one of these areas, being told now at this late stage that the cost of

their degree is set to more than double. It's just not fair.



KARVELAS: Okay, so it's just as Labor just going to oppose this whole bill or

are you prepared to negotiate?



PLIBERSEK: Well, look we haven't seen - Today is the first day we've seen the

exposure draft of the bill. So, I'm looking at that in some detail. But making it

harder and more expensive to get a university education at a time like this

makes no sense. New South Wales alone, the number of students who have

applied to go to university next year is double the number of last year. So, we

should be making it easier and more affordable to get an education not harder

and more expensive which is what this government is doing.



KARVELAS: The Vice-Chancellor...



PLIBERSEK: Can I just say other one of the thing about the jobs. Okay go on.



KARVELAS: I just I do want to ask. The Vice-Chancellor of the University of

South Australia has proposed folding the State's three universities into two and

reorganising TAFE. Do you think that that is a sort of sensible idea given we're

seeing the reduction of international students - a university sector that's clearly

facing a crisis?



PLIBERSEK: Look, I think if universities want to talk about working more

closely together, merging or allying themselves with one another or with TAFE,

I'm happy to countenance that. I think it's really up to the universities

themselves to make those proposals. What's sad about this is they're doing it

from a position of desperation. We've lost billions of dollars an international

student revenue. So far, we know that more than 3,000 full time jobs have been

lost from the university sector. We don't know how many thousands of part-timers and casuals because, of course, the contracts are just not renewed so

they don't show up as people being sacked from the universities. But one of the

reasons that the Nationals would be so upset by this proposal is when you take

a few hundred jobs out of a regional community, that has a huge impact. So it's

you know, early career researchers, it's academics, but it's also people who

work in admin - people who work in the cafeteria or on the grounds of the

university. It’s having a huge impact across Australia.



KARVELAS: You have been critical of Minister Gee, raising these issues or

breaking ranks as you've described it. Do you think he should go?



PLIBERSEK: I think it's the other way around. I'm critical of the legislation and

I'm gobsmacked by the fact that two ministers who share a Department can't

get the legislation right before they release an exposure draft. I mean, these are

two parties that are in coalition. Two ministers that share a department.

Seriously, how hard can it be for them to at least have one unified position on

you know, making it harder and more expensive to go to university, if that's

what this government wants to do.



KARVELAS: Does Australia have too many universities given we're unlikely to

see international students return in large numbers for a while?



PLIBERSEK: Look, I think it's important that we do think ahead to bringing

International students safely back to Australia when we can do that and that

means making sure that we continue to have a high-quality education here in

Australia and that we work on a brand Australia approach to attracting

international students when our borders reopen when it's safe to do so. As for

whether we've got too many universities, I don't think so. I don't think that's the

real issue here. The real issue here is the government continues to cut billions

of dollars from their own funding of universities plus we've lost revenue from

international students. Universities are having a hard time and I can't really

understand why this is the one sector that the government is so determined to

turn its back on.



KARVELAS: I just wanted to return to something you've already raised which

is the year 12 students, but also the broader cohort if we can a Victorian or

Melbourne-based students who are now doing this remote learning. What do

you make of the sort of consequences of that and what sort of questions need

to be addressed in relation to whether they repeat a year or the way that they're

managed given a lot of their year is now being spent at home?



PLIBERSEK: Look, it has been an extraordinarily difficult year for children, for

students, for their teachers and for their parents and I think there's quite a few

issues that come up. We have to follow the health advice. Obviously, if it's not

safe for kids to be at school and it's not safe for school staff to be there, we

have to follow that health advice. But, remote learning does come with a cost to

a child's education and that cost is much, much greater for kids who are

already educationally disadvantaged. So, they've been a lot of proposals about

how we can help kids catch up there, you know, Grattan Institute have one

proposal. Teachers and their Unions are talking about different approaches. But

one thing is for certain, we're going to have to put extra resources into helping

those kids who have fallen behind catch up. It's just not good enough for kids to

keep progressing, particularly through those early years of school, where

they're learning so much of the foundations of literacy and numeracy. We have

to make sure that they've got those basics under their belt, particularly before

they turn 8 years old, because it gets much harder after that. So, we need extra

resources to help those kids catch up. And it's true also of those kids in their

final years. They've really struggled as well. That's why it's doubly cruel to

make it harder for them to go to TAFE or to go to university, to make sure that

they're employable in this extraordinarily difficult jobs market.



KARVALAS: Just finally on New South Wales and the way COVID-19 is being

managed in New South Wales. Today, 22 new cases. Do you think the case

has been made for stronger shutdowns in New South Wales? Are you

concerned about the numbers coming out of New South Wales?



PLIBERSEK: I think the case has been made for all of us to keep following the

medical advice - not to become complacent. It's so very important that we can

continue to do all of the, you know, hand hygiene, social distancing, not going

to work, not going out when we're sick, getting tested if we've got symptoms. All

of those things are absolutely critical. I'm not going to second-guess the

medical advice, but we should be following it what it whatever it is.



KARVELAS: Just some breaking news Tanya Plibersek and I know you won't

have lots of insight into what's happened here. But today the Victorian Premier

is made the point in a hearing...



PLIBERSEK: You are making me very nervous Patricia! Yes, go on.



KARVELAS: No, no. You are going to be okay. I'm just interested in what your

view is in terms of how we clarify this. There are now two different positions.

Victorian Premier said this morning that these ADF resources that are

apparently been offered to Victoria to deal with hotel quarantining hadn't been

offered. But, the Defence Minister Linda Reynolds has just released a

statement contradicting the lines given by the Victorian Premier this morning. It

says that there were offers to help that were made to Victoria and the

Government in Victoria said help wasn't required. Who are we to believe when

we've got a Premier and then the Defence Minister saying different things.





PLIBERSEK: Look, you know, I can't possibly know the details of

conversations between the Commonwealth Government and the Victorians.

What I would say is that Daniel Andrews has been doing an incredible job,

including an incredible job of standing up and answering questions every day.

Those press conferences that go sometimes for an hour. He has been

available. He has been open and it's you know, it's a pretty sharp contrast to a

Federal Government that doesn't want to answer questions about the Ruby

Princess and isn't prepared to answer questions about aged care.



KARVELAS: Thanks so much for your time.



PLIBERSEK: Thank you, Patricia.



KARVELAS: Tanya Plibersek is the Shadow Minister for Education and

Training.







ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350







