

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC BRISBANE DRIVE

WEDNESDAY, 19 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Restrictions in Victoria; State borders; Aged Care; vaccine;

STEVE AUSTIN, HOST: The Federal Opposition says that the government is

deliberately trying to avoid its responsibilities in key areas during the

coronavirus pandemic i.e. aged care. Prime Minister Scott Morrison today,

responded to counsel assisting the Royal Commission, Peter Rozen QC's

declaration that the Federal Government had no specific plan for COVID-19 in

aged care. He said, of course there is a plan, there is no complacency on the

government's part. Richard Marles is the Deputy Labor Opposition Leader

federally and he says the Commonwealth is trying to avoid responsibility and I

spoke to him today on this.

RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR

PARTY: Look I think we are pretty focused on, in all seriousness what's

happening here and getting past what is a very difficult situation. I don’t think

people are particularly occupied by the thought of how other States are looking

at us and to the extent people do think about that, I think it's completely

understandable. But there are borders that are around Victoria at the moment

and indeed Queensland is maintaining its own borders around its own State. I

mean right now I think Annastacia Palaszczuk’s latest information is that there

are seven active cases in the entirety of Queensland-

AUSTIN: That's right.

MARLES: I mean there's more than three times that number in the city of

Ballarat alone. So, it's a really different situation. And what's playing out in

Victoria right now has devastating health impacts, I mean there's a whole lot of

tragedy really, particularly for those of us with loved ones in aged care, but it's

also having devastating economic consequences. So, I can well understand

why if you're sitting in the Queensland Premier's chair right now you're wanting

to do everything you can to make sure that that's not what's playing out in your

State.

AUSTIN: We're a federation of states. Do you have- what is your thinking on

whether the states should be more supportive of the states that are- that have

sort of flattened the curve, which was the original intent of the three-phase

program, designed by National Cabinet. We're a federation of states, are we

being too isolationist? Or too Queensland first- according to a misused Donald

Trump, sort of phrase? Are we being too isolationist in that regard?

MARLES: Well I don’t think the people of Queensland are being that and I

certainly don't think the Queensland Government is being that. I do think that

there is a space for national leadership and in the context of that national

leadership, the role of internal borders, one would hope is something that is

managed cooperatively and actually I think there has been something of a

failure of that national leadership in terms of seeing those borders being

maintained cooperatively. I mean if you look at the position that Annastacia

Palaszczuk has taken in relation to the Queensland-New South Wales border

for a number of months now, she was copping a whole lot of criticism around

the country for some time. I think the stance that she's taken is looking pretty

good right now. And what we really needed to see was some national

leadership from the Morrison Government supporting the States in relation to

the positions that they have taken in relation to those State borders. And in

some instances, borders are internal to States. I mean that's what's going on

here as well. And ultimately when we think about this, borders, I mean right

now there is something of a border between Geelong and Melbourne, there's

obviously a border in place across the Murray and there's obviously a border at

Tweed Heads. I mean, all of those are actually instances of physical distancing

to stop the virus from moving. They’re in the same category as wearing masks,

as restricting travel and movement in terms of going to work. All of these are

critical measures to stop the virus from spreading and I think if there is anything

we learn from what's played out in Victoria over the last two months it's that we

need to be very cautious in the easing of those restrictions because we only

ever want to do them once.

AUSTIN: My guest is Richard Marles. Richard Marles is the Deputy Labor

Opposition Leader. He is also the Opposition Shadow Minister for Defence.

Obviously, he is based in Victoria- somewhat of a hotspot for the coronavirus in

Australia at the moment. This is ABC Radio Brisbane; Steve Austin is my

name. Whose responsibility is it, constitutionally in Australia to manage and

regulate the aged care sector?

MARLES: Well, this is clearly the Commonwealth's responsibility. It is their

responsibility under the National Health Agreement which exists between the

Commonwealth and the States. And what we need in moments of crisis is

Governments to stand up and take responsibility and in fact the last thing-

AUSTIN: What, if any role, do the states have in aged care?

MARLES: Well the principal role is with the Government, with the

Commonwealth Government and their own Royal Commission makes that

clear. I mean the Royal Commission they have put in place to examine the

failure in respect of the aged care sector over the last seven years makes it

clear that there needs to be a nationally coordinated plan put in place by the

Commonwealth Government, the Morrison Government to deal with the sector

and its preparedness in relation to the threat that is posed by the Coronavirus.

AUSTIN: So that is not happening in the National Cabinet at the moment,

Richard Marles? Where the States and the Prime Minister gather together to

talk.

MARLES: What is absolutely clear, from what the Prime Minister was saying

today, on the ABC, is that here is a Prime Minister who's there is desperately

trying to avoid responsibility for aged care. The Commonwealth is the regulator,

the Commonwealth is the funder and the Commonwealth is the one that's in a

unique position to put in place a nationally coordinated plan which is the very

thing that is being called for by the Royal Commission that the Commonwealth

itself established to look into the problems that exist within the aged care

sector. A Royal Commission they put in place before COVID struck. I mean the

thing here is this Steve, but even before COVID had come to Australia, I think

we all understood that aged care facilities were really on the frontline of

vulnerability to this virus-

AUSTIN: Yes.

MARLES: And then you know, very vividly we saw a real life case playing out

with Newmarch in New South Wales. I mean this is completely devastating.

And when the question is asked about, well what lessons were learned from

Newmarch? And what did the Government do to protect the rest of the aged

care sector around the country from this happening elsewhere? The Royal

Commission itself said that what the Government was doing was engaging in

self-congratulation and hubris. That is an utter indictment of the Commonwealth

and its role in relation to aged care. And first and foremost what we need is for

the Government to stand up and take responsibility, so that we can have some

confidence that the tier of government responsible for this sector is actually

accepting responsibility and is going to do something about it. From there we

need a nationally coordinated plan and actually, it will be really pretty useful if

they released the report into the Newmarch affair as well, because there would

be a whole lot of lessons, I am sure, that will be contained within it.

AUSTIN: Well, in relation to the Commonwealth-State responsibility in different

areas, how then do you feel about the Commonwealth, or the Federal

Government going to the High Court to stop Border Force staff appearing

before the Ruby Princess Inquiry in New South Wales?

MARLES: Well I think it's scandalous, I mean I think it's absolutely scandalous.

I mean -

AUSTIN: So there is two different events, in two different states. In your mind,

they're indicative that the Commonwealth is avoiding its constitutional

responsibility, or worse?

MARLES: Yeah and I mean, you know we can all be legal eagles and go out

there and try and claim that in the fine print there's not responsibility but

actually what the public is crying out for now, are national leaders which stand

up and say whatever needs to be done, we're there to do it. And whatever

faults have occurred, we take responsibility for them and we're going to fix them

going forward. And what they don't want is a Government which is slipping and

sliding and avoiding at every turn responsibility for anything. So what we see

with Scott Morrison and we see it time and again, is willing to front to give good

news to do some hoopla around some announcement but when there is a

difficult moment this is a Prime Minister who consistently goes missing and it's

got nothing to do with him as far as he's concerned and that's what we see.

AUSTIN: Richard Marles, thanks for your time.

MARLES: Thanks Steve.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363









Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.





