

DAILY UPDATE - Defence response to COVID-19



news.defence.gov.au



/national/daily-update-defence-response-covid-19



Australian Army soldiers support New South Wales Police with quarantine compliance checks in



Sydney. Photo: Corporal Chris Beerens



The ADF is contributing to the whole-of-government response to the COVID-19 pandemic



with a range of logistical and personnel support. Defence has prepared responses to a



range of contingencies through the Emergency Management Australia-led response.



As of 1800 AEST 6 April 2020



National - Approximately 1500 personnel are deployed as



part of Operation COVID-19 Assist



The Minister for Defence, Senator the Hon Linda Reynolds CSC,



announced



Operation COVID-19 Assist



on April 1, 2020.



1/4



Current nation-wide Defence support includes:



Reconnaissance and planning support teams to all state and territory



governments to assist with emergency response planning.



Contact tracing teams to work with authorities.



Supporting law enforcement agencies with mandatory quarantine



arrangements for air arrivals into Australia.



The ADF will not be authorised as law enforcement officers as this remains the



responsibility of the states and territories.



Additionally, the ADF:



Has established the three-star-led COVID-19 task force to coordinate



Defence’s internal response to COVID-19 and support the whole-of-



government effort.



Is supporting Emergency Management Australia-led (EMA) planning for



the National Communicable Disease Incidence of National Significance Plan



in response to COVID-19.



Is supporting the Department of Health with logistics and specialist staff.



Has provided health, logistics and movements support to the Department of



Foreign Affairs and Trade and the Australian Border Force repatriation and



care of Australian Nationals on Christmas Island and Howard Springs via



RAAF bases Learmonth and Darwin.



Has been supplying clinical and epidemiological support to the Department



of Health National Incident Room since early February 2020.



State-by-state breakdown



*Note: Personnel in Joint Task Group headquarters, supporting roles, and those preparing for



tasks are included in overall state-based figures but are not captured in the list of tasks.



New South Wales - 483 personnel



329 ADF personnel are supporting state police quarantine and self-isolation



directions at Sydney Airport, ports, local hotels and residences.



Since March 26, 16 soldiers from the Army have been assisting the Foodbank



charity, based in Bankstown, Sydney. The soldiers are helping to pack food parcels



for people who have been required to self-isolate and have no means to secure



their own food supply.



2/4



25 personnel are involved in planning support and contact tracing teams.



Queensland - 270 personnel



29 ADF personnel are supporting state police with the reception of international



arrivals at Cairns and Brisbane airports.



30 personnel are supporting state police quarantine and self-isolation compliance



checks..



9 personnel are involved in planning support.



69 personnel are providing support to Queensland Police to protect Indigenous



communities



Victoria - 39 personnel



7 personnel are involved in planning support and contact tracing teams.



16 personnel are assisting with surgical mask production



1 person is supporting state police with their quarantine compliance management



efforts.



Western Australia - 166 personnel



103 personnel are supporting state police with their quarantine compliance



management efforts.



11 personnel are supporting contact tracing and planning efforts.



South Australia - 30 personnel



11 personnel are involved in planning support.



Tasmania - 72 personnel



30 personnel are supporting state police quarantine compliance checks in Hobart,



Launceston and Burnie.



26 personnel are involved planning support and contact tracing teams.



Northern Territory - 110 personnel



3/4



54 personnel are providing logistics, communications and medic support to the NT



Police at three Northern Territory border control locations on the Stuart, the Barkly



and the Victoria Highways.



The logistics are focused on catering and other sustainment operations for



the NT Police in the remote locations.



The communications support will assist police data and voice transmission in



the remote locations with limited reception.



The medic support will assist police in the health screening of civilians who



are trafficking through the areas.



ADF personnel are not involved in the enforcement of border controls.



7 personnel are involved planning support and contact tracing teams.



6 personnel have deployed to perform quarantine compliance checks.



Australian Capital Territory - 22 personnel



11 personnel are involved in planning support and contact tracing teams.



4/4

