

SENATOR MURRAY WATT  SHADOW MINISTER FOR NORTHERN AUSTRALIA  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DISASTER AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT  LABOR SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  MACKAY, QUEENSLAND  TUESDAY, 18 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Federal government joining high court case to keep mining workers as  “permanent casuals”; Nationals MPs must make Scott Morrison pull out of court  case.

MURRAY WATT: It's great to be back in Mackay and the Mackay Whitsunday region  today. I'll be here for a two day visit where, really, the point of the visit is to meet with a lot  of locals, businesspeople, unions, community groups, to get a better sense on the ground  of what the impact of COVID-19 has been and what needs to be done around the  recovery. Over the course of the next couple of days. I'm going to be meeting with people  from the resources sector, the agriculture sector, the tourism sector, both in Mackay,  Sarina and Airlie Beach to get a real cross-section of views about what's happening and  what we need to get jobs happening again in the region.

And one of the things that's already apparent from the conversations I've had is how  important it is to see some kind of a jobs plan from the federal government. You'll be  hearing from Julianne (Gilbert, State MP), and I'm sure she's been talking a lot about what  the Palaszczuk Government's jobs plan is to recover from COVID-19. But unfortunately,  we still haven't really seen anything from Scott Morrison from a federal perspective about  jobs. And in fact, what they're actually doing right now is actually making job security for  people in this region even worse than it was pre COVID.

One of the things that's happened under the Morrison government over the last few years  is a real explosion of casualisation and labour hire, particularly in the mining industry. And I  know from previous visits that I've made to places like Moranbah, Tieri and Middlemount  that there are hundreds of mining workers these days who are employed as what they call  "permanent casuals". And I've met people who have worked as casual employees for  years and years and years. And what the consequence of that is, is that they don't get any  of the job security of a permanent employee. They don't get any of the leave entitlements  of a permanent employee. If they take a day's sick leave, they lose their pay. They don't  get any annual leave, let alone long service leave. And what that means is that it's very  hard for them to get a home loan. It's very hard for them to have any job security at all. So  that explosion of casualisation has happened under the Morrison Government.

And what's happening right now is that the Morrison Government is joining a high court  case which would make the permanent casual rort in the mining industry permanent. And  what's happening is that we've had labour hire companies go to court to try to keep the  right to keep these people employed as casuals for six, seven, eight, nine, ten years. It's  completely insane and it's really unfair to people to keep them employed as casuals for this  long. So I can't believe that the Morrison government - at the very time when people are  worried about their jobs - now is joining a high court case to keep mining workers as  permanent casuals. What the Morrison Government and George Christensen and Michelle  Landry should be doing is fighting to make sure that mining workers have permanent jobs,  not to have casual jobs year after year after year.

So I'm calling on George Christensen and Michelle Landry as the local MPs to get on the  phone to Scott Morrison and convince him that their government should pull out of this high  court case. They like to talk about how much they like miners and care about miners, but  what they really care about is the big mining companies. This is a chance for them to show  that they're with mining workers, they should pull out of that high court case and make sure  that casual workers who are there for years actually get treated like permanent workers.

JOURNALIST: The CFMEU also have quite a few issues with the casualisation of the  mining workforce. They believe that it adds to the safety concerns with people on a casual  working basis, not confident enough to speak up about safety issues in fear that they will  lose their jobs. Is that another reason why we need to make these workers more  permanent?

WATT: Absolutely. And again, I've met exactly people in that situation who've been  employed as casuals for years. But because they're so concerned about losing their job if  they speak up, they keep their mouths quiet when they see safety issues. And of course,  that puts the entire workforce at risk. Right now, there's an inquiry going on in Brisbane  about the mine explosion that we saw at the Grosvenor Mine a few months ago, where  five, I think it was, miners were terribly burnt as a result of a gas explosion. That mine has  a very high proportion of its workforce as labour hire. It's no surprise that if people are  worried about keeping their job day to day, that they don't want to speak up about safety  issues. And that's why people who are employed essentially as permanent workers should  be treated like permanent workers. And that's why the government needs to pull out of this  high court case today.

JOURNALIST: How do you think having more of a permanent workforce would change the  mining industry?

WATT: Well, for starters, I think it's obviously good for the employees to have permanent  work. It means that people are actually able to get a home loan. It means that people aren't  in fear of losing their job from day to day. Again, I've met miners who are employed as  casuals who've had kids who’ve had to go to Townsville for hospital care, and they've been  unable to travel with their families because they can't get the time off work. So it's  obviously good for the employees to have permanency. But I think it's actually good for the  employers as well. I mean, in this day and age, it's good for employers to have long term,  loyal staff. You get better productivity out of them. You don't have to retrain them if you've  got staff turning over all the time. So it's actually a win-win for employers and employees, if  we can have more people employed as permanents.

JOURNALIST: And you think maybe it would be more of a positive for Mackay and I



suppose the greater Isaac region as well with more people permanent? They may live in  this region as opposed to being FIFO and live outside of our local area?

WATT: Definitely. I think it would be really good for the region to have more permanent  employees. It does give people that sense of security that if they are going to take up a job  in a mine, that that job is going to be there for them in six months time or six years time. So  they're more likely to put down roots in the region, less likely to have to travel by FIFO from  Brisbane or anywhere else. And again, I think the job security that comes with having a  permanent job makes you a bit more confident to go out and spend a bit of money in the  local shops. If you're worried about what's going to be in your pocket from day to day,  you're less likely to spend money in the local shops, and that's obviously bad for the  regional economy as a whole.

JOURNALIST: Fantastic. Murray, anything else you want?

WATT: No, I think that covers it pretty well.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TALI ELEY 0448 078 456









