

The Hon Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development

The Hon Josh Frydenberg MP  Treasurer

The Hon Alan Tudge MP  Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

Monday 5 October 2020

MORRISON GOVERNMENT INVESTS $625 MILLION IN TRANSPORT  INFRASTRUCTURE TO BOOST SA ECONOMIC RECOVERY

The South Australian economy will be boosted, roads will be safer and thousands of jobs created, with a  $625 million investment into transport infrastructure from the Federal Coalition as part of our COVID-19  economic recovery plan.

The latest funding injection builds on a series of statewide infrastructure investments from the  Commonwealth in responding to the COVID-19 pandemic which now total more than $785 million.

Key investments for South Australia include $200 million for the Hahndorf Township Improvements and  Access Upgrade; $136 million for Stage 2 of the Main South Road Duplication between Aldinga and  Sellicks Beach; and $100 million for the Strzelecki Track Upgrade.

Prime Minister Scott Morrison said Tuesday’s Federal Budget would deliver funding for infrastructure  which supports the Government’s JobMaker plan and help South Australia recover from COVID-19.

“We have been working closely with state and territory governments to invest in the infrastructure that  is ready to go and can help rebuild our economy and create more jobs,” the Prime Minister said.

"These projects will keep commuters safe on the road, get people home to their loved ones sooner and  provide better transport links for urban and regional communities.”

“As part of the COVID-19 economic recovery plan we have invested an additional $785 million focused  on shovel-ready projects across the state.

“This latest investment will provide another boost to the local economy and is part of our plan to  support an estimated 2,600 direct and indirect jobs across the state.”

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the Government is focused on delivering priorities and boosting local jobs as part of  Australia’s road to recovery.

“We will draw on local businesses to stimulate local economies through these infrastructure projects,”  the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“Infrastructure means jobs, it means livelihoods, it means stronger local communities and it means  building a better and more secure future for our nation.”

Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure Alan Tudge said the infrastructure boost across  Adelaide and South Australia would help provide certainty on the economic road back from the  pandemic.

“This means job creation right now across the city on a variety of significant projects,” Mr Tudge said.

“Key investments across South Australia include $200 million for the Hahndorf Township Improvements  and Access Upgrade, and $100 million to seal priority sections of the Strzelecki Track.”

“We will continue to invest in the South Australian economy in the coming years, through congestion-busting projects such as the $136 million for Stage 2 of the Main South Road Duplication between  Aldinga and Sellicks Beach.”

“These investments will deliver on the Government’s economic plan for a stronger and more resilient  Australia, boosting the economy, meeting our national freight challenge and getting Australians home  sooner and safer.”

Since being elected in 2013 the Liberal and Nationals Government have committed more than $9.8  billion for infrastructure in South Australia.

[END]

Media Contacts:  Prime Minister’s office: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  Deputy Prime Minister’s office: Jo Williamson 0418 475 668  Minister Tudge’s office: Michael Bennett 0434 782 923  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

Press Office of the Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Prime Minister, Canberra

SOUTH AUSTRALIA - 2020-21 BUDGET PROJECTS

New projects

Project Federal Funding Total Cost

Hahndorf Township Improvements and Access Upgrade $200 million $250 million

Main South Road Duplication Stage 2 - Aldinga to Sellicks Beach $136 million $170 million

South Eastern Freeway Safety Upgrade $28 million $35 million

Strzelecki Track Upgrade $100 million $125 million

Victor Harbor Road Upgrade $12 million $12 million

Princes Highway Corridor Funding Allocations

Princes Highway Corridor - Intersection Improvements $40 million $50 million

Princes Highway Corridor - Overtaking Lanes $28.8 million $36 million

Princes Highway Corridor - Pavement Works $45.6 million $57 million

Princes Highway Corridor - Rest Areas $4 million $5 million

Princes Highway Corridor - Safety and Signage Improvements $10.4 million $13 million

Princes Highway Corridor - Shoulder Sealing $7.2 million $9 million

Subtotal $612 million $762 million



Additional funding

Project Additional Federal Funding Total Federal Funding

Goodwood and Torrens Junctions $13.2 million $202.6 million

Subtotal $13.2 million $202.6 million



Total new funding $625.2 million



