



The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister



Senator The Hon. Marise Payne  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women

The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health





JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

Thursday 20 February 2020

CONTINUING TRAVEL BAN TO PROTECT AUSTRALIANS FROM THE  CORONAVIRUS

The protection and safety of Australians is our highest priority.

The National Security Committee of Cabinet has today decided that the continuing coronavirus  infections in mainland China make it necessary to continue the travel restrictions on foreign nationals  entering Australia for a further week to 29 February.

This decision, as with all decisions taken by the Government with respect to the coronavirus outbreak,  has been guided by the expert medical advice of the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee,  made up of the Commonwealth’s Chief Medical Officer and chief medical officers from each state and  territory.

The committee has advised that there are signs the spread of the coronavirus in Chinese provinces  outside Hubei province is slowing. We will need to watch closely whether this positive trend continues  as people return to work after the holidays.

Unfortunately, the number of infections and deaths in Hubei province itself continues to grow.

The AHPPC has also advised that the number of cases in Australia remains at 15, indicating the  Government’s precautionary approach to preventing the spread of coronavirus on our shores continue  to be successful.

The continuation of the travel restrictions means that for a further week, foreign nationals - excluding  permanent residents - who have been in mainland China will not be allowed to enter Australia for 14  days from the time they left mainland China.

As before, Australian citizens and permanent residents will still be able to enter, as will their immediate  family members (spouses, legal guardians and dependants only).

We continue to require Australian citizens, permanent residents and their families who have been in  mainland China from 1 February 2020, and who return Australia, to self-isolate for 14 days from the  time they left mainland China.

People who have been in contact with someone confirmed to have coronavirus must also self-isolate for  14 days from the time they were in contact with that person.

We will continue to consider developments in China and advice from the AHPPC as they meet and  review health and travel arrangements on an ongoing basis.

Our government continues to work closely with state and territory authorities as well as our  international partners to ensure we keep Australians safe.

[END]

Media Contacts:  Prime Minister’s office: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  Minister Payne’s office: David Wroe, 0429 531 143  Minister Hunt’s office: James Perrin, 0447 534 427  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

Press Office of the Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Prime Minister, Canberra



