



The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  SYDNEY, NSW  FRIDAY 16 OCTOBER 2020



EO&E…

PRIME MINISTER: Good afternoon everyone it’s good to be back here in Sydney, also been tremendous  to be up, right across Queensland, moving from the Gold Coast all the way up to Cairns, and to return to  Sydney today for some very important matters. Unfortunate of course, that we were unable to have the  National Cabinet meeting today that will be held next Friday. There was a mechanical difficulty with the  BBJ which prevented my return to Sydney yesterday and so National Cabinet has been rescheduled for  next Friday.

But importantly today, the National Security Committee of Cabinet has met today which I was able to  return for and there we were able to finalise arrangements for our agreement with the Northern Territory  Government, I will be meeting with the Chief Minister this afternoon to work through these and many  other issues, as an important bilateral discussion with the Chief Minister for the use of the Howard Springs  facility, which, under the agreement as referred to as the Northern Territory Centre for National  Resilience. This agreement will extend out, on this arrangement until the end of March with both the  opportunity to extend that agreement and expand that agreement should additional capacity become  available at that facility. That would give us roughly, over that period of time, given the two week  quarantine period plus the cleansing of the facility in between groups coming through of around about  5,000 people over that period of time. This arrangement is intended to supplement the more significant  arrangements that we have in continually lifting the caps at our major ports of entry into Australia which  is now, as a result of the changes we put in place at the last National Cabinet, at just over 5,500 weekly  slots, sorry, weekly capacity of people coming into each of those areas and going into hotel quarantine.  Which means we're getting more and more and more Australians home every week. Now we're also being  able to supplement that with this additional facility, which initially will be used to take in groups as a result  of supported flights coming out of three locations. Firstly, out of the United Kingdom but there are also  flights being arranged out of India and out of South Africa. Not all of those will necessarily go to Howard  Springs but those flights, which are being done by Qantas, particularly the UK flight, they are, the seats on  those flights are being sold by Qantas. But Qantas has the priority list of vulnerable passengers who are  in the UK that get the first opportunity at those seats on those flights and our High Commission there is

contacting all of those individuals and giving them the opportunity through Qantas, to be on those flights  so they can return.

But the good news is, of the around about just over 4,000 Australians who were identified and DFAT  identified as vulnerable on 18th of September, just over a quarter of those have now been able to return  to Australia and we're making very good progress on ensuring that more and more Australians are getting  home. And as those places continue to open up at our major points of entry, when we can get in particular  Melbourne back online, that will make a big difference and we look forward to that happening as soon as  that can. I've obviously raised that with the Premier some weeks ago but there remain challenges there  at this point in time, but we look forward to being able to pick that up again.

Now, at Howard Springs, at that centre, those who come through will obviously in the same way that  others are paying for their quarantine arrangements, that will be the case there at Howard Springs and  that's at $2,500 for an individual and $5,000 for a family. Today we also, as a NSC, a National Security  Committee of Cabinet, further discussed how we may be able to progress in a number of other areas, that  is travel from safe countries into Australia. We're many many months still off this. But the medical expert  panel is already considering various options about that, how that can be achieved using a traffic light  system for the various countries. It does involve looking at the many other quarantine options that could  be made available from home isolation to corporates who are returning various workers from various  parts of the world and being able to put in place their own corporate arrangements for quarantine that  would meet standards that would need to be in place, that would be at least equivalent to what is done  in the publicly-run facilities or supported, I should say, through the hotel quarantine arrangements for  returning Australian citizens. And so that means that we can work to try and get back to a new kind of  normal for Australia, as much as getting Australians home is our top priority when it comes to utilising  these quarantine arrangements, our other priority is to get Australia back to a safe level of engaging with  the rest of the world and in priority areas. That of course is in areas like students and business visitors to  Australia, and the like. And potentially other visitors.

Now, today, we have already welcomed our first Kiwis back to Australia for a holiday. That's fantastic.  Some 230, I understand, were on the flight this morning that has arrived, and I think is just going through  customs now as we speak, and there are others who will be coming. And we welcome those Kiwis, Kia Ora  to those Kiwis who've joined us today, I hope you enjoy your holiday in New South Wales or the Northern  Territory or the ACT and tell your friends and we’re looking forward to seeing more of you, we’ve got a  few Australians in New Zealand at the moment for the Bledisloe on the weekend. There'll be a few Kiwis  heading this way for the Bledisloe return matches here in Australia in a few more weeks’ time.

So we're making progress in all of those areas. It's important that we look ahead. Yes, we need to deal  with the here and now when it comes to COVID-safe travel and behaviour and quarantine, and returning  Australians. But with or without a vaccine, we need to be in a different place next year to where we are  this year. And we need to be planning for that now, and we are, just as we've been planning around these  Howard Springs arrangements now for some period of time. Howard Springs has actually been used in  recent months, particularly to enable people on their way through the Northern Territory to ensure they  complied with other border arrangements in other states and territories, in particular in Queensland. It's  been used for inbound, those arrivals into the Northern Territory. It has also been used for seasonal  workers that have been coming through for important areas in our horticultural industry in the north. And  so now, as we move into this next phase, we'll be able to use this facility to support the far greater  capacity, which has always been our first priority, of   opening up those ports of entry.



So it's excellent to be in a position that we've got our first visitors, our first international visitors, coming  to Australia. That's a real turning point from where we were just over six months ago. And here we are,  already, before the end of the year, getting at least to some new point of normal when it comes to COVID-safe travel. But it has to be done safely. And in putting these arrangements in place where we have  AUSMAT experts who will be in place at Howard Springs to ensure those arrangements are done well,  there will also be a regular external audit of infection control practices at Howard Springs and that will be  advising directly through to the Chief Medical Officer.

Now before I move to a couple of other items, and to your questions, I also want to announce today that  Nick Warner AO PSM will be retiring when he concludes his current term as the first-ever Director-General  of the Office of National Intelligence. He'll be stepping down and retiring in December. I've known Nick  for many years, as many of those who have worked at a senior level across government, have for a very  long time. He has served in this role as my principal intelligence adviser and the head of the national  intelligence community since December of 2017. Nick has an extremely long and distinguished career  serving Australia's interests and defending and protecting Australia's interests. He's a great Australian,  who has done an outstanding job, spanning some four decades in areas from national security and foreign  policy and so many other areas. And so, we thank you, Nick, on behalf of a grateful nation for keeping  Australia safe and keeping Australians safe. You've done a superb job. And obviously we look forward to  continuing to work with you over the balance of your term, and we wish you all the best in your  retirement, but I have no doubt that Nick will still be in a position to be supporting us in any number of  other arrangements on a less formal basis going forward into the future. His expertise, his experience, his  knowledge of these areas is, I would say, without peer and we have indeed been well-served by him in his  time, both in this role as the Director-General of the Office of National Intelligence but also as Director-General of the Australian Secret Intelligence Service. Prior to that he held a range of senior positions,  including Secretary of the Department of Defence and a senior international advisor to Prime Minister  John Howard. He has served many Prime Ministers and he's served them extremely well. And without fear  or favour, I can assure you, as I'm sure my predecessors will also attest. Overseas, he served as the High  Commissioner to Papua New Guinea, a special coordinator of the regional Assistance Mission to the  Solomon Islands, RAMSI which was a tremendous success. And so I have no doubt he will continue to  serve Australia well, but perhaps not at quite the frenetic pace he's done so, for four decades.

I also want to welcome, the announcement by Naval Group that they have commenced, put out  expressions of interest for 23 major items of equipment for the new Attack-class submarines. This work  has been assessed by Naval Group as being worth up to $900 million across the 12 submarine fleet.  Manufacturing such as essential pieces of equipment in Australia will support Australian jobs while  building confidence in the Australian defence manufacturing industry and we're working with Naval Group  to maximise opportunities for Australians, and Australian industry, including through this announcement  today. Naval Group has committed to maximising Australian industry involvement with at least 60 per  cent Australian industry capability.

So a lot on the agenda today. That was the key focus today. I look forward to the National Cabinet meeting  being held next week. There were no pressing matters that National Cabinet, that we were anticipating  significant announcements or decisions on today. It was a meeting that was continuing to review a  number of proposals and get status reports on that, and provide them with further direction. And we will  deal with those formally next Friday. I note also what has been a pleasing set of numbers out of Victoria  when it comes to case numbers today. I agree with the Premier, this is important news, but especially for  Victorians. You know, Victorians have kept up their side of the bargain. Victorians and, in particular,

Melbournians, have done their bit to see this second wave that occurred in Victoria be brought under  control, to arrest it. And that has come with great sacrifice. Some 70,000 jobs have been lost in Victoria  over the last two months. The impact on the mental health and anxiety of Melbournians, and Victorians  more broadly, has been significant. We've worked together with the Victorian government to provide the  support through additional mental health support and services, and to work closely with them with the  deployment of the ADF and so many others to assist Victoria as they've gone through this difficult period.  But at some time you've got to step off the shore and you’ve got to start moving forward again. We've  been in contact, of course I spoke to the Premier the other day, we're working with him as he prepares  his next stage. They are all matters and decisions for the Victorian Premier but I know Victorians are really  hoping that on the weekend they can see some significant relief to the significant impositions that have  been there, that have been put in place by the Victorian government to get this second wave under  control. We cannot be complacent about this. We see what is happening in Europe at the moment,  devastating results there, further restrictions coming in, curfews in major European cities. And Melbourne  has been going through that. And we don't want to see Melbourne or Victoria go back into that situation  again. But the Premier has made it clear that they have improved their tracing capability and it's time to  ensure that we can now move forward and give Victorians and Melbournians the opportunity to build  back, to recover what has been so terribly lost over these recent, very difficult months and I'm looking  forward to those announcements on the weekend, and I'm sure Victorians are. They'll be, along with the  rest of the country, urging the Premier to move as far as he possibly can go, because Victorians have  earned it. They've done the right thing. They've kept their side of the bargain and now it's time, I think,  for them to be able to move further forward. We look forward to those announcements on the weekend.

Happy to take some questions.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you attend a Liberal Party function last night?

PRIME MINISTER: No.

JOURNALIST: Why wasn't there another plane sent for you?

PRIME MINISTER: There was. It arrived this morning and we got on it and flew back this morning.

JOURNALIST: Could it have come earlier?

PRIME MINISTER: Not to get us back in Sydney at a reasonable time, no.

JOURNALIST: There wasn't a security facility in Townsville…

PRIME MINISTER: Not for the purpose of this meeting. The National Cabinet is not just me on the end of  the phone. There's the Secretary of the Prime Minister and Cabinet's Department, there is the Chief  Medical Officer, who was flying up to Sydney for that event. We can't help mechanical failures of planes.  They happen from time to time. When that happens we reschedule arrangements. It’s as simple as that.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you mentioned Nick Warner's retirement,

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah.

JOURNALIST:  Given the reports that came out in the ASIO report this week, the thwarted attempts to  influence Australian intelligence, what is the current threat to Australia from foreign agents?

PRIME MINISTER: Well we have strong protections in place to deal with those things at all times. I think  the report just reflects how successful our intelligence agencies have been. But I'm not about to go into a  commentary about their capabilities or how they do their work. All I know is they're very effective at doing  it. And Nick Warner has been an architect of our capacity for a very long time.

JOURNALIST: Senator Abetz in estimates this week was asking Chinese-Australians to denounce the  communist party. Do we need to make a pledge like this for foreign-born Australians?

PRIME MINISTER: There is only one pledge that any Australian citizen should take and that's the pledge  they take when they become an Australian citizen.

JOURNALIST: What do you make of Senator Abetz then asking Chinese-Australians to do that [Inaudible]?

PRIME MINISTER: I just said the normal practices should be observed.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you prioritised vulnerable people, what classifies a stranded Australian as  vulnerable? Is it their age, their health condition, and who assesses that?

PRIME MINISTER: The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade assess that, based on their consular  experience. And so those, they make, and it’s a whole range of issues, I mean people can be medically in  a situation where they’re vulnerable, there may be family circumstance, there may be issues of economic  need, it’s a broad cross section of issues that could place someone in a vulnerable position. Their ongoing  accommodation arrangements where they may be. There is a range of different issues that DFAT uses to  make those bespoke assessments on each and every case. And the numbers do move around based on  changing people's circumstances as well. And so, but we are prioritising those who they've identified, our  consular officials have identified as being the most vulnerable and they have the priority allotment for  those flights.

JOURNALIST: If someone cannot pay for their flight or their accommodation, how can a stranded  Australian in need take advantage of this?

PRIME MINISTER: We awarded to the Department of Finance, Foreign Affairs and Trade some months  ago $65 million to support the work of DFAT for those who might be in a difficult situation. There are a  range of arrangements they put in place. Zero interest loans which can be paid back over a longer period  of time. There's emergency cash assistance in some occasions can be provided. That's all done at the  discretion of the Australian consular officials. Australia's consular corps are extraordinary. I mean, this  year, more than any, they've been doing an amazing job. Over the course of the last, over the COVID  period, there have been 29,100 Australian citizens who have been assisted by DFAT to get them home.  Over 29,000. That's what they've been able to achieve. And that work continues. They do it each and every  day. And you know, that included getting Australians out of Beirut after it was blasted. They did that while  the windows were shattered in their own offices, working with the most basic of communications facilities  and they got those Australians home. So I think our consular corps in our Department of Foreign Affairs  and Trade, they're brave, they are smart, they work incredibly hard, they're amazingly compassionate and  they deal with people at their most vulnerable when they're away from home. And I think they're amazing.  I think they do a tremendous job.



Sorry, up the back?

JOURNALIST: Just how damaging is the scandal involving the New South Wales Premier to your Coalition's  re-election chances?

PRIME MINISTER: I've already made my remarks about the Premier, I’ve worked with the Premier for  many years, many, many years. And there’s an inquiry going on and that’s appropriate. But Gladys  Berejiklian is the Premier that New South Wales needs in these difficult times. She has been an  extraordinary leader, particularly setting, I think the right bar, the gold standard, as I've called it, when it  comes to contact tracing and testing arrangements here, and outbreak containment. Keeping New South  Wales open while keeping New South Wales safe. It has been an extraordinary effort. And like all the  Premiers, Chief Ministers, myself, as we've gone through COVID it has been a very uncertain time. We've  had to make adjustments along the way, learn what we've needed to learn and make the changes to our  programs. And no-one has done that, I think, better than Premier Berejiklian and she has very strong  support, obviously, from the Deputy Premier and the many members of her team. The Deputy Leader of  the Liberal Party, Dominic Perrottet, they are a team just focused on keeping New South Wales safe when  it comes to COVID-19 but also keeping New South Wales open.

JOURNALIST: Should WA's borders come down now given that the Chief Health Officer has said travel  bubbles between states should be fine?

PRIME MINISTER: That's a matter for the Western Australian Government. Again, I've had no quibble with  the Western Australian Government about the decisions they've made. They should be made on health  advice. Where there are borders, domestically, in this country they should only be there for as long as  they need to be and they should come off as soon as the medical advice permits that. And that's the only  reason why those borders should be in place. And the Western Australian Premier has always said that  those borders have been there for those reasons. And I'll leave it to others to make judgements about  what has been said by the Health Minister and the Chief Health Officer in WA. They also need to be done  on a consistent basis and there can't be double-standards about it, and there needs to be common-sense  applied to ensure that the wheels of commerce continue and that - borders, of course, can provide some  further protection, they are no substitute, though, for a world-class contact tracing system. They are no  substitute for a world-class testing regime. They're no substitute for ensuring COVID-safe behaviours and  practices. Sometimes people can get a bit more confident when the borders are up and ignore some of  those practices, and that actually puts everybody at great risk. You may forget the virus but, I can tell you,  the virus won't forget you. We need to continue to manage our COVID response on that basis. There's no  vaccine at this point. I was enormously encouraged when I went to the University of Queensland last week  during the course of this week, I should say, and to see the remarkable progress they're making. But that's  not in place yet. We have a long way to go. We've got to continue to build back. We've cushioned the  economic blow of COVID-19. Our health results are among the best in the world. Our economic results in  cushioning that blow are amongst the best in the world. But now we have to recover those jobs. And  we’re seeing that happening everywhere else except for Victoria. And we want to see those Victorian jobs  come back and that's why we're looking forward to some positive news this weekend. But then it’s about  building back for the future which is what our Budget was all about, it’s been incredibly well received. I  was so pleased to see how well it was received up in Queensland over the course of this week, visiting so  many businesses seeing their optimism. I made one assumption in this Budget and that was in the strength  and resilience of Australians and I think that’s a very safe assumption.

Thank you very much.

[END]

