



MEDIA RELEASE

COVID-19 RESPONSE FROM DISABILITY REFORM COUNCIL

"APPALLING": STEELE-JOHN



Thursday 19 March, 2020

Australian Greens disability spokesperson Senator Jordon Steele-John has

described the COAG Disability Reform Council's (DRC) response to COVID-19

as appalling



Senator Steele-John has called on the DRC to act with more urgency, and

provide more clarity about the impacts COVID-19 will have on disabled people,

our families and our support networks.



"Yesterday's meeting was an opportunity for the DRC to show that they

are listening to the disability community and take urgent action. They've failed

to do either; their response has been too slow and frankly, does not respond

appropriately to the urgent needs of our community," Steele-John said.



"What we needed from yesterday's meeting was a comprehensive action plan

to ensure that people in our community who are at risk have access to the right

information and appropriate supports to get through this crisis. What we got

was a list of so-called priorities that didn't cover half all of our concerns or have

a clear timeline for action.



"Critically, a dedicated hotline and a phone-based outreach program for people

who are at risk must be established to provide support, carry out well-being

checks and reassure the community that their needs will be met. The list of

priorities identified by the DRC is also lacking in several key areas.



"Disabled people need a commitment that throughout the life of this crisis there

will be equal access to healthcare for all and that all steps will be taken to

ensure our hospital system is accessible and inclusive for all.



"It is not good enough to say that "appropriate consideration" will be given to

disabled people as part of the health response; our community needs to know

that people will get the healthcare they need, when they need it.



"There has been no mention of the need to develop a stand-by workforce to

ensure that disabled people who need support can have certainity that they will

be able to get it, even if their usual service provider is compromised.



"Access to increased funding for disabled people where needed to ensure that

we can continue to access services and supports is critical, just as it is critical

to support service providers.



"The outcomes of this meeting have failed to address the urgency of the issues

disabled people face and the DRC must now act."

Senator Steee-John said the Greens support the recommendations made by

Australian peak disability organisations in response to the COAG Disability

Reform Council, which can be found here.







Media Contacts:

STEELE-JOHN - Tim Oliver; 0448 316 387





