SENATOR TIM AYRES

LABOR SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2NZ INVERELL

MONDAY, 9 NOVEMBER 2020



SUBJECT: US Election.



MONTE IRVINE, HOST: I've been joined on the phone this morning by Tim Ayres, New South

Wales Labor Senator. Good morning. Senator, How are you this morning?



SENATOR TIM AYRES: Good morning. Good morning to your listeners.



IRVINE: Now Senator, big news from last week all the way through the weekend. That's all

everyone's been talking about. It's the US Presidential election and waking up on Saturday

morning and seeing that Joe Biden actually has the numbers to win the election. He is

President-elect of the United States. How did you see it all unfolding?



AYRES: Well, I think like most of the rest of the world, there's a big sigh of relief over the

weekend, as it became clear that the United States was going to return to normal transmission.

But as you watch, this extraordinary democratic process, different in each of the states,

millions and millions of people voting. 150 million people in total have voted over the course of

the process, a record vote, more people than ever before voting for Joe Biden. And in fact,

Donald Trump increased the number of direct votes voting for him as well. It's an extraordinary

process and it took a painfully long time to resolve and I think that the world was really holding

its breath.



IRVINE: Yeah, absolutely. And it is interesting what you're saying there, I mean, Joe Biden has

a new record for the amount of votes cast for a Presidential nominee, 74 million votes there.

And, as you said, Donald Trump, he's 'get out the vote' campaign did really well as well. So

you're looking at quite a large number of the American people getting out and voting and

remembering that voting in America is not compulsory. So they've certainly turned out the vote

this year. And I do think it's because they are so divisive, the President Trump, he was a very

divisive character, or he is a very divisive president, and he managed to get his voters out and

that in turn energized. I think the Democrat voting did it a different way. They did it in a safer

way for COVID-19 because COVID-19 is still running rampant in the United States. They tried

to do it in a more safe way that to do it with mail-in voting. What do you see now as being the

implications for Australia, first of all, with the transition, so we still got Donald Trump's going to

be President, between now and January. And then after the inauguration of Joe Biden, what's

that mean for Australia?



AYRES: Well personally I’ll just say, in terms of the American situation, firstly, thank God for

compulsory voting and having one Australian Electoral Commission that manages the rolling

out of the vote and the count. That sort of system has stood Australia in really good stead. It is

true that the election campaign's been very divisive in the United States. And it comes to the

end of a pretty divisive four years of American politics, but more people than ever have voted

before. That's a good thing. People have got to have their say. And it's an emphatic convincing

victory for President-elect Biden. Four or five million votes, at least at this stage in front,

probably going to increase that lead as counting is finalized, and a pretty convincing electoral

college victory. So that's a good thing.



What it means in the Australian context, I think, is that firstly, you would have to be very

concerned about how closely Scott Morrison has tied himself to the Trump administration over

the course of the last few years. It's going to be pretty hard to forget the footage of Scott

Morrison at the Trump Rally, Trump political rally, with his thumbs up, effectively endorsing the

political campaign of Donald Trump. He's toyed with Donald Trump's rhetoric around a whole

host of issues around climate change, around creating this sort of apprehension about - I think

the phrase he used was negative globalism - trying to stoke the sort of anti cooperation,

nativist forces in Australian politics.



He's not repudiated that host of backbenchers who've been out on the back bench pushing

conspiracy theories about the election. You know that the Craig Kelly's, the George

Christensen's, that the Matt Canavan’s have been out there saying, without any foundation,

that this election has somehow been subject of election fraud. And remember, some of these

characters are the same people who are out there promoting conspiracy theories about

Coronavirus, saying all sorts of extremist things straight out of the Trump playbook. And finally,

the fact that Joe Hockey, our former Treasurer and then Ambassador to the United States has

himself been stoking these claims, these conspiracy theorist claims about election fraud,

without being repudiated by the Prime Minister.



So the Prime Minister has been happy to let all that run and that is an improper intervention, a

sort of taking sides, in the American system. I am certain that has been noticed by the by the

Biden team. It's not the way that an Australian Prime Minister who's acting in the national

interest should be acting in the interests of all Australians. But instead, he's taken a partisan

pro-Trump approach. And I think that's going to do Australia no favours on the global stage.

But it's also a bit of a sign of the vulnerabilities that Scott Morrison has in Australian politics.



IRVINE: Just taking you back to something you said before, though, about Scott Morrison

being involved and tying himself tightly closely to the Trump administration. Wouldn't that just

make sense as a Prime Minister, wanting to get the support and gain the support of our closest

allies and maintaining that? Isn't that a sensible thing to do? I, can't imagine a Labor Prime

Minister taking a different course and not supporting the President of the United States.



AYRES: It's very important, though, that that doesn't reach into partisan politics. It's absolutely

crucial, as you say, that, that the Prime Minister of Australia has a very strong relationship with

the United States President. You look at Bob Hawke's relationship with Ronald Reagan and

the Labor Prime Minister's relationship with Bill Clinton, no partisan distinction, just in the

national interest. But this has gone a lot further. It's, it's gone to allowing a whole lot of

conspiracy theorists on the back bench and all of the  sort of pro Trump rhetoric, and it's gone

to allowing himself to appear at a Trump political rally. That's, that's a big step in the wrong

direction for Australia. And it just shows how far gone the Prime Minister is on this in this sort

of extremist approach to politics.





IRVINE: Do you think but Donald Trump came to power as a populist style President, he

brought in that populist style politics, he railed against what he called the swamp. And they

brought him, that helped bring him to power? Do you think this is the end of that style of

politics, we have seen like we saw in the UK, the follow up from that we saw Boris Johnson get

in under the same sort of circumstances. But he's an, even he has changed his rhetoric to be

more policy based and policy focused rather than going for the populist saying what the voters

want to hear. We've seen his rhetoric change around COVID-19. And particularly after he

caught it. Do we see, do you think this could be the end of that popular style of politicking?

We've even seen the change in what's happened in Queensland. What happened with One

Nation. One Nation has that popular style about it. Do you think we're seeing the end of that

style of politicking?



AYRES: Well we've got to learn the lessons from the US campaign and think carefully about it.

This kind of rank populism doesn't go away just by itself. The clear message from the Biden

campaign is that people who had been economically shut out of the system, couldn't find a

decent job, the vast swathes of Middle America who have been pushed down the incomes

scale, as income inequality gets more and more severe in that country - they turned to Donald

Trump in 2016. But they turned to Joe Biden in 2020. He was a he was a very different kind of

figure to Donald Trump, had a long-term experience, people saw an experienced politician,

former Vice President, 48 years in the Senate who had a message about bringing the country

together in a clear personal story: he's from Scranton. He said, you know where I'm from, and

you know who I'm for, for people in regional towns and for people in the suburbs, and had a

campaign that focused on jobs, on an effective public health response to the Coronavirus and

a strong message for that matter, on climate change.



It was an unapologetically progressive campaign. But it was aimed right at the heart of Middle

America, right at the people who live in the suburbs and live in the regions. And I think that's

the message for Australian politics, we've got to make sure, we've got a keep on the Labor

side focused on issues around jobs on a decent economic recovery that makes the country

stronger and pulls Australians together, working for a fairer future. And it means that we've got

to continue to have a strong message on climate change.



I should say on climate change, with the new Biden administration, signalling a very tough

position from the United States, rejoining the Paris Climate accord, a strong focus on

international action that will, unless Scott Morrison radically changes his approach, that will

leave Australia isolated on the global stage in terms of climate action, and that will have a

negative consequence for Australian jobs, the Australian economy. Joe Biden's clear message

on climate change is he's going to focus on American action at home but demand parallel

international action. And that is that does leave Scott Morrison hanging out with Saudi Arabia

and Brazil and the Russians at the do-nothing extreme end and that is a big problem for Scott

Morrison.



IRVINE: Senator we've run out of time. Thank you so much for your time this morning. We'll



talk to you next Monday.



AYRES: No worries. Talk to you next week.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JOE MCKENZIE 0431 377 319

