

STEPHEN JONES MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES

MEMBER FOR WHITLAM





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP

CANBERRA

SUNDAY, 9 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Beirut; Coronavirus; Fraud; Government’s disastrous early-withdrawal of superannuation scheme; young people; nursing homes;

2020 Budget; JobKeeper



STEPHEN JONES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES:

Thank you all for coming out here on a cold, wet Canberra afternoon.



I want to start by expressing, on behalf of the Australian Labor Party, our

sympathy for the family of Isaac Oehlers, who passed away in that devastating

blast in Beirut earlier this week. We also want to extend our sympathy to the

families of the 17 Victorians who has been revealed by the premium passed

away overnight.



Now, a few moments ago, it was revealed that three Queenslanders have been

arrested in a further episode of fraud, through the government's trouble-

plagued early release of superannuation scheme. It's quite clear that the

problems of theft and fraud arising from this scheme are much bigger than the

government has revealed. It's time for the government to come clean.



We know that over 2.5 million Australians have accessed their superannuation

through the early release scheme. In, part because there was insufficient

support or timely support otherwise coming to them. Of those 2.5 million

Australians, over 600,000 have completely wiped out their retirement savings,

and we know that young Australians are the majority of that group.



Today, we can reveal that the total cost to these young Australians that is

people under the age of 35 is $44 billion in retirement savings. That is $44

billion that has been wiped out in retirement savings for young Australians. And

it was revealed earlier this week by the Reserve Bank of Australia that young

Australians and the superannuation sector are doing the heavy lifting in

economic stimulus. Without the contribution of that early release from the

superannuation sector, the economy wouldn't be going as well as it is, and it's

already in a poor state. So, for these young Australians, the message from the

government is quite clear. The consequences are: $44 billion dollars lost in

retirement savings and there's are going to have to work longer. That means

they're going to be paying higher taxes, but also means they're going to have

less available for them in retirement potentially a lower pension.



They're going to look back on this and think of this superannuation policy as

being as dumb as the introduction of cane toads in Australia. This is the legacy

of this government policy.



Happy to take this any questions.



JOURNALIST: The government says that the amount of people actually using

the super scheme is very small. So far, they've only arrested three people.

What's your reaction to that that the majority of people are using it for our

agency?



STEPHEN JONES: Well, actually that's not quite right. The tax office revealed

in the COVID committee last week that there are at least hundreds of instances

of fraud. That number could be growing, but we need full transparency from the

government. We need transparency from the government about: how many

instances of fraud, what they're doing to prevent further instances of fraud, and

how the individuals going to be compensated for the money that has been

stolen from their superannuation accounts. The answers to each of those

questions have not been forthcoming.



JOURNALIST: What is it about the scheme that you think’s making it more

susceptible to fraud, than any other ATO administered scheme?



STEPHEN JONES: There's a number of problems with this scheme. Firstly,

they created a cargo cult, and you've had government members running

around the country somehow promoting that “it’s free cash”. And no doubt that

has been part of it. You’ve also got the automated self-assessment scheme, so

that you're able to access the scheme. I don’t want to use this forum as a

mechanism to provide a user's guide on how to engage in fraud yourselves, but

the design of the scheme and the way it’s been administered has left it open to

the frauds that we’ve seen.



JOURNALIST: Now, the Prime Minister has repeatedly said that a high

proportion of the young people who are taking out money have invested it

wisely, for example to sure up their mortgage and the like.



STEPHEN JONES: Look, the government should release data that's its

assertion, but frankly that’s not the purpose of the scheme. The purpose of the

scheme when the Prime Minister and the Treasurer stood up in Parliament and

said we are introducing a scheme to deal with hardship. That is the scheme

that was legislated by Parliament. That should be the scheme that the tax office

and the government are implementing. If they wanted to introduce some sort of

general stimulus scheme or some alternative investment scheme, they should

have stood up in Parliament and said that that's what they were doing. But they

weren’t. That's not the purpose of this scheme. We 100% percent support the

original purpose of the scheme, that is to make money available to Australians

for hardship



If money is being withdrawn for other purposes. It's an indication that it hasn't

been withdrawn in accordance with the law.



JOURNALIST: But as you say supported the policy at the time, and saw that

there was some benefit in doing it? So how else would you have structured it?



STEPHEN JONES: We warned the Government at the time: the only thing

worse than a bad policy, is a bad policy that was poorly implemented. And this

is a bad policy that has been poorly implemented. They have been more

focused on getting money out the door than they have been on checking on

instances of fraud or theft or whether the scheme has been complied with.



JOURNALIST: There’s been significant problems with Victorian nursing

homes, which have been blamed on the Commonwealth Government. But

we’ve got control cases from around the country where this hasn’t happened.

Doesn’t this show that the fault lies with the Victorian Government?



STEPHEN JONES: We’re dealing with a significant crisis in Victoria, and

they’ve just gone into stage 4 lockdown. Clearly there is a significant problem in

aged care, and there are problems in other areas throughout the state. I think,

at a time when there's a crack in the dam, and everyone is working around the

clock to catch that up, I don't think it's a time when we should be searching for

who’s responsible for putting the crack in the dam. I think we've got to work on

ensuring that we are fixing the problem. There's a judicial review that has been

appointed in Victoria, and other reviews around the country that are underway.

Let them do their work.



I think the Andrews government is doing the right thing: working cooperatively

with the federal government to ensure that we could deal with the crisis at

hand.



JOURNALIST: On another issue - Mathias Cormann didn’t rule out corporate

tax cuts being in the October budget. Would you consider supporting tax cuts

for bigger companies?



STEPHEN JONES: Look, we think that there are bigger priorities and ways to

stimulate the economy. We don't think that we are going to see a tax cut led

recovery. We’re more interested in ensuring that the government has got a plan

for jobs and a plan to get us out of the economic woes that we're in at the

moment. We don't think that is going to be a tax cut led plan.



JOURNALIST: The finance minister also alluded to flexibility in terms of

JobKeeper and further changes should the situation in Victoria warrant it. What

do you think of that, and do you think that’s fair in terms of providing Victorians

with certainty?



STEPHEN JONES: Well, clearly, the numbers the government released in its

budget update a few days ago were wildly optimistic. It's been revealed by the

government themselves that they weren't based on health advice. So clearly,

they were wrong. We will work with operatively with the government to ensure

that JobKeeper and JobSeeker are adequate to the needs of the Australian

community. Whether that is the level, or whether that is the dates on which

JobKeeper is phased in and out, we will work cooperatively with the

government on each of these things. But I do want to make this point: tinkering

with the guidelines is not a plan for jobs, and it's not a plan for economic

recovery. What want to see from the government is a plan for jobs and a plan

for economic recovery.



JOURNALIST: Do you think that, in terms of certainty, it’s fair to be making

decisions like this on the fly?



STEPHEN JONES: We think that their absolutely were problems with the

JobKeeper arrangements. We said to the government that it could be better

targeted. It didn't make sense, for example, that there some people who are

getting a pay rise, where other people were being excluded from the JobKeeper

arrangements.



Understandably, when you're moving quickly, as the government was in those

early days, a scheme need to be put in place to get things moving.



But when problems are obvious, when the opposition is willing to work with you

on fixing some of those obvious problems, they should have moved quicker

than they did to change some of those guidelines. We’’ work more effectively

with them on improving the scheme, but I've got to say some of the

assumptions that the government put in place around employment and around

economic activity are wildly, wildly, optimistic. For example, I don't think anyone

will assume or should be assuming that international air travel and our borders

are international borders are going to be open on the 1st of January, as was

assumed in the economic update. If that is what the government is basing its



assumptions around JobKeeper, then it obviously has to go back to the drawing

board.



SUNDAY 9 AUGUST 2020



MEDIA CONTACT: AMY SMITH 0459 846 926



