



Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra





THE HON DAN TEHAN MP  Minister for Education



MEDIA RELEASE

10 November 2020

Researching needle-free vaccinations

World-leading research to develop and commercialise needle-free vaccinations has taken  place in Australia using Morrison Government funded research infrastructure.

The development of needle-free vaccinations will revolutionise health and create new  business and job opportunities in Australia.

The Vaxxas Nanopatch is based on research by the University of Queensland and  developed using research infrastructure funded through the National Collaborative Research  Infrastructure Strategy (NCRIS) network.

Minister for Education Dan Tehan said the Morrison Government had committed more than  $256 million to fund the NCRIS network in 2020-21.

“Vaxxas has used the NCRIS-funded infrastructure of the Australian National Fabrication  Facility and Microscopy Australia since the Nanopatch’s inception,” Mr Tehan said.

“The combination of Australian National Fabrication Facility and Microscopy Australia has  been essential to make and measure this revolutionary technology as it developed.

“The NCRIS network supports high-quality research, like that being undertaken at Vaxxas, to  drive greater innovation in the Australian research sector and more broadly.

“We want the world-leading research conducted in Australia to be turned into jobs, business  opportunities and economic growth.

“In this year’s Budget our Government provided an additional $1 billion for university  research and $157 million for research infrastructure.

“The Budget also provides $5.8 million to design a scheme to accelerate turning university  research into new products, job creation, productivity gains and economic growth.

“The $900 million Industry Linkage Fund, created as part of the Job-ready Graduates  package, will incentivise university engagement with industry and focus on creating more  STEM-skilled and job-ready graduates in areas of industry and community priority.”





Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

Vaxxas Chief Development and Operations Officer Dr Angus Forster said the initial research  and much of the development work on the vaccine delivery technology was conducted using  NCRIS infrastructure.

“Without NCRIS support, this breakthrough technology may never have come to fruition,”   Dr Forster said.

“Vaxxas’ continued use of the Australian National Fabrication Facility (ANFF) and  Microscopy Australia (MA) enables and accelerates the fabrication and measurement of our  medical device components generating advanced manufacturing jobs in Australia.”

Vaxxas is working to fast-track its technology to deliver COVID-19 vaccines.



ENDS





Media contact:  Tehan: Byron Vale 02 6277 7350 | minister.tehan.media@dese.gov.au

