

CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



JASON CLARE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR REGIONAL SERVICES, LOCAL GOVERNMENT

AND TERRITORIES

MEMBER FOR BLAXLAND



CORONAVIRUS: LABOR’S CALL TO SUPPORT OUR HEALTHCARE

HEROES



Our frontline health care workers are heroes in this health emergency and deserve as

much support as possible from us to keep saving lives.



With reports this week of health workers being publicly abused on public transport because

of their day-to-day proximity to the virus, more and more workers are driving to the

hospitals where they work so they can arrive safely.



Labor condemns anyone who vilifies health workers and we call upon all Australians to

throw their full support behind each and every worker in the healthcare sector.



These people are caring for the victims of this pandemic and they are keeping our health

system running.



So today, Federal Labor is calling for coordination across all levels of Government to

provide two tangible support mechanisms to help our heroes through this crisis.

Firstly, Labor is applauding local councils that have already acted to provide free parking to

hospital workers during the Coronavirus pandemic, and encouraging all levels of

government to do the same.

Free parking is a gesture of respect. It’s the least we can do.

Canterbury - Bankstown has acted today, with Mayor, Khal Asfour, announcing all health

and hospital workers would receive a special COVID-19 exemption sticker, allowing them

to park for free near hospitals within council boundaries.

Secondly, Labor has written yesterday to the Minister for Health, Greg Hunt to express our

concern for untenable living arrangements for many critical frontline health professionals.

In many cases, health care professionals live with others who are vulnerable and at higher

risk of complication if they contract the virus.

These workers are burdened by putting those they live with at risk while wanting to

continue to work to contribute through this crisis.

The Federal Government should coordinate with all levels of government to ensure that

eligible health workers have the accommodation they need to continue to work.

We must do everything possible to support the frontline healthcare staff that are supporting

us at this critical time.

This virus does not discriminate. We are all in this together. All levels of government,

unions, civil society, and the community in general, should unite to support our dedicated

healthcare workers through this unprecedented health emergency.

SATURDAY, 4 APRIL 2020

MEDIA CONTACTS:

LIZ FITCH (BOWEN) 0424 512 512

SCOTT DAVIES (CLARE) 0419 546 197

