TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS FIRST EDITION WITH PETER STEFANOVIC

WEDNESDAY, 12 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECT: Schools; Universities; Aged Care.



PETER STEFANOVIC, HOST: Let's bring in the Shadow Education Minister,

Tanya Plibersek. Tanya, good morning, good to see you. Thanks so much for

joining us. So first of all, just want to get your reaction to that outbreak. It's

getting very worrying those numbers, up to 22. I think it's about 17 related to

that particular cluster. What's your view of that?



TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND

TRAINING: Oh, look, I think the premier is quite right to say that now is not a

time for extracurricular activities or any unnecessary large gatherings. I know at

my kids’ schools the end-of-year concerts aren't likely to go ahead. It's just

been Education Week you can parents haven't been able to visit schools as

they normally do. Schools have been sending, you know, videos and

communicating with parents in other ways. Parent-teacher nights have mostly

been cancelled. We did ours by Zoom. PNC meetings are happening by Zoom.

So, I think schools, for the most part, are taking very seriously the, you know,

basically minimising contact between students and other adults from outside

the school. That protects the adults outside the school, it protects the students,

it protects the school staff. We should be very careful to follow the medical

advice now because we see how quickly things get out of hand if we don't.



STEFANOVIC: Yeah. I mean, I was going to ask you more broadly speaking

how you think the schools are handling the crisis perhaps not just in New South

Wales but also in the other states as well.



PLIBERSEK: I think they've done an absolutely amazing job and full credit to

the principals, to the teachers, to the other school staff who went virtually

overnight in a lot of states to remote learning. It's been tough on kids. It's been

tough on parents, but you think about the principals, the teachers, the school

staff that have been organising it all. They've done a magnificent job and a lot

of them essentially went from a Christmas period, where we had those terrible

bushfires, exhausted into a new school year and then very quickly were trying

to work in a whole different way. They've done a great job but it's taking its toll

on the school staff and it's certainly taking its toll on students. Like, I talked to a

lot of students in their final year of school who are going into their HSC in New

South Wales or the other, you know, final school exams around the country.

They've had the most difficult year and the little kindy kids as well they had, in

some places, six weeks of school to get used to their new teacher and their

new friends, to start to learn, to read and write and do maths and suddenly

school’s off. So, it's been tough and the most disadvantaged kids are the ones

who suffer the most. They are falling behind. For every two months of remote

learning, they're falling behind by a month. I mean it is a terrible time for them.



STEFANOVIC: Moving on to universities now Tanya and in particular those

universities in the regional areas. There appears to be a design flaw in the

university overhaul, that's according to the Nats anyway. They say they should

be a halt to prices for mental health and social work subjects. What's your

reaction to that?



PLIBERSEK: Well, two things. The first is the Nationals aren't the only one

pointing out that this is a dog's breakfast of a new policy, that makes it harder

and more expensive for people to go to university, at the very time when our

unemployment queues are growing by hundreds of thousands of people every

month. So, it should be easier and more affordable to go to uni. Instead the

government's making it harder and more expensive. Now, the Nationals have

pointed out some flaws, you know, they're not the only ones. The universities

are pointing out the flaws. The employer groups, the professional associations

of social workers, psychologists, scientists are all pointing out that instead of

making it easier to study in their disciplines, this package makes it harder and

more expensive. But, what's really extraordinary about this is you've got two

government ministers fighting it out in public at a time when all we want from

the government is that they show leadership. That they tell us that it's okay,

we've got this, while these people are unemployed, we’ll help them get the

skills and education they need so that their job ready as the economy begins to

recover. That's what we want from the government right now. Instead, we've

got two senior ministers slogging it out in public, taking their eye off the very

important goal in educating our workforce for the jobs that will be available as

the economy covers.



STEFANOVIC: So I mean Dan Tehan says that he will consider all feedback as

it sort of gets towards final legislation. What more would you want?



PLIBERSEK: Oh, he should go back to the drawing board. Like, honestly, this

is a dog's breakfast. The Minister himself, Dan Tehan, got up at the National

Press Club and said he wants more people to study science, he wants more

people to study psychology. He's made it more expensive for them to do that or

he's cut funding to the universities for those subjects, so universities will be

offering less places in those subjects. Social work has more than doubled in

cost right around Australia. We've got communities on the brink with mental

health problems, stress from the bushfires, the drought, now Coronavirus -

desperate for that support. He's more than doubled the cost of getting a social

work degree. We know there are jobs for social workers. Child protection

systems right around Australia desperate for those graduates to work in child

protection. Absolutely vital front line work. Why on earth would you make it

more expensive to get a qualification where there are jobs waiting for you in the

community that desperately need to be done. He should go back to the drawing

board and start from scratch. The main problem here is the government is

trying to cut funding to universities, at the same time as universities have lost

billions of dollars of revenue from international students. And this is the result.

On average students will pay more and there will be fewer places at university

because of these changes.



STEFANOVIC: Just switching to aged-care Tanya. I just want to get your

reaction to it. I mean there's been new headlines every day out of Victoria at

the moment, but this Royal Commission is serving up a few more. It's spending

most of its focus on the issues that Newmarch House a few months ago now.

Those problems have extended as we know to Victoria. Now, there's reports

today that some elderly patients who had been positive for COVID-19 were

turned away from hospitals, they were given sedatives. So, what's your reaction

to the goings on there?



PLIBERSEK: I think it's heartbreaking. You look at nursing homes or aged care

more generally across the board and I think this is obviously one of the area's

that's been hardest hit and seeing what we saw in New South Wales, the

Federal Government really ought to have had a plan for aged care across

Australia. This was a very predictable area of concern. My mum's 88. My

mother-in-law's the same age. She's in a nursing home. My husband and I are

beside ourselves worried about our parents, like all Australians are who've got

elderly parents, particularly if they're in a nursing home. It's very clear that the

Commonwealth Government has responsibility here and it's unbelievable that

the planning wasn't done for, you know coming out of New South Wales, for the

whole of the rest of the country. The evidence that there was no plan is

extraordinary. And what I would say is, you know, Daniel Andrews is getting up

every day doing hour-long press conferences, prepared to answer every

question, even the very uncomfortable ones and in contrast, we've got a Prime

Minister who doesn't want to talk about the Commonwealth government

responsibility for aged care, doesn't want to talk about the Ruby Princess,

doesn't want to answer questions, wants to cancel Parliament so that we can't

interrogate these issues. It's very disappointing and it doesn't give people

confidence.



STEFANOVIC: Well, now there's a stoush between him and the feds though

over the ADF. I mean, do you have a view on that? I mean, he says the ADF

wasn't offered. The Federal government says it was. Do you have an answer

there? I mean, it seems as though there was help though.



PLIBERSEK: Yeah. Well, my view is the last thing people want is governments

pointing the finger at each other. They just want to be confident that if they

need help, the help will be available. And I suppose the only difference I see is

Daniel Andrews is prepared to stand there for an hour a day taking every

question from every journalist. And we've got a Federal government and a

Prime Minister who doesn't want to take any responsibility even for areas that

are very clearly the responsibility of the Commonwealth government, and that

in itself is very worrying.



STEFANOVIC: Yeah. Okay. Well, he is doing that though. There's no doubt

about that. Tanya Plibersek, good to get your thoughts this morning. Thanks so

much for joining us.





PLIBERSEK: Thanks Pete.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN  0427 464 350



