1









The Hon Alan Tudge MP

Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure

Acting Minister for Immigration, Citizenship,

Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs



The Hon Darren Chester MP

Member for Gippsland

Minister for Defence Personnel

Minister for Veterans’ Affairs





Transcript

Doorstop, Sarsfield Victoria

17 February 2020



Subjects: Working holiday makers supporting bushfire-affected areas; coronavirus  protections; National Party leadership

DARREN CHESTER: Well, it's great to be here at the property of Elaine Schaeche, just at  Sarsfield about ten minutes out of Bairnsdale. I welcome my great mate and ministerial  colleague, Alan Tudge. Thanks Tudgey for coming here today as well. And Kevin Butler from  BlazeAid. It's a very important announcement in terms of how we're going to continue to  support my community, the community of Gippsland, as it recovers from the bushfires.

People like Elaine have had a lot of losses over these last six weeks. Elaine lost her own  family home which she'd had for more than 40 years, but also all her fencing. What we're  announcing today is a way for more of the working holiday visa people who are in our  community already, how they can actually assist with the bushfire recovery.

It's a huge job ahead of us right across Gippsland, right throughout regional Australia, to  help our communities recover. I thank you, Alan, for taking the time to come down here  today. I want to thank you for the work you're doing behind the scenes to get support for  my community as the rebuild is under way. So, with those few words, Alan, I'll leave it to  you for the announcement.

2



ALAN TUDGE: Thanks so much Darren, and thanks for joining us as well Kevin, and all the  great work which you do with BlazeAid. We need all hands on deck with this recovery effort,  and that includes people who are out here on backpacker visas. To that end we're making it  easier for backpackers to be able to make a contribution to the bushfire effort. We're doing  three things to that end.

One, we're enabling a backpacker to work for 12 months with a single employer, rather than  the normal six months. Now typically, we only ask people to work for one employer for six  months so that they can move around and in terms of other locations. Now they'll be able  to work for 12 months in one location. That means, for example, if you're a farmer out here,  you've had a backpacker working with you for the last five and a half months, and you're  worried you're just about to lose that person - that person will be able to stay on for a  further six months during the recovery effort.

Second change we're making is we are including building work as part of the definition of  specified work which a backpacker is able to do as part of their visa. Now typically, that  wasn't part of the conditions, now it will be, and again, that means that we'll have more  backpackers being able to do the fence building, the building of the houses, other  construction work which is so desperately needed in the bushfire areas.

And the third thing, though, which is directly related to BlazeAid and other volunteer  organisations, is that we are changing the rules so that a person can do their three months  of voluntary work rather than paid work, and yet still qualify for a second year visa. Now,  typically we ask people to do three months of paid work in a regional area if they want to  get a second year visa, a working holiday maker visa. We're now changing that to saying that  you can do voluntary work for three months and you'll still be eligible for that second year  visa. The work has to be in the bushfire affected areas, it has to be with a registered  organisation such as BlazeAid. But what that will mean is that we'll be able to access - and  hundreds of backpackers who want to come out here and make a contribution, help out for  a few months, just like a couple of backpackers are doing here, and yet still that will qualify  them for a second year working holiday visa here in Australia.

So, these are three very practical changes which we are making in order to facilitate more  people helping out with the bushfire recovery efforts. There is so much work to do. We  need all hands on deck, and that includes the international backpackers who we know want  to make their contribution as well.

KEVIN BUTLER:  Well, the new legislation is going to be an enormous boon for BlazeAid.  Historically, BlazeAid is for 60 to 65 years of age. They work on fence lines right throughout  the fire-ravaged areas. Their knees and ankles may not be the best. When these new people  - the young backpackers - come along, they uplift the spirits, the strength, and the lives of  people who've lost so much from the fires. We're able to build great relationships and  camaraderie with them. We're going to get that fencing done a lot quicker. I think of all

3



things that have happened in BlazeAid in the last several years; this measure brought in by  the Federal Government is going to be the - I guess, the muscles which is going to help us  rebuild far quicker than what we would have ordinarily done.

There's been quite a massive interest internationally with the bushfires. A lot of young  people have wanted to come out and help. They can come out now. It's all going to be  accredited to their 88 days. We've got BlazeAid bases from Kangaroo Island to the  Queensland border, approaching 40 to 45. And the communities are going to be so much  better off. We're going to get the work done far quicker. BlazeAid is just really, really  appreciative of the work of the Federal Government in getting this across the line. Can't  thank them enough.

JOURNALIST:  Minister, is this likely to be a sort of standing provision - standing rules for any  disaster in Australia now?

ALAN TUDGE: Every disaster is considered case by case. Certainly, the extending from six  months to 12 months had been used before, but the other two measures hadn't. But we  have to assess each one as it comes, and what the needs are.

JOURNALIST:  And so you talk about building work, does this specifically have to be for the  backpackers in a bushfire-affected region?

ALAN TUDGE: Yeah, that's right.

JOURNALIST:  And have you got a map or a sort of [indistinct]?

ALAN TUDGE: It's the bushfire-declared areas, including the LGAs, which have been  bushfire-declared areas.

JOURNALIST:  And how many people are you anticipating will take this up?

ALAN TUDGE: It's very difficult to know, to be honest, what the answer to that question is.  There's probably about a third of all working holiday makers do stay on for the extra year.  And to do so, under the previous rules, you had to do three months of work in a regional  area. Now, as I've said, you can do three months of voluntary work with an organisation like  BlazeAid and still be eligible for that second year working holiday visa. So we hope it'll be in  the hundreds of people who will want to come out and make a contribution, and therefore,  they'll be eligible to stay on for a second year.

DARREN CHESTER:  I might just add to that Alan. Thanks, Richard. From the Master Builders  Association, which is already undertaking skill mapping, we know we're going to have a  shortage of skills in places like Mallacoota, and Mallacoota has got 100 homes that have  been destroyed. In an average year in Mallacoota, we might have built 5 or 10 homes. It's  going to require a huge effort to support the local builders but also other tradies who will  come to town to help locals rebuild their permanent homes in those places. So, we certainly

4



welcome the capacity to get more skilled workers in our areas under the backpacker  program as well.

JOURNALIST:  How long will this program last? Is it in effect from today, or does it need  legislation [indistinct]?

ALAN TUDGE: So, there's three measures here. One of the effects - the measure from six  months to 12 months is just a ministerial decision, which I have made effective of today. The  other two measures will require an instrument to be tabled but that can be done in the next  few days.

JOURNALIST:  Just with a different hat on, if I could ask -

ALAN TUDGE: Any other questions on this?

JOURNALIST: In terms of the backpacker visas, I mean, there's already been concerns in the  past about working conditions. Are there going to be extra protections put in place, I guess,  this time round when you're looking at kind of different industries getting involved?

JOURNALIST: The normal protections are in place under the Fair Work Act and the Fair  Work Ombudsman. Everybody, if they're employing an Australian or a foreigner, has to  abide by Australian law and there are serious consequences if they don't.

JOURNALIST: But in the past, we've seen that that's been not the case and backpackers, in  particular, have been taken advantage of. So what are you doing, I guess, now?

ALAN TUDGE: Well, again, I mean, we've boosted the resources for the Fair Work  Ombudsman, and they have to do the right thing, and anyone who's aware of people not  doing the right thing should call Fair Work Australia.

JOURNALIST:  Just with your immigration hat on, if I could. What checks and balances are in  place for Chinese workers coming in by ports, not just the planes, in terms of the  coronavirus?

ALAN TUDGE: So, like on a cargo ship or something like that? So, typically, if a cargo ship  arrives, you might have some foreign nationals on it. They'd be on a transit visa. Now, since  the new measures have been put in place, we're cancelling those transit visas for Chinese  nationals, and we're asking them to stay on the ship while the boat is docked at an  Australian port. Now that occurred over the weekend. It did so successfully, and that will be  in place until the ban is lifted.

JOURNALIST: A New South Wales firefighter has claimed he's been sacked by the RFS for  speaking out against the Prime Minister. Is this concerning for free speech?

ALAN TUDGE: That's the first that I've heard of it and there's rules in relation to unfair  dismissal. If he feels as if he's been unfairly dismissed, then he has avenues available to him.

5



JOURNALIST: And Darren, are you confident that Michael McCormack will be your leader in  the next election?

DARREN CHESTER: I've got every expectation that Michael McCormack will lead us to the  next election and beyond the next election. Michael has been re-elected leader of our party  room three times in two years. The last election, the National Party held every one of its  Lower House seats and did a great job under Michael's leadership. He continues to have the  overwhelming support of the party room. He certainly has my personal support. I think he's  doing a terrific job in very difficult circumstances, in the fires, the droughts that we've  experienced in recent times. There's a lot of pressure on regional Australians, and the more  the National Party focuses on the people that send us to Canberra, the better we'll go, and I  think that's the message to my colleagues.

JOURNALIST:  Your message is to stop stirring trouble?

DARREN CHESTER:  My message to my colleagues is remember why you were sent to  Canberra in the first place. You were sent to Canberra to fight for your community, not fight  amongst yourselves. Michael McCormack is doing a great job. He's had the support of the  party room now three times in two years. The issues of the last couple of weeks are done  and dusted. Move on, focus on issues that matter to regional Australians.

JOURNALIST:  And do either of you two have time to get out and help BlazeAid build some  fences?

DARREN CHESTER: Well, I think it's in the interest of every farmer in Gippsland if I don't  touch their fences if they want to maintain their stock and keep them in good shape off the  roads, they'll keep me away from the fences. I'll perhaps support them by buying them a  beer at the pub afterwards.

ALAN TUDGE: Alright. Thank you.

[ENDS]



