JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES

MEMBER FOR HUNTER





WHY I WANT LABOR TO HELP THE PM FIX THE ENERGY MESS



COVID-19 and our first recession in thirty years demand a new approach from our political class.

A series of Government announcements on gas, electricity generation and low emissions-technologies this week were an admission of six years of inaction and failure.  Scott Morrison is now  scrambling to fix the consequences of that inaction and Labor has to find a way of giving him the  space to do so.

One of the unpalatable realities of Labor’s 2019 election loss is our inability to call the shots. Now,  our unemployment rate gives us one million reasons to be open-minded and flexible in our  responses to Scott Morrison’s attempts to address his Government’s failings.

More gas into the market and new gas-fired generation will put downward pressure on energy  prices, create jobs, and stabilise our electricity system.  More firming power will allow more  renewable electricity into the grid. That’s a good thing.  In repairing his wrongs, Scott Morrison will  do things differently than we would, but Labor needs to be to mindful not to let the perfect get in the  way of the possible.

The Clean Energy Finance Corporation (CEFC) and the Australian Renewable Energy Authority  (ARENA) are proud Labor achievements and despite the Government’s best efforts, growth in our  renewables sector has been impressive.  It’s now for Scott Morrison to demonstrate that with more  money, he can expand tasks of the CEFC and ARENA without distracting them from their focus, the  renewable energy sector.

A little more than six years ago, the Abbott Government taught us what no to do. By repealing the  Gillard Government’s sophisticated and legislated carbon-pricing mechanism, he guaranteed the  “carbon wars” would remain a feature of the Australian political landscape for at least another  decade.  We are all now paying a price.

If Gillard’s architecture had remained in place, today’s energy prices would likely be lower,  manufacturing job numbers would be higher, carbon pollution would be lower, the electricity grid  more reliable, and like the GST, people would barely know it was there.

Investors would be making good returns from a more modern and predictable energy system,  resources companies would still be exporting their coal, gas and iron ore, and both industrial and  household consumers would be looking favourably upon Julia Gillard’s legacy. Further, Australia  would now be holding its head high on the international stage, using its carbon reduction  achievements to argue, with credibility, that our under-performing friends around the world should  follow our example.



If Tony Abbot had not abolished Labor’s $1.7 billion carbon capture and storage fund, that  technology would now be more advanced.  If Malcolm Turnbull and Scott Morrison had not wasted  so much time and energy on the politics of the Liddell power station, our progress on hydrogen might  also be better.

Since 2014, Coalition Prime Ministers have been telling us the policy architecture it has in place will  be sufficient to keep energy prices down, reduce carbon output, and to keep our electricity grid  stable and reliable.  But despite that, they have constantly changed direction. They proposed a NEG,  a CET and an EIS, but delivered none of them

They promised “direct action” through the ERF would bring carbon pollution down.  It hasn’t.  They  told us farmers would be able to participate in the carbon market.  Not true.

The Prime Minister’s hand-picked adviser Andrew Liveris told the National Press Club on  Wednesday he stands with all those who have taken the pledge on zero-net emissions.  This should  be Scott Morrison’s next step, just before finally releasing a coherent energy policy. Let’s get on with  it.  Now more than ever, the nation needs effective action from its politicians.

This article was published in The Sydney Morning Herald on Thursday, 18 September 2020

MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641

