

JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC THE BUSINESS

WEDNESDAY, 2 DECEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: National Accounts; Recession and recovery; Labour market; JobSeeker.



ELYSSE MORGAN, HOST: Jim Chalmers, these growth figures are pretty good. As the

Treasurer says the recovery looks to be gaining momentum. Labor's been calling for the

extension of a whole bunch of the supports that have been pushed into households and

businesses. Isn't this a sign that we no longer need those programs, and tapering may be

appropriate?



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: The quarterly GDP number for September was

welcome, but not surprising. The point that we've been making is that that number doesn't tell

the full story about the condition of the economy. What looks like a recovery on paper will still

feel like a recession for a lot of Australians. The labour market is expected to still be pretty

weak for quite some time yet and that's a point that the Reserve Bank Governor was making

as recently as today. He's also been making the point, as did the OECD overnight, that we

shouldn't be in a rush to pull back some of this economic support out of the economy which

runs the risk of cruelling the recovery. That's the point that Labor has been making for some

time.



MORGAN: Which supports do you think are critical to continue with? We have JobSeeker

pushed out at a low rate right until March; we've got JobKeeper also until late March at a lower

rate. Do you think that they should still be extended beyond March?



CHALMERS: The point we have been making, and I think you and I have probably talked

about this before as well, is that we understand that when it comes to JobKeeper for example,

there will be a point where that is tapered away and out of the economy when the labour

market is ready for that. The Government has been in a rush to pull some of that support out.

We weren't supportive of the cuts that they made in October. We are worried that they're

declaring victory over this recession too soon and that will have consequences.



MORGAN: What do you think will be the signs that it is okay to start tapering JobKeeper in

particular?



CHALMERS: I don't think there's one indicator but certainly the issues that we're most

cognisant of and most concerned about, and the Reserve Bank's on the same page by the

looks of it, are all the labour market indicators. We've got a million unemployed,

unemployment’s been rising, and 1.4 million Australians are underemployed. We've got an

issue with wages which the Governor of the Reserve Bank said today will be a feature of the

economy for some time. I think those are the issues that we need to zero in on.



MORGAN: You're going to be pushing for JobKeeper to be extended as it is now beyond

March, even though we are seeing the recovery gain momentum? Even if we still do have

pockets of pain in the economy?



CHALMERS: Our consistent position all along Elysse is that you want to make sure that

JobKeeper in particular, but some of this other support as well, is really responsive to what's

actually going on in the economy. That's why we were critical about the snap back assumption

which proved to be horribly wrong. It's why we've being critical about some of these moves that

the Government's made. You want it to be reacting to what's happening in the labour market.

You want some flexibility -



MORGAN: But don't you think it should be more nuanced than it is currently, rather than how

it's doled out at the moment? We also saw in the data this week that year on year gross

company profits, are up by 19 per over that same period? Wages are up by 0.4 per cent.

Doesn't that show that this needs to be more nuanced?



CHALMERS: I don't think it necessarily shows that, but it's an important point that you make

that in today's numbers we had profit share going up and wages share of income going down.

That's clearly an issue that was a problem even before COVID-19, but we don't want this

pandemic to be a reason why that situation gets worse. We've got a substantial issue with

wages in this country. Compensation per employee today was another weak number, but

wages have been weak for some time now. That's one of the reasons why consumption has

been weak for some time, despite a bit of a recovery today. It's a reason why so many of the

other problems that we had in the economy even before 2020 have been more or less

neglected because we've had this historically stagnant wages growth.



MORGAN: You've argued that the base rate of JobSeeker is too low, but you haven't

nominated a permanent figure for that. What's your view now? You’ve just spent this interview

arguing that we've still got a very rocky road ahead. A lot of people will still need support. How

much support?



CHALMERS: We take the view that a lot of your guests have had over the last 12 or 18

months or so that it shouldn't go back to $40 a day. You're right that we haven't nominated a

new figure and you're right that we said it should be responsive, at least in the near term, to

economic conditions. The time has come for the Government to give people some certainty

about the permanent rate.



MORGAN: How much should it be? Why won't anyone from Labor ever make any indication

as to what you think it should be? Why is it such a taboo?



CHALMERS: I wouldn't describe it that way. It's simply that we don't know what kind of budget

we'd inherit; we don't know what rate we’ll inherit will be. Between now and -



MORGAN: You didn't know what the budget was going to look like a couple of months ago and

you argued about whether or not people should be allowed to access their super. You didn't

know what the budget would look like and you argued about whether or not JobKeeper should

be extended at the same rate or pulled back or not. You just said that people who are looking

for jobs need certainty. Why not just put out a number, and actually make the Government

then respond to it?



CHALMERS: Because the examples you just used then Elysse are about temporary support in



the economy. We're talking about the permanent base rate and between now and the next

election there'll be at least one more mid-year update, maybe two. There'll be at least one

more budget. The Government themselves have said that somewhere in the first half of next

year they will clarify their position. I think it's responsible and reasonable that Labor

understands what rate and what kind of budget we will inherit before making a decision of that

magnitude which has an ongoing impact on the budget.



MORGAN: Jim Chalmers, thank you very much for your time.



CHALMERS: Thank you, Elysse.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











