



THE HON ANDREW GEE MP  Minister for Decentralisation and Regional Education   Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Investment   Federal Member for Calare



MEDIA RELEASE

4 September 2020



Young Australian poets follow in the footsteps of renowned bush poet  Dorothea Mackellar

Today Australia’s up and coming young poets were recognised at one of the nation’s oldest and  most iconic poetry competitions, the Dorothea Mackellar Poetry awards.

The awards, in honour of renowned country poet Dorothea Mackellar, offer young Australian’s a  unique and creative way to express themselves and make sense of the world around them.

The Minister for Regional Education, Andrew Gee said this year’s competition was fierce, with over  7,650 primary and secondary school students, from the city to country Australia, taking up the  literacy challenge.

“It’s been a difficult year for young Australian’s, with the bushfires, drought and now the COVID-19  pandemic disrupting many aspects of their everyday life,” Minister Gee said.

“In these challenging times, it has never been more important to stop, relax and unwind - and that  is exactly what poetry offers.

“Whether just like a young Dorothea Mackellar, you are stuck overseas homesick for country  Australia’s sweeping plains and ragged mountain ranges or in isolation in the inner city suburbs of  Melbourne - poetry can offer both refuge and enjoyment.

“It is crucial that we continue to support and inspire our next generation of writers through initiatives  like the Dorothea Mackellar Poetry Awards.

“That is why the Australian Government has today announced it will provide an additional $290,000  in funding to support the Dorothea Mackellar Memorial Society and Poetry Awards over the next  five years.

“This funding will help to keep Dorothea Mackellar’s poetry legacy alive and will provide young  Australians with an important voice through poetry for years to come.



“Congratulations to all of this year’s award winners and the runners up. Poetry forms a vital part of  Australia’s unique culture, and I encourage you to continue to pursue your passion for the pursuit  of literacy excellence.”

The winners of the 2020 Dorothea Mackellar Poetry awards are:

Category Name Age School

Lower Primary Nina Cordaro 8 All Hallows Catholic Primary School

Upper Primary Iris Jiang 11 Cherrybrook Public School

Learning Assistance  Primary  Curtis Giang 11 Redeemer Baptist School

David Maher Award Max Shearer 11 Rowena Public School

Junior Secondary Ivy Downes 13 Individual Entry

Senior Secondary Theo Harkin 16 Hobart College

Learning Assistance  Secondary  Lola Wang 13 Redeemer Baptist School



Media Contact: Gabi Phipps 0400 917 405, Gabrielle.Phipps@dfat.gov.au



