

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

BLACKTOWN

WEDNESDAY, 11 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Government’s economic measures for COVID-19; coronavirus; impact

of coronavirus on casual employees; AMA calls for establishment of a centre for

disease control; fever clinics; Government’s announcement of changes to bushfire

loans.



ED HUSIC, MEMBER FOR CHIFLEY: Welcome, everyone. I want to start by thanking the

Labor Leader, Anthony Albanese, the Deputy Leader, Richard Marles, and also my

Western Sydney colleagues, the Shadow Minister for Health, Chris Bowen, and also Dr

Mike Freelander, the Member for Macarthur for being here today at the Kildare Road

Medical Centre. I often remarked my colleagues that the amazing thing about this centre is

that I have never seen a centre work so hard to not have people visit it. And by that, I

mean they invest a lot, Peter Rushton and the team here, in preventative health education.

Trying to make sure that people’s quality of life is improved by taking the steps that ensure

they never have to see a doctor or avoid it as much as possible. When Anthony and I first

spoke about him visiting here, it was about talking in relation to the issue of doctor

shortages. Centres like this and many others in high-growth parts of Western Sydney find it

very hard to get doctors that they can be able to meet local health needs. A lot of this is

driven by decisions made by Government that make it hard for centres to get the GPs that

will be available to help communities like mine, like those that sit in Chris’ area, or in Mike

Freelander’s area, to make sure that there is that quality of health care. We now,

obviously, are very much focused on the response to coronavirus. Centres like this are

going above and beyond to provide additional support for local communities, in advance of

what anything the Government has announced, or thinking of announcing, to provide that

quality of care. They should be commended and supported. And I certainly, as a local

Parliamentarian, want to see centres like this supported actively, and that we are not

complacent, but we are on the front foot to ensure that communities like mine get the

healthcare, at a time like this, that is both timely and responsive to these emerging health

needs. And with that, I would like to invite Anthony, and again welcome him to our part of

Western Sydney. Thank you, Anthony.



ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Thanks very

much, Ed.  And it is always good to be in Blacktown and part of Western Sydney, this

thriving, expanding community here. And it's a part of today's visit, is a part of a Shadow

Ministry meeting where it will be taking place in the Hawkesbury and hosted by Susan

Templeman. We have, in particular, following our visit to Batemans Bay and our future visit

to Tumut, we want to visit electorates that have been particularly impacted by the bushfire

crisis. Today, however, on the way we're looking at another crisis, a health emergency that

we're seeing emerge from coronavirus. And it's been very good today to have a briefing

with this Medical Centre here in Blacktown that's providing services for the local community

and going out of its way to be part of the solution. However, the fact is, whilst we welcome

any initiative by the Federal Government, it is of some concern that they are saying that

today's announcements are demand-driven. What we need on this is to provide leadership,

not complacency. Leading doesn't mean following demand. And that's the concern here.

We've heard today that there's a real concern with the provision of personal protection

equipment, which is in short supply, including masks and other equipment to keep those

people providing these tests safe and to keep those people who enter the medical centre

here safe as well. We need to make sure that the messages which go out are clear. So

many people have fronted up to the GP who don't need testing. And others who do need

testing can't get through to a GP. We also have circumstances whereby you have to have

visited particular countries. The fact is that I think this global epidemic is far beyond looking

at specific countries just being impacted. Quite clearly, when you have a country like Italy,

which effectively has been shut down, the number of people who've flown through that

nation and others means that this has spread much more widely. And the fact is also that

for many nations who don't have a health system that is as sophisticated as ours, then it's

clear that there are hidden figures out there from many nations in our region. And we need

to make sure that everything the Government does, it tries to get ahead of this. Labor has

been practical in the number of suggestions that we've put forward. We'll continue to do

that and to provide every support for any funding that's necessary to deal with this.

Because one of the things that we know is that the cost of inaction will be far greater than

the cost of action. We have to deal with issues like workforce issues, both for those people

directly impacted in the health sector, aged care workers, workers in facilities such as this,

but also the issue of casual workers and the IR implications to someone who misses out

on an income simply not survive from day to day. It's quite clear that there hasn't been

clear information out there, which is why you've seen panic buying of toilet paper and a

whole range of responses from people who are concerned, but who aren't quite sure what

the implications of this virus are. I'll ask Chris Bowen, our Shadow Health Minister who's

been leading Labor's position on this and has been keeping on top of all of these issues to

make a few comments as well.



CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks very much, Albo. The

package announced today by the Government is good, but not good enough. Not good

enough in our view, given the size of the challenge facing the Australian people. As

Anthony said, we give them bipartisan support for every action taken. But that does not

mean we won't, as a responsible Opposition, call for more. So, just in a few elements of

today's package, it's good that the telehealth rebate has been introduced. But Labor had

called for a much broader telehealth rebate. We want people being able to call their doctor

and for that to be covered under Medicare bulk-billing. What the Government's announced

today is only in relation to elderly Australians and some subsets of vulnerable people. Now,

it seems to us that it would make much more sense to have that much more broadly

available. Also, the Government must urgently clarify whether this covers telephone

consultations or not. The Prime Minister on Twitter this morning said that it did. That's not

evident in the announcement in the detailed documents. That refers to Skype and video

conferencing. And with all due respect, not everybody has Skype and video conferencing

available to them, particularly as this bulk-billing rebate has been at this stage made

available primarily only to elderly Australian. So, we think there's a much better way. We've

been calling for this consistently. We said last weekend, it was urgent in the letter that

Anthony and I sent. And I said in my media comments on Sunday, it was now urgent. It's

now being done today. But it's not enough. Also, we welcome the investment in pathology.

There's long waiting times for pathology reports. We think there's a case for much more

resources into pathology. We welcome some of the resources in there today. We'll

obviously interrogate the detail. One of the elements which is not clear in the package is in-home testing. This is something that our friend and colleague, Mike Freelander, has been

rising with us. You can get in-home testing if you live in Western Australia. You can get

drive-through testing if you live in South Australia. But not in other states. It shouldn't

depend on what state you live in, as to whether you have to go to see a doctor to get

tested or you can have it done in your home. There needs to be national leadership. There

needs to be a national approach which the Federal Government must coordinate. So

again, we express our support for the Chief Medical Officer and the steps being put in

place. But we will call for more. This is a very significant issue going forward. And the final

point I'll just end on in relation to where we are here in Blacktown, we've had a very good

briefing from the doctors here and proprietors here about doctor shortages. We have

separately to this, called for the Government to reconsider the impact on regional and

outer metropolitan Australia of their changes, whether it be foreign doctors in district of

workforce shortage, distribution priority areas, whether it be bulk-billing incentives, we've

raised it in Parliament. Everyone wants to say more doctors working in remote Australia.

But areas like this and regional Queensland where I'll be next week are suffering doctor

shortages as well. And the changes are making it worse, not better for them. So, we

previously call for a rethink. We express and renew that call today in the light of this rapidly

changing challenge, the Government must rethink its changes to make it harder for

practices like this one in outer metro Sydney, and Melbourne, and Brisbane, and also

regional areas to attract and maintain doctors.



ALBANESE: Thanks. Happy to take any questions.



JOURNALIST: Mr Albanese, Christian Porter said that casuals are already given a loading

and so has not in fact called for the Government to support them if they have to self-isolate. Is that reasonable?



ALBANESE: No, it's not. The fact is, if you're a casual employee, living from day to day,

and many casual employees, we've seen a significant increase in casualisation of the

workforce. These are people who want full-time employment. For many of them we know if

you add up those people who are unemployed and those people who are underemployed,

the figure is 2 million people. Now, if you work three days a week, and you essentially have

no savings, you spend all of your dollars, your weekly or fortnightly pay packet on food,

shelter, clothing, and all of a sudden that disappears, because you don't have any sick

leave entitlements. Then how do you buy food? How do you pay your rent? How do you

ensure that you can go on? So, you might be tempted to turn up at work even though you

probably should be self-isolating, because you have to survive. And the Government has

to do better than to just dismiss this as business-as-usual. This is another example of the

Government's complacency and looking at things not as they are but through rose-tinted

glasses. The fact is that casualisation of the workforce is an issue. It's one that we should

be addressing more broadly. But in particular, the current circumstances require a

response from the Industrial Relations Minister that is far more sympathetic. Because the

consequences of it for individuals, and indeed for all of us, have an interest in people being

looked after at this time.



JOURNALIST: Should people who aren't sick but who are told to self-isolate be paid?



ALBANESE: Well, obviously people who are told to self-isolate, they're not told to self-isolate for no reason. This isn't a random call-out there. This is a call in the interest of

public health. Public. There is an interest for the general public in this happening. And the

Government needs to respond in an appropriate way. One that is sympathetic and one

which is consistent with putting public health interests as the absolute priority.



JOURNALIST: Is this something for the Government to address? Or is it a hole in Fair

Work Act?



ALBANESE: Well, look, the Government needs to provide leadership. The Government's

responsible for legislation which governs workplaces. And here we have circumstances

which are not perhaps unique, but which are certainly very serious, and which require a

response. And the Government needs to do better than to say, 'She'll be right, nothing to

see here'. My concern about this Government is that whether it's the economy and the

weakness that we saw at the end of last year, why we were calling for increased measures

as far back as June, whether it be the bushfire crisis, or whether it be this health

emergency. What we see from the Government is complacency. We see it following rather

than leading. And we see it playing catch-up. What the Government needs to do on all of

these issues is to get ahead of the response. And the Government should be doing that.

And I would hope that Christian Porter really thinks about his comments and the

implications of them.



JOURNALIST: The AMA has called for the establishment of the Centre for Disease

Control, the National Centre. Would that be something that might clear up some of the

confusion around the messages about how to protect yourself from coronavirus?



BOWEN: I think that's a proposal which should be considered and examined, not in the

heat of the moment today. I'm sure the AMA would say it's not something that will be

introduced overnight. But when we are considering how well we did through this challenge,

the establishment of a Centre for Disease Control is one of the options which should be

examined by the Government. And I think the Deputy Chair of the House of

Representatives Health Committee Dr Freelander might be instigating a committee inquiry

into exactly that issue of pandemic preparedness and whether a CDC is the right model

going forward



DR MIKE FREELANDER, MEMBER FOR MACARTHUR: Thanks very much. Look, that's

something that we have strongly considered. We think at the present time, it's a bit early to

be exploring. But it's certainly something that I am very much in favour of. Can I just say,

this is a crisis. I've worked in public hospital system for over 40 years. And this is the

greatest public health crisis that I've seen in my working life. And that includes the HIV

response. This is a crisis that requires a national response. My personal view is that we

should be led by a group of experts, and there are a number of fantastic experts in

Australia, Peter Doherty is one of many people that could lead this. And that's what we

should have. This requires a national response. It requires a response from every single

one of us. There is very little surge capacity left in our public hospital system. We struggle

every winter. And we're heading into winter with influenza season. We struggle. We are

going to struggle now because of this coronavirus crisis. We will get through it if we all

work together. If we get mixed messages, if people panic, if there's inappropriate

responses, we will fail. And that will be at the cost of a number of people's lives. So, we

have to do this the right way with a national response. The politics are meaningless. They

are absolutely meaningless. I really mean that. We are facing a crisis that we all have to

deal with. And if we don't deal with it in the right way, people are going to pay with their

lives. We will get through it because I have huge confidence in our medical workforce, not

just including our doctors, there are nursing staff, and technicians, ambulance officers. We

all need to work together. And if we get the policy settings right, we will get through this. At

the moment, we know coronavirus is here. We have to really slow down the spread, so our

systems can cope. And there needs to be national policies about all these things. And it

needs to be led by the experts. I think it's crazy to have big sporting events or big concerts

where thousands of people get together. That is going to increase the risk of spread. It is

all about risk management. We can get there. We have seen the wonderful practice here

today, they're really going out of their ways, using all their resources to have a correct

response. And we need to be relying on our primary care people to do the right thing and

we will get through it if that happens. Thank you.



JOURNALIST: The Government's announced these 100 fever clinics, but they say they

won't all be rolled out until May. Is this concerning?



BOWEN: We are very concerned about that. The first Australian diagnosis of COVID-19

was the 29th of January. I think the Australian people and the Opposition have been very

patient and supportive of the Government. But to be announcing the fever clinics today,

which they flagged some weeks ago. And now saying it might be up to six weeks before

some open, I don't think that's good enough. Now, we don't underestimate the complexity

of recruiting the medical staff, getting the facilities up and running. But this hasn't

happened yesterday or the day before. We've been dealing with this since January. It's

now March. And we would like to see those fever clinics up and running more quickly than

the six-week time frame that's being given. And of course, if they do manage that, it will

have a big tick from us. But it's not good enough to wait another six weeks.



JOURNALIST: Just one question about bushfires. The Government's announced changes

to bushfire loans and a new grant of $10,000. Is that going to make a difference to the

people who've been affected?



ALBANESE: Well, I hope it's better than what they've done up to this point. As of the

Senate Estimates just a week ago, there had been five loans throughout the entire nation.

The fact is that the Government announced $2 billion of support for the bushfire crisis. We

found out that was only a notional amount, there's no actual budget allocation. And $500

million of that notional amount is allocated in the current financial year, 10 per cent of that

notional amount has actually been spent up to this point in time. Common-sense tells you

that bushfire communities need support right now, and they're not getting it. And so, it is

another thing to talk about loans as well. What they need is cash injections in the form of

some grant money, as well, for businesses that have lost some of them up to 80 and 90

per cent of their annual income where they rely upon it in December or January. A loan



isn't going to assist that process because that will just increase the debt of those

businesses. The fact is that the Government's response when it comes to the recovery of

the bushfire crisis, has been complacent, has been sitting back and thinking that it'll all be

okay. And what communities tell me, that I've visited, is that they haven't seen any money

on the ground. And next week, I'll be visiting Bega on the south coast of New South Wales

with Mike Kelly, our local Member and the local Mayor, Kristy McBain. And I will be talking

with businesses on the ground there about what their needs are. Because they're just

telling us that the support has been not enough and has been too slow. Thanks.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053



