UNOFFICIAL





The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT

INTERVIEW WITH MICHAEL USHER, CHANNEL 7  SUNDAY 22 MARCH 2020



EO&E…

MICHAEL USHER: Prime Minister, there's a great many people across our country who are fearful, a bit  scared, uncertain tonight, and the states seem to be going their own way this afternoon. Lockdowns, some  school closures or early holidays. Do you think it's now inevitable that we'll move as a nation toward a  lockdown of all cities, a national lockdown to stop the spread of COVID-19?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I certainly understand the anxiety of all Australians about the coronavirus. they've  seen what's happening overseas and they've seen the escalation, the cases here in Australia, particularly  in New South Wales. And so I understand that concern. I know Australians know that in the majority of  cases, about 8 out of 10, actually a little better in Australia, and most Australians who would contract the  virus would experience a mild illness. But the issue is ensuring that we contain as best as we can and  control the spread because that will save lives of the more vulnerable members of our community. Now,  we've always said, as a National Cabinet, that we will seek to get standardised and consistent responses.  But I've also said that states will need to go beyond that to deal with the specific situations in their state.  So that was completely envisaged. I mean, last week we'd actually acknowledged that as a group and we'd  tasked the medical expert panel to provide advice about how states could take additional actions,  particularly in areas of where there was outbreaks of the virus.

USHER: There is confusion out there, though. I mean, people are saying beaches close, but not schools  broadly. I have to admit, I think I'm even unsure tonight and I'd like to think I'm pretty informed in the  past few days. Should we be sending our children to school in the morning, Prime Minister?

PRIME MINISTER: The medical advice, my kids will be going to school in the morning and that's important  and that school will be open, as I understand. And we'll be following the medical advice, as we always  have, and that if our children are not well, then they shouldn't attend school. As long as the schools are  open, that is the case. But importantly, as I said, for those health workers and others, a complete closure  of schools across the country would take out 30 per cent of our health workforce. Now, you can imagine  what the impact would be on running our intensive care units and our emergency departments if we were  to get 30 per cent of those workers taken out of there or in aged care facilities. So these are the very  difficult decisions that have to be taken when you're looking at these issues individually.



USHER: The 6 month window that you talk about often, can I talk to you about that or the 6 month period?  This is looking forward and what we have to get our head around. Is that based on medical advice or is  that your judgement call about what we just have to prepare for?

PRIME MINISTER: No, it's based on the expert modelling that we've had done through our medical experts  to give us an idea about potential spread and duration of viruses under various scenarios, and I've said it's  at least that. It could be a lot longer than that. And that's why I know when people start talking about  locking things down, you can't just lock things down for two weeks and four weeks and open it again and  think it's all going to be Okay. That would be a foolish decision, because when you open it up again, the  virus just takes off. So if you shut things down, you have to understand that if you do that, that you may  well be doing that for at least the next six months. And that has to be sustainable. That's why I say the  economic impacts of this and the broader health impacts, it's going to break our hearts. I have no doubt.  But it must not break our spirit or our resolve to continue to deal with this crisis in a sensible way, in a  compassionate way, helping each other to help us all through to the other side.

USHER: And a big chunk, you’ve got $66 billion today was about preserving jobs. Are you worried, though,  that the jobs might have gone already? A lot of layoffs already in the past week or so.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, there have been and there'll be many more. And that's why we've put in the,  we've doubled the job seeker payment. We've basically waived so many of the rules to access it. And that  means people also potentially going to, access to rental assistance and family tax benefit provision. This  will be important to help them. What we did today was about widening and deepening and strengthening  the safety net that is there for people. People will lose work and we know that's going to happen. We will  seek to minimise it as much as possible. But I'm going to be straight with Australians. This is going to be  the toughest economic situation we've likely seen since the Great Depression and also when it comes to  war time, one of the biggest challenges of keeping Australians together and focusing forward since the  Second World War. So people need to understand that we are in extraordinary times.

USHER: I want to talk to you about the hospitals briefly, Prime Minister. Health workers are telling us that  they're facing shortages of some of the essentials, the masks, the hand sanitizers. They're concerned  about access to respirators as well. What can we do to ensure that those essential services, those very  much needed products, are accessible?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, we’re securing additional supplies for those, including tests. I mean, for example,  on testing, we've done, I think about 127,000 tests. We have one of the highest rates of testing anywhere  in the world. And we also have the highest, we understand, rate of negative turn backs or comebacks on  those tests, some 99 per cent. So our testing is much higher than the United States or many other parts  of the world. But equally with what's called the PPE equipment, the masks and things like that, we're  ensuring that we've got domestic supplies that'll be able to be manufactured and we're repurposing our  manufacturing lines to do that. There's a lot of work being done between the private industry and the  government to deliver on that. On sanitizer, it's the same thing. Many, many companies are now changing  their production lines to provide sanitizer. And when it comes to the respirator machines equally, that's  something the Health Minister is working closely with the states and territories to ensure we get greater  access. But the key thing is this, though, if people social distance, that is keep a healthy distance away  from each other and don't do what we saw down at Bondi Beach, when people take these messages  seriously about self-isolation, what you're doing when you do that is you're saving lives, you're saving

people's livelihoods. And that's why it's so important. That is our biggest weapon against this virus, is  every single Australian doing the right thing.

USHER: Let me talk to you about the Australian spirit. We saw the best of it during the bushfires. There's  no doubt about that. We seem to have taken a complete left turn and gone to some places that have been  pretty ugly. What do you... what's your take on that?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, there's a lot of great stories too, Michael. I know there's a lot of focus on the  despicable behaviour we saw in supermarkets and the cavalier sort of disregard of public health that we  saw at Bondi Beach, which I suspect people did naively, but innocently, because they weren't waking up  to the very real situation we're in. But there are many more wonderful stories about Australians helping  each other, particularly elderly Australians who are more at risk and need help getting access to supplies.  And we're seeing that in our community and we're going to see more and more of it. People also taking  their responsibilities just to socially isolate for 14 days if they're in that situation. People are doing that  more and more. And I want to thank them for doing that and need to do more of it, because that, again,  that is the weapon that we have to fight this virus and we're all enlisted in that task. So, yes, there have  been concerning behaviours and those things need to stop. But equally, we're also seeing the very spirit  you're talking about, and that's what I'm relying on to ensure that we can get everybody on this bridge to  the other side of the recovery.

USHER: Your reaction to the AFL shutting down its season, that's been announced. No decision for the  NRL yet?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, these are going to be things that are going to occur there. This is unprecedented.  The fact that the AFL, as you've just told me, is not proceeding. I've been in meetings fairly back to back  today. That doesn't surprise me, because now in this new world in which we're dealing with the  coronavirus, I must say, nothing is surprising me because we need to take the sort of decisions that we've  never even contemplated before. And the NRL, I'm sure, will weigh up their own decisions about what  they do, and they'll be seeking to follow the health advice as well. And I'm sure they will follow that health  advice because they know that is the most important thing.

USHER: Do you think we should be sending our team to the Olympics in Tokyo?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, again, the IOC will make the decision, but well, the simple answer to that is, is we  have a complete travel ban to the rest of the world. So the Smart Traveller advice and the advice from the  Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, I think is pretty clear there.

USHER: And that would apply to our athletes going to the Olympics, yes?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, the health of all Australians is the most important thing. And there's nothing more  important than that.

USHER: Just one message, if you can, Prime Minister, what do you say to Australians who are really feeling  a bit rattled, uncertain, a bit scared right now?

PRIME MINISTER: These are anxious times, Australians are strong and we're going to find out just how  strong we are, and I know we're not going to be disappointed. If we rally together, as we always have as

a nation, we have the inspiration of those who've done it before us. We will get on this bridge to the other  side of recovery. We will bounce back stronger. But it's up to all of us to do the part that we have in  ensuring that Australia emerges from this stronger. And we support those most at need, most vulnerable,  and we take them with us. And I know Australians won't let us down. That's not who we are as a people.  We are people who overcome. That's what we've always done and that's what we're going to do.

USHER: Prime Minister, thank you for joining me.

PRIME MINISTER: Thank you very much.

[END]

Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

Press Office of the Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Prime Minister, Canberra



