

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING  MEMBER FOR SYDNEY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS WITH ALAN JONES  THURSDAY, 9 OCTOBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Federal Budget; older workers and women left behind; Government  failure on housing policy.

ALAN JONES, HOST: We're joined by Tanya Plibersek the former deputy Leader of the  Federal Opposition and now Shadow Education Minister; Amanda Stoker the Liberal  Senator from Queensland. Both women splendidly credentialed. Ladies, thank you for your  time. Could I just ask you about these eye-watering figures. When Kevin Rudd legislated in  2007 for a debt ceiling of $75 billion all hell broke loose on the other side. Then in  response to the global financial crisis, the debt ceiling went to $300 billion by 2013. The  Coalition took office and in 2014, the legislation was scrapped and replaced with an  administrative mechanism to revise the ceiling as needed. Now the ceiling is $1.1 trillion.  Can I come to you Amanda first, this is eye-watering stuff, isn't it?

AMANDA STOKER, SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND: Look it is a lot of money. We  shouldn't shirk that but at least the spending here is temporary and it's targeted. We've  learned the lessons of Labor's mistakes to the GFC where the spending they engaged in  for a crisis that was 45 times less bigger than what we currently face was baked in for 10  years and in processes like halls nobody wanted, pink batts processes that were making  people lose their lives, cash for clunkers, cheques to dead people and dogs. I mean we've  learned all the lessons of that period...

JONES: Amanda...

STOKER: And we are keeping all of the spending short-term, so that it's all about  economic recovery and jobs.

JONES: Okay now Amanda, can I just ask you this? Are you seriously suggesting that it  was a sensible thing to say to a casual employee who was on 250 bucks a week that that  employee would automatically get 750 bucks under the JobKeeper program? Come on.

STOKER: The JobKeeper program was in a sense ‘one size fits all’ so that it could be  rolled out really quickly because we knew that people were hurting-

JONES: Amanda, in England they said we'll pay you 75 per cent of your final average

salary. That person would have been getting 75 per cent of 200 bucks which would be,  work it out a hundred and forty dollars. Tanya, comment from you Tanya Plibersek.

STOKER: And the complexity of that meant they didn't get it for weeks.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Well  Alan as you know, the debt had doubled under the Liberals well before coronavirus hit  Australia's shores. And as for saying that this is temporary debt, a child born today will be  paying this debt off when they turn 60. The estimate is the debt will be paid off in 2080. So  this is not temporary debt. But Alan we do need to invest in creating jobs right now, you  and I have spoken every week about how worried we are about the fact that there's a  million people unemployed now, they'll be another 160,000 unemployed by Christmas. It's  how we spend the money.  We need to be building things that last. So tonight Anthony Albanese talked about  investing in rail rolling stock, in defence industries, in an electricity transmission grid. We  know that the grid is gold-plated, we want to bring down prices of electricity and we have to  do that by investing...

JONES: Just on this...

PLIBERSEK: And of course on child care as well, child care that makes it possible for  working women to go to work.

JONES: I think that's a new world. Look, so I ask again about unemployment. $5 billion is  available in the budget to employers, any business, if they take on an apprentice or trainee  or what the Government calls young jobless up to the age of 35. Now, I just may mention  that Albanese has picked this up tonight. There is a stack of legislation to about age  discrimination, Amanda is this age discrimination? There are many people unemployed  now who are saying, well hang on if I go for a job and I'm 40, they might say well, hang on  if I put a 32 year old half the wage will be paid. I'm out of the equation. Amanda?

STOKER: Alan nothing really could be further from the truth. The facts tell us that the  people who have overwhelmingly borne the brunt of unemployment in COVID are young  people.

JONES: That's true.

STOKER: This is a measure that's designed to correct that and get them back into the  workforce. We know that young people don't have as much experience. They don't have  as much wisdom yet. They don't have what they need to be attractive hiring propositions.  And so we're trying to re-balance the ledger to give them a chance.

JONES: Yeah, Amanda that is true but a 28 year old unemployed, to me anyway, is no  different from a 45 year old unemployed. You're wanting those people to have a job. And  so if there are two prospective employees going for one job, under this provision if the  employer takes on the 28 year old, the 42 year old, you'll have to pay full freight, for the 28  year old he'll get a 50 per cent subsidy. What do you make of that Tanya Plibersek?

PLIBERSEK: Well Alan it's true that young people have suffered a lot during this  recession. But so have women, particularly women over the age of 45. We know that they  have lost more hours of work and they've been right at the front lines of the jobs that have

been lost in industries, like hospitality and tourism. So we want to see older workers looked  after as well. And don't forget, those older workers are going to see their JobKeeper cut if  they go on to unemployment benefits. They're going to be back down to $40 a day. If  you're a mum with a few kids and you’re even 36 or 37 you’re just over that cap. You don't  get a job. You don't get JobKeeper, that's going to that's going to go, and you're back on  unemployment benefits of $40 a day. It's just unfair. It's just cruel, and a lot of these cuts  happen before Christmas.

JONES: It's a tough one to solve this too. Amanda, it's supposed to be jobs, jobs, jobs  what I have never understood, if an employer gives someone a job today they're taxed, it's  called payroll tax. How does that make sense? If it's about jobs, jobs, jobs. Now I know this  is a state issue, but surely something's got to be done by way of tax reform to stop that  anomaly, hasn't it?

STOKER: Look, I think Australians shouldn't forget that the introduction of the GST was  supposed to spell the end of Payroll Tax-

JONES: Yes. Yes. Yes

STOKER: - and the states have overwhelmingly reneged on that deal and they should be  held to account for that. In Queensland we've got an election soon, that's an opportunity to  do so. But this election is all about jobs. To take up the point that was just being discussed  between you and Tanya, while there have been in the budget bunch of measures that are  designed to help young people through the difficulty of getting from unemployment to a job  in this COVID crisis, we shouldn't forget that that is in a sense of rebalancing of the playing  field in circumstances where we already had a whole lot of programs in place that were  designed to help older people overcome, what is a real difficulty for them in getting from  unemployment to work. So there was already a lot of measures in place to help them but  this budget is all about making sure that we are equipping Australian businesses with  everything they need to be profitable, to be stainable not because of some you know, big  allegiance to corporate Australia, but because that's where regular Australian's get their  jobs.

JONES: Okay, I think that makes a lot of sense but can I take this point? This is the old  chestnut forgive me, can I trot it out again? Business. Now there are businesses out there  who build houses, now if we want people to get into housing and we want greater  opportunity, it's like buying bananas. If there are a few bananas the price of bananas goes  up. Now there's a shortage of supply in housing. There are stack of reputable people who  want to build housing. Housing is full of multipliers. Why shouldn't we be putting housing  and I'll ask you first Tanya, front and centre here, to on the one hand because of greater  supply help people get into housing at a cheaper price and on the other hand generate  jobs for skilled people and the multipliers down the track, whitegoods and all the rest of it.

PLIBERSEK: We absolutely should Alan and I'm really pleased that Anthony Albanese  tonight announced that we would support repairs on a 100,000 public housing homes, right  across Australia because the tradies could be in there tomorrow. They'd be at Bunnings  tomorrow and then be in the house by the afternoon fixing up the leaking roofs, the mould,  the old kitchens, the old bathrooms on those places that need upgrading but we should go  further. We should be building housing, building housing at the social housing end and also  affordable housing. I was a Housing Minister during the global financial crisis. We built  21,600 public housing homes. I started the national rental affordability scheme, that's

50,000 homes. But we also helped first home buyers into a home of their own. It is the  great Australian dream and it should be possible for someone on an ordinary income to  afford a home of their own. We now see that it's increasingly out of reach for too many  young Australian families. It's not fair and we need to change it.

JONES: Amanda just coming to you that's an awful bind for whoever's in the Federal  Government because of course, this is all a product of State Governments planning and  bureaucracy and that tied up in red tape. How does the Federal Government, with its  commitment to trying to build up housing supply, housing stocks, getting jobs. How does it  overcome State Governments bureaucratic blindfold towards all of this?

STOKER: Alan you're right that the states have to come to the party and are not doing  their not doing their bit, but it is also true to say that the Federal Government has done a  lot in this space. The first home deposit scheme has seen another commitment in the  budget. It was fully subscribed in its first round and I have no doubt this will be too. This will  be to the Homemakers scheme sees more opportunities and more take up a rise of 60 per  cent, 67 per cent I think in the approvals since it came into being.

JONES: Can I just make a point there-

STOKER: - Can I draw a distinction Alan, it's an important distinction I want to make here.  When the Coalition invest in housing it's all about empowering individuals to choose their  builder, their contractors, their tradesmen, there home. When Labor wants to do this they  want to take taxpayers money to build public housing that stays a public problem and that  encourages nobody to have a home of their own.

PLIBERSEK: Hang on a minute Alan, Amanda just said that public housing is a public  problem! In what way?

STOKER: Public housing is a public expense-

PLIBERSEK: I'm shocked.

STOKER: Public housing remains a responsibility of the public for the long-term.

JONES: Yeah Amanda, I'm not talking about that. I'm actually talking about giving the  opportunity for business - we're all talking about business here - to simply build more  houses. I could name you the Triguboffs and the Lang Walkers and the John Woods in  New South Wales alone who are ready to build thousands of houses, which would  increase the supply, cheapen the price to the buyer and provide tradesmen with jobs,  provide whitegoods businesses with opportunities to sell products, and the State  Governments will stand in the way of this happening. How do you solve that?

STOCKER: Alan, what they're tearing their hair out about is the land releases in State  Government responsibility and the charges that are inflicted by State Governments and  Local Governments for development, none of those are Federal responsibilities.

PLIBERSEK: When I was the Housing Minister we worked very closely with those  developers and we worked closely with Local Government and State Government. We saw  massive land releases and changes to local government planning, because we worked  with them.





JONES: I wish all that green and red tape could get out of the way, good to talk to you. I  know we've been of a truncated tonight because of the budget speech by Albo. We'll talk to  you next week though. Tanya won't be with us next week. Thank you for the courtesy of  letting me know, Amanda will see you next week.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350









