

CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC NEWS 24 AFTERNOON LIVE WITH PATRICIA KARVELAS

WEDNESDAY, 11 MARCH 2020



SUBJECT: Coronavirus



PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST:  Chris Bowen, welcome.



CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Afternoon PK, good to

be with you.



KARVELAS: The Government has extended the travel ban to include Italy.

Were they too slow to do that given how serious the outbreak there has been?



BOWEN: My understanding was the original decision to apply extra tests on

arrival from Italy was on the basis of advice from the Australian Health

Prevention and Principal Committee. I'm not going to quarrel with that advice. I

have my criticisms of the Government but the one thing that they have done

right is accept the advice of that Committee which is the joint Commonwealth

and State Chief Medical Officers. Obviously we have said that obviously we

believe travel bans should not be relaxed certainly very lightly and there should

be consideration further ones being put on. But I'm not going to quibble with the

Government about the timing when it was based on the advice given everything

I've seen of that committee



KARVELAS: On Friday the cost of the health response to Covid-19 was

estimated at a billion dollars. Today's announcement is worth $2.5 billion. The

AMA president Tony Bartoni says it's a really good start. What is the total cost

likely to be? Do you think the Government is investing enough?



BOWEN: Well I would put today's package is good but not yet good enough. I

do think it could have and should have gone further. Again I welcome all the

measures in it but I would say that they have not gone far enough in several

elements most particularly telehealth. They have extended the Medicare rebate

for telehealth. What does that mean in the real world? That you can be bulk

billed for calling your doctor or videoconferencing a doctor with concerns. But

it's quite a limited group that now applies to. I think it should apply much more

broadly. Are there people with concerns all over the country and not just

confined to older people or vulnerable groups and I think it would be in the best

interest of all to avoid unnecessary or avoidable trips to the doctor and all the

risk that that entails in the waiting room et cetera if the telehealth rebate was

much broader in scope.



KARVELAS: So when you say broader if I can get some clarity. How broad do

you….



BOWEN: Potentially as broad as it can be particularly in relation to COVID-19

concerns or chronic illness concerns more broadly. I would like to say much

more broadly applied than it's being applied this far. I thought I was expecting a

much bigger announcement when it comes to the telehealth rebate than what

we've got today. Also while I support the fever clinics and I don't underestimate

the complexity in getting the personnel, the medically trained personnel and the

locations I do think six weeks is too long to wait. The first Australian diagnosis

was 25th of January. That's some time ago. Now we were quite understanding

of the fact that the Government needed its time to respond, that it was not

something that was you know expected a couple of months ago but it has now

been going on for some time and so the announcement today to say that the

clinics might take another six weeks I thought was a disappointing element.



KARVELAS: So what are you concerned about? What are you worried will

happen over the next six weeks?



BOWEN: Well it's quite clear that this is going to get worse. The question is

how much worse it gets and how long the impact on Australia can be delayed

to enable our health system to prepare adequately. Now every single step

should be taken that could be taken in this instance. And you know as we've

provided bipartisan engagement and we mean that sincerely, we've had good

briefings from the Chief Medical Officer, we’ve supported every single move the

Government has taken including some controversial ones. Including some ones

that were getting criticism from elsewhere. They didn't get any criticism from the

Labor Party because we understood the complexity and the seriousness of the

case. That doesn't mean that we can't and won't say what should and shouldn’t

be done better and more quickly. And there's two instances I'm giving you

today. I'm not going to get into sort of doomsday or alarmist predictions but it is

clear to me as well Patricia that we need a full public information campaign.

The Government’s announced that today but I think to that that has come a bit

late but I welcome it nonetheless. But it needs to provide the full facts the

concise, the factual and medically driven advice to Australians because I do

think there's a hunger for that information and in a vacuum of that information,

misinformation will reign.



KARVELAS: Do you accept that the response will in part be limited by the size

of the available health workforce and that more money isn’t going to change

that. I mean you can only actually provide the health came based on the

number of workers you have in Australia and that is clearly under strain?



BOWEN: Of course. Of course that's the case but there are other things that

can be done as well. I for some time have be suggesting for some time that the

Government engage with unions with colleges with peak groups about retired

workforce. There's retired medical professionals out there who would be more

than happy to come back, who might not have been retired for 20 years, may

been retired for a few years and are still capable of making a contribution.

There are other people who have skills who maybe moved on to other

industries. These are things that can be done. I'm not suggesting it's easy but

I'm suggesting if we don't try then nothing will happen. There are a lot of

experts out there whether it be in the Royal College, the various Royal Colleges

not only of GPs but other Royal Colleges throughout the health system,

whether it be the Health Services Union or the Nurses and Midwives

Association. There's a lot of experts who could give the Government advice

about extending the medical workforce. There's no magic bullet, there's no

magic wand but there are important discussion to be had.



KARVELAS: There's also $100 million for the aged care sector to up skill

workers and boost staff numbers and improve infection control. Do you think

that will make a significant difference?



BOWEN: Well it's certainly a good step. Obviously we welcome that. Whether

more is needed is something we'll have to look at very closely. It's a significant

amount of money I don't quibble with that. But the aged care sector without

being alarmist about it, is an area of exposure. We know that the more elderly

are more exposed to this virus. We know that aged care facilities are

particularly vulnerable given the close quarters that people live in. That's no

secret and that's a scientific given and so extra support and care is necessary.

Now we've got a lot of criticisms of the Government's aged care policy more

broadly which we do think has weakened aged care but going forward it is

important that we engage very strongly with the aged care sector to provide

every support to the workforce to the providers to everybody involved because

it is an area of concern if this virus takes hold.



KARVELAS: Do you support the union movement's proposals for two weeks of

legislated paid sick leave for people like casuals?



BOWEN: I certainly support any steps to support casuals in this issue and...



KARVELAS: How about this very specific proposal that the parliament

legislates for two weeks?



BOWEN: We've been very open to that. We've been very open to that. We also

haven't been prescriptive. We would support anything which supports casuals,

unlike the Government. I've got to say I was gobsmacked, I mean talk about

arrogance and out of touch; Christian Porter to say ‘casuals would have put

money aside for this eventuality’. I mean if ever you need a better example of

why is Governments out of touch with reality I think you'll struggle to find one.



KARVELAS: He did say that here yesterday with me but equally today he's

clarified and said he understands that not all casuals will have necessarily have

been making those provisions. Do you accept that?



BOWEN: Bit too little too late after a torrent of feedback to him I'm sure. I mean

we has Scott Morrison saying ‘Nobody could have predicted this’ at a press

conference ,’Put your hand up if you predicted this nobody would have

predicted this’  then you’ve got Christian Porter saying casuals should put

money aside for it. I mean this is just gob smacking arrogant and out of touch

and it's not only a matter of economics and fairness it's also good medical

policy. We're already seeing one instance of somebody turning up for work

when they shouldn't, have when they're meant to it's in self-quarantine but

where people are struggling to put food on the table and bills to pay you can

understand people making give you a decision. So the Government really really

does need to tackle the issue of casuals



KARVELAS: And if they were to provide for instance a welfare payment let's

just say Newstart which the minister also yesterday confirmed to me was an

option on the table. Would that be enough? Because that's not necessarily a

replacement wage for a casual who does a couple of shifts a week which are

much more high earning?



BOWEN: Well again it's better than nothing but it's not replacing income that

they've forgone and something you know obviously ideally better than that

would occur for casuals. While we would be open to supporting any steps

forward that would be one which I think would not be necessarily enough in the

circumstances.



KARVELAS: So you don't think just giving welfare payments like that to people

in this category would be good enough?



BOWEN: Well again Patricia we're trying not to be too prescriptive to be fair to

give the Government room to come up with a decent package. Certainly the

ACTU which first raised this issue has done a good job putting forward

proposals which are sensible proposals. While I don't think Newstart would

necessarily go far enough to replace the income lost we're not going to quibble

if there are steps put forward which are an improvement but we will also call for

even better steps if necessary. So I don't want to be too prescriptive because

there's lots of ways this could be done. I think the ACTU has made good

contributions but based on everything I've seen the Government just doesn't

get it. They're not going to do anything based on all the evidence. I hope I'm

wrong about that. I hope I've missed something.



KARVELAS: What evidence do you have that people will be coming to work

sick and be spreading the virus?



BOWEN: Well I'm just simply making the point Patricia that you minimise the

risk of that if you’re providing people with financial support.



KARVELAS: In terms of tomorrow's big announcement, tomorrow morning the

Government will announce a multi-billion dollar stimulus package. We know

now the quantum will be a lot larger than we thought. I imagine you welcome

that with your former shadow treasurer hat on?



BOWEN: Yes and there's no doubt that this needs to be a substantial package.

I've made the point and Jim Chalmers has made the point it's not just about the

quantum it's about the design. If it's good design and gets a greater multiplier

effect and bigger bang for the buck. But there's no doubt this needs to be big. I

don't think there's much point you and I speculating on how big it is given its

less than 24 hours away. We'll know soon enough, sooner rather than later. As

we've all said as Anthony as Jim as I, multiple Labor spokespeople said; we'll

be constructive if it's good. If it doesn't go far enough we reserve the right to

say so and we reserve the right to make any criticisms but we're also not going

to stand in the way of it even if we think it needs to go farther. We'll support

what's there. If it's good design good policy and something which should be

facilitated through the Parliament.



KARVELAS: I understand the prime minister has just given a bit more

information about what we might look at for this stimulus package. How about if

for instance casuals or others were put on a sickness allowance because there

is a welfare payment called a sickness allowance. Also the minister confirming

to me that that's on the table would that be better than Newstart?



BOWEN: Well we'd have to look at the details Patricia in fairness. We will all

know soon enough. I've made that sort of principled comments that casuals

should get support and should be more rather than less. It should be as close

as possible to what they were receiving when they're at work, if not the same

as what they were receiving when they're at work. We need a very strong policy

for casuals there's no doubt about that. I can't really predict what it's going to

be. I understand the Prime Minister's made some comments in the last little

while but we're really just speculating now. We'll know soon enough and we'll

have a strong response as soon as we've seen it.



KARVELAS: Do you accept that one off payments rather than building in a

Newstart increase or a pension increase is a good way to give people money

now to spend in the economy but at the same time not build in large spending

into budgets going into the forward estimates?



BOWEN: Well I’ve seen Scott Morrison say he's magically got a way to avoid a

long term structural impact on the budget. Well we'll wait and see. Thing about

short term payments is sure they can have a role to play, they did in Labor's

stimulus. They had some role to play but we also had structural reform

underway to improve the aged pension and other pensions at the time and

while a one off payment obviously would be a good step for let’s say Newstart

recipients it doesn't solve the longer term issues for Newstart. But again we

need to see what's in the package Patricia we will see it soon enough.





KARVELAS: That's right we'll see it tomorrow morning. Chris Bowen thank you

so much for joining us.



BOWEN: Good on you Patricia.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













