Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg







THE HON KEITH PITT MP

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia  Member for Hinkler

THE HON MICHELLE LANDRY MP  Assistant Minister for Children and Families  Assistant Minister for Northern Australia  Member for Capricornia



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE  23 November 2020

COALITION GOVERNMENT SUPPORTS DNA CONFERENCE

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt gave the opening address to  the sixth annual Developing Northern Australia conference in Rockhampton today, which  brings together governments, industry and researchers to discuss ways to drive economic  growth and resolve challenges that impede development in northern Australia.

“The Coalition Government is supporting northern Australia with more than $3 billion for  farmers, businesses and communities in response to the floods, drought and summer  bushfire crisis,” he said.

“More than $4 billion has also been provided for northern Australia in the October Budget  to help the north rebound from the COVID-19 downturn.

“For northern Australia, the future is about development. It’s about bringing forward new  infrastructure projects, encouraging growth, strengthening business and creating jobs.

“The Government’s investment will help us pursue a gas-led recovery by developing  strategic basin plans that will create thousands of jobs across the north, starting with the  Beetaloo Basin in the Northern Territory.

“We’ve committed almost half a billion dollars to water infrastructure and feasibility  projects that can catalyse a range of projects in the north and create jobs.

“Reforms that I have introduced for the Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility (NAIF) will  also speed up approvals and make it simpler for suitable projects to qualify for funding from  the $5 billion facility.”

NAIF has already committed more than $2.4 billion to support projects across northern  Australia, supporting around 8,000 jobs and helping the northern economy through the  COVID-19 recession.

Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg





Assistant Minister for Northern Australia Michelle Landry also addressed the conference and  said jobs would be central to the next phase of northern development, underpinned by the  Developing Northern Australia White Paper.

“The Coalition Government is committed to support the north to reach its full economic  potential and the next phase of the northern agenda will have a singular focus on creating  jobs through more business opportunities as we recover from COVID-19,” Assistant Minister  Landry said.

“We will work to make sure people right across our north can benefit, including Indigenous  Australians. By working in partnership, with all of our key stakeholders we will support  greater Indigenous economic participation, jobs and prosperity.”

Minister Pitt also welcomed a major research report from the Cooperative Research Centre  for Developing Northern Australia, to be released this week, which identifies barriers to  development and jobs growth across agriculture, health services, communications and  traditional owner-led businesses.

“The State of the North Report is a valuable contribution to northern Australia and its  continued economic expansion will help communities, businesses, industries and policy  makers make informed decisions for the next phase of the Northern Australia Agenda,”  Minister Pitt said.





ENDS

Media contact:    Minister Pitt - Marnie Hobson 0407 090 230  Assistant Minister Landry - Tom Birkbeck 0418 908 159





















