

The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au



7 October 2020



BUDGET 2020: BUILDING 21st CENTURY WATER INFRASTRUCTURE

An additional $2 billion will be invested in new water infrastructure projects as part of the Budget,  demonstrating the Morrison-McCormack Government’s ongoing commitment to supporting and investing in  regional communities through drought, bushfires, floods and COVID-19.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the additional funding more than doubles the Government’s existing $1.5 billion  investment in the National Water Infrastructure Development Fund.

“The Government is planning for the long term through a 10-year rolling program of priority water  infrastructure investments,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“This is all about increasing water security to build greater resilience in our regions as we create more jobs  and see continued growth in our agriculture sector.

“We have already committed to more than 20 water infrastructure projects across Australia, supplying  billions of litres of water for productive use each year, but we want to do even more.

“That’s why we have doubled our investment to $325 million for Wyangala Dam and $242 million to the  Dungowan Dam project as a part of this additional funding.

“We have also established the National Water Grid Authority, standing up an Advisory Body chaired by Mr  Chris Lynch, which is developing a new investment framework and completing five construction projects.”

The Deputy Prime Minister said the Government was working closely with state and territory partners to  identify a rolling program of priority water infrastructure projects.

“Even through this difficult year, the agriculture sector grew by $1 billion - with the right investments in  water infrastructure, we are supporting its continued growth for the future, as we work toward making it a  $100 billion industry by 2030.

“We are helping increase water security in areas where extensive irrigated agriculture already exists, while  also helping to unlock new agricultural regions, especially in Australia’s north.”

For further information, please visit www.nationalwatergrid.gov.au.

Ends.

Media Contacts: Deputy Prime Minister - Jo Williamson 0418 475 668 | Dean Shachar 0418 202 860

