

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE  MANAGER OF OPPOSITION BUSINESS IN THE SENATE  CHAIR OF THE SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON COVID-19

SENATOR FOR THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  SUNDAY, 27 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Liberal Government cuts to JobKeeper, budget speculation; tourism  announcement; border closures; Victorian outbreak.

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE: Thanks everyone  for coming. Australia is in a deep recession. We know that there's almost a million people  unemployed and it's expected that 400,000 more people will join them by Christmas. And  here we are, tomorrow, with the Government pressing forward with its decision to rip  crucial support out of the economy by cutting back JobKeeper. On Friday, they cut  JobSeeker. We know this has been critical support over the last six months to keep food  on the table people in jobs and businesses operating during the COVID pandemic. It  makes no sense to withdraw that kind of economic support in the absence of any national  jobs plan or anything to replace it. The Government hasn't been able to articulate what the  impact of these reductions in expenditure is going to have. We know it will rip billions out of  the economy over the next few months. We don't know how many people will lose jobs  because of these cuts. There's estimates of hundreds of thousands of Australians slipping  back into poverty because of these cuts. And there isn't an answer from the Government  about what they're going to do to keep people being able to put food on the table, being  able to support employment, support businesses, and keep people working across this  country and that's what we need to see. We need to see a national jobs plan. And the  Treasurer in the absence of it, could use his pen and fix this, before the changes come into  effect tomorrow, just like the Minister for Social Security could have prevented the cuts for  JobSeeker from occurring on Friday. Happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: How long would you want it to be extended at that $1500 a fortnight rate?

GALLAGHER: I think our point is we want at least a plan, or the Government to outline a  plan to replace whatever they're cutting. And for them to articulate exactly how that  replacement, that jobs plan, those measures would continue to support the economy in the  short term. I mean, what is going to happen next month and the month after that, even if  they come up with measures in the budget, that's going to take months to roll out as they  do every year. We need something to support people now. So we've been saying they

should be targeted and taper to the economic  circumstances of the time. We see nothing  in the economic data that would support the withdrawal of this amount of expenditure  without anything there to replace it in the short term.

JOURNALIST: You could test that in the Senate by supporting a greens disallowance  motion just over a week from now. Will Labor?

GALLAGHER: Well, it doesn't need a disallowance in the Senate. The Treasurer has the  power to prevent these cuts from happening now, just as the Minister for Social Security  does. We gave the ministers those powers in the early stages of the pandemic just so that  they could do this, that they could taper and target these payments to the economic  circumstances of the time, regardless of whether the Parliament is sitting. I would say  though, that the Labor Party is not into parliamentary stunts that would endanger crucial  programs like JobKeeper and JobSeeker, from actually supporting the economy. So we  say rather than take part in some greens motion, how about the Government take  responsibility and use the powers the Parliament has given them. They’re unprecedented  powers, and they were given to them for a reason.

JOURNALIST: Labor has previously pointed out that JobKeeper has given some workers  part timers as a pay rise. So what do you think should be happening with part time  workers?

GALLAGHER: Well, this is an issue that we raised with the Government. And we know  from the JobKeeper review that that meant that about $6 billion in expenditure went into  giving people more money than they would have normally received or would have received  prior to the pandemic. So we don't have an issue with the part time payment for  JobKeeper. We think that is sensible and we've already said that. You know, that $6 billion,  potentially could have been used for something else, well could have been used to include  more workers in the JobKeeper scheme. But what we're saying is, make sure that when  you're introducing those rates, make sure that people are given the right amount to support  them to you know, live basically. To put food on the table and to support their income at a  time when we're in a deep recession and we've got a million people out of work.

JOURNALIST: Just on the stage two and stage three personal income tax cuts. There's a  lot of speculation and the Government signalling that some of it at least would probably be  accelerated in the budget is, is that something that Labor would support - both stages of  these?

GALLAGHER: Well, again, I think this really highlights the fact that we have no plan from  the Government. We are desperate to see what the plan is, if there is one, and how it all  works together. We have been open to stage two and in fact, prior to the COVID  pandemic, when the economy was in the doldrums, we were saying that should be looked  at as a potential bring forward measure. But we, in the absence of a plan from the  Government it’s really difficult to say what we would support or not. You know, where is the  plan? We can read the tea leaves, we can read your columns, we can try and kind of  guess where the Government's going with it. But we need to see what that plan is, and  then we would assess it on its merits. But those merits would have to be that it creates  jobs, it drives employment growth, it looks after people in this country in a recession, and  that it isn't wasted on rorts or dodgy deals or money for mates. That's going to be the test  that we apply to the budget and that includes any tax cuts, plan - stage two or stage three  that they might bring forward.

JOURNALIST: The Trade Minister and Tourism Minister is today announcing $150 million  rescue package for the industry. What's your reaction to that?

GALLAGHER: Well, it's hope it gets where it's needed. We've seen lots of announcements  from this Government over the last few months. They have, you know, titles for programs,  sexy titles - JobMaker, JobTrainer, Home Builder, but what we've seen is they make these  announcements and then disappear. It takes ages for this money to get out the door. Labor  has been calling for a rescue package for tourism. We know hundreds of thousands of jobs  have been lost in this sector. Let's make sure that the announcement today actually  delivers substance on the ground and actually goes to help people either keep jobs or  employ jobs in this area. It's done it really tough and it's been too long for this Government  to respond.

JOURNALIST: Senator Birmingham is also backing the idea of a New Zealand trans-Tasman travel bubble, quarantine free into at least New South Wales by Christmas. Does  that carry risks? Do you think they're acceptable on that timeline?

GALLAGHER: Well, I guess everyone wants to go back to some kind of new normal, don't  we? I mean, people are wanting to see hope they want to think forward that they’ll be able  to go on a holiday. I think those you know, work through the detail of that, take the health  advice, make sure it's safe, all of those issues can be worked through if it's possible you  know, I think it's something that we would support. But again, I think the focus domestically  has to be on jobs. The economic challenges facing this country are so significant, that we  need the Government 150% working on what they're going to do to drive jobs and, you  know, look after families over the next very difficult year.

JOURNALIST: You've run a territory government here in the ACT and you've dealt with  state premiers and chief ministers over the years. What do you think of Western Australia's  continued border closer, particularly to Canberrans from this state where we haven’t had  COVID for a long time?

GALLAGHER: Yeah, I have had the fortunate opportunity to sit around the table, so I  guess I understand. WA has always, regardless of which party runs the WA Governments  always sees itself as slightly different to other parts of the country. They're always very  parochial, putting Western Australia first, I think, you know, it's these border issues have  really highlighted, I think, some of the local challenges state and territory leaders have to  manage based on their own health advice and what their health officers are telling them  versus the federated model of a preference that everybody does the same thing at the  same time. We know the pandemic has hit places differently. We know the challenges  faced in particular populations in states are different, you know, and those have to be  managed and people - state premiers are very close to their local community much closer  than the Federal Government. So I think we see some of that coming through the  decisions that have been taken. Having said that, here in the ACT, we do feel like we've  been under the pump a little bit unfairly. The coronavirus pandemic has been managed  really well here. We've never had community transmission in our jurisdiction and so I think  it is difficult to justify why borders are closed to places like the ACT.

JOURNALIST: Just back on tourism. I imagine a lot of tourism workers are on the  JobKeeper payments. Do you think once they go off those payments from tomorrow, or  they reduced that $150 million package is enough to boost business to get them back into  work and make up the difference?



GALLAGHER: Yeah, well, it's a bit like taking with one hand and giving with another isn't it  and we know that the Government itself is expecting I think about 1.7 million people to  come off JobKeeper over the next three months. How many of those end up on  JobSeeker, on the unemployment queue is the real question. And whether they doing  enough through new announcements is going to be - I think we'll see that over the next few  months, but a bit might be a little bit too late for those tourism workers who will see their  pay reduced and those businesses that have used it as a lifeline to keep operating. So,  you know, they're the real issues. You can announce a fund today but when's this money  going to get out the door? We've seen it with every other program this Government  announces. They announce a program and then three months later, the money is still in  the Treasury and hasn't left. And that's what we can't have. We've got JobKeeper really  supporting the economy now. Every fortnight people get that, I think, announcing funds, it's  a very different ballgame because that money isn't guaranteed getting to where it's needed  in the time that it's needed, and we think more jobs will be lost because of it.

JOURNALIST: As John said, you are a former chief minister of the ACT. Could you ever  see a circumstance like Dan Andrews has where you wouldn't have been aware of which  minister was responsible for private security decision in hotel quarantine? And do you  believe he should have to stand aside as a result of what's happened to Victoria?

GALLAGHER: I think they're really matters for Victoria. You know, I think this has been a  really difficult pandemic. We've really changed ways of operating. Quick decisions being  made, big decisions being made. Yes. As a former chief minister, I can imagine situations  where public servants make decisions that you might be unaware of at the time, I certainly  learned things out of audit reports and inquiries that were held after a series of facts. That's  no doubt. I mean, you wear the political cost of that, but you can certainly imagine that  situation happening.

Okay, thanks, everyone.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: PAT CRONAN  0432 758 224











