The Hon Stuart Robert MP  Minister for the National Disability Insurance Scheme  Minister for Government Services

MEDIA RELEASE

Authorised by S. Robert MP, Canberra

Sunday, 5 April 2020

NDIS participants to receive priority home delivery  from leading supermarkets

A new service to be launched tomorrow will see NDIS participants receive priority home delivery during the  coronavirus pandemic from some of the country’s biggest supermarkets.

Following close collaboration between the National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA) and leading  supermarkets, the new Priority Home Delivery Service will ease the stress for over 340,000 NDIS  participants who are unable to do their shopping in their usual way.

From tomorrow (Monday, 6 April), every NDIS participant will receive an individual code via SMS or email  which will give them access to the priority delivery offer. Upon completing an online shopping order,  participants will be prompted to enter their code when choosing the home delivery option.

Minister Robert said the service is another example of how the Government is collaborating with the private  sector to develop whole-of-society efforts to help Australians in need and comes as the NDIA continues to  implement its NDIS Pandemic Plan.

‘The Priority Home Delivery Service will help hundreds of thousands of NDIS participants across the  country access everyday items through an option that removes personal health risks and great stress  associated with going shopping in the current environment,’ Mr Robert said.

‘I thank those supermarkets for delivering this service as it will be a great help to hundreds of thousands of  Australians and their families.

‘The Morrison Government is committed to ensure the well-being of Australians with disability are  considered as the coronavirus pandemic unfolds. Our priority during this period is doing what we can to  support the immediate needs of NDIS participants, including through enabling priority home delivery of  groceries and other basic essentials.

‘The NDIS is one of the most important social and economic reforms in our country’s history, and is already  significantly improving the lives of people with disability and their families. This is another example of how  we are working to improve the level of support provided, with more choice and control for participants.’

For more information, including a list of participating supermarket retailers, please visit www.ndis.gov.au.

For more information on the Australian Government’s response to the coronavirus pandemic, visit  www.australia.gov.au.

