









THE HON ALAN  TUDGE MP   MINISTER FOR POPULATION,  CITIES AND URBAN  INFRASTRUCTURE

BRIDGET ARCHER MP  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BASS

THE HON MICHAEL  FERGUSON MP  MINISTER FOR STATE GROWTH  MINISTER FOR SCIENCE AND

TECHNOLOGY

CR ALBERT VAN  ZETTEN

MAYOR OF THE CITY OF  LAUNCESTON

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Alan Tudge MP, Minister for Cities, Urban Infrastructure and Population   WANTIRNA SOUTH, VICTORIA



31 August 2020

CITY DEAL DELIVERING FREE PUBLIC WI-FI IN HEART OF LAUNCESTON

Free Wi-Fi is now available across the entire Launceston city centre, with locals already  making good use of high-speed internet.

Delivered under the Launceston City Deal, the project has significantly expanded public  access to the city’s free Wi-Fi network.

Popular recreation spots like Riverbend Park, the Cataract Gorge and Waverley Lake were  among the last areas connected to what is now Tasmania’s largest local government-managed public Wi-Fi network.

Federal Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure Alan Tudge said the City  Deal project put Launceston ahead of many major cities across Australia.

“Fifty new wireless access points have been rolled out across Launceston under the City  Deal to see all public spaces in the CBD covered by the network,” Mr Tudge said.

“It’s great to see it up and running for the public and visitors, providing a free and fast  network without time restrictions.”

Tasmanian Minister for State Growth and Science and Technology Michael Ferguson said  the Wi-Fi expansion formed part of the jointly funded $19.4 million City Heart Project, a  centrepiece of the City Deal.

“The City Heart Project is all about redefining central Launceston as a modern regional  retail, cultural and business hub by redeveloping critical local infrastructure and supporting  events that together are re-energising the city’s centre,” Mr Ferguson said.

“We’ve already delivered the revitalisation of both the Brisbane Street mall and Civic  Square, breathing life into these critical activity hubs. We’re also investing in projects to  improve signage and public transport to help people get around our beautiful city with  greater ease.

“Our joint investment in the City Heart Project has already delivered a much-needed boost

to local jobs and the construction sector, with completed works having supported at least  142 positions so far, including 15 trainees or apprentices.”

Federal Member for Bass Bridget Archer said the project was yet another example of how  the game-changing City Deal was delivering on its vision to make Launceston one of  Australia’s most liveable and innovative regional cities.

“Progressing projects under the City Deal has never been more important,” Mrs Archer said.

“This partnership between all levels of government is supporting jobs, businesses and the  regional economy while delivering lasting infrastructure that is setting Launceston up for a  strong and vibrant future.”

Mayor of the City of Launceston Albert van Zetten said public Wi-Fi networks were highly  utilised by tourists, students and disadvantaged communities.

“This is a fantastic project, made possible by the Launceston City Deal, which will help  make our city more accessible to visitors," Mayor van Zetten said.

“While the COVID-19 pandemic has effectively put our tourism industry on hold, we want to  ensure that we are ready to bounce back as a prime tourism destination when the time is  right."

To access the new network on your smartphone, tablet, laptop or other wireless connected  device, join the Wi-Fi network named “Launceston WiFi”.

A portal page will appear and once the terms and conditions have been accepted, users  can click “Get online”.

For more information on the Launceston City Deal, visit  www.citydeals.infrastructure.gov.au/launceston.

[ENDS]

Media Contact:  Minister Tudge - Michael Bennett 0434 782 923  Minister Ferguson - Carly Dolan 0437 925 010   Cr van Zetten - Mayor’s Office (03) 6323 3101 | 0413 671 926  Ms Archer - Lucy Mercier 0438 801 732

