

STEPHEN JONES MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES

MEMBER FOR WHITLAM





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS AM AGENDA

WEDNESDAY, 26 FEBRUARY 2020



SUBJECTS: Coronavirus impacts on the economy; Economic stimulus, Labor’s

handling of the GFC.



ANNELISE NIELSEN: Joining us live now is Shadow Assistant Treasurer Stephen Jones.

Thank you for your time.



JONES: Great to be with you Annelise.



NIELSEN: Now, we know the economy has taken a huge hit. It does seem like the

promised surplus is under threat, but it's that not expected when you have a global force

like coronavirus impacting your bottom line?



JONES: I think the thing here is that the Government has been caught napping. A few

months ago they were having t-shirts and coffee cups printed saying ‘surplus achieved’,

‘economy going gangbusters’ when the truth was very, very different. Growth was flagging,

wages were low, company profits, business investment, all of it was showing signs of a lot

of weakness and the Government was basically too stubborn, or too blind, to see what was

going on. We were calling for stimulus measures. We repeat those calls because we see

the capacity of this crisis to spread from just the tourism sector and the higher education

sector, which are the most exposed at the moment, through to other areas of the economy.

We're repeating our calls for the Government to implement a stimulus package, it is much

needed. The Government seems to be too busy patting themselves on the back and

looking backwards not forwards. We need some leadership, and we're certainly not getting

it from this Prime Minister.



NIELSEN: The IMF has said that the global growth was supposed to go from 2.9% to

3.3%, now it's going to go to 3.2% because of coronavirus that's huge in global contexts.

Has Labor done anything to try and prepare for something as seismic as coronavirus?



JONES: We haven't been in government for seven years. So the question is what has the

Government done to prepare us for this? The answer to that is very little indeed. Entirely

reliant on monetary policy, refusing to do anything to budge demand, refusing to do

anything to boost wages growth, watching productivity decline watching business

investment decline, which has left us in an incredibly vulnerable position. Do not add worse

insult to injury by failing to intervene now. We need a stimulus package. We need to be

looking at those sectors of the economy which are immediately impacted, but we also need

a plan. So, revisit those suggestions we were putting to the Government at the end of last

year, bring forward the tax cuts, bring forward some of that infrastructure investment. On

top of that, how about delivering on some of the things that you'd promised to those

bushfire affected regions, because when I'm talking to businesses in those regions, not

one cent of the money promised is flowing into those areas at the moment. That's a huge

problem.



NIELSEN: What specifically are people in bushfire regions saying that they were promised

and hasn't been delivered?



JONES: The business assistance grants. Not one dollar has flowed through to those areas

yet. What they're saying is the Government is big on the promise, but we're not seeing that

assistance flow through to people on the ground. What they need is cash in their tills and

cash in their wallets, right now, and they're not getting it.



NIELSEN: When you reference the coalition's been in Government for seven years and so

the onus is on them. If we look back just before that seven years, that's the last time we

had something this drastic affect our economy the Global Financial Crisis and Labor was

able to draw on a significant surplus to get through that particular incident. Wouldn't the

prudent thing to do be building up a surplus again, as much as you can, so you can deal

with these issues?



JONES: What Labor did was implement a fiscal stimulus package, which meant Australia,

almost alone in the entire world, didn't see the sorts of economic devastation visited upon

households.



NIELSEN: But you had the opportunity to use that stimulus package because there was a

surplus.



JONES: Surely the point is we acted and did what was necessary. Governments aren't

households, governments have the capacity to draw down on their extra borrowing

capacity, and this government has got a fantastic set of borrowing numbers at the moment.

Money has never been cheaper. A great environment for the Government to be investing

in infrastructure. They should be bringing forward those tax cuts, as we've already talked

about, because people need the cash in their wallets now, business need the stimulus and

the confidence now. Now is the time for the Government to be acting like Labor did back

through the GFC. We didn't dilly-dally, we took the best advice and we thought we have

got to put the interests of households, of workers, of businesses first. What businesses and

workers are crying out for now is some leadership from the Government and a sign that the

Government is going to put their interests first, the interests of businesses, small

businesses, workers, households ahead of its own political interests. Let's forget the

marketing, the spin. Let's get down to a real plan and they're not saying that from the

Government at the moment.



NIELSEN: Well, if we look at to the two major industries that have been impacted by

coronavirus, it's mainly higher education and resources.



JONES: I’d add tourism to that as well.



NIELSEN: Actually, that's a fair point. So what specifically could the Government do to

stimulate those particular industries? You need students to stimulate higher education, you

need tourists to stimulate tourism and it's just something that they don't have a lot of



control over right now.



JONES: I think that there will be two sorts of impacts in higher education. If all we're doing

is shifting the demand, when the students are arriving, when they're paying for their

courses, when they're spending their money in Australia, that's more likely than not just

going to shift it into the later quarters of this year. What universities need is assistance with

their cash flow. Government has at its disposal tools to assist the university sector, the

higher education sector, with its cash, most likely to be quite contained throughout the

course of this year. Tourism is going to be very, very different indeed, because it's not as if

people who are planning on having their holiday in Cairns or in outback New South Wales

in April, May, June of this year are going to say well I won't do it in April, May, June or this

year I'll do it in August or September. They're most likely not to come, and that is a

permanent hit to jobs in those regional areas, to those tourism businesses who are already

doing it tough. A very different sort of assistance is going to be needed in those areas,

particularly if they're already reeling from bushfire, or flood impacts, or cyclonic of events

as well. So very, very different sorts of interventions, one temporary one more permanent.

What we need is the Government acting on both of those and sending a clear signal to

business, we've got this guy's, we've got this, we've got a plan to put in place. What we're

getting at the the moment from the Prime Minister and the Treasurer is the exact opposite.

Nothing to see here. If there is an intervention will leave it to the Reserve Bank, and they

can cut interest rates again and what we've seen over the last four years., that's simply not

working.



NIELSEN: We’ve got GDP figures out next week as well. So we'll be keeping a close eye

on that too. Stephen Jones, thank you for your time.



JONES: Always good to be with you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: AMY SMITH 0459 846 926



