Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.







The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health

Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Public Service and Cabinet

TRANSCRIPT

31 March 2020



PRESS CONFERENCE  PARLIAMENT HOUSE - CANBERRA

E&OE…

Topics: Coronavirus update; partnership with private health sector; expanding ICU & ventilator  capacity

GREG HUNT:  Thank you very much to everybody for joining us today. I’m joined in particular by the Chief  Nursing and Midwifery Officer, Alison McMillan, and with the Deputy Chief Medical Officer, Dr  Nick Coatsworth.

Nick is a specialist in respiratory conditions and infectious diseases and is overseeing Australia's  ventilator expansion program within the hospital system and the ICU. Also joined, in particular, by  Michael Roff, the CEO of the Australian Private Hospitals Association.

One of our great tasks as we, on the one hand, contain the spread of coronavirus and flatten the  curve - that's our great first task. But our second task is to boost the capacity of our hospitals to deal  with this outbreak, to provide the support for our patients, to guarantee that we can fight to protect  every life of every Australian.

Today is about, in particular, securing and expanding that capacity. A partnership between the  Australian Government, the States and the private hospitals, that will bring over 30,000 beds within  the hospital system, into an integrated partnership between the Commonwealth and the States and  the private hospital sector.

It will bring over 105,000 full and part-time hospital staff, including 57,000 of our amazing nurses  and midwives. It guarantees them their future and their support, both during the crisis and beyond.

But most importantly, it brings their resources to the fight against coronavirus, COVID-19, in  Australia. So, to put all of this in context, as I mentioned, our task is two-fold. First, to help contain  the spread of coronavirus.

And I think it's important to begin with the latest news. As of 6:00 AM this morning and the report  to the National Incident Centre, there were 4,359 cases. They are being updated during the course of  the day by individual States and we'll provide this evening an updated figure. Sadly, we now have  19 lives lost.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





One of the things which we’d also mention is the number of cases in intensive care and those on  ventilators. We have currently, on the latest advice available to me, 50 cases in intensive care and  20 cases on ventilators.

What those figures show, coupled with the fact that now, with well over 230,000 tests completed,  we have what we would regard as a reflective picture of the numbers in Australia; that if the lives  lost - and each one is an agonising loss -below 1 per cent, then that is indicative that the testing  regime is capturing the significant reflective data for the country.

If those within ICUs, and in particular with ventilators, in the low numbers that we see - and all of  these numbers we know will climb - but they are reflective again of the numbers. And it presents a  very different picture to some other countries, where the lives lost represent not half a per cent but  10 per cent of the cases.

It means that the case numbers there are not fully reflective of the situation. So, by having what we  believe is the broadest and widest testing program in the world, perhaps only Singapore and Korea,  but at this stage, our numbers indicate that we are at the global forefront, we have a good picture of  where we're at.

All of this is then being backed by the social measures, and these most difficult of social measures  are about saying - whilst we are making progress, and whilst we are now flattening the curve in the  first early stages of progress, there's more to do.

We were at 25 to 30 per cent growth just over a week ago, on a daily basis. Now, we have come  down, in the last week, to the low teens, and the latest advice I have from the National Incident  Centre this morning is that the last three days have been approximately 9 per cent, on average.

That's an achievement to which all Australians have contributed. And I want to say, in these most  difficult of times, with these most difficult of measures, that none of us had ever dreamt we would  ever be involved in, you have risen to the occasion. To those Australians who are at home, to those  Australians who are isolating or in quarantine, I want to say thank you.

Your actions are making a difference and saving lives. This progress is early. It's significant. But  now, with these additional rules around gatherings and movement, we are going the next step to  help reduce again the level of infection and to support our containment. All of that is then backed  by our attempts and our plans and the reality of improving capacity.

Today, we make a very significant stride in improving capacity. Two days ago, we announced  universal telehealth for Australians. In other words, we rebuilt Medicare over the course of the last  10 days. Now, we have over a million telehealth consultations that have been completed. That's  protecting doctors and nurses, and protecting patients, and providing access where otherwise it  might not exist.

The second great element in the reconstruction of the Australian medical system is reconstructing  the relationship between public and private hospitals. The partnership between the Australian  Government, the States and the private hospital system will deliver additional capacity for the  Australian system.

It does that in return for the viability of the private hospital sector throughout the course of the  COVID-19 epidemic, this pandemic that the world knows, and it does it in such a way that the  hospitals will be available, and their staff will be available, to participate fully in our national

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



response and to be able to bounce out and to support the needs of the population after we emerge  from the period of coronavirus.

We will be guaranteeing the viability, along with the States, of all 657 private hospitals in Australia  - and we're doing this with a Commonwealth guarantee, then State partnerships, and then the  individual private hospitals relying on the source income that they have from their ordinary  operations.

Those three things together will mean that our hospitals will be able to continue. An important part  of this is that, in return for our guarantee, there's a guarantee of flexibility, capacity, participation  and staff retention from the private hospitals.

The Private Hospitals Association has committed to that. Their membership has committed to that.  The Day Hospitals Association has committed to that, Catholic Health Australia has committed to  that and we've had support from our magnificent doctors and nurses with the Council of the  Presidents of Medical Colleges on behalf of all, all of our doctors, supporting this and being part of  the statement, and the Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation has also signed on.

And Annie Butler will be making statements from Victoria, she recently returned from overseas,  and as Secretary of the National Federation, she will be speaking from home because she's doing  the right thing and practising isolation for the time being.

In terms of the capacity, it means over 34,000 beds and chairs that will be made available to the  public hospital system. A third of intensive care units are within the private hospital system and will  be made available. Over 105,000 full and part-time staff, including over 57,000 full and part-time  nursing staff.

The activities are broad and they will work together, the hospitals have committed to be fully  flexible. They may be taking public hospital services, they will be making their ICUs available, they  may see an exchange of staff or equipment in either direction.

They may be providing support services for patients who are coming from aged care homes or other  areas where there may be need for isolation or quarantine. They may set up in the day hospitals flu  clinics, they may set up in other day hospitals' testing clinics.

They have committed to be flexible in a way that has been beyond conception. And what this  agreement does is it dramatically expands the capacity of the Australian hospital system, at the  same time as we are bringing down the numbers of what could have been the case, or as Australians  know, the process of flattening the curve.

I might ask Nick Coatsworth to talk about what this means for capacity in our hospitals but also to  give Australians insight into what we're doing with expanding ventilator capacity.

NICK COATSWORTH:  Thank you, Minister. Three weeks ago, I was Director of Infectious Diseases and a full-time  clinician at the Canberra Health Services. At that time, I was working alongside my colleagues in  intensive care through the executives of the hospital, anaesthetists, emergency physicians to develop  the plan for Canberra healthcare services.

This is to say that quietly and diligently, over the past three and four weeks, intensive care units and  emergency departments around Australia have been working towards increasing their capacity, as  we've seen such horrific images coming out of Italy and the United States.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



So, this dual idea of containment and capacity has been in progress concurrently. And I'm pleased,  as the Minister has indicated, that today we can share some of that data with you. In particular, I'd  like to focus on intensive care units and ventilators.

At any one time, there's approximately 2,200 ventilated intensive care beds in Australia. At the  moment, we are using just over 20 of those for patients who are suffering from COVID-19. With  immediate expansion, repurposing of other ventilator machines, including anaesthetic machines and  use of the private sector, we can expand to 4,400. Our target capacity for ventilated intensive care  beds in Australia currently stands at 7,500.

We are working round the clock to procure ventilators. I can tell you today that, locally, we will  have 500 intensive care ventilators fabricated by ResMed, backed up by 5,000 non-invasive  ventilators, with full delivery expected by the end of April.

This capacity increase is being matched by workforce increases that I'll let my colleague, the Chief  Nurse, Alison McMillan, discuss. I'm aware that colleagues in critical care, primary care, and  throughout the hospital system are under incredible strain at the moment, looking at a wave that is  crossing other healthcare systems in a way that we couldn't imagine.

I think the Minister has actually emphasised that we are a very different context in Australia. Our  death rate is lower - although, those 19 deaths are a tragedy and my heart goes out to those families.

Our hospitalisation rates are lower and our number of community cases are lower. But I would urge  Australians now is not the time to take the foot off the pedal. The restrictions that the Minister and  the Prime Minister have introduced on gatherings are absolutely essential to prevent the virus from  making its only move, which is from one person to another.

So, I would urge all Australians, follow those instructions to a T. Look towards your State  Governments for exactly what they are telling you to do. And I'll finish my comments there and  hand over to the Chief Nurse.

GREG HUNT:  Alison?

ALISON MCMILLAN:  Minister, thank you. What does this mean for nurses and midwives in the private sector? It means  job security for them. That they can contribute to the response of this now and into the future.

57,000 nurses and midwives out there who have job security. And this is critically important.  Nurses and midwives are the centre often of our healthcare delivery system. In our world-class  system, our nurses and midwives are the most highly trained across the world and are extremely  well-respected by the community.

But this is going to mean that we're going to have to ask them to be flexible about how they work  and where they work, because the work that we're going to need them to do might require them to  work in a public hospital or in an environment that they may not have worked in before. The  training will be there, and we're partnering with obviously the States and Territories to get those  arrangements underway.

So, I ask, and I know, that nurses and midwives across the country will understand that our  profession is focused on patients, and on patient care, and with their help, as the Minister has  described, while we're controlling the spread, we're going to increase the capacity by utilising this  vitally important part of our health service and workforce.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





GREG HUNT:  Michael, if you might just say some words.

Michael Roff, the CEO of the Australian Private Hospitals Association.

MICHAEL ROFF:  Thank you, Minister. I’ll just be brief. I did want to thank the Minister, though, because he   very early on realised that with the reduction in elective surgery in private hospitals, which we  know in most cases will be coming to an end on Wednesday, there was no revenue coming through  the door, which means it was very difficult for us to pay our nurses, maintain buildings and  maintain that capacity.

So, we’ve been working very hard on this partnership. We've heard the word ‘unprecedented’ a lot  this year, but this is absolutely unprecedented in terms of the integration of the capacity of the  private hospital system, including those 57,000 nurses and the third of all, intensive care beds into  one health system to deal with this pandemic and respond to this pandemic.

And very importantly also, I think, to make sure that private hospitals are there on the other side of  this. It's not business as usual, so there's a lot of services that are normally provided in private  hospitals that won't be provided for the next six months and public hospitals, for that matter, too.

So, there is going to be a big backlog when we’re on the other side of this pandemic, and this  arrangement from the Commonwealth and the States means that private hospitals will be there to  help with that backlog on the other side. The Victorian Government is very close to a deal with the  private hospitals in that State.

Hopefully that will be finalised today, and I’d just like to implore all of the other State Governments  to very quickly come to arrangements with the private hospitals in their own States, but we’d like to  see the Victorian model followed.

And I’ll probably leave it there, Minister.

GREG HUNT:  Okay, thank you. Do you want to join us and- yep, Phil?

JOURNALIST:  In relation to that last point, is this going to work, the integration of the private hospitals?

Like, the current public hospital system, where across the country you have split funding between  the States and the Commonwealth, or are they going to be funded differently in every State in terms  of the proportion of Commonwealth-State funding and whatever the private hospitals can kick in?

And within those states, will it be done by group - you know, Ramsay Health, Healthscope or  whatever - or be uniform across the State?

GREG HUNT:  So, there are two parts to it, as you say, exactly, Commonwealth and State funding. And so, any one  hospital will have the support from the Commonwealth, will have the agreement with the State, but  the States are developing both a uniform model within Victoria and Western Australia that have  made the most progress.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



And in my discussions with State Health Ministers last night, all committed to agreements at the  earliest possible time. I think all are aiming for the end of the week. And it is likely that most States  - I can't speak for all of them - but most, will pick up the Victorian model.

So, I'll let Victoria speak to it, but the broad principles are that they will provide a retention  payment, or a payment to be available, and an activity payment. And so, we will then provide the  funds over the top.

Particularly in some cases, such as day hospitals, there will be much more required from the  Commonwealth. You know, on an individual hospital basis, it will vary, but at the end of the day,  what we're doing is guaranteeing the capacity that they will provide in return for us guaranteeing  the viability.

JOURNALIST:  Minister Hunt, are you able to put any kind of estimate on how much this is likely to cost the  Commonwealth over the next six months?

And is this an effective nationalising of the private hospital system during this health emergency?

GREG HUNT:  So, two things. Firstly, it is a partnership. They are available as an extension now of the public  hospital system in Australia.

So, whilst we're not taking ownership, we have struck a partnership, where in return for the State  agreements and the Commonwealth guarantee, they will be fully integrated within the public  hospital system. Our expectation is that this will be an additional $1.3 billion. That's, however, not a  capped figure.

If more is required, more will be provided. If it turns out that it's not that expensive, then those  funds will be available for other activities. That takes our total additional investment to over $5.4  billion within the health sector.

JOURNALIST:  Just on the nine per cent, rolling three-day infection average - if we were to get to a situation where  that rate comes down to one per cent or zero per cent, would we then start talking about an exit  strategy to, sort of, loosen some of these social restrictions?

GREG HUNT:  Look, our goal is to bring down the numbers as far and as hard and as quickly as possible. We are  seeing what I would describe as early promising signs of the curve flattening. But we've got a long  way to go. And so, let us not get ahead of ourselves. There will be an exit, absolutely.

And that will be guided by the medical advice. And one of the amazing things is that we have  brought all the medical advisers together into a single national source of medical advice - the  medical expert panel of Chief Medical Officers that reports to the Chief Ministers in the National  Unity Cabinet - and that's the place where these decisions are being made.

We're very strongly supporting that process. So, the answer is we're actually going, as we've seen in  the last 48 hours, harder rather than softer. The measures that had been put in place in the previous  two and three and four weeks have begun to yield benefit. The measures that we've just put in place,  we hope will deliver more benefit.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



And we effectively have the majority of Australians in self-isolation other than for the essential  reasons. And work is one of those. But these will, we believe, improve the situation. And the more  it improves, the earlier we will be able to start to release those.

But now is not the time to contemplate that release. We have to deliver the outcomes to save lives.

JOURNALIST:  Minister Hunt, in terms of those beds, you said that they’d- you'd like to have 7,000 or 7,500 of  those ventilated ICU beds available. Do you see a circumstance where every single one of those  beds will be needed?

And also, sorry, Mr Hunt, does that kind of expose that our health sector was under resourced  before this crisis? And do we expect the modelling for the coronavirus that the Deputy Chief  Medical Officer mentioned he would like to see released, will that be released and when?

GREG HUNT:  Sure. A few questions. A few questions in there. The first thing is we have one of the best health  systems in the world. And I would argue the best and certainly, at this point, we are, in my view, the  best-prepared country in the world that has seen any significant outbreak.

What we've been able to do is take the existing capacity and, as Nick has said, double it almost  immediately by repurposing of other intensive care beds and other units such as anaesthetic units.

And then we have been able to commission over 5,500 additional units, which should- which  include many in reserve capacity, over and above what we need, and that would give us the 7,500.  And I'll let Nick talk in particular about what that means.

But our belief is that that means that we should be able to meet all possible contingencies. So, that's  planning for the worst case. What we're seeing are signs that we will be far better off. In terms of  modelling, we are working on that, and there will certainly be additional modelling provided.

But the Prime Minister, over a week ago, released the modelling in terms of the charts, and made  that available to the country. And that was the range. What they are doing now is reviewing that  work over the course of the coming week. But every day we're providing all the information we  have.

Nick?

I won't put a time on it, because that’s- we're being guided by the work and the pace of the work.  But we are planning for- let's put it this way - the 7,500 is planning for the highest possible need,  and to make sure that we are overprepared, not underprepared.

Nick?

NICK COATSWORTH:  I think your question referenced - do we foresee that we would get to 7,500? We are just over 20 at  the moment and we've talked about building capacity whilst containing. So, another way to describe  that is acting to contain whilst planning for the worst, which the Minister has said.

So, we need a stretch target, if you like, to be sure that we would have enough ventilated intensive  care beds. But the absolute priority is not to get there. None of us - and not a single health  professional in the country - wants us to see us anywhere near Italy or the United States.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



And just to emphasise where we are, the positive testing rate is three in every 100 in Australia. And  recently, it was one in every two in the United States. So, every two tests they did, someone was  positive.

That demonstrates how different the community transmission is, or the amount of undetected cases  in the community. We literally have hundreds of public health workers in every single jurisdiction  doing the contact tracing to make sure that when someone is found with this virus, all of their  contacts are found and quarantined.

And as Brendan Murphy has said, and we have said all along right from the start, that is how you  combat an epidemic, by breaking the transmission chains. So, if we can keep that community  transmission under control, then we won't need anywhere near the 7,500. That is the objective.

JOURNALIST:  Minister, overnight the National Cabinet agreed that the social distancing measures in place now  will be the national baseline, and the next move will be based on State and Territory Chief Health  Officers. Specific further measures will be recommended and taken on that localised, State-by-State  basis.

Given that, what does that mean for the overall hierarchy, in terms of if the AHPPC meets and has a  consensus but states want to divert?

And to give you an early example, with the enforcement of the reasons for leaving the house, New  South Wales Police have strongly indicated that they will be enforcing that to the letter of that  order, which means that a person could not go out of their home to visit a partner because that is not  considered one of the reasonable reasons to leave a home.

So, given that there is going to be more and more intricate, specific detail that these States are  rolling out, who do people listen to? And do you think that rule in particular is fair, given the state  we're in?

GREG HUNT:  Look, firstly, what we've actually seen is the National Cabinet coming together. They are becoming  more and more unified. It's a unique arrangement in Australian history, and it's been done at a time  when everybody has been dealing with massive pressures on their economic, social and health  systems, all at the same time. And for that integration to occur, I think, has been extraordinary.

In 50 and 100 years' time, I suspect people will look back on this National Cabinet as being one of  the most amazing achievements of the Federation in Australia's first 200 years. That's my honest  view.

Having said that, the point of this is to say - what are the standards? We've moved across the  country to the two-person rule or the family unit rule. Then it's being applied at the individual State  level. And from- you may remember from our earliest discussions, talking about this idea of rings  of containment.

And the rings of containment mean that where there are local needs, where there might be a  particular hot spot, then tougher restrictions can be placed. And this was exactly what was  contemplated from our earliest design, but using the common principles, and at the same time what  was contemplated and decided by the National Cabinet this week.

And so I think it's completely consistent that where individual States or Territories, either across  their whole jurisdiction or in part- I know in the Adelaide Hills, they had seen an outbreak

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



following a major social gathering; that further restrictions had been put in place in some of those  areas. That's exactly the idea of rings of containment - being able to provide tighter controls to  protect the population in specific areas where we need that containment.

JOURNALIST:  The advice is. Sorry, if the advice is to send kids home from school, if possible, why isn't it the  same for childcare centres?

GREG HUNT:  We're following the medical advice. And, actually, with great respect, I don't think that's a fair  reflection of the medical advice on schools. It's- where possible, we are encouraging children to be  in a position for learning.

And of course, in relation to both schools or childcare centres, what we want to preserve, above all  else, is the capacity of our critical workforce to be able to work. And the infection rates amongst  children are significantly lower and the consequences among children around the world are  significantly lower.

Neither is a universal protection. But that was the very, very clear medical advice of the AHPPC.  They took advice from infectious diseases experts. People have provided that advice fearlessly and  we followed it.

JOURNALIST:  Minister Hunt, just following on from Claire's question before, in terms of couples, say, there’s  someone who lives in one house and there’s someone who lives in another, but they are in a couple,  would they be- just on medical advice, would they be allowed to be seeing each other and then  going back to their own homes?

Or is this the point at which we say, potentially, they have to consider either isolating from each  other or moving in together?

And just following on from what was said in New South Wales this morning, there was a  suggestion that there should be more testing be done in certain areas to see what the community  transmission was like. It was suggested that, say, in Bondi, they should be doing more because there  was a cluster of cases.

What is the advice for practitioners in those areas? How do they figure out who to test when there is  a limited availability of tests?

GREG HUNT:  Let me deal with the testing first. In terms of the testing, New South Wales has been doing a  tremendous job on testing. They have focused on the process of contact tracing. And the rules  around testing remain the same - where there's been contact or overseas travel, and there are  symptoms - that they are the priority cases.

In hot spots, then we know that they are also testing more broadly, and that's appropriate. And so,  this is one of the things that we believe has allowed the rate of infection growth to decline because  they have been chasing down the contacts and the hot spots simultaneously.

Now, in terms of the rules of the National Cabinet, they were laid out with regards to households  and gatherings of two, where people are not from within the same households. I won't add anything  to that. That will be a matter for individual States if they wish to go further.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



JOURNALIST:  Some States are releasing heat maps based on their own data. South Australia says it's waiting on  the Commonwealth to finish theirs. When do you expect those heat maps to be available and to who  will they be available?

GREG HUNT:  So, we'll be providing all the information that we have. I think we're getting- data is going in both  directions and then there's common work being done on that.

Nick, I don't know if you want to add in terms of the final resources that are being developed…and  public (inaudible) is our approach in all of those things.

NICK COATSWORTH:  Sure. So there's a variety of jurisdictional reporting mechanisms. I'll address specifically intensive  care because we're working in partnership with the Australia-New Zealand Intensive Care Society  to develop a real-time intensive care heat map, where hospitals with intensive cares will report,  biaily, on their COVID-19 patients and bed and ventilator availability.

GREG HUNT:  I think there's one here that I haven't heard from and then we'll have to keep going after that, I  apologise.

JOURNALIST:  A very quick update on health staff, the workforce that have been impacted as schools go to pupil-free days and earlier school holidays.

You mentioned the number of staff that be available from the private sector but how many are  actually available? Have you started to see an impact on staffing of schools, changing the way they  operate?

GREG HUNT:  Look, I don't have any figures on that. In the particular case of school holidays, I know families are  very used to making preparations and arrangements. At this stage, our health workforce has been  holding up and I think that's an appropriate place for me to finish. Today is about-

JOURNALIST:  What about the partner issue because no one's answered it yet. Can you go and visit a partner who  lives in another house? What is the medical advice? Either way, is that a risk of transmission or is it  okay?

GREG HUNT:  Okay. So, let me finish this question, respectfully Claire, that because we had one and then I'll come  back and finish on that.

So in terms of the situation with the medical staff, our GPs, our aged care workers, our hospital  staff, we've now taken measures on all fronts to assist them and they are doing an extraordinary and  heroic job.

Then in terms of the situation with regards to households, people are allowed to meet in gatherings  of two. If a particular State has made a ruling about entrance into houses, I will respectfully leave  that to them. The National Cabinet decision was about people being able to go out in groups of two  and to keep to households in addition to that.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



I'm not aware of the details that you've just provided so I won't try to provide advice on that. My  last comment is to Australians and to our health workers. To Australians, I want to say thank you.  These early promising signs are your doing.

These actions are beyond what anybody in government would ever have wanted to have done, and  beyond what any Australian family would ever have sought to face. But people are rising to the  occasion and this can be, can be one of our greatest moments as a country.

If people are taking care of each other, by not going out; if that they are taking care of each other by  supporting their seniors - and I do want to add that there will be an additional $59 million for 3.4  million meals to be delivered to seniors at home who may be isolated.

But if you're volunteering to provide groceries or meals for people who are otherwise truly isolated,  I want to say thank you and to those who are contemplating it, that would be a wonderful human  gesture.

But this can be one of our finest moments in our most difficult times as a country and Australians  are overwhelmingly doing that. But right at the forefront of all of these people are our nurses, our  midwives, our doctors, our allied health workers and our medical and hospital support workers.

Today is about giving them security and integrating two national systems, our public and private  hospital systems, in a once-in-a-century redesign of our hospital services. It builds on what we've  done with a once-in-a-century redesign of our general practice services that have been delivered  over the last few days.

We're building that capacity at the same time as you are providing the containment and helping to  deliver the early flattening of the curve.

Thank you.

-ENDS-

