

RICHARD MARLES MP

ACTING LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  TODAY SHOW  FRIDAY, 18 DECEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus outbreak in the northern beaches of NSW; contact tracing;  state borders; quarantine.

SYLVIA JEFFREYS, HOST: Joining me now is Minister for Trade and Tourism, Simon  Birmingham and Acting Leader of the Opposition Richard Marles. Good morning to you  both, Simon to you first how worried should we be about this outbreak?

SIMON BIRMINGHAM, MINISTER FOR TRADE AND TOURISM: Well, I think we should  have confidence first and foremost in New South Wales authorities. Yes, of course, it's a  concern and everybody should follow the health advice that has been put out by those New  South Wales authorities. But you know, the New South Wales Government has done an  incredible job right throughout 2020 when there have been outbreaks and clusters that  have occurred, they've managed to stamp them out and to do so very quickly without them  spreading widely across the state and so they've demonstrated they've got world class  testing, contact tracing systems and an ability to get on top of these sorts of things and so,  yes, you know, there's a point of concern there and people should absolutely get out, get  tested, if they have any doubts or reasons to do so. Follow the advice of the health  authorities, but also have confidence that New South Wales has demonstrated it can get on  top of these things and we should back their systems to do so again,

JEFFREYS: As tourism minister, what are your thoughts on the border closures and the  travel hotspots that have been imposed in the last 24 hours?

BIRMINGHAM: Look, I think some of these actions are a little bit premature and I’d urge all  States and Territories to recognise as I said, the success that's been put in place by New  South Wales, the fact they've demonstrated time and time and time again through 2020,  that they contain these things, that get on top of them and they've stopped the spread  themselves, without really the need for these types of measures during the course of the  year and it obviously does plant a lot of uncertainty and there are so many Australian jobs  dependent on our tourism and travel industry and they just can't afford to take another hit. If  this turns out to be an unnecessary hit from some States and Territories.

JEFFREYS: Richard, Western Australia has already slammed its border shut to the whole  of New South Wales should Queensland follow suit, at least with Greater Sydney?

RICHARD MARLES, ACTING LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Well, I  think both States need to be thinking about the medical advice that they're getting in terms  of making the decisions that they are making. It doesn't seem as I read it, that the hard  borders are being put in place at the moment. I think Simon is right that we should have  confidence in the New South Wales case tracing system, they've done a really fantastic  job during the course of the year and whilst this is obviously a source of enormous anxiety  and concern, you know, these sort of events during the year have been able to be  managed by New South Wales. I mean, as I've been saying all year, I'd like to see some  more leadership from the Federal Government in relation to the whole question of  Australia's internal borders. But at this point, it seems to me that people are, are acting in a  sensible why

JEFFREYS: Simon, it's likely this started with an international flight crew member, we  clearly have a chink in our armour here with international flight crews not having to  quarantine in hotels. Is it time for that to change?

BIRMINGHAM: Well, I expect that that will be reviewed, as with every one of these cases,  there's been further reviews and further tightening -

JEFFREYS: But do we have time to review? Look at what’s happened in the last 24 hours.

BIRMINGHAM: No, health officials act pretty quickly on these things when they look at it.  So after the South Australian cluster, which again was got on top of very, very quickly,  through isolating, contact tracing all of the right processes and practices. The same things  occurring right now in New South Wales, but after that it's a cluster again, a result of  returning Australians from overseas and the challenges of those international arrivals  bringing COVID into the country. They upped the testing regime to change some of the  practices in relation to other staff. And that was all done on the basis of health  officials analysing what had happened and I expect they'll do the same and they'll do the  same pretty quickly in this regard to.

JEFFREYS: Richard, how are you about international flight crews not quarantining in  hotels?

MARLES: Well, I mean, we need to have international crews coming here to bring  Australians home. There needs to be the proper arrangements in place for them and I think  it's important that that is a situation which is continually reviewed. What's also important  though, is that we have really good case tracing and we do, New South Wales, as Simon  has said has shown that through the course of the year and I think around the country, that  level of expertise is now being equal by the other States and we should have confidence in  that.

JEFFREYS: Okay, Richard Marles and Simon Birmingham, we appreciate your time.  There's a lot up in the air today and we're glad that you could join us this morning. Thank  you.

ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363











