



MEDIA RELEASE  JOBSEEKER

More evidence of shameful lack of support for disadvantaged and people

on low incomes in Anglicare’s Jobs Snapshot



The Australian Greens said today Anglicare Australia’s Jobs Snapshot once

again demonstrates the urgent need for a permanent increase to JobSeeker

and Youth Allowance to ensure that the payment is above the poverty line.



It is absolutely shameful that in a country as wealthy as Australia the

Government is not ensuring that disadvantaged people and those people on

low incomes are properly supported through this crisis”, Greens spokesperson

on Family and Community Services Senator Rachel Siewert said.



The Government also needs to fix the employment services system in this

country, it is not fit for purpose and instead of cutting over a billion dollars from

employment services that money should be invested in better delivery of

service.



The budget did not deliver for many unemployed Australians, for example there

are hundreds and thousands of jobs in the care economy, not only would that

help vulnerable Australians obviously it creates employment.



We are not all in this together. The Government is turning a blind eye and



giving the cold shoulder to the people that were out of work before this crisis

and to the million people who have entered the income support system

because we are in a recession.



The Government has no plan to manage the mortgage and rental stress that is

coming now that Jobseeker is back below the poverty line.



It’s pretty galling that the Government keeps talking about the mental health of

Australians when they are keeping so many people in limbo on whether they

will be living on $40 after Christmas.



I have just introduced a Greens private senator’s bill to reinstate the original

rate of the Coronavirus Supplement to $550 a fortnight for people on Youth

Allowance, JobSeeker and the Disability Support Pension.



This is the sixth bill to increase JobSeeker - formerly Newstart - that I have

introduced in my 15 years in Parliament. Those in Parliament who support an

increase to JobSeeker should vote for their professed values.



If this bill is passed it will reinstate the original rate of the Coronavirus

Supplement at $550 a fortnight for people on Jobseeker and Youth Allowance

and extend the supplement to people on DSP and those on the Aged Pension

accessing Commonwealth Rent Assistance."





Media Contact

Lucy Cowcher-Guthrie; 0418 401 180



