Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.







The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health

Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Public Service and Cabinet

Professor Brendan Murphy  Australian Chief Medical Officer



TRANSCRIPT

15 March 2020



INTERVIEW WITH DAVID SPEERS  ABC INSIDERS

E&OE…

Topics: Coronavirus; infection period and symptoms; Communicable Diseases Network Australia;  Cabinet Ministers; isolation, social gatherings; supermarkets; parliamentary sitting week; schools;  lockdowns.

DAVID SPEERS:  Brendan Murphy, Greg Hunt, thank you both for joining us.

GREG HUNT:  Morning.

DAVID SPEERS:  Let’s start with this. You were both at the meeting on Tuesday with Peter Dutton, this Cabinet  meeting. Are you certain you don’t have coronavirus?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  No one can be absolutely certain about everything, but all of our advice internationally is that the  peak infectious period is when you have symptoms.

There have been very few cases of people transmitting the virus in the 24 hours beforehand. So all  the way through our public health advice in our published series of national guidelines, which is the  public health advice that the entire country’s been using, where we define a close contact as  someone who’s been in contact with someone who is symptomatic at any stage or up to 24 hours  before.

DAVID SPEERS:  Because the confusion is you’ve got the US Center for Disease Control says some spread might be  possible before people show symptoms, the World Health Organization says it is possible to catch  coronavirus from someone who has just a mild cough and does not feel ill.

So where exactly is this 24 hour window, where’s that from?

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





BRENDAN MURPHY:  This was our Communicable Diseases Network Australia looking at the international evidence. You  have to draw a line. In a public health response you have to set a case definition and that’s what  we’ve been using right across the country with every contact of every case.

DAVID SPEERS:  So this is now the advice?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  This has been the advice since January.

DAVID SPEERS:  Okay. So, people watching out there, if they know they’ve come into contact with someone with  coronavirus, as long as it was more than 24 hours before they showed symptoms, they’re fine?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Well, they do not need to self-isolate, they don’t meet our case definition, and we believe they’re  very, very unlikely to have been infectious.

DAVID SPEERS:  Were you prepared to self-isolate, Minister?

GREG HUNT:  In fact, the whole Cabinet was, and so I think that’s an important thing. What we’re very focused on  is two things here.

One is ensuring that the medical advice is paramount and I understand there are many people with  views, but if there was a breakthrough of absolute national importance on Friday it was the  agreement that the group of Chief Medical Officers around the country - it’s known as the  Australian Health Protection Principal Committee or AHPPC - is the paramount source of medical  advice to the nation.

That’s been agreed and we now have a unique wartime Cabinet situation of a National Cabinet,  which has been established. They have established, as we sought, the Chief Medical Officers as  their principal source of advice, and Medical Officers have set out the conditions…

DAVID SPEERS:  And I want to come back to that. Just, if I can, on this particular case of Peter Dutton. Given you  feel comfortable about him not infecting anyone at that Tuesday Cabinet meeting, why then  yesterday did we see cleaners in hazmat suits scrubbing the rooms where Peter Dutton had been on  the Tuesday?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  I think that was an abundance of caution taken by the people in the Commonwealth Parliamentary  Offices. We don’t…

DAVID SPEERS:  And self-isolation would not be an abundance of caution?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Well, I think the virus probably doesn’t last for more than a few hours.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



DAVID SPEERS:  So why were they scrubbing it down?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  I’d have to check with the people who…

DAVID SPEERS:  You don’t know. Do you know?

GREG HUNT:  That wasn’t a decision I’m aware of either the Chief Medical Officer and I’m not aware of any  Cabinet involvement in that. So…

DAVID SPEERS:  Someone’s decided that there’s enough risk to send in fully-clothed cleaners to scrub down the  whole area. They didn’t need to do that?

GREG HUNT:  Yeah. Can we step back a moment here. We are now heading into an unprecedented situation, not  something that any of us have experienced in our lives, and our job is to ensure that a number of  things happen.

One is that there is the preparation which began during January and has contributed to the spread  being far slower in Australia, although we acknowledge that it’s accelerating now. We’ve prepared  both the system, but we’ve prepared the nation for the fact that we’re not immune, therefore we are  going to face…

DAVID SPEERS:  I appreciate that. But I just want to get into the confusion that there is right now. People who were  on the Qantas flight with Peter Dutton before your Tuesday Cabinet meeting were also told to either  self-isolate or get a test.

GREG HUNT:  Do you mind if I answer this? Queensland Health has done what’s called the case investigation and  they established that the relevant time for contact with Peter Dutton was the 11th of March. I would  imagine that the airline, following the protocol because it wasn’t known at that time when the  relevant case definition started, made their decision.

DAVID SPEERS:  There’s a lot of confusion out there. Qantas is doing one thing, you’ve got cleaners in hazmat gear  doing another. You’re saying it’s very clear. It’s not, is it?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  The advice is clear. Sometimes people interpret the advice over-cautiously, but our advice has been  absolutely consistent the whole way through.

GREG HUNT:  I do think there’s a very important thing here and I would not want some of the non-medical people  who might be sitting on the panel to be giving medical advice to the country, and obviously I’m  talking to Peter. I think it’s very important that we listen to the medical experts and why this is  important is to make sure that the right people are being tested…



Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



DAVID SPEERS:  I agree, and we’re going to get to the medical questions.

GREG HUNT:  No, I would like to proceed, please, David.

DAVID SPEERS:  Okay, sure.

GREG HUNT:  And the two fundamental conditions are, firstly, that somebody has either been in contact - contact  is being defined as symptoms minus 24 hours - or they’ve returned from overseas and then they  themselves have symptoms.

Now, many people have understandably where it’s not known at what time the diagnosed person  has developed symptoms, taken additional precautions, which is entirely understandable and  appropriate.

But once that contact period is known then the greater detail is in place. So the rule for the country  is being set out clearly now and it’s important that we follow the medical advice and not the  armchair experts…

DAVID SPEERS:  Okay, but you do accept, well, armchair experts perhaps, but there is also conflicting advice from  the World Health Organization and, as I say, you’ve got conflicting advice coming from airlines  and so on as well, so it is important to clear this up.

GREG HUNT:  They haven’t done the wrong thing, because at that stage the time of symptoms wasn’t known.  Queensland Health and the Deputy Chief Medical Officer who also conducted a case investigation  established the same thing and provided the same advice for this individual. More broadly…

DAVID SPEERS:  Let me get to a list of…

GREG HUNT:  ...we will all be connected in some way over the coming months to people who are in some way  either infected or isolated, and it’s very important that our approach is one of national support.

DAVID SPEERS:  Well, let’s get to some basic facts here for people who are confused and wondering what’s okay and  what’s not. Should people be shaking hands right now?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  At the moment we are strongly suggesting that returned travellers should practice what we call  social distancing, so that’s keeping a distance of one-and-a-half metres if possible from people, not  being in close contact, so not shaking hands, avoiding all public gatherings…

DAVID SPEERS:  But as long as you haven’t just stepped off a plane it’s okay?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Yeah, or if you have been in contact with a case.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



DAVID SPEERS:  But everyone else can shake hands?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Yeah, that will change if we get more community transmission. We are now in a phase of  promoting broader social distancing. So I think…

DAVID SPEERS:  Okay, and just on that, is it okay to go to the movies right now?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Well, this is an evolving situation, David.

DAVID SPEERS:  What’s the advice right now, though?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  The advice right now is that as a first step we are suggesting that all non-essential gatherings of  more than 500 people not proceed.

DAVID SPEERS:  Okay, but a cinema, less than 500 but you’re still sitting in a closed room for a couple of hours with  people.

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Indeed, and the new Cabinet has asked the health experts, we’re spending two days on Monday and  Tuesday working out a more nuanced interpretation.

DAVID SPEERS:  Okay, but today if I’ve got a ticket to the movies, do I go?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  The risk is relatively low at the moment because we’ve only got 250 cases. The move to reduce  mass gatherings is a pre-emptive move.

DAVID SPEERS:  Okay, so it’s okay to go to the movies.

BRENDAN MURPHY:  The epidemiology is evolving, but as the case numbers increase we will likely be recommending  increasing measures of social distancing.

DAVID SPEERS:  Okay, sorry to press on this but people are wanting some specifics. You’re saying it’s okay to go to  the cinema today. What about the gym?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  I think the gym is fine. But everybody at the moment needs to practice very good hygiene, so if  you’re going to the gym I would be very focused on hand washing, using hand sanitisers, all of  those social distancing, good hygiene measures, we want everybody in the community to start  practising those and to start thinking about how we will do social distancing in future.



Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



GREG HUNT:  So, the next phase of our public information campaign begins today, we’ve already had…

DAVID SPEERS:  I’ve seen that, but it doesn’t explain a lot of these basic questions. What about trains and planes? Is  it okay to travel?

GREG HUNT:  Well, it’s designed to be, firstly, very simple so as people can understand, helping to stop the  spread...

DAVID SPEERS:  It’s general.

GREG HUNT:  Secondly, to be flexible, just as Karen was talking about, the ability to step up both information and  measures as we have done, which is what we’ve done…

DAVID SPEERS:  And that’s what I’m trying to get to…

GREG HUNT:  …and then thirdly to direct people to, if they need additional information, to health.gov.au.

DAVID SPEERS:  But does health.gov.au have these answers? What about riding on a train? If you have to catch the  train to work, takes you an hour, is it okay to be on that train?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  At the moment we are not suggesting that people should stop taking public transport. As the  situation evolves, every day we meet as the experts for two or three hours and we’re looking at the  case numbers, the evidence of community transmission…

DAVID SPEERS:  So this might change?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  This will change. Our social distancing measures may well change over time. At the moment we are  ahead of the curve. We’re moving earlier than most countries have on public gatherings.

DAVID SPEERS:  If you’re over 70, should you stay at home?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  If you’re over 70 you should be more careful. Particularly if you’ve got chronic disease. More  careful about social distancing measures.

DAVID SPEERS:  So things like trains and cinemas and so on?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  I think you would be more careful about those things at the moment.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



DAVID SPEERS:  What does more careful mean?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Avoiding things that aren’t essential.

DAVID SPEERS:  So if you’re over 70, don’t go to the cinema?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Well, I think if you’re over 70 and you’ve got chronic disease, at the moment the risk is very low  but you might want to start thinking about taking more social distancing measures in the future.

GREG HUNT:  Can I talk a little bit about the course of the next six months because I think what everybody is  looking for is the course and the perspective…

DAVID SPEERS:  Well, I think they’re looking for some details, with respect Minister, what they should do today. I  get your point that it’s important to look at the long term. But right now people don’t know whether  to go to the restaurant or the supermarket…

GREG HUNT:  Can I put all of this in context, and I will address that. So, the advice which was given by the  medical experts and accepted by the National Cabinet which was formed on Friday is that mass  gatherings being defined as 500 would become the threshold.

They’ve actually brought that forward. Some have asked, have they pushed that back? It was the  opposite. They’ve brought that forward far earlier than might have been necessary if you were  doing a stepped approach, but out of the abundance of caution.

So whereas other countries with far higher caseloads have brought those in, but they have brought  those in when the caseloads have been much, much greater than Australia.

So in terms of where we’re at in our national caseload, this is coming in dramatically earlier than in  many other countries.

DAVID SPEERS:  Well, can I ask you about that, Professor Murphy. Was this based on medical advice, the Monday  advice?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Absolutely. We made the decision to recommend to Government on Friday.

We thought that the decision should have been made then earlier than we might otherwise have  done.

We were initially talking about expecting greater emergency transmission before we introduced  these measures but we felt that it was time to make the decision to give a bit of time for  adjustment…

DAVID SPEERS:  But not this weekend. So it’s okay to go to the footy today, but not tomorrow?

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



BRENDAN MURPHY:  Well these things, they’re not black and white. As the caseload grows you start introducing  measures, but our decision on Friday was that Monday was an appropriate time on the predicted rise  in cases to introduce it.

GREG HUNT:  And that is bringing it forward. The other thing is we view this as a six-month window for  Australia. Now, that time might be shorter, it might be longer, but that’s our best estimate on the arc  and course of the virus…

DAVID SPEERS:  And where is this heading in terms of, I see the Victorian Chief Health Officer saying you should  go out and buy enough food to last two weeks. Is that your advice as well?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  I think that’s a little bit premature at the moment, but I think…

DAVID SPEERS:  So who do we believe, you or your Victorian counterpart?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Well, I think that we’re generally at one on all of our advice.

DAVID SPEERS:  Well, not on this…

BRENDAN MURPHY:  I think that for most people we don’t want to encourage major panic buying at the moment. We’ve  seen that with the supermarket chains. But I think it’s probably sensible to have a few days of  supplies.

DAVID SPEERS:  A few days?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Yeah.

DAVID SPEERS:  Can you see, I mean, you’re talking about, we’re all unified now, we’ve got this National Cabinet.  But we’ve got the state saying go and buy two weeks’ worth of food, you’re saying don’t worry  about that.

BRENDAN MURPHY:  No, I’m not saying don’t worry about it. I’m just saying that we will get proportionate, collective  advice. There are sometimes people in one jurisdiction who are a bit more forward-leaning because  of the circumstances in that jurisdiction.

But our advice to governments has always been unanimous. So our advice on the social distancing  was unanimous, our advice on border measures…

DAVID SPEERS:  What’s the thinking on schools at the moment? A lot of people are asking about this. It is a difficult  one.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



Some schools are taking it upon themselves to close down. Do you think we’re going to see -  Minister I’ll let you first - more school closures?

GREG HUNT:  Let me look at the broad question here. There is the potential, and when we’re looking forward over  this course of the next six months, we are rightly keeping all options on the table, whether it’s in  relation to travel, whether it’s in relation to schools.

The schools question will be very much guided by the medical advice. One of the things that they  have talked about is not moving too early on something like that because of the balance that many  children - and I understand that one of the leading state education authorities in New South Wales  pointed out the risk of children being with grandparents, of taking parents out of the workforce who  might be in the health and medical sector, disrupting supply chains. So maintaining the structure of  society to maintain the support…

DAVID SPEERS:  It’s complicated.

GREG HUNT:  …and also, Brendan can address this, the question of infectivity and impact on children of the  disease.

BRENDAN MURPHY:  So, one of the interesting and positive aspects of this virus is that there have been very few reports  of symptomatic infection in children. What we don’t know is whether children are getting infected  but just don’t get symptoms.

DAVID SPEERS:  They can still spread it.

BRENDAN MURPHY:  They can still spread it. Or whether they’re not getting infected. The former is probably more likely.  But, in a way, if they are getting infected and they’re perfectly well, whilst they might spread it, it  also creates a herd immunity. So there is lots of complex questions about schools.

DAVID SPEERS:  So we’re not there yet, but this might be something coming?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  There’s no question that we have a range of social distancing measures that we will not hesitate to  recommend to government. But they’ve got to be proportional and they might last for a long time.  So you don’t want to move too early.

DAVID SPEERS:  And we know politicians can be infected. Do you think Parliament should sit next week?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Parliament is planning to sit next week, they are taking measures…

DAVID SPEERS:  Do you think they should?



Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



BRENDAN MURPHY:  I think if they can take measures to reduce public traffic, and I know they’re going to do that.

DAVID SPEERS:  Reduce the number of people in the building?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Correct.

DAVID SPEERS:  MPs as well as staff?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  They are- I had a meeting with the Presiding Officers yesterday and they are looking at a range of  measures to reduce the number of people in the building including staff and visitors.

School groups have nearly all cancelled now. So I think it is important that Parliament sits because  it’s the last time before- the Minister can obviously speak to that more than me. But I think they’re  very focused on making sure…

DAVID SPEERS:  Can you have a limited number of MPs, a quorum basically, rather than everyone being there?

GREG HUNT:  Look, the Presiding Officers have been taking the medical advice and they are working to make  sure that we operate within exactly the same parameters as the nation.

So, when you think of what our responsibility is here, starting in January, to make sure that we did  all the steps to contain and slow the spread of the virus in Australia, and that has so far put us at a  far lower rate of infection than many other comparable countries that received their initial cases at  the same time.

We were able to contain the 15 cases from Wuhan, to carry out three successful quarantines, to slow  that, but we’ve been very upfront that we’re not immune.

These are unprecedented measures, as I say, a wartime like National Cabinet created for the next  phase.

And the way we view this is always trying to do things ahead, the mass gatherings situation has  been brought forward and then the next stage of the information campaign is bringing people in so  as they can help stop the spread but they also have the specific information that if they meet that  definition then it’s appropriate to be tested but if they don’t meet that definition…

DAVID SPEERS:  They don’t need to.

GREG HUNT:  …then there’s no need to.

DAVID SPEERS:  Let me ask you finally, then, this staged process, could we reach the point that we’ve seen now in  Italy, France and Spain, where we have the complete lockdown in Australia?

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



BRENDAN MURPHY:  It is potential that could be the case, but that may be focal. One of the things we know about  outbreaks of infections is that they can affect one part of a country, not another…

DAVID SPEERS:  So you could lockdown part of Sydney, but not the whole country.

BRENDAN MURPHY:  You can. Potentially you could. I mean look, the Koreans did that for two provinces very  successfully, locked them down. So everything is up for consideration. The Premiers and the Prime  Minister said to us, the health advisers, give us your fearless advice and we will take it.

DAVID SPEERS:  Okay, we are going to have to leave it there.

GREG HUNT:  I will just add something.

DAVID SPEERS:  Just quickly.

GREG HUNT:  There are no options that are off the table. The paramount goal, and the Prime Minister said this to  me at the outset, and that’s why to make a decision to close the border with China on the first of  February was extraordinary and unprecedented.

It was in a global context where it probably was going to hurt Australia more than almost any other  country, and yet we did that. And so our task is to not only prepare but to say to Australians: these  will be challenging times, but if we all work together and have that wartime spirit, then we will get  through this.

DAVID SPEERS:  All right, Minister Hunt, Professor Murphy, thank you both very much for joining us today.

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Pleasure, David.

GREG HUNT:  Thanks, David.

(ENDS)

