

JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

TEN NEWS

TUESDAY, 6 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECT: Federal Budget.



PETER VAN ONSELEN, HOST: If Labor was in power, would you have spent as much as

this Government during this pandemic?



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: We've always acknowledged that there is a

role for the Government to step in and support people's jobs and support people's

communities in a really difficult time like this. Our issue is with the effectiveness of this

spend. It's quite remarkable that in this budget the Government's racked up a trillion dollars

in debt, but there's still no long-term vision for the country.



VAN ONSELEN: So where should the debt be going if you're not happy with where it is?



CHALMERS: I'll give you one example, you think about the hiring subsidy that the

Government announced today. What they don't want people to know is that 928,000

Australian workers who are currently on unemployment benefits aren't even eligible for that

hiring subsidy. That's clearly something which is concerning to us. There are issues in

superannuation that we are worried about and we'll take our time to work through the

detail. But overall, there are some things we can support. The main issue we have is a

trillion dollars of debt without the bang for the buck you'd expect.



VAN ONSELEN: And you'd also keep JobSeeker and JobKeeper higher than what they're

leaving them, where would you take money away to do all those things, or would you just

have more debt?



CHALMERS: We've had a series of pork barrelling scandals, we've had a series of rorts,

we've had a Liberal Party donor paid $30 million for a $3 million dollar parcel of land -



VAN ONSELEN: But that's chump change compared to the billions we're talking about.



CHALMERS: But the point that we're making is the Government's not good at spending

this money effectively. A trillion dollars in debt, no long-term plan and unemployment is still

expected to be higher in four years’ time than what it was before COVID-19. There’s still no

plan for childcare and still people left out in this budget. Our concern is the effectiveness of

the spend. We don't think it's fair.



VAN ONSELEN: Are you comfortable with four years from now them projecting a deficit of

sixty-seven billion dollars? It seems high.



CHALMERS: It remains to be seen. The budget actually has, for ten years, quite sizable

deficits. That's pretty remarkable when you consider that Morrison and Frydenberg said

that they had already got the budget back into surplus. Clearly that hasn't proven to be the

case and they need to explain that.



VAN ONSELEN: I asked the Treasurer this and I'll ask you: do you think you're going to

ever see a surplus budget in your political career now?



CHALMERS: It's hard to imagine. It rests on the fact that we need to get this economy

growing much faster in the recovery. We need to kickstart the recovery. That means

getting cleaner and cheaper energy, doing more to turn our ideas into jobs, it means

teaching and training our people for technological change. What we really need to do is

turbocharge and kick-start this recovery and get the place growing in a sustainable way. If

we do that, we can fix the Budget.



VAN ONSELEN: So, if this was a Jim Chalmers not a Josh Frydenberg budget, what



would the centrepiece of it be?



CHALMERS: I think energy policy certainly is a big part of the story here, the lack of it has

meant there hasn't been enough business investment -



VAN ONSELEN: You guys don't even have a target.



CHALMERS: What's required here and when I talk to business right around Australia,

what they really want, is some stability in policy. They  want to invest in cleaner and

cheaper energy but they're worried that the Government's had 22 policies in the last seven

years. Nothing in the budget undoes the damage caused by that uncertainty.



VAN ONSELEN: Jim Chalmers, appreciate your time.



CHALMERS: Thanks very much.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













