

ED HUSIC MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES  MEMBER FOR CHIFLEY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS  THURSDAY, 3 DECEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: China; Trade.

ASHLEIGH GILLON, HOST: Joining us live from Canberra is the Shadow Minister for  Resources and Agriculture Ed Husic, thank you for your time. Your Labor Frontbench  colleague, Madeleine King had a whack at the so-called Wolverines group, including some  of your Labor colleagues who are really strong China critics. Do you agree now's the time  for them to actively temper their language? Are they doing more harm than good in your  portfolio interests of agriculture and resources?

ED HUSIC, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES: Ash the  biggest thing I'm concerned about is jobs, we've got to make sure that exports are moving,  that we're earning money from that and that we're protecting jobs. We at this point in time  have nearly 80 ships off the coast of China, with nearly a billion dollars worth of coal sitting  there. We've had in the last 24 hours, some companies like Peabody down in the Illawarra,  who are telling their workers that from 4 January 2021, they're going to need to take  extended leave and use up their leave credits, because coal can't be stockpiled anymore.  We do need to see some resolution and improvement in the relationship so that we can get  that those exports moving, we can protect those jobs and we can have the economic  benefit at a very difficult time, the first recession in 30 years. So the focus has got to be on  jobs, and how we protect and grow them.

GILLON: Scott Morrison today accused Anthony Albanese of having an each way based  on national security. Isn't that what you're doing now? You can't endorse the Government's  plan to strongly stand up against China but then point the finger at the Government for  allowing relations to turn toxic. It's one or the other, isn't it? Isn't that a message that you  also need to send to this group of parliamentarians who do have very strong language on  China? If your focus is on jobs shouldn't you be urging them to temper their language?

HUSIC: It'd be fantastic Ash if in life it was just one issue we deal with at a time. But  unfortunately, in a complex society and in a complex economy, we've got to be able to do  two things at once; stand up for our values, but do it in a way that doesn't come with the  sort of economic consequence that we're seeing right now. The government does need to  find a way through, they've got to be able to resolve through back channels or whatever the  impasse that we've reached. Bob Hawke could pick up the phone to his counterpart back in

the day, John Howard could do the same and Scott Morrison should be able to do the same  right now because we've got a lot of jobs riding on this. Again, that doesn't mean that we  shut up or we turn a blind eye on the things that matter most to us. But just think before you  speak and recognise that if you're going to be fast and loose with your language, this can  come with a cost in terms of deteriorating the relationship. So  as I said, the focus is on  jobs, protecting and growing jobs, especially in the resources sector, especially with a lot of  companies that are worried about the stockpiling of coal and wanting to keep it moving and  not wanting to see international competitors get a foot in the door, that might be a longer  term arrangement that we really can't afford to see.

GILLON: To be fair, the nature of the Chinese regime has changed quite a lot from the  Hawke and Howard years.

HUSIC: I totally accept that.

GILLON: When you look at the resources sector, though, what could be the next frontier do  you think in this trade war in particular and how confident are you that iron ore is safe from  Beijing's wrath?

HUSIC: I think we've seen in the last 24 hours, how much iron ore sales helped the WA  economy. Not just in terms of economy but jobs in WA and so clearly, we've got to think  carefully about how we again find that balance between standing up for our values and  interests and ensuring that we have the growth, the economic growth and the jobs that  come out of the export of iron ore from WA. In agriculture as well there's a lot in WA I know  that there'd be barley growers, for example, they're very concerned about what's happening  with the treatment of exports there. Wine as well, that's the other market that's been  affected. Beef too. We want to be able to see our agriculture sector and resources sector  do well and find that balance.

GILLON: Several oil refineries are on the brink of closing around the country. BP has  already decided to close its Kwinana plant in WA. If you were the Minister now what sort of  fuel security measures would you be implementing? The Government's looking I know at a  production payment or a subsidy to provide support. Is that the right move?

HUSIC: I met with workers this week from refineries across the country Ash, who are very  concerned about their future work and concerned about employment. Not just direct but  indirect jobs too, the contractors that have a role in maintaining those refineries. The things  that they have said to me that I think have some really strong merit and should be  considered is the Government working with the sector on storage. Making sure that our IEA  fuel supply obligations, the stockpiling obligations of 90 days that we could see an  improvement in storage. We could see some measures with respect to some of the stuff  that the Government's talking about. The AWU for instance are arguing that there might be  other measures with respect to adding to the fuel price, we're obviously going to work  through some of this stuff. But certainly strategic infrastructure in respect of refineries and  boosting our supply is definitely something worth looking at. I would be interested to see  what the Government response is there. At a time where we're arguing more for self  reliance in a post-COVID environment and seeing what we can do, for a lot of those  workers, they want to see the Government take some concrete steps in listening to what  they have been saying, what the unions have been saying and encouraging refineries to  stay onshore and that we don't see a situation where we're just importing refined fuel.  We've had a proud history here, we should be seeing what we can do to maintain that into



the future.

GILLON: Yeah, sounds like the Government's making progress on that front. So we're  watching that closely for any announcement Ed Husic. Thanks, for your time.

HUSIC: Thanks, Ashleigh.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KATE BOYD 0438 881 997











