ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



ED HUSIC MP

MEMBER FOR CHIFLEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW   SYDNEY  WEDNESDAY, 16 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus pandemic impact on retail workers and small businesses;  JobKeeper; JobSeeker; Australians stranded overseas; use of RAAF VIP jets to bring  Australians home.

ED HUSIC, MEMBER FOR CHIFLEY: Afternoon, everyone. I am Ed Husic, the Federal Member for  Chifley. Welcome here to the Eastern Creek border. I wanted to start by making this point; when  Josh Frydenberg brings down the first recession Budget in 30 years, he has three priorities, jobs,  jobs and jobs. It means a massive deal to people out here where through the pandemic, we saw  major layoffs occur. For example, in clubs, if you were a casual, you were probably the first to go  and you'd lost your job early on. We had a Government that was slow to put in place wage subsidies  as a result of what we were pushing for. There were a lot of people who missed out on getting  support, particularly if you're casuals, or for example, dnata workers who live in this area who  couldn't get that JobKeeper support. Support that lots of local small businesses in this area say kept  them afloat. We even had small business owners today approach us and speak with Albo about the  value of JobKeeper. And some of them can't believe that it's actually being cut early when they need  the support right now. So, to have Anthony Albanese here, in our part of Western Sydney, is a big  deal to be able to hear from workers here in Woolies about what they did to survive, and what the  organisation did to survive through the pandemic and to also make the case for the most important  thing for us in our part of Western Sydney, and in fact, the country, is to get the country moving and  to get it working again. And I'm grateful, Albo, that you've been here today to hear firsthand from  workers in our area.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Thanks very much, Ed.  And it's great to once again have a very warm welcome here in Western Sydney at Eastern Creek.  And today we've heard firsthand from retail workers, but also from small business owners, about the  pressures that they've been under. Firstly, I want to give a big shout out to the retail workers who  kept Australia fed and watered during this pandemic. They've been doing it tough. And in some  cases, there's been a bit of pressure on them more than usual. It's important that they have our  respect, that people continue to behave in a polite way towards workers who are doing their best to  make a difference. And I say thank you to our retail workers today. But the Scott Morrison recession  is one that's having a real impact on people. Now's not the time, when unemployment is continuing  to rise, to have a withdrawal of support. And that's why the Government should reconsider its

decision to cut JobKeeper, to cut JobSeeker, to cut support. They should be looking at ways in  which they can increase small business support. And we've put forward an eight-point economic  plan to boost the economy at this time where it's really struggling. We know from the Government's  own predictions, that there'll be an additional 400,000 unemployed between now and Christmas. So,  the fact that they're talking about actually decreasing support at the end of this month is simply  inappropriate.

Lastly, I'd say as well, before taking questions, that Scott Morrison needs to do more to bring home  the 25,000 Australians who are stranded overseas. You have circumstances whereby a young mum  with a one-year-old in London was told to ‘go and find accommodation at a homeless shelter’. That  was the official recommendation, and it simply is not good enough. We know that Scott Morrison has  assets at his disposal through the Royal Australian Air Force VIP fleet. We know that those planes  are good enough to fly Scott Morrison or the Governor General to Europe or to the United States.  We know they are available and largely sitting idle right now. And we know there is no additional  costs because the planes are there, the RAAF personnel are there, and the need to keep flying in  order to keep up their hours and the training that takes place on those flights. In addition, we know  that Qantas and other airlines have available aircraft that are also sitting idle at the moment. So, the  only thing that is lacking at the moment is leadership. There is no lack of hotel space, there is no  lack of planes. All there is a lack of is leadership from Scott Morrison. And if Scott Morrison isn’t in  charge of entry into Australia and our national borders, and he is not in control of our quarantine,  what is the National Government responsible for? He has a responsibility to these Australians, a  duty of care to do much better than is happening at the moment. He can't continue to want to lead  the country but not accept responsibility for anything that is happening during this pandemic. Happy  to take questions.

JOURNALIST: Do you think it is reasonable to relax the cap on arrivals by 2,000? Or should it be  more?

ALBANESE: Well, we have a response today to my intervention yesterday. I'm pleased that the  Government is starting to respond a little bit, but it's not enough. The fact is that Northern Territory,  Western Australia, Queensland are all saying they're prepared to do more. They'd be pleased to do  more. What they need is some Commonwealth support and Commonwealth leadership. We know at  the beginning of the pandemic, for example, the facility outside of Darwin can take 3,000 people  alone. And we know that this Government continues to be there for the photo-op, but never there for  the follow-up. What they need to do is not make announcements, they need to make sure that this  actually happens.

JOURNALIST: Michael McCormack has said that he has asked states and territories and says that  they will comply. But do you think they have to agree with the Commonwealth?

ALBANESE: Look, if only the Deputy Prime Minister had some influence. He's writing a letter to the  states and territories. Now, we know the National Cabinet isn't national, and it's not acting like a  cabinet. But how absurd is it that the Deputy Prime Minister holds a press conference today and  says he's writing a letter about the 25,000 Australians who are stranded overseas and can't get  home and that the National Government is responsible for. This isn't the responsibility of the states.  This is the responsibility of the National Government. And what it requires is national leadership. Not  a Deputy Prime Minister who's writing a letter. The National Cabinet, so-called, is having their  telephone hook-up on Friday. It's become increasingly clear that it is becoming dysfunctional  because the National Government, it's chaired by Scott Morrison. And it's almost as if they're not

participants, they're observers on this process and don't have control over anything at all. But to be  reduced to writing letters, is, I find it, quite extraordinary.

JOURNALIST: Are there concerns about using the Howard Springs facility for quarantine of  international arrivals when it's being used to currently quarantine domestic travellers, and would that  cause a risk to domestic travel?

ALBANESE: These are practical issues that are able to be sorted through. The Government will  come up with a whole range of excuses. That is what they're good at. What we want is outcomes,  not excuses. We are a vast continent. If we can't provide accommodation and space for many more  people than we are now, then it's because the Government, the Federal Government, is not being  fair dinkum about finding those solutions.

JOURNALIST: Do you think you would have a practical response to facilities such as Christmas  Island being used where there are currently people waiting to be deported there? What is the  practical solution there?

ALBANESE: Well, actually, the last report that I had about Christmas Island was the Biloela family,  the two young kids and their mum and dad were the only people in the facility certainly for a while  there. And after, Christmas Island had been closed. I'm not sure of how many people are there right  now. But I do know that the Commonwealth was able to find literally tens of millions of dollars to deal  with this family, of taxpayers' money, in order to make a political point for a family that the people of  Biloela were very happy to stay and continue to make a contribution. The fact is that this  Government needs to find a solution. These things aren't that difficult. This is a time where,  newsflash to the Commonwealth Government, there are less international tourists coming into  Australia than has been the case in my lifetime, quite possibly. That is the case. Therefore, it is a  time where there are more hotel rooms available than have been available in my lifetime, as well.  So, in addition to that, of course, there are a range of Commonwealth facilities that could be made  available. The truth is that this Government have, like on a range of issues, not been prepared to  make decisions and produce outcomes. What they have been more interested in is pretending that  they're observers of this whole process, that the Prime Minister's job is to chair a so-called National  Cabinet meeting once every couple of weeks, be told by the premiers who have a chat with each  other about what they're all doing in their respective jurisdictions, and then he goes out and holds a  press conference. Well, the Commonwealth is clearly in charge of our borders. And the  Commonwealth is clearly in charge of quarantine. They should be able to fix this.

JOURNALIST: One in five young people in South West Sydney are currently unemployed. What is  that going to look like with the Federal Government's JobKeeper plan?

ALBANESE: Well, it'll get worse with the cuts to JobKeeper. It'll get worse with the cuts to  JobSeeker that are taking money out of the economy when the Government should be doing the  opposite. The Government should be providing support for our economy at a time when it's needed.  Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053

