

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T

Monday 31st August 2020



Minister Littleproud Media Conference Mural Hall  Parliament House Canberra

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: All good? Well, good afternoon, and thanks for all coming. And  can I firstly acknowledge the work of the Commission in putting out their interim  observations? This is very important. We are set to be done by the end of August to give  the Government some direction about what this year's bushfire season will look like and if  there was any recommendations they felt they should bring to us straight away. We're  pleased to read through the report, and there's more detail for me to go through, but I'm  working through those quickly as I can. But I think it's important that we understand that  what the report effectively says is that what we've dealt with isn't unprecedented. It means  this is what we're going to have to deal with into the future, and what it's telling us is there  needs to be a more nationally-coordinated approach in terms of preparedness, in terms of  fighting these disasters and where the trigger points are for the Federal Government to get  involved, and also the recovery, making sure there's consistency across our country.  Whether you live in Stanthorpe in Queensland or Tenterfield in New South Wales, the  recovery should be consistent between states to make sure that no-one is felt as though  they're left behind. There's some clear direction around work that we're going to have to  continue to do with states around hazard reduction, around using the data to make sure  that that data can be used consistently to go into a fire- national fire-raiding program, to  ensure there's consistency. And that knowledge and that data can be used in real time to  keep people safe and help them make the decisions they need to. This is a very important  document, one that we'll obviously continue to work through, and over the coming couple  of weeks the Commission will start to provide some recommendations around where to  from here. But let me say that between the Federal and State governments we've  continued and already started on a pathway, not in any way in disrespect to the  Commission, but understanding and learning organically from some of the things that  happened last year about how we can do things better in making sure that there is some  greater national consistency. In fact, we've started that particularly in the recovery process.  But the Government has acted; in terms of that recovery, it has… $1 billion of the 2 billion  already out the door. The last significant piece of that is around the local economic  recovery plans, which have to be locally led, not Canberra-led. So, we're proud of the fact  that we've been able to get money out the door. There's still some work to do with the  states, particularly around those programs that we asked them to roll out in terms of  recovery, but this isn't about blame. This is about support, understanding, and making sure  we get this right. As we heard last week, the Prime Minister and I got a very  comprehensive briefing around what we're facing this year. And while it may be a normal  bushfire season, you still have to understand there are hot spots where we are at high risk  for bushfires again this year, but we are also going to have to have the agility to be able to

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

pivot into disasters like cyclones and flooding. We are seeing that the bureau is predicting  a 70 per cent chance of a La Nina event happening. In 2010 and -12, we saw the effects of  that. So we have to overlay that with the complexity of COVID-19 in keeping our  emergency service personnel safe but being able to have a nationally coordinated  approach that gets our emergency service personnel from one state or the other or to be  able to sit in a boat in swift river rescue and be able to do that safely from COVID-19. And  the states are preparing for that and have done a lot of the legwork for that. They still have  the operational management of disasters, and can I say they've done an outstanding job  over some trying circumstances, and we'll continue to support them, and we will continue  to formalise where those trigger points are where the Australian Government can help to  support them.

QUESTION: Minister, what do you think of the idea of National Cabinet or a National  Cabinet-type body overseeing the bushfire response?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I think that there's actually some merit with respect to that,  and the Commission has touched on that around how can we have that agility where a  process like National Cabinet can lean into it, where we have lines, consistent lines of  communication between the Federal and state governments in making sure- you know, the  Prime Minister made an unprecedented move this year in bringing in reservists  compulsorily. That's never been done in our nation's history, but he took the leadership in  understanding that this recovery and particularly the day one after was going to be very  traumatic for a lot of Australians, and there needed to be boots on the ground. And the  only way to do that effectively was to get the Defence Force out there, and I can tell you  there are communities that just change the psychology after- overnight as soon as those  khaki men and women walk through their streets. There was some calm restored, and I  think that's where a mature conversation can happen quickly through a National Cabinet  process. But we'll continue to work and not pre-empt what the Royal Commission may  recommend, but there is opportunity to build on that process.

QUESTION: Minister, last summer the Prime Minister said that the short reporting  timeframe for the Royal Commission was needed because fire managers needed  recommendations before the fire season started. The Royal Commission hasn't delivered  on that. The fire season's already started. I mean, is that a danger now? Are you  disappointed the Royal Commission hasn't actually delivered any recommendations that  fire managers can use?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No, because fire commissioners from around the country all fed  into this Royal Commission. There was an understanding and appreciation by the  commissioners of what they've done and how they'd do it. They planned meticulously last  year, and I think, we just need to be careful about the commentary around that. These are  some of the best fire commissioners in the world, if not the world. And let me tell you, they  were listening to the advice about what we were going to face last year and this year and  what we are looking at this year. They are preparing themselves meticulously around that  in terms of the resources they require. There has been no stone left unturned. I think  commentary to the contrary is in fact a little disrespectful to our fire commissioners. They  cooperated openly with the Commission and will continue to do so as we would in making  sure that if there's anything else that needs to be looked at, then the Federal Government  will look at these recommendations in a mature and respectful way to ensure that the  outcomes that Australians would expect between tiers of government is effective in  keeping them safe during natural disasters.

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

QUESTION: You can see that there were big issue between coordination of the state and  Federal governments.

DANIEL LITTLEPROUD: No, I think what you have to understand is the state bodies acted  very efficiently and in an outstanding way in fighting these fires. That is their responsibility,  and I think you would have found that there would have been a lot more lives lost and a lot  more homes lost if the planning had not been there and the work that those fire  commissioners undertook in extraordinary circumstances that effectively- there was no  human way of putting those fires out. It was simply trying to manage them, and if they  hadn't been as professional and efficient as they were, we would have seen more disaster.  So, I think in terms of that coordination- in fact, I approved 50 tasking requests at their  discretion within four minutes of getting it with ADF support, whether that be for hercs to  move firefighters around, whether that was about having fuel on the ground, whether that's  about using ADF bases, it was given to them in a matter of minutes of them asking. So I  think there was great coordination between Federal and State governments, and obviously  I think where we've got some more work to do is around the recovery process. This is one  of the biggest recoveries in our nation's history with respect to a natural disaster. There will  be learnings; we've got to be mature enough to understand that. I'm proud to say that the  Federal Government's payments, 60 per cent of those through the DRP payments, were  out within 60 minute- sorry, 40 minutes of people asking for them. They were in people's  accounts. Some of the longer-term recovery and clean-ups and other payments and loans  and grants took some time, but some states have had bigger task than others. But there's  no point in reinventing the wheel. It's about getting better coordination and harmonisation.

QUESTION: So, Minister, then what's the key tangible takeaway for fire managers from  this document?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I think that the clear is around strengthening that that  nationally coordinated approach, having a clearer understanding and enunciation of  exactly where the Federal Government comes into it. This is not in any way, shape, or  form trying to take away the operational management of fires from state officials. This is  about making sure that there are clear lines, not only for state governments but for the  community, to understand there is a point and a juncture where the Federal Government  may need to bring its resources in, but also about how we use that data and bringing it  together instead of having a federated response where one state wants to do another.  There is real opportunity to harmonise some of that data to ensure we're giving real time  information to people and keeping them safe and also making sure that there's  consistency with respect of the recovery process in ensuring that, doesn't matter which  side of the border you live on, you're going to get a fair crack at the recovery not  dependent on your state.

QUESTION: Minister, given that these disasters are likely to get worse as time goes on, do  you accept the observation in the report that further warming is inevitable over the next 20  years?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: And that's what's been factored into our planning in years past  and into the future and, in fact, this year. The BoM tells us that we have to be prepared to  pivot somewhat away from a significant bushfire threat to that of a La Nina event. That  would in fact mean more cyclones and greater chance of flooding. So that agility within our  emergency management system has already developed and is in fact already mature, and  I have to say that the states have done an outstanding job in making sure that that's  happened in terms of their preparedness and a build-up of resources.

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T



QUESTION: Minister, the report found that the warning system needed to be better. Is that  something that you'll commit to working with states and on a federal level to improve  before the end of this year?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well we've already started that. The Federal Government's put  $6.2 million towards achieving that national consistency. But we obviously got to get the  states to agree and hopefully this will be a catalyst for them to work collaboratively  together and with us to achieve that because I think there's some real benefits to that in  terms of the harmonisation because particularly if you're just on one side of the border to  the other, it just makes it easier for those border citizens to have consistency and  understanding of what that threat might be because fires don't necessarily respect a state  border line.

QUESTION: Minister the delay to the report's release; is it affecting preparations ahead of  the bushfire season. Are any draft recommendations being circulated among fire chiefs to  ensure that they're fully across the key issues that need to be addressed?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: We're expecting in the next couple of weeks that the commission  to provide further recommendations based on what they have found in their observation  and that will be through the commission, as I understand, consulting with key stakeholders  to make sure that those recommendations are achievable. And we'll obviously wait for  those, but as soon as we get them, we'll work through that as a government as quickly as  we can, make sure that there is a conversation with state governments around  understanding what has been outlined in this report.

QUESTION: Minister, just on wine - the Chinese obviously announced-

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Hang on, can I just do bushfires? Is there anyone else on  bushfires?

QUESTION: Well, is that too late, though, if you're waiting another couple of weeks?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No, I think you have to understand that there has been meticulous  planning and in fact those fire commissioners were before the commission in  understanding what they do and how they do it. So I don't think there's anything that the  commission would find that hasn't been asked by them to the fire commissioners and  understand any difference of things that may need to be done. We would have seen that in  these observations with the recommendation. So I've every confidence the commission  has done this in a very articulate way that ensures everything that needs to be understood  by a government is understood now.

QUESTION: Minister, what do you think of Australia having its own sovereign capability in  terms of the aerial fire bombers? Do you think we should be spending hundreds of millions  of dollars to try and up that?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, as you appreciate, the states have operational management.  They're the ones that give the advice through their peak body AFAC. We, in fact, make a  financial commitment around the standing cost which is around $26 million. And then we  also pay for some of the operational management of that fleet. There's 150 strong fleet  that will be here for this season, but that has to come from the experts, not from me or a  bureaucrat from Canberra, but from the experts on the ground in each of those states that

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

understand the risk that they are trying to mitigate and prepare for. And obviously we'll wait  and see if there's any specific recommendations by the commission about AFAC and that  nationally coordinated approach and we'll learn from that and understand. But our financial  commitment will be there and we'll work with the states to make sure whatever resources  required, and if that means it's a permanent fleet of some nature, then we'll obviously take  that from the experts, not from politicians.

QUESTION: Just on China, can I get your response to the second investigation into the  wine industry and do you think it's retaliation given the foreign interference  announcements made last week?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well let's make this clear, that that's not the second retaliation,  this is actually the formalisation of the first one that they announced the other day.

QUESTION: Sorry, in terms of the wine?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: The wine. So this isn't anything new. This is simply the  formalisation of that process, one in which they gave us two or three days' heads up on.  So this isn't earth shattering to us. It was actually something that we understood was  coming. It was simply the formalisation of the process that we now will respect and work  through and vigorously defend the wine industry around dumping as well as subsidising  any mechanism whatsoever. So we'll continue to do that through the process, we'll respect  that and make sure that every support of the industry is provided in articulating that.

QUESTION: Minister, just on the wine, again. China has some of the most heavily  subsidised vineyards in the world. How would you characterise this launching of this  investigation given the double standard that it appears to be exposing Australia to?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well obviously we're going to defend this vigorously. Of the 37  OECD countries in the world, there is only New Zealand that subsidises their farmers less  than Australia. We will strongly contest that we don't subsidise Australian wine industry or  the agricultural sector to most of the OECD countries. And in fact, also with respect to  dumping, Australian wine is the second highest priced commodity in the Chinese market.  So this is a premium product. So obviously we respect the process. We have a free trade  agreement in place. We respect that. We'll work through that and make sure that we  strongly advocate for the fact that Australian farmers have not dumped and are not  subsidised.

QUESTION: Minister, just in terms of international borders. Since the closure of the  borders, growers are now reporting to the ABC they're leaving fruit and other produce on  the ground to rot. So what are you doing you get more workers in to deal with the shortage  of backpackers and Pacific workers?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well I started back in March when I was able to achieve an  extension to the Pacific and seasonal worker program and the Working Holiday Maker for  an extra 12 months if they worked in agriculture. Then what we've also been able to do is  work with the Northern Territory Government about a pilot program in increasing, that was  about keeping the numbers that were here and then to try and increase, particularly  through the Pacific and seasonal worker program, was to actually work with the states to  now give them the opportunity to work with industry to bring in those workers where they  may see fit. The states manage the quarantine and the health restrictions they put in  individual states. So we have opened this up for the states in which to work with industries

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

and to get something going. If one of the smallest jurisdictions in the country can manage  to get something up and going, I would have thought that the rest of the states could  actually do something about it. But we're also looking at incentives for, particularly  students. I mean we're going to see a lot of Year 12 students finish in a couple of months  and they're not going to have the opportunity to backpack around the world. There may be  an opportunity for them to backpack around the country and make a quid while they're  doing it. And also those university students who will finish in a couple of months, the  opportunity for them to go and work in agriculture and make a quid over the summer  holidays and then go back with some dollars in their pocket, have a better time when they  go back to uni while still studying. So we're looking at a number and range of different  incentives but also mutual obligation that we may be able to support the agricultural sector.  You've got to understand COVID-19 does- makes it very difficult for people from overseas  to come in. We've got to understand that's going to be a challenge for some time. So we  are looking at every option available to try and make sure that there is a workforce in  Australia to support Australian farmers.

QUESTION: Including may be subsidising it? Because one of the big issues has been that  Australians don't want to do these jobs in a lot of cases and the pay isn't considered high  enough. I mean, is there any way that you can increase the amount of incentives?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: We won't be subsidising because there'll be WTO issues with  respect to that. So what we will be doing is looking at how we can mobilise the workforce,  those particularly that no longer have a job. You've got to appreciate but, that many of  those that are unemployed aren't anywhere near these jobs. And in fact, if you're  unemployed in Sydney today and we're looking for mango pickers in Darwin, you're 2500  kilometres away. So it just makes it a little bit difficult to get them up there for three days'  work- three months' work and then to turn around come back.

So we're trying to work through that, understand the demographics and who and how we  can try and get Australians into this. We are market testing all these jobs before anyone  from overseas takes them. I think that's important to understand and appreciate.  Australians get first crack at this but that farmers do not have the luxury of sitting around  and waiting for someone to turn up and we're going to try and continue to get whatever  resource we can to support Australian farmers, particularly as we get into these warmer  months.

QUESTION: Minister, you mentioned Darwin. I understand mango pickers from Vanuatu  are due to arrive there tomorrow. Is that the case and if not, what's the cause for delays?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: The Vanuatun Government. So they obviously have to give  approval for those workers, those citizens of theirs to come to Australia. We are working  with Marise Payne through DFAT to make sure that they clearly understand and  appreciate that we will keep them safe in Australia. There will be social distancing  restrictions, there'll be health restrictions to make sure that they can come over under the  seasonal work and Pacific Island programs and we'll protect them and their citizens and  make sure that they'll be okay. So- but you've got to understand, that is the sovereign right  of any nation to make that determination and we'll continue to work with them and we're  hoping that a decision from them will be very soon.

QUESTION: So just to clarify, they are arriving tomorrow or?

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No, until there's approval by the Vanuatun Government, we will  have to obviously work with them and we will respect the decision that they make. But  those that are already in the country, so long as they work in agriculture, health or aged  care, they are more than welcome to stay and work under those programs.

Thanks guys.



Media contact:  Douglas Ferguson, 0455 448 985

