



THE HON MELISSA PRICE MP  Minister for Defence Industry  Member for Durack

2021 AUSTRALIAN DEFENCE SALES CATALOGUE SUBMISSIONS NOW  OPEN

Australian defence industry businesses across the country are being encouraged to  submit their applications for inclusion in the 2021 Australian Defence Sales Catalogue.

Defence Industry Minister Melissa Price said Defence was opening the submission  process for the Australian Defence Sales Catalogue early as part of the Morrison  Government’s strategy to assist Australian small business.

“The catalogue showcases world-class Australian defence industry products and  services, and is pivotal to the work of Australian Defence Attaches across the globe,”  Minister Price said.

“It promotes quality Australian products and services to our foreign counterparts.

“I encourage small businesses which are involved with the defence sector to apply, as  we are allowing more time for businesses to complete their applications.

“The Morrison Government and Defence have been working hard to keep the wheels of  defence industry turning throughout the COVID pandemic. The 2021 Australian Defence  Sales Catalogue is aimed at boosting sales and business activity and is another way we  are continuing our support for the sector.”

The current edition of the catalogue includes leading-edge technologies, products and  services from 170 Australian businesses, and this is expected to increase for the 2021  edition, as it has every year since inception.

Submissions will remain open until 23:59 AEDT on Sunday 27 September, 2020.  Information on eligibility criteria and the process for the 2021 edition of the catalogue  can be found on the Australian Military Sales website  at: https://www.defence.gov.au/Export/australian-military-sales/

For information on eligibility for the catalogue, please  visit: https://www.defence.gov.au/export/australian-military-sales/australian-military-sales-catalogue.asp



Media Contacts  Ben Spencer (Minister Price’s office): +61 412 754 310  Defence Media: media@defence.gov.au



Authorised by the Hon Melissa Price MP, Minister for Defence Industry, WA, Australia.

