

JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

BRISBANE

SUNDAY, 4 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Apprentice wage subsidies; Federal budget; President Trump

and coronavirus; ADF and the Queensland border.



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: I might just say something about

the Government's training announcement today and then the budget more

broadly.



Labor welcomes any support for apprentices, trainees, young people in

particular, and any efforts to undo the mess made of training by the Liberals

over the last seven years or so. We can't afford a lost generation of workers

sacrificed to this recession and unable to get ahead in the recovery. This

announcement today from the Government doesn't make up for the 140,000

fewer apprentices and trainees on their watch. It doesn't fully restore the billions

of dollars which have been ripped out of training over the last seven years.

There is no vision for the future of training in this announcement, nothing for

young people and how they grasp the opportunities of the recovery and make

sure that we can teach and train people for technological and economic

change. It doesn't make up for the fact that this Government is notorious for

making big announcements with big dollars attached and then not following

through on it. We'll take the time to go through this announcement made by the

Government today. We'll go through all of the details. We'll want to make sure

that it is properly implemented and properly designed. Subject to that we hope

to be able to welcome and support this announcement today even though it

doesn't undo all of the damage done to training and apprenticeships by this

Government over seven long years.



The budget on Tuesday night can't just be another marketing exercise which

treats Australians as mugs. We can't have just another series of

announcements, big dollar figures, all of the fawning headlines, and all the pats

on the back without the follow through for Australians doing it tough. There are

almost a million Australians unemployed and that's expected to get worse

before it gets better. We're in the teeth of the deepest, most damaging

recession in almost a century. We're confronting a full-blown jobs crisis in this

country. The budget needs to be about jobs, it needs to be about supporting

people, it needs to be about investing in the future so that we have something

to show for trillions of dollars in debt.



If the Government's budget on Tuesday nightdoesn't prevent unemployment

being unacceptably high for unacceptably long, then the budget will have failed.

This budget should be judged on whether or not the Government can prevent

unemployment being too high for too long. It can't be another marketing

exercise. It can be another set of announcements without follow through. Too

many Australians are relying on the Government to get this right in the labour

market, in our communities, and to make sure that we're properly investing in

the future. We need to make sure that the legacy of this first recession in

almost three decades isn't just high unemployment for longer and trillions of

dollars in debt. We need to make sure that the budget invests in people, invests

in the future, invests in jobs, and supports people who are doing it really tough.



Over to you.



JOURNALIST: Just back on the wage subsidy, what are your concerns that

women won't get as much value out of this as [INAUDIBLE]?



CHALMERS: This announcement on its own for apprentices and trainees is

obviously not a substitute for a more comprehensive jobs plan which

recognises the disproportionate impact on women of this deep and damaging

recession. We need to make sure that there is proper investment in jobs that

recognises that women are concentrated in industries like the care economy.

We need to make sure that as we invest in jobs and invest in the future, that

Australian women aren't left out, left in the lurch, and left behind.



JOURNALIST: Do you think it would be enough to keep young people out of

the unemployment queues in big numbers?



CHALMERS: That remains to be seen. This announcement won't make up for

the 140,000 fewer apprenticeships and traineeships in the system since the

Government came to office. This is the Government which promised 300,000

new apprenticeships, and instead has delivered 140,000 fewer apprenticeships.

We need to ensure that young people, apprentices, trainees, and workers more

broadly are invested in not just to get them through this difficult period but so

that there's a vision for training so that young people aren't sacrificed to this

recession, so that we don't have a lost generation of workers, and so people

can grab the opportunities of the recovery and benefit from technological and

economic change, not just be its victims.



JOURNALIST: Would you like to see people who are on the JobKeeper

payment, when it runs out, transition into this scheme?



CHALMERS: Our concern with JobKeeper is that it's being withdrawn too fast.

We can't have a situation where the Government, having implemented

JobKeeper too slowly and too narrowly, now withdraws it too quickly and too

bluntly. Pulling hundreds of millions of dollars each fortnight out of the economy

before it's ready risks cruelling the recovery before it even gathers pace. What

we need to see on Tuesday night is an extension of JobKeeper, a

reconsideration of the Government's JobKeeper cuts, and also a recognition

that it's far too early to cut JobKeeper without something substantial to replace

it.



JOURNALIST: How worried are you about the political stability in the US over

President Trump's hospitalisation and how that might impact Australia's

economy?



CHALMERS: We want for President Trump and Mrs Trump what we want for

everybody impacted by this virus: we wish them a speedy recovery. Clearly, the

whole world is watching with some interest what's happening in the United

States. This is a virus which has impacted every country. We wish for them

what we wish for everybody; a speedy and full recovery. We need to get on top

of this virus. That means taking sensible measures here at home. It means

sensibly deploying a vaccine when it's available. All of these things will matter

greatly but clearly the world is watching very closely what's happening in the

US.



JOURNALIST: One last thing about the troop withdrawal from the Queensland

border, there's been a lot of argy bargy and some claims yesterday from the

Deputy Premier that the Federal Government misled the state over the



withdrawal. The Defence Force has said that the Government's not been

misled, and the PM's refused to comment. Do you have anything to say on

that?



CHALMERS: As always, when the Prime Minister says we're all in this

together, it's just a marketing slogan. We know that from the way that he is so

desperate to point the finger at states, to try and obscure the fact that he has

failed on aged care and it's costing lives, and he has failed on jobs, on the

COVIDSafe app, right across the board. This Prime Minister is notorious for

shifting the blame and pointing the finger. He says we're all in this together at

the same time as he picks fights with the states. If we're all in this together that

means the Prime Minister needs to focus less on picking fights with

Queensland, Victoria, and elsewhere and more on trying to give the states and

more importantly people, workers, businesses, and communities the support

that they need and deserve so that we can all get through this very difficult

period together.



Thanks for that.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949



