







SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Finance  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Leader of the Government in the Senate

Senator for South Australia

TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Interview on ABC News, News Breakfast with Lisa Millar  Topics: …South Australian COVID-19 outbreak; SA disruption to tourism, China-Australia trade relationship;  19/11/20  07:33AM

Lisa Millar: Well, returning to South Australia's lockdown and at this stage it's expected to last for six  days, with some restrictions remaining after that. But what effect will it have, on not only the state's economy,  but Australia's economy? Finance and Trade Minister, and South Australian Senator, Simon Birmingham,  joins us from Adelaide. Good morning, Senator. You are living through this.

Simon Birmingham:   Well that's, that’s right. Lisa, I will be staying at home today, just as pretty much all  other South Australians will be, as the State Government applies this six-day lockdown. South Australian  authorities have decided to go hard, go early, in an attempt to make sure that they can get this over and done  with as quickly as possible in terms of crushing this latest cluster. We understand the logic of their approach  there, these are their decisions. They're calling it a circuit-breaker and that's exactly what it needs to be -  short, sharp and effective so that lives and businesses, can get back to a COVID-safe normality as quickly as  possible.

Lisa Millar: What if it's not short? We’ve already had leading epidemiologists on the program suggesting  that South Australians really need to get used to the idea this won't be six days; it’ll be at least 14 days.

Simon Birmingham:   Well, I think authorities have already said that they expect 14 days of restrictions, but  it is six days in terms of the extreme nature of this lockdown, that is partly to enable authorities to be able to  get right across all of the contact-tracing elements. We already have thousands of people who were in  isolation prior to this lockdown as a result of the extensive work authorities are doing. Now of course, we have  to keep following the health advice to act appropriately in that regard, to get across it. But, I think we also  should have a fair degree of confidence that authorities believe they intervened in terms of this cluster early,  that their contact-tracing has been effective. And this lockdown has really been driven by the fact that there  was just so many points of contact that the initial positive cases had that they see the need just to have this  pause, this circuit-breaker as they're calling it.

Lisa Millar: Senator, can Australians confidently plan summer holidays?

Simon Birmingham:   Look, I hope so. But this is perhaps, from the Tourism Minister's perspective, one of  the greatest disappointments of what's happened in the last week - that the disruption to travel plans, the risks  that people will see are real and I understand the concern people would have. What I would re-enforce to  Australians there is that airlines, accommodation providers and others have really pivoted to the times and are  providing far more flexibility, easier access to refunds, all of the types of changes to enable and encourage  travel across Australia. So, I do urge people, where it's safe to do so, to plan those holidays, to get out there  and support our many tourism businesses and small businesses across the country, because they certainly  need it.

Lisa Millar: But, it’s very difficult to encourage people to do that when you don't know what's going to  happen with borders? We’ve had numerous people who are in South Australia right now, who’ve been there  on holidays, people who were trekking through Tasmania suddenly being pulled off trails. I mean, this is a  massive blow, not just for South Australia, but for the nation.







Simon Birmingham:   It is a massive blow to the tourism industry, there's no getting away from that. I do  hope - particularly if South Australia demonstrates that all of the immediate steps it's taken prove to be  successful and this is short, sharp and effective, that it is the circuit-breaker they say - that we can then try to  bring the states together again to apply common approaches in terms of, not only the hot spot definitions, but  then how they go about closing borders if that becomes necessary in the future. Because it is the different  approaches, and the extreme approaches in some instances, that have really caused particular disruption.  People often only need a day or two to be able to correct their plans, to get, to get that refund from their airline  but if they get no notice at all then that really does exacerbate the disruption.

Lisa Millar: Senator, I need to ask you about China because there have been developments overnight.  The nine newspapers this morning reporting this sort of background briefing from a Chinese official in  Canberra who reportedly said to them, China is angry. If you make China the enemy, China will be the enemy.  This looks like the relationship between Australia and China is heading in one direction only here.

Simon Birmingham:   Well, those sorts of comments certainly aren't helpful, but the Australian Government  will maintain our consistent posture, and it’s consistent in every level. The list I’ve seen identifies a number of  areas. Now, we make no apologies for Australia having foreign investment laws that act in Australia's national  interest for protecting communications networks. But, on all of these things, we do it in a non-discriminatory  way. It’s not about any one country it is about ensuring that Australia’s interest-

Lisa Millar: They’re saying you're poisoning bilateral relations.

Simon Birmingham:  I don't accept that at all. Now, I'm not going to respond to nameless allegations that  have been made by alleged officials. What I will do is re-enforce that, from the Australian perspective, we  value the bilateral relationship; we seek to have a mutually-beneficial one in the areas of mutual interest; and,  we are willing to have dialogue with our officials from- with our counterparts from China. Those things remain  the case and we will continue that calm posture, and equally though, continue from an Australian perspective,  to protect our areas of sovereignty and national interest. But I re-enforce, we do that on a non-discriminatory  basis, regardless of the nature of the country or that we're talking about.

Lisa Millar:  You, You say you're willing to have conversations and negotiations. They won't talk to you.

Simon Birmingham:   And that's why I say, the ball is in their court. We have been very clear that, from an  Australian perspective, we are willing to sit down, have that dialogue. Nothing has changed in terms of  Australia, we have always had foreign investment laws that are operating in the national interest and that  require checks and balances there - that is common place for countries right around the world, including  China.

Lisa Millar: Senator, it's good to have you on. Good luck with the personal experience of lockdown - we're  all feeling it for South Australia having gone through it and Victoria. Thanks for being on the program.

Simon Birmingham:   Thanks so much, Lisa, much appreciated.



Media Contacts  Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.

