

Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA

MEDIA RELEASE

8 September 2020

SKILLS BOOST FOR STUDENTS AND JOB SEEKERS IN ACT

The Commonwealth Government and the ACT Government have launched the ACT  JobTrainer Agreement.

School leavers and job seekers in the ACT will now benefit from a training funding boost as  part of the Morrison Government’s $1 billion JobTrainer Fund.

An extra $16.75 million will be injected into the ACT’s vocational education and training  (VET) sector, with $8.38 million from the Australian Government matched dollar-for-dollar  by the ACT Government.

Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business, Senator the Hon Michaelia  Cash, said JobTrainer will play a central role in the Territory’s recovery from the COVID-19  pandemic.

“Our training investment under JobTrainer will provide job seekers and young people,  including school leavers, in the ACT with valuable opportunities and skills,” Minister Cash  said.

“Our recovery will be a skills-led recovery.”

“The Morrison Government is working closely with jurisdictions to establish the $1 billion  JobTrainer Fund, with a $500 million investment matched by the State and Territory  governments.”

“This will provide up to 340,700 additional free or low-fee training places to help Australians  upskill and reskill in areas of demand.”

Minister Cash said the JobTrainer Fund is part of the Australian Government’s $6.5 billion  investment in VET in 2020-21.

“This includes $2.8 billion Supporting Apprentices and Trainees wage subsidy, which is  helping small and medium businesses keep their apprentices in work,” Minister Cash said.

“Of this the Morrison Government has to date assisted 589 employers to retain 1,213  apprentices and trainees in the ACT.”

“The Government is committed to strengthening our VET system to get Australians into  work and help drive the nation’s prosperity in the years to come.”

For more information about JobTrainer visit: https://www.dese.gov.au/jobtrainer-fund

MEDIA CONTACTS  Guy Creighton - Guy.Creighton@dese.gov.au - 0438 815 302  Brittany Higgins - Brittany.Higgins@dese.gov.au - 0449 171 294

