Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania









Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck  Minister for Aged Care and Senior Australians  Minister for Youth and Sport



15 October 2020





Nutrition key to health for senior Australians



Senior Australians have been encouraged to maintain a healthy diet as the COVID-19 pandemic  changes the way we live, work, study and socialise.

As part of National Nutrition Week, Minister for Aged Care and Senior Australians, Richard  Colbeck, has urged people of all ages to eat well to boost their immunity and overall health.

He said this is particularly important for senior and vulnerable Australians.

“Eating well is at the foundation of our individual health but this can be challenging for many  people during such difficult times,” Minister Colbeck said.

“The Australian Government maintains the Australian Dietary Guidelines which provide  evidence-based advice about the amount and kinds of food we need to eat for health and  wellbeing.

“By following the dietary patterns recommended in the guidelines, we will get enough nutrients  essential for good health.

“It will also help reduce our risk of chronic health problems such as heart disease, type 2  diabetes, some cancers and obesity down the track.”

Only one in 20 (5.4 per cent) of Australian adults and one in 17 (6.0 per cent) children aged 2-17 years meet the recommendations in the Australian Dietary Guidelines for fruit and vegetable  consumption.

Minister Colbeck praised the efforts of meal delivery services like Meals on Wheels, which  plays a crucial role in supporting the health and wellbeing of over 200,000 older Australians  across 592 service locations.

Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania





“With the impact of the pandemic, the care and wellbeing of senior Australians has been a  priority this year, and meals services and food security have become even more important,” he  said.

More than 10 million meals every year are delivered with the support of more than 76,000  Meals on Wheels volunteers.

The Government provided an additional $59.3 million to enable more prepared meals, food  staples and essential daily items to be delivered to seniors in need.

Meal deliveries are available through Commonwealth Home Support Programme (CHSP).

“National Nutrition Week is a great opportunity for people to think about the foods they eat  and ensuring they maintain a healthy and regular diet,” Minister Colbeck said.

For more information about the Australian Dietary Guidelines, see here.

To locate an Accredited Practicing Dietitian visit the Dietitians Australia website here.

More information about meal deliveries is available by contacting Commonwealth Home  Support Package meal providers directly, or through My Aged Care on 1800 200 422.







[ENDS]



