CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





MEDICAL RESEARCH WEEK

ADDRESS TO AUSTRALIAN SOCIETY FOR MEDICAL RESEARCH



ONLINE

MONDAY, 16 NOVEMBER 2020



*** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY ***



I’m joining you from the land of the Gadigal people of the Eora Nation, and I pay my

respects to their elders past and present.



Every time I do that, I remind myself and my audience that we are not on track to Close the

Gap in First Nations health outcomes, as we as a nation have promised to do.



Getting back on track will require an urgent national effort - one guided by health and

medical research.



From better understanding the social determinants of health to developing cures for

disease, researchers have an irreplaceable role in Closing the Gap.



And so I thank those of you who are working so hard on these issues.



I acknowledge the Society and your President, Christoph.



I particularly want to acknowledge the Society’s advocacy to governments - and in my

case, aspiring governments.



Since coming into the Health Portfolio 18 months ago, I’ve been inundated by concerns

from researchers and institutions about the MRFF in particular.



But few of those groups have felt able to express their concerns publicly.



The Society is one of the few groups that has stuck its head above the trenches and made

constructive suggestions.



I know that isn’t always easy. But it’s vital - because it’s the only way to win hearts and

minds and change policy.



And finally, I acknowledge all of the Society’s members, and indeed all health and medical

researchers around Australia.



One of the silver linings of COVID-19 is that all Australians have been reminded of your

importance.



Some of you are working on treatments and vaccines for the virus. Our lives and

livelihoods depend on that work.



Others of you are working on the many health threats that were with us before the

pandemic, and will be with us afterwards.



In many cases that work has been interrupted by COVID-19.



But my hope is that one legacy of this year is that we’ll begin to treat those other threats

with the same urgency as COVID-19.



NHMRC



It’s always tempting to focus on the MRFF, because it’s new and shiny.

But I actually want to begin on the NHMRC.



Not many people would realise that the NHMRC is one of the oldest enduring government

agencies we have.



The Health Minister who established the NHMRC, Billy Hughes, said in 1936 that the new

Council would help achieve “infinite possibilities in human health and happiness”.



He wanted it to drive translation, saying “as fast as new knowledge is acquired it must be

applied”.



And in its annual report that year, the Health Department said the NHMRC would produce

“complete cooperation between the Commonwealth and the state governments, [and] the

medical … and other professions”.



OK, so there might have been a little over-promising. We probably haven’t achieved rapid

translation, complete cooperation, or infinite health and happiness!



But for eight decades since, the NHMRC has been the bedrock of medical research

funding in this country. Its work over those decades should be celebrated.



We do also have to be honest though.



More than 85 per cent of NHMRC applications are rejected.



Not because the applications were sub-par.



Not necessarily because they didn’t stack up.



But because the NHMRC does not have a big enough budget to fund all the applications

which are judged to be of high scientific quality and worthy of funding.



And the pressure is only set to grow, with the recent federal Budget confirming that

NHMRC funding will continue to fall in real terms.



That has real consequences.



First, and most obviously, Australia does not do as much health and medical research as it

could.



That means fewer lives saved, and fewer lives changed.



Second, we miss out on the broader economic and social benefits of that research.



Deloitte has estimated that every dollar invested in the NHMRC returns $3.20 in health,

economic and social benefits.



We don’t get those benefits if we don’t invest in the first place.



And third,  it has devastating consequences for researchers themselves.



I want to spend some time on this point.



Since 2012, the number of full-time researchers supported by the NHMRC has fallen by

more than 20 per cent.



1 in 5 jobs supported by the NHMRC, gone.



And that trend hurts mid-career researchers in particular.



Because if you’re a senior researcher, at the L3 level, your chances of having an NHMRC

application approved are around one in two.



Not perfect, but not bad.



But if you’re a mid-career researcher, at the EL2 or L1 level, your chances fall to one in 10.



A lottery.



This year, those pressures have been compounded by the COVID pandemic and

recession, particularly for those of you who work in universities.



With university revenues plummeting, jobs and projects have been at risk more than ever

before.



And while the JobKeeper wage subsidy has cushioned the impact on other sectors, the

Government has inexplicably excluded universities from the program.



Frankly, the only explanation is ideology.



It’s no wonder that the Society’s workforce survey returns such dismal results.



75 per cent of you say medical researchers have weak and uncertain prospects.



79 per cent of you wouldn’t recommend a career in the sector to others.



And 42 per cent of you have considered leaving research for another career.



I hope you don’t. We need you.



But if we want to keep you, we must deal with the fact that applications to our premier

funding body, the NHMRC, are being rejected for budgetary reasons.



We have to be discussing ways of getting that figure higher.



All that said, the NHMRC has stood the test of time because of its focus on high-quality

investment, on translation into practice and policy, and perhaps most importantly on

integrity.



And as Health Minister I would intend to keep that long-standing reputation for quality,

independence and integrity in the NHMRC untrammelled.



Which brings me to the Medical Research Future Fund, on which I want to spend the

remainder of my time this morning.



Because just as Billy Hughes and his contemporaries created a system that would last into

the next century and beyond, so we must do with the MRFF.



Labor welcomes the fact that the MRFF is now fully capitalised.



We support the MRFF in Opposition, and we will maintain and strengthen it when we win

Government.



I say ‘strengthen’ because the MRFF is far from perfect.



I want to address three concerns in particular today.



The first is about how the MRFF’s priorities are determined.



In theory, of course, Priorities are set every two years by the Australian Medical Research

Advisory Board.



Indeed, I welcome the Priorities for the next two years, which were published this week.



But in practice, MRFF priorities are actually determined by the Government’s within its

MRFF 10 Year Plan.



Some of those allocations are entirely consistent with the AMRAB’s Strategy and Priorities.

Some aren’t.



The real problem is that we have no idea how or why those allocations are made.



Let me give you an example.



The MRFF 10 Year Plan includes over $300 million for the commercialisation of medical

research.



Of course that will be a useful investment. Commercialisation is one way that your work

reaches Australians.



But there is an opportunity cost.



Put simply: the money we spend on commercialisation is money we can’t spend on

something else.



How did the Government decide that the best possible use of that $300 million was

commercialisation?



How did it decide, for example, that commercialisation was twice as important as

Indigenous health research, which has been allocated around half as much?



Again, I’m not questioning commercialisation itself, and there may be good answers to

those questions.



But we just don’t know, because there’s no transparent process through which the

Government sets MRFF priorities.



My second concern is about how grants themselves are awarded.



We learned at Senate Estimates last month that 13 per cent of MRFF grants have been

awarded without a competitive process.



Those grants are disproportionately large, because they represent 41 per cent of funding.



To put it another way, for every $5 the MRFF invests, $2 is awarded without a competitive

process.



Frankly, I don’t think it passes the test of good governance.



Can you imagine if that happened at the NHMRC? It’d be a national scandal.



Now, I said before that the Society’s advocacy was having an impact, and it’s true.



In the last year, the number of non-competitive grants has fallen to 9 per cent, and the

value of non-competitive grants has fallen to 19 per cent.



That’s welcome - but we’ve got a ways to go.



My third concern compounds the first two, and it’s about a lack of transparency.



We simply don’t know enough about what MRFF rounds are coming up, or what grants are

awarded, or why.



We only have the figures I cited just now because Labor asked for them in the Senate.



Unlike the NHMRC, those sorts of figures aren’t routinely reported for the MRFF.



I know I’m not alone in this concern.



Again, according to the Society’s workforce survey, 91 per cent of you don’t believe there’s

adequate transparency around the MRFF.



That’s probably one reason for your lack of confidence in the MRFF.



Less than half of you - only 45% - believe the MRFF will benefit your future research

aspirations.



We need to turn that around.



I think the three concerns I’ve outlined about the MRFF all stem from an excess of

ministerial discretion.



Now, I am not opposed to the elected government of the day being able to identify key

research priorities.



The MRFF is designed to be strategic, to allow a government to set a national vision.

That’s good.



But in our Westminster system, ministerial discretion is usually balanced by transparency

and accountability.



There should be more of that in relation to the MRFF.



I raise these concerns not to undermine the MRFF - far from it.



I raise them because I want to strengthen the MRFF so that it outlasts its makers, as the



NHMRC has done.



We should have two strong and unimpeachable schemes, with the NHMRC more focussed

on basic science and the MRFF more focussed on translation.



But as I’ve suggested today, that’s going to require investment in the NHMRC, and reform

of the MRFF.



I look forward to continuing to work with the Society on both of those priorities.



And I look forward to taking your questions today.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ELIZA MITCHELL 0413 410 931



