

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES  MEMBER FOR HUNTER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2GB WITH DEBORAH KNIGHT  FRIDAY, 7 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Beirut Blast; Newcastle Ammonium Nitrate Stockpile; Victorian COVID-19 Outbreak; Jobkeeper Eligibility Changes; Parliament Sitting.

DEBORAH KNIGHT, HOST: Let's dive into it with Angus Taylor and Joel Fitzgibbon. Lots  to cover of course, a lot of big news breaking during the course of the week, fellas. Good  afternoon. Angus, hello to you.

ANGUS TAYLOR, MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND EMISSIONS REDUCTION: G'day  Deb, G'day Joel.

KNIGHT: Hey Joel.

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: G'day Deb, Angus.

KNIGHT: Now I want to start with Beirut because the scenes - just awful, devastating, hard  to wrap your head around and the explosion that happened in Beirut, it's raised fresh  concerns about the massive stockpile of ammonium nitrate in Newcastle and locals are  now calling for it to be moved out of Newcastle to the Hunter where it's used in the local  coal mines. Joel, you're the member for Hunter and the Shadow Resources Minister. Do  you think this stockpile should be moved because at the moment, it's just three cases in  the CBD of Newcastle?

FITZGIBBON: Well, can I first of all, Deb, just quickly express my sympathy for all  Australians of Lebanese heritage. And of course we are all thinking their families back at  home. Yeah look, of course this is going to emerge now as a debate in Newcastle and the  Hunter region. That plant, of course has been there for more than 50 years. It employs 200  people or more directly and lots and lots of contractors around the valley. I think we have  got to be very careful about comparing the high quality facility working on Kooragang  Island, which faces some of the most stringent safety guidelines and laws in the world with  what has happened in, effectively, what is a failed state, Lebanon. I mean, you don't have  welders working around these stockpiles. The government there has been negligent in just  stockpiling that product there for I think up to 10 years it's been now since they confiscated  it. We do have very stringent standards here and I think the comparison is a dangerous  one to make.

KNIGHT: Are you confident, Angus, as Energy Minister that they are, we are safe here in  Australia? That the storage of ammonium nitrate - not just in Newcastle but in other  Australian areas is up to the strictest standards here. Because in Newcastle that stockpile,  it's four times the amount that went up in Beirut.

TAYLOR: Yeah, Like Joel, Deb, can I express my sympathies to the family of the  Australian who was killed in that blast, but 230,000 Australians who have got Lebanese  heritage and many of them will be affected by this. But look, like Joel we have very strong  regulations run at the state government level, and I think it's important to note that, and this  is very different. I mean, this is a Hezbollah-controlled port where the ammonium nitrate  have been sitting there for six years, next to a fireworks dump. So it's a very, very different  situation. Ammonium is widely used across Australia for fertiliser for farmers as well as in  the mining industry. And it's a really important product. Now we do have very strong  regulation, as Joel says, and I'm sure the state government is looking very carefully to  make sure that's right. But the situation is very, very different.

KNIGHT: Now, the Commonwealth has committed $2 million to help Lebanon in this  recovery. But as we saw from the visit by the French President Emmanuel Macron, many  of the locals say they are really concerned about the Lebanese government's ability to use  aid properly. They are calling them corrupt, saying don't donate money, because it's not  going to be used effectively. What are your thoughts, Angus?

TAYLOR: Well, the money is not going to the Lebanese Government, the money is going  to trusted aid partners. There's a million dollars to the World Food Programme, and a  million dollars to the Red Cross. And they are proven, very effective providers of aid and  they'll provide the food, the medical care and the essential items. So that's how we're doing  it. I think that is the right way to do it. They're very experienced in disaster relief like this.

KNIGHT: Yeah, which is good to hear. Now COVID, of course, what's happening in  Victoria, so concerning. We've got 450 deaths, 450 new cases rather, announced today  from Victoria, which is better than the 700 plus that we've seen during the earlier in the  week and last week too, but the economic impact of this, of the stage for lockdown in  Victoria, it's going to be massive. Angus. a lot of confusion about businesses who have to  close, who need to reduce their workforce. Are you confident that it's being done well by  the Victorian Government? Even the boss of Australia Post revealing today, she only found  she had to cut back staff in Melbourne this morning because of a website.

TAYLOR: Yeah and look, it's an incredibly difficult situation down in Victoria and I’ve talked  to my parliamentary colleagues down there. I think they're all sharing the pain of such a  difficult situation. Look, our role in this is to make sure we support all Australians, from the  Federal Government, all Australians during such a difficult time and of course, particularly  in Victoria, we've made some significant changes to the job seeker eligibility. We expect  that Jobseeker will be used by not what was expected a million Victorians, but 1.5 million  now because of what's happened. We've got to make sure that they get the support they  need and that's exactly what we're doing with those changes.

KNIGHT: Yeah, well the Victorian Government has contacted Australia Post now to say  that that issue will be fixed. So obviously things are being moved along. It's an evolving  situation. But Joel, the government, obviously announcing Jobseeker but also changes to  Jobkeeper to make it more flexible. That's a welcome move, isn't it?

FITZGIBBON: Well, the government does need to be agile. This is a moving feast and it's

not getting better, it's potentially getting worse Deb, with the spread in Victoria. We haven't  seen the worst of the economic fallout of COVID-19 yet, so agility is important, so is a level  of bipartisanship. We need the states together with the Commonwealth, working as one.  No one pretends any of this is easy. There are no right or wrong answers on the balance  between health and the economy, except to say that we do need to follow the expert  advice in this area. I do think we need a longer term plan for economic recovery. Hopefully  we will get beyond the health side of COVID in the not too distant future, and it's going to  take a lot of bipartisanship and a lot of smart, innovative and hard work to get the economy  back on track.

KNIGHT: And just on the rate of JobKeeper, Angus, could we see that rate change too,  because it is supposed to go down to $1200 next month?

TAYLOR: Well, the main thing is to make sure that businesses and most importantly,  people who are eligible for it, or need it, are eligible for it. And that's what we've done. I  should have said JobKeeper when I was using those numbers earlier, not JobSeeker. But  look, that's the main thing we've got. We've got to make sure that the money is getting out  there to the people who need it. And that's exactly what we'll be doing through the eligibility  changes we've made.

KNIGHT: And finance Minister Mathias Cormann was suggesting that the rate is not set in  stone. So that is good to see that you are, have got that agility and the ability to move with  the evolving situation and look, obviously, it's such a difficult time for everyone and we  need to have real accountability and real questions asked and answered too, as we go  along through this, but why can't Parliament sit virtually? And I know that the self-imposed  quarantine that's being brought in and suggested for Parliament when you resume on  August 24th. But surely, Angus, if other governments overseas can do it, why can't we do  virtual Parliament - virtual question time - here in Australia?

TAYLOR: Or be sitting physically on August 24, as you rightly said. Now, to do that…

KNIGHT: With very strict measures for a lot of the Victorian MPs to either quarantine in the  ACT for 14 days, or do it at home. I mean, couldn't they stay at home in their electorates  and do it by Zoom?

TAYLOR: Well ultimately, the way Parliament votes, and that's where the rubber hits the  road on these things, is a matter for the presiding - for the President and the Speaker. And  their view at this point is that there's this real challenge and that's - we're meeting in person  on August 24. And you're quite right, the Victorians in particular will have to go into a 14  days or 14 days of isolation, to be able to meet the requirements of the ACT. Look it's  crucial that we don't further spread COVID-19 by sitting in Parliament but we think we can  do it by sticking to those rules. And that's exactly what we'll be doing on August 24.

KNIGHT: How would you go with the technology, Joel. Do you reckon you could manage a  Zoom call? I know it’s kind of is fraught at times and people are sort of saying ‘put the mute  on - we can hear you talking’. But could you? Is it something that's feasible and should be  at least considered?

FITZGIBBON: Deb, three months ago I didn't know what Zoom was.

KNIGHT: You’re not alone. Not Robinson Crusoe there.



FITZGIBBON: Now I'm a zoom expert. And having done so many Zoom calls, I do doubt  the capacity of that technology to have a properly functioning Parliament. Obviously, our  response to COVID has to be, first and foremost, taking the expert medical advice. But,  gee, our democracy is very, very important as well. And while ever we can meet together,  we should do so. And of course, as Angus has said, we have set up a facility so that  people from Victoria can come in by electronic means. I think the more we can meet, the  better. A functioning democracy does require face-to-face interaction wherever and  whenever we can.

KNIGHT: All right now, the issue of merchandise. I want to talk end on this because we've  seen New South Wales Labor MP Jo Haylen spotted out and about handing out these  personalised bottles of hand sanitizer, with her face emblazoned on them. And so is the  New South Wales Minister, Adam Marshall. We know with face masks, a lot of companies  are putting their own logos on the face masks too. And the Victorian Chief Health Officer  Dr Brett Sutton is back at work today, just quietly as well, but he can be found on face  masks and even on bedsheets. So tell me, if you could have your own face on a piece of  merchandise, Angus Taylor, what would it be?

TAYLOR: Well Deb I’ve got a in front of me, right here, a constituent sent me a face mask  with my name on it, and it's convinced me we shouldn't go into mass production.  Absolutely shouldn’t for this one. But the one I really want to see is Joel’s face on a Labor  LEAN T-shirt. Got to be green, Joel. Got to be green.

KNIGHT: Joel would you go there?

FITZGIBBON: He couldn't help himself. I reached my destiny many years ago, Deb, when  my face first appeared on a beer coaster. No better form of campaigning than to display  your name and a photo on a beer coaster. But if we really want to encourage the take-up  of PPE amongst the community - face masks et cetera - I suspect the way of not doing it is  to have politicians plastered all over them.

KNIGHT: You're right, it’s probably not a good measure at all if you want to encourage  everyone to do it. Good on you, fellas. Great to talk. Thanks again.

TAYLOR: Thanks Deb.

FITZGIBBON: Thanks Deb.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641









