





THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP  MINISTER FOR POPULATION, CITIES  AND URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE

SENATOR DR SAM MCMAHON  SENATOR FOR THE NORTHERN  TERRITORY





THE HON MICHAEL GUNNER  CHIEF MINISTER OF THE NORTHERN  TERRITORY







MEREDITH PARRY  ACTING VICE-CHANCELLOR  OF CHARLES DARWIN  UNIVERSITY



MEDIA RELEASE

The Hon Alan Tudge MP, Minister for Cities, Urban Infrastructure and Population

WANTIRNA SOUTH, VICTORIA





8 October 2020



EXCAVATION JOBS FOR LOCALS AT CHARLES DARWIN UNIVERSITY CITY  CAMPUS

A Northern Territory company has been awarded the excavation contract for Darwin’s  new Charles Darwin University campus.

Today’s announcement means that construction of the $250 million Education and  Community Precinct will soon kick off.

NT company DTA Contractors won the tender, worth approximately $2 million.

DTA contractors will be responsible for excavation of the building’s two-level basement  on the Cavenagh Street site.

The centrepiece of the Darwin City Deal, the precinct will include state-of-the-art teaching  and research facilities, while also housing an art gallery and library.

Federal Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure Alan Tudge said sourcing  local expertise was critical for the project and for the NT economy.

“Providing job opportunities to locals in the construction field, such as architects and  building engineers, was a top priority,” Mr Tudge said.

“So far all the on-site works have been carried out by local businesses and more than 30  per cent of the design work has also been carried out by local firms.”

Chief Minister of the Northern Territory Michael Gunner said this was part of the  Territory’s jobs-led recovery from the coronavirus crisis.

“This project will make 730 jobs available during construction and create an estimated  54 ongoing jobs every year. The excavation itself will see a peak of 18 contractors  working on site, with all sub-contracts needing to be locally sourced,” Mr Gunner said.

“This facility is expected to boost the Darwin economy by $600 million over a 30-year  period, keeping local businesses working and cash flowing in the community.”

Senator for the Northern Territory Dr Sam McMahon said the project was on track.

“Excavation is expected to start in mid-October once the necessary approvals have been  obtained,” Senator McMahon said.

“We expect the excavation will take about four months to complete once underway.”

CDU Acting Vice-Chancellor Meredith Parry said the Precinct secures CDU’s future.

“The precinct is an investment in creating the standard of facilities that make studying at  CDU attractive to Territorians, students from other parts of Australia and from overseas,”  Mrs Parry said.

“If CDU is to grow and continue to offer the chance for Territorians to pursue further  education, and to realise the opportunities that this growth creates, CDU needs to be  able to offer not only the teaching students require, but also the learning experience and  facilities they expect.

“The new Precinct meets the needs of students who want to be able to work, learn and  earn in one location. The new facility will also benefit part time students, many of whom  work in the city, in juggling the demands of work and study.”

DTA will be required to manage the trees onsite and ensure compliance with the Tree  Protection Plan and mandatory liaison with the dedicated site arborist.

DTA will also ensure waste is identified and disposed of in accordance with the relevant  regulations and implement the necessary storm water and traffic management plans.

The City Deal is a joint initiative of the Australian and Northern Territory governments  and the City of Darwin.

The Darwin City Deal Implementation Plan is available at   www.infrastructure.gov.au/cities/city-deals/darwin.

[ENDS]

Media Contact:  Minister Tudge - Michael Bennett 0434 782 923  Chief Minister Gunner - Maria Billias 0401 119 746  Senator McMahon - Electorate Office (08) 8948 3555  Acting Vice-Chancellor Parry - Leanne Miles (08) 8946 7798

