



The Hon Stuart Robert MP  Minister for the National Disability Insurance Scheme  Minister for Government Services

TRANSCRIPT

E&EO……………………………………..

Interview Transcript - 5AA, Mornings with Leon Byner  Topics: NDIS and coronavirus, Services Australia/Centrelink

LEON BYNER:          Now the NDIS scheme is having a couple of changes. The plans are to be extended by  up to two years, 24 months, ensuring continuity of support and increasing capacity.  Discussions have been between the Minister and the Disability Reform Council which is  a group comprising all states. So to find out exactly how this is going to be changing or  modified, let's talk to the Government Services Minister Stuart Robert.

Stuart, thanks for coming on today. Essentially, what is going to happen if you are either  applying for NDIS or you're already waiting for a decision, or you're on a plan, what  happens?

MINISTER ROBERT:          Yeah. Thanks Leon. Good to talk to you. The Disability Reform Council and ministers,  all state and territory ministers, we had an emergency meeting on the 18th of March,  almost two weeks ago. And of course your local South Australian Minister Michelle  Lensink was there who is brilliant at this. And substantial changes are being made.  People can go to the NDIS website to see a COVID-19 update that gives all of that. But  we're seeking to ensure that all providers are viable so they can claim a month's worth  of their normal expenditure upfront in a direct cash injection. There's substantially more  funds in terms of core support, people can now have their plans for two years, 24  months if they want to so they won't expire. So if people are comfortable where they  are, they can instantly go for two years. We're moving of course to- from face to face to  telephone meetings. But in terms of people coming to the scheme, access to the  scheme, all of that continues as normal.

LEON BYNER:

Now, what's going to happen to the waiting time? Because I know that you've had a real  headache, you've been pulling your hair out for some time on this, where the waiting

time to either get a plan and then have it implemented has been somewhat delayed.  Have we fixed that to some extent?

MINISTER:      We have. The average time or the average access is four days and that's down from  well over 50 days, six to nine months ago. So very happy with in terms of time from call  to access, and then access to plan. Now as we've moved from face to face to  [indistinct], I don't think that should move in any great extent. Now DRC is again  meeting, Disability Reform Council, on the 6th of April and we'll have a look at those  numbers and we'll just review the decisions we made on the 18th to make sure they're  still right that people's access is still there and providers are still viable. But I don't  suspect there should be any change from that, but we'll have a better view on the 6th of  April, Leon.

LEON BYNER:

Have you got any feedback from providers who then provide the service once you've  got the plan in place? Have you got any feedback that they're short of staff?

MINISTER:      We had a fair bit of feedback leading up to the 18th of March emergency DRC and of  course the Quality and Safeguards Commission that is the regulator, if you like,  [indistinct] the providers there. And the feedback was about participants withdrawing  from things like therapy or community support and moving more into home, in line with  the Prime Minister's guidance. And there was concern that there may be some issues  with staff not being available because they may be self-isolating. So that's where we  provided a lot more funds to them. The Quality and Safeguards Commission has been  providing advice and of course we've started to call all 28,000 more vulnerable  participants and [indistinct] help from the NDIS just to ensure a regular contact with  them. So we're monitoring it carefully. At present it's more of a concern that there may  be shortages because people are self-isolating. But at this stage, there doesn't seem to  be any widespread shortages that have been reported to us.

LEON BYNER:

And just generally, how are you going with the immense, immense traffic on Centrelink  numbers, websites and so on and phone services for people to register and also get  what they need?

MINISTER:      It's certainly been an event. What happened last Sunday night after the National  Cabinet and the Prime Minister spoke at about 10:30, saw the greatest [indistinct] I think  the country has ever seen - hundreds of thousand, maybe up to a million people  suddenly find themselves in extraordinarily difficult circumstances which is just  heartbreaking, Leon. Well what we're saying to people is, yes, it was certainly  overwhelming for any nation's systems, [indistinct] countries can't prepare for that sort  of deluge. But we're saying to people the online channels have been massively  strengthened, we strengthened them prior, on that weekend, to a thousand per cent

capacity. Turns out we needed 2500 per cent capacity. That's all been done now. But  we say to people go online, if you need to register with the JobSeeker and you've got a  customer reference number, straight to myGov. If you don't have a customer reference  number, again, go to myGov. Use your credentials for Medicare or for tax and you can  register an intent to claim and then we'll contact you. So for example, last night we  contacted hundreds and hundreds of thousands of people who put in an intent to claim  and had no customer reference number. And today we'll be contacting many hundreds  of thousands more who have got a customer reference number. So we're actively  communicating with people that there's no need to go to a shopfront. Go online first and  the telephone as second.

LEON BYNER:

Now, I have a question which I don't think spills the beans. We had Josh Frydenberg on  a while ago and he will be explaining later today and indeed on our show tomorrow  about this subsidy. But if we're going to have a subsidy paid to employers to give to  employees. Is there an expectation that the pressure on Centrelink will somewhat  diminish?

MINISTER:      [Indistinct]… I just speak in the peripheral on this because I'm not across the details of if  a subsidy may well come across or what it would be. But you'd have to think that that  would be yes. Because if people are saying in work, they wouldn't need a JobSeeker  payment. So on the surface you'd have to say that that would certainly relieve really  pressure. Although the Centrelink network is now, in terms of the digital channels and  working through the enormous volume of people who put their hands in the air for  support, is working through that really well now.

LEON BYNER:

By the way, few questions, if people want to apply for a job because I know Centrelink is  still recruiting; what do they do?

MINISTER:      Just go Google Centrelink online and you'll see the- on the website where the  application process is. We're certainly looking at bringing 5000 extra staff on board. Also  we're certainly looking for people but we always are, I mean, we're constantly recruiting  because a couple of hundred people leave our 30,000 strong workforce every month.  So we're also engaging very large workforce blocs. For example, Flight Centre, if they're  no longer using their call centres, that's something that we're actively looking at - can  we use their call centre and processing centre? So that's a centre of a thousand people  already set up with gear and everything ready to go. So we're certainly recruiting in big  blocks like that, but we're always looking for great people.

LEON BYNER:

Alright. Stuart Robert, Government Services Minister, thank you for joining us today. As  I said, we'll keep you well up to date.

[ENDS]

Authorised by S. Robert MP, Canberra





