ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

PRESS CONFERENCE

SYDNEY

MONDAY, 3 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Paid pandemic leave; JobKeeper; aged care; need for an economic

recovery plan; Craig Kelly’s comments on hydroxychloroquine; Victorian

coronavirus outbreak; Victorian lockdown; COVIDSafe app.



ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Thanks for

joining us. All Australians today are thinking about our Victorian friends. And our hearts

and our thoughts are with them during what is a very difficult time. We support the

measures that have been announced by Premier Andrews, just as we support the

measures that have been recommended by Premier Berejiklian for New South Wales. It is

very clear that this is an Australian problem, not a problem of one state. It is an Australian

problem that requires an Australian solution.



And today, Labor is calling upon the Prime Minister to announce a three-point plan. The

first is paid pandemic leave. It is very clear that the issue of people going to work because

they don’t feel like they have an alternative in terms of putting food on the tables of their

families is one that must be addressed. No one should be put in a situation of looking after

their family or looking after their health. That is why paid pandemic leave is necessary. And

it should be announced immediately as a priority of the National Government. We've been

calling for this for weeks now, and it is time that the Government acted.



Secondly, we need to revisit changes to JobKeeper. It's very clear that a range of

businesses who did okay in June won't be doing okay in the September quarter. It's also

very clear that a reduction in support will lead to real hardship as well. This is a case

particularly for Victoria, but also for other sections of the community. A number of people

were left behind when JobKeeper was announced. We want to make sure that more

people are not left behind as a result of the changes that have been announced by the

Government, and they should revisit that announcement.



And the third issue is that they should accept responsibility for aged care. It is very clear

that it is a national responsibility. And the Government needs to announce a national plan

for aged care and dealing with these issues. And that needs to be as a matter of urgency

as well. Can I say as well, just in conclusion before I ask Chris to make some comments,

that the Federal Government can't shirk its responsibility. It can't duck its responsibility for

aged care, for the Ruby Princess debacle and its role in it, for the issues that are there with

the COVIDSafe app and its failure to identify, quickly, in terms of tracing people who may

well be affected. And fourthly, looking to the future, it can't shirk its responsibility for an

economic recovery plan. We want to make sure that no one is left behind during this

pandemic. But we want to also make sure that no one is held back during the recovery.

What that means is a plan for jobs. The Government has announced that there'll be

240,000 additional unemployed people between now and Christmas. And it's very clear

that what they haven't announced is a plan to get those people into work. To actually make

sure that we learn the lessons of the weakness in terms of the Australian economy, we

build resilience, and we support people into work. Without a Government plan for

economic recovery, we will have real issues for much longer, the recession will be deeper

and longer than it needs to be. Chris?



CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks very much, Anthony. As

Anthony said, the most important thing to say today is that our thoughts are with every

single Victorian. This is not a Victorian pandemic. It's not a Victorian wave. This is a global

pandemic. And we have to say that we're in it together and mean that we are in it together.

And we are in it with our Victorian cousins, brothers, sisters and friends.



Two matters I want to touch on before Anthony and I hand over to questions. Firstly, the

Minister of Health has announced that in Victoria, mental health plans will be extended to

20 consultations. This is welcomed. But I must say doesn't go far enough. In May, the

Labor Party suggested that 20 visits be allowed on the mental health plans across the

country during this pandemic. The mental health implications of this pandemic do not stop

at the Murray River. And there are people doing it tough right around Australia. And any

counsellor, psychologist, psychiatrist will tell you that 10 visits is not enough. So again, we

tick the expansion in Victoria, welcome it and congratulate the Government for that. But we

say, let’s make sure that it applies to every Australian to have equal rights to a fully

developed comprehensive mental health care plan for their needs.



The second matter I want to deal with is that the Member for Hughes, Mr Kelly, has made

some utterly outrageous statements on Facebook earlier today. I'm not going to dignify

them with repetition. I'm not going to repeat them. Just to say this, in Australia, as in most

countries around the world, what drugs are safe and efficacious is determined by an

independent body. In our case, the TGA. Not by politicians. By medical experts. For Mr

Kelly to launch an attack on the Premier of Victoria today, about hydroxychloroquine, is

dangerous. There are enough conspiracy theories already circulating. This is dangerous

and outright irresponsible. And it's incumbent on every politician and every commentator to

call it out, so that people have one clear message. Listen to the TGA about what drugs are

safe, and not to what you see on Facebook by Mr Kelly or anybody else. So, just to remind

you what the TGA last said about hydroxychloroquine, they said, ‘Given the limited

evidence for effect against COVID-19, as well as the risk of significant adverse effects, the

TGA strongly discourages the use of hydroxychloroquine outside of its current indications

at this time other than in a clinical trial setting or in a controlled environment’. So, that's

what the TGA says. That's where Australia should get their advice. Not from Mr Kelly, who

would do well to be silent, to support the medical advice, to support Australia's doctors and

not score ridiculous points with Trumpian rants on Facebook.



ALBANESE: Thanks very much. Happy to take questions.



JOURNALIST: Doesn’t the Daniel Andrew’s Labor Government also need to be

scrutinised for the situation in Victoria?



ALBANESE: Well, of course Daniel Andrews has accepted responsibility for what he is

responsible for. He stands up and has media conferences each and every single day. But I

make this point; the National Parliament should be meeting tomorrow. And the fact that it

isn't is, I think, a source of regret. We are of the view that when Parliament is due to sit on

August 24, it must sit. There is a committee that's been established, including the Speaker,

and the President of the Senate, along with the Managers of Business for both the

Government and the Opposition, in the House of Representatives, and the Senate, it's

working through the issues. Any restrictions based upon medical advice should be

implemented. But it shouldn't be beyond the capacity of our National Parliament to meet

when it's due to meet in three weeks’ time because I think that the Australian people who

are going to work, providing essential work, in particular, would expect that our politicians

aren't above that and that we're able to participate in parliamentary processes which needs

to debate these and other issues. We raise this today, the three-point plan, because it's not

possible to raise it in Question Time tomorrow which we would in the ordinary events

timetable. So, I do think that it is important that the National Parliament requires

accountability to be held. But this is a global pandemic, as Chris just said. This is a national

issue that requires a national response. It requires the coordination of the National

Government with state and territory governments, under the government system that we

have.



JOURNALIST: There has been thousands of new cases down there in the past couple of

weeks. Do you think the situation down there is officially out of control?



BOWEN: The Premier has been very clear. He's declared a state of disaster. He's

imposed very harsh restrictions. As Anthony said, he's taken the decisions that are

necessary. It's very clear that tough action is necessary to get this virus under control in

Victoria. It's not to say that what's been done so far hasn't worked. Because the situation

would have been much worse without the stage three restrictions, but it hasn't worked well

enough, and hence the stage four restrictions have had to be implemented.



ALBANESE: I make this point, though. That the Federal Government, the Morrison

Government, have been supportive of the changes that have been announced by Daniel

Andrews yesterday. But you can't have the national leadership of the Coalition

Government saying one thing and their backbench members, whether they be Victorian

backbench members or New South Wales members like Craig Kelly making this sort of

irresponsible, outrageous comments that they have made on social media and in other

forms. Mr Morrison needs to get his backbench in line. Because it is unacceptable, the

comments of Craig Kelly, the comments of Tim Wilson similarly, and many others. They

are completely unacceptable. And I think that, quite frankly, the actions of the Victorian

Liberal Party Opposition stand in stark contrast to what we have done, whether myself as

Leader, Chris as our Shadow Health Minister, Tony Burke in industrial relations, Jim

Chalmers in Treasury, where we have put forward constructive suggestions. We've

continued to play a constructive role. We will do that. But Mr Morrison needs to get his own

troops in line because some of these comments are quite unacceptable. Craig Kelly, the

comments that he said don't bear repeating as Chris Bowen has said. But frankly, I was

shocked by them, that any Member of Parliament would be so irresponsible at a time

where Victorians are doing it tough. These restrictions are tough, but they are necessary.



JOURNALIST: Do you think the COVIDSafe app should be looked at, given what's

happened in Victoria and some of the rising cases in New South Wales as well?



BOWEN: Well, it's not working. It's found a handful. The first key element to fixing it is to

admit there's a problem. We would all cut the Government some slack to say the app was

developed quickly. But they have to say it's not playing a role. You've had Victoria

slammed into a very harsh lockdown, partly because contact tracing is so difficult. And

there are thousands of people working on contact tracing and they deserve to have the

app working to help them. We say this with no sense of triumph. We supported the concept

of the app, unlike the National Party we actually encouraged Australians to download it. It's

not the fault of Australians who have downloaded it. It's simply not playing the role it

should. And the first step to fixing that is for the Government to accept it hasn't worked as

well as it should, to listen to the expert advice. I've heard it, you've heard it, the IT experts

who have given advice as to what can change and to take it on board. Right across

Australia the app needs to work. It needs to work in Victoria, New South Wales,

everywhere. It just has to be called out. It's not working as well as it should and could.



JOURNALIST: On the paid pandemic leave, do you have any ideas about who should pay

for it? The Government is under financial strain and so are state governments and so are

businesses.



ALBANESE: Well, a range of businesses have introduced paid pandemic leave to their

great credit. What we've said is that there's a role for the Government to step in and

provide some support for this to occur, where there are gaps. The key principle is this; no

one should be in a circumstance whereby they are going to work because they don't feel



like they have an option. And they are the circumstances which are there. We know that is

the case. We've known that was the case for some time. And the failure to have paid

pandemic leave means that there is a cost to that as well. Because people going into work

and therefore spreading infection has a cost to it. And we're seeing the cost in terms of

economic cost with the Victorian shutdown. We're seeing the cost as well with restrictions

on economic activity throughout the country. So, we do need to start at first principles. And

the first principle is to make sure that no one is put in a position of choosing between

looking after their health and looking after their family. Thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053



