

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



MARK BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENERGY

MEMBER FOR HINDMARSH



JASON CLARE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS

MEMBER FOR BLAXLAND







E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP

ADELAIDE

SUNDAY, 11 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Social housing in desperate need of repairs; Government’s

failed HomeBuilder scheme; economic benefit of social housing; wage

subsidies; Stage Three tax cuts not giving “bang for buck”; Royal

Commission into media; aged care; childcare; economic benefits of

women contributing to the economy; population; energy grid; Rewiring

the Nation; state COVID restrictions.



MARK BUTLER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND

ENERGY, MEMBER FOR HINDMARSH: Thanks everyone, for coming along

this morning. I'm Mark Butler. I’m the Member for Hindmarsh, which is the

federal electorate we find ourselves in. It's a great pleasure to welcome

Anthony Albanese who's in a particularly good mood because Souths won last

night. That's why he’s spent the morning smiling. He's accompanied here with

Jason Clare who's our Shadow Minister for Housing at a Federal level. We also

have the Senate Leader for Labor Party, Senator Penny Wong, and we're

joined by a couple of our state colleagues. So Joe Szakacs, who's the local

member here, the Member for Cheltenham, and Nat Cook, Labor's Shadow

Minister for Housing. Without further ado, over to a very happy Anthony

Albanese.



ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE LABOR PARTY: Thanks very

much, Mark. And I want to thank Nathan who welcomed us into his home

today. He lives here with his son who's just completing high school. And

Nathan is very much a proud South Australian, and he's proud of where he

lives. But he's not being done a good service. The fact is, that the bathroom

that we just saw is a disgrace and it's a health risk. There’s a hole been cut into

it. There's mould. It is an unhealthy circumstance for anyone to be living in

those conditions. And as well, we saw some of the communal facilities - the

laundries where the tap isn't so much dripping as running. Wasting water,

creating a mess, and meaning that people aren't given the dignity that they

deserve. Now, Nathan's bathroom has been in this state now for 10 months

since the beginning of the year, and nothing's been done to fix it. They came

and cut a hole out to check to see what it was, whether there was asbestos.

There certainly is black mould there. And they have gone away and still nothing

happened. We can do better than this. We have, at the moment, right around

the country needs such as Nathan's. This is his home. He deserves better.

Australians deserve better. We should be using the opportunity that's there to

create jobs immediately by fixing up bathrooms like Nathan's, fixing up

communal laundries like the one here, fixing up people and at the same time

employing plumbers, carpenters, plasterers, electricians, all be given jobs.

Tradies could be on the job next week, if this Government was prepared to

forget its prejudice against people who live in public housing, and actually do

the right thing. This is a circumstance whereby, here in South Australia as well,

I do want to say something about the Government's rhetoric, which is ‘we're not

doing anything about public housing, but we've got HomeBuilder’. Now as of

last month, September, HomeBuilder had been delivered precisely to one

South Australian. One. That's proof that you can get it I guess. But it's also

evidence that this just isn't being rolled out anything like the speed that they say

a would.



There are 100,000 public housing dwellings that have maintenance problems

that could be fixed up. There are one million unemployed, they are to be joined

by 160,000 more between now and Christmas. What we should be doing is

matching that up. And that's why Labor announced, in the Budget Reply, that

we would take action in terms of social housing and we called upon the

Government to do maintenance as a first step, immediately. We also need to

increase social housing supply in order to look after the 200,000 people that are

currently on public and community housing waiting lists. South Australia has a

proud history of having a substantial public housing and community housing

stock. And that fine reputation that South Australia has is being undermined

by circumstances such as Nathan's, the Federal Government could be doing its

bit. This would represent substantial value for money. This is low hanging fruit.

The economists all identified it in the lead up to last Tuesday night's Budget,

the Government ignored it. They need to stop ignoring circumstances such as

Nathan's. All Australians should be valued. And Nathan should be given the

sort of support to live in conditions that we would expect to be just the human

right of all Australians. Jason?



JASON CLARE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND

HOMELESSNESS: Thanks, Albo.  Well, you saw the conditions that Nathan

and his family are living in. There's 100,000 places just like this, right across

Australia, full of mould, leaks and rot, leaking taps, exposed wires, holes in the

roof, damaged floors. And the plan that Albo announced just last week could

help to fix a lot of that and keep a lot of tradies working. You know, the fact is,

the housing construction industry that employs almost a million people is going

off a cliff at the moment. Work is drying up. It's expected that instead of building

170,000 homes this year, like they did last year, they'll only build as little as

125,000 homes. Now, if that happens, that means a lot of tradies out of work

looking for work. And this is a program that could be done fast, could be done

in almost every suburb in every town across the country, and keep a lot of

those tradies on the tools. And we know that the HomeBuilder scheme that the

Government announced five months ago is just not rolling out as fast as it

needs to and is not doing enough. Even with the HomeBuilder scheme factored

in, the number of homes built this year is going to drop to that level of as low as

125,000. And if you need any more evidence that it's not rolling out fast

enough, then just listen to that number that you gave a moment ago, Albo. I

remember that press conference on that bloke’s front lawn, the newly laid grass

five months ago, where the Government was told to get off the grass. They

promised 27,000 people would get this money. So far, only one family in South

Australia has got a cent. So it's too small to save tradies’ jobs. And it's rolling

out too slowly here in South Australia, and right across the country. The Master

Builders Association, the Housing Industry Association, and the Property

Council of Australia have all said the same thing. They've all said put

government money into building and repairing social housing, because it can

help save the jobs of their members. They're not calling for this because they

think it's a way to end homelessness. They're calling for it because they're

worried about the end to their members’ jobs. It's a sort of thing that we could

do really fast. We could do it in almost every suburb in every town, big and

small across the country. And we can change the lives of people like Nathan

and his son for the better. I only hope the Government finally wakes up and

listens.



ALBANESE: Thanks very much, Jase. Happy to take questions.



JOURNALIST:  Just on JobKeeper. What rate would you nominate beyond the

end of this year?



ALBANESE: Well, we don't think it should have been cut this month. We think

the circumstances whereby JobKeeper was cut whilst the economy is still really

struggling. So it should be done on the basis, as we've said, it should taper off.

We don't argue that JobKeeper should be there forever, it’s a wage subsidy.

But the wage subsidy should be there as long as the logic is the same as it was

when it was introduced. And I think that it's very clear that the circumstances

which led to wage subsidies being introduced, reluctantly, by Scott Morrison,

are still there.



JOURNALIST: Do you have a figure?



ALBANESE: What we think is that it shouldn't have been cut this month. We

think that it should obviously taper off according to circumstances. But the

circumstances right now don't justify cutting JobKeeper this month.



JOURNALIST: What is the circumstance that would justify a tapering here?



ALBANESE: It's an improvement in the economy. People getting back to work.

Not the prediction that's in the Budget papers that says things are going to get

worse,  that 160,000 people will join the unemployment queue between now

and Christmas.



JOURNALIST: But that has been witnessed, since the start of the lockdown.

We’ve had hundreds of thousands of jobs come back. I mean, how many

hundreds of thousands have to come back?



ALBANESE:  We have 160,000 more unemployed people between now and

Christmas. Those circumstances are that those people will be doing it tough.

Many of those will be because JobKeeper being cut will have an impact and will

add to the unemployment queue.



JOURNALIST: The Treasurer says that he's absolutely committed to Stage

Three tax cuts. Are you?



ALBANESE: The Treasurer this morning said the reason why he didn't bring

forward Stage Three of the tax cuts was because they wanted bang for their

buck. The Treasurer has said that they won't get bang for their back by bringing

forward Stage Three of the tax cuts, you've got to question the whole economic

policy of this Government. They don't have a strategy to grow back the

economy. What they have as $100 billion of new spending, creating a trillion

dollars of debt, and no real plan for reform, or ways in which you really boost

economic growth into the future. They will have nothing to show for it at the end

of this. And I think that's a tragedy. A big difference between Labor and the

Coalition is that we're saying ‘yes, you need to invest, but you need to invest in

a way that makes a difference’. Now, one way that we've seen here today,

short term difference, but tell you what, big difference to Nathan's life, if he

doesn't have to live in the sort of toxic circumstances that we've seen the state

of his bathroom that he has to put up with.



JOURNALIST: So are you committed to those Stage Three tax cuts?



ALBANESE: We tried to exclude Stage Three of the tax cuts. We tried to do

that. We weren't successful, and they've been legislated. We'll make decisions

about a whole range of policies down the track. But the question is now for

Josh Frydenberg. If he doesn't think there's any bang for the buck from Stage

Three of the tax cuts, why did he introduce it?



JOURNALIST: An additional spend on social housing that you’ve urged, do

you have a sense of how much of the backlog that could clear if delivered? And

then should you win the next election will it be necessary to increase the

baseline of social housing spending to really bring that down to nothing?



ALBANESE: Look, we think that there's about 100,000, the maintenance

requirements. And the average cost of maintenance we found in the past, in

terms of the GFC, we think that should be, we'd be asking the states to match

investment as well. We'd be making that request. So if the states put in a

similar amount, that’s $1 billion. 100,000 at $10,000 each, which is what the

average, you know, we're talking about maintenance costs. We're not talking

about just fixing the leaky taps that we've just seen. But jobs that are

substantial. The average cost is about $10,000. We believe for a billion dollars

is what you need to clear the backlog.



JOURNALIST: Do you support Kevin Rudd’s call for a Royal Commission into

Murdoch’s media empire?



ALBANESE: I haven't called for one, we'll call for our own Royal Commissions

at particular times. We called for a Royal Commission into aged care. Kevin is

doing that as, as a private citizen, a former Prime Minister, he's entitled to put

his views. I get to announce Labor Party policy.



JOURNALIST: Tens of thousands of older Australians are still waiting for a

home care package. Would Labor commit to ensuring everyone who needs one

receives one?



ALBANESE: Well, what you need to do is to have additional investment in

terms of home care and aged care residents as well. We need to address

issues like staffing. I spoke at the National Press Club about a month ago and

outlined an eight-point plan to deal with the immediate needs of aged care. One

of those was increased home care packages.



JOURNALIST: Do you believe as well, by way of government's responsibility,

that they should be taking on more? You’ve flagged things like childcare as

well? Is it your view that they need to be bigger and take on more?



ALBANESE: The Government does have a childcare subsidy now. There's

agreement on that. The problem is you need a number of degrees in micro and

macro economics to understand it. There's a complex interrelationship between

the tax system and the childcare subsidies, so that people really struggle to

work out what their entitlements will be. And such that if you're a police officer,

married to a teacher, and you want to work, both parents want to work five days

a week, making a contribution to their careers, you currently have a massive

disincentive in the system, so that if a woman, by and large, it is largely women

that this impacts, who wants to work a four-day week, or a five day a week,

instead of a three day week, you're paying 80, 90, sometimes 100 per cent of

your income to pay for the childcare costs. So there’s a massive disincentive

that's really hurting families in terms of lowering the income that they have. It's

hurting as well as a national economy. Because what it means is that lower

productivity and lower participation. If you want to have a strategy, a serious

strategy, to grow the economy out of the recession you've got to look at how

you get economic growth, not just hope that businesses that are already

struggling at the moment will go ‘oh, we’ll just make some new investments’.

Businesses, particularly small business, are just trying to get by at the moment.

They're not looking at employing extra people. They're not looking at investing

in new capital equipment. What they're looking at is trying to survive at the

moment. And you have to look at ways in which you can grow into the future,

and increasing women's workforce participation, boosting productivity, helping

business helping the careers of women who still retire with 47 per cent of the

superannuation balances that men do, this is about a stronger economy, but a

fairer society. And by the way, just as an add-on to the economic benefit, the

long term economic benefit is because a child develops 90 per cent of their

brain capacity in the first five years. This is good for them, too. We want every

kid to have the best start in life. This is good for kids, it's good for women and

families. It's also good for our economy.



JOURNALIST: Just on childcare, Australia's population is said to be one million

people less at the end of next year than previously thought. Do you think by

providing more affordable childcare encourage people to have more children?



ALBANESE: Obviously what people do when they weigh up whether they have

their first child, and the average age now is around about 31 when a first child

comes along. It's changed in recent times. One of the reasons for that is

economic pressures. I spoke the other night in the budget reply, about a time

when people could afford to buy their own home. A whole lot of young people

now have written off the possibility of owning their own home. And the average

wage isn't enough to do that for so many people. And they weigh up their

economic circumstances. And if you provide the economic security of ensuring

that people know that childcare will be supported, and that you'll be supported

to participate in the workforce, then that will, of course, provide an incentive.

There are three ways you can grow the economy, the three Ps - population is

one of them. And with emigration, rather than immigration, more people leaving

then are coming into Australia, that is going to be very problematic in the future.

The only reason why we weren't in recession last year was growth of

population. The other two are participation, where this is the obvious thing to

do. And of course, productivity, where this will really add to productivity in a

substantial way. This is substantial economic reform, that also has benefits for

our society, and in particular has benefits for women. And women were

forgotten by last Tuesday night's Budget. This is a Budget in the context of a

recession, whereby the Government acknowledges that women have been

disproportionately impacted adversely by this recession. And they had nothing

to say to them. And when we raised it in the Parliament, you had stuff that you,

frankly, couldn't make up like ‘women can drive on our roads that we're going to

build as well’. I mean, it was the most absurd statement, since Scott Morrison

argued, regarding maternity facilities at Yass Hospital, that women could give

birth in the extra lines that we're putting by the side of the Barton Highway. This

Government just doesn't get it. That's the truth. It just doesn't get it. Now almost

a week after their Budget came down, Josh Frydenberg showed today that he

still doesn't get it.



JOURNALIST: How do you know the Government’s subsidy to hire workers

over 50 has failed?



ALBANESE:  By when you look at when you look at the figures of the take-up,

which still show that a majority of it hasn't been used.



JOURNALIST: The Federal Government is supporting the project for new

interconnecter between South Australia and New South Wales. Does Federal

Labor have a view on that? Do you support it?



ALBANESE: We support it. We came up with the Rewiring the Nation strategy.

The weakness here, though, is that if you look at the Australian Energy Market

Operator, maybe Mark might want to add to this, their integrated system plan.

It's a whole integrated plan for the nation having a national energy grid. That is,

that works. And I've been coming to South Australia for a long time, but just a

short time ago, when I came to South Australia, we're getting questions from

both the state Liberal Party and also the Feds who were bagging the South

Australian Labor Party's policy under Jay Weatherill saying ‘none of it'll work.

It's all a disaster’. And the fact is, it has worked and they've increased the size

and the capacity of the batteries. So in terms of a policy, the low hanging fruit

again here, and it's available, it's a technology neutral policy. But what it of

course will do is drive investment in lowest cost new energy, which we know is

renewables. Mark, do you want to say something?



BUTLER: Thanks for the question, Dan. I mean, the Federal Government is not

supporting the interconnector in the way that Anthony Albanese’s Rewiring the

Nation policy would. What we know is we need to build a modern energy grid to

unlock the renewable energy resources of the future. But there is a real risk of

gold plating. And we dealt with that risk on Thursday night by saying that we

would leverage the Commonwealth Government's capacity to borrow at super

low rates, saving consumers hundreds of millions of dollars in effectively profits,

hefty profits, that can't be will go to these big multinational private operators

that are building this grid. We've also heard, for example, that Transgrid, which

will build the New South Wales end of the energy interconnector, have asked

because they're having trouble getting finance from the private market for

revenue to be fast tracked, effectively fast tracked on consumers’ power bills.

So what we've done is we've put in place a plan that will ensure that the

integrated system plan, the Rewiring of the Nation, will be built effectively, will

be built on time, and we will be built at the lowest possible cost. Scott

Morrison's plan will involve hundreds of millions of dollars of extra interest and

profit payments going from consumers to these big transmission providers. It's

a very different policy.



JOURNALIST: Your state colleagues are a bit more sceptical about the idea of

the interconnector. They’re worried about effectively offshoring generation to a

larger state. DO you see that there is a difference of opinion yourselves?



BUTLER: Federal Labor has supported the Integrated Systems plan. This was

a process that started after Alan Finkel the Chief Scientist’s review,

commissioned by Malcolm Turnbull, a grid plan was something he said was

essential for the 21st century to allow us to become a renewable energy

superpower. All governments, all industry, all of the energy regulators have

then developed that plan which was released earlier this year. And an Albanese

Labor Government will make sure that that plan is built and built at lowest cost.



ALBANESE: One more, maybe.



JOURNALIST: Do you believe that Daniel Andrews’ suggestion that the

restrictions should be extended? Do you believe that he's making a mistake by

that?



ALBANESE: I haven't seen the comments but people should take the advice,

as I know Daniel has and another state premiers of all political persuasion

have. And there have been restrictions in all the states. This is my first visit to

South Australia for a considerable period of time. It’s my first visit to any state

other than New South Wales or the ACT for a considerable period of time. The

appropriate thing is to take the health advice. I don't think anyone wants

restrictions on one day more than necessary, but we do have to get the right

health outcomes. And the truth is that in Victoria, in terms of the effort that's

being made by Victorians to keep each other safe, and to contribute to keeping

the nation safe, is quite extraordinary. I just want to pay tribute to the Victorian

population who are absolutely doing the right thing at the moment.





Thanks very much.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JOSHUA LLOYD 0421 673 841





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













