

AMANDA RISHWORTH MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION AND

DEVELOPMENT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR YOUTH

MEMBER FOR KINGSTON



OVERWHELMING SUPPORT FOR LABOR’S WORKING FAMILY CHILD

CARE BOOST



Labor’s Working Family Child Care Boost announcement has received

overwhelming support from families, business, economists and the early

learning sector.



Anthony Albanese announced that an Albanese Labor Government will

introduce the Working Family Childcare Boost to support Australian women and

parents to work more, and to put more money into the pockets of working

families.



Our plan will make child care more affordable for 97 per cent of families in the

system, and remove financial barriers that disincentivise second income

earners, predominantly women, to work full-time.



Our plan is a win, win, win - it is good for parents, good for children, and good

for the economy. It’s a no brainer.



Danielle Wood, CEO Grattan Institute

“The Labor plan to make childcare cheaper will deliver big economic and social

dividends. Reducing out of pocket costs will improve accessibility to early

childhood education and care which is good for children, good for women’s

workforce participation, and good for the economy. It’s is the policy we need for

these times.”



Kate Carnell, Australian Small Business and Family Enterprise

Ombudsman

The Australian Small Business and Family Enterprise Ombudsman Kate

Carnell says Labor’s alternative Budget plan to make childcare cheaper, would

deliver essential support to women in small business.



“There is an overwhelming economic case for affordable childcare, with many

credible economists arguing it would boost the participation rate and deliver

significant productivity gains.”



“Crucially, affordable childcare would allow more women to work on growing

their businesses - an important contribution to Australia’s economic recovery.”



McKell Institute

By increasing workforce participation and productivity, the Working Family Child

Care Boost, if applied on a continuing basis, could be expected to achieve an

economic return on investment of at least 100 per cent and possibly much

more.



Georgie Dent, Executive Director The Parenthood

“Investing more in early learning education and child care would pay dividends

in supporting more women into paid work, growing employment in a female-dominated industry and giving kids the best start possible.”



“Few other opportunities for government can deliver such strong economic

returns, let alone the priceless benefits for children, families, business and our

society.”



Sue Morphet, Chief Executive Women

“This reform would significantly address the powerful workforce disincentives

created by the current Child Care Subsidy - ensuring that more primary carers,

predominately women, are supported to take on full time work.”



“This is not welfare; it is investment in the infrastructure women need to

participate more fully in the workforce and maximise their productivity and

opportunities. It is good for business, good for the economic recovery and good

for the wider community.”



Thrive by Five, Minderoo Foundation

“This is reform that is good for children, for women, for families, and for the

economy - all critical considerations in the design of our post-COVID economic

and social recovery.”  - Nicola Forrest, Co-chair Minderoo Foundation



“The next step of our campaign is to win bipartisan support,” - Jay

Weatherill,CEO Thrive by Five



Sam Page, CEO Early Childhood Australia

“We particularly welcome budget measures that address economic recovery at

the same time as addressing long-term social reform which benefits children

and families.”



“Labor’s commitment to act swiftly to support women returning to work by

improving affordability and access to early childhood education is good news

for all Australians.”



Helen Gibbons, United Workers Union

“Making early education more affordable will also go a long way to securing the

long term job security of early childhood educators, whose jobs and hours were

greatly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.”



“This is a move which recognises the central value of early childhood education

to the Australian economy and communities, compared to the Federal

Government who, once again, have turned their back on the sector.”



Sally McManus, Secretary of the Australian Council of Trade Unions

“Spending our money to get us out of a recession should be done in a way that

leaves a positive legacy. Funding childcare for working parents has benefits on

so many levels.”



Elizabeth Death, Early Learning and Care Council of Australia

“Ensuring that all children have access to quality, affordable early learning is a

key challenge for all political parties as we approach the next Budget and the

next Federal Election.”



“We particularly welcome Labor’s proposal to scrap the annual CCS cap, which

artificially limits workforce participation by some parents, especially women.”



The Front Project

The Opposition Leader’s proposal to remove the CCS cap and lift the maximum

subsidy rate will remove disincentives for parents to work and improve

children’s access to early learning.



Julia Davison, CEO, Goodstart Early Learning

“It is good economics and good social policy that  Labor Leader Anthony



Albanese has made funding early learning and care one of his first major policy

commitments.”



“We would encourage the Federal Government to match Labor’s commitment

so that cost is no longer a barrier for children to access early learning, or for

their parents to return to work.”



SATURDAY, 10 OCTOBER 2020



MEDIA CONTACT: JEMMA SLEVEC 0405 752 923



