JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

WEDNESDAY, 26 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECT: Morrison Government’s failures in aged care.



JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINSITER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS: Good morning, I

want to start by acknowledging that since yesterday there have been seven more deaths in

aged care in Australia and my heart goes out to those families who have lost loved ones.

That now means that 335 Australians, older Australians who have died in residential aged

care in Australia since the beginning of this pandemic. I am particularly concerned that

what we've seen this week in Question Time is the Prime Minister try and boast about how

well they're doing in aged care. I don't think that's fair to the more than 300 families who

have lost people in this crisis to COVID-19. These are families that have not been able to

grieve with their loved one. And what we've seen from the Minister for Aged Care of

course, is is that he can't even answer basic questions in his own portfolio. And we've seen

that clearly the Prime Minister has sidelined the Minister from basic responsibilities in his

own portfolio, critical decisions around when an aged care response centre should be set

up in states and territories where there is an outbreak. It is incredible that the Minister

yesterday admitted to the Senate that he had not briefed the Federal Cabinet on aged care

matters, when we've got an outbreak that has hit 200 facilities across Australia and over

300 people are now deceased, over 3000 workers and residents have been infected by

COVID-19. And we've got the Prime Minister trying to boast that we're doing a good job

and we've got a Minister saying he hasn’t even briefed National Cabinet. It's not good

enough. Richard Colbeck is not up to the job. And it appears the Prime Minister also thinks

he's not up to the job. He didn't exactly give a strident defence of the Minister in the

Parliament yesterday.



JOURNALIST: What do you think the Government should be doing at this point to further

prepare, what can actually be done now at this very time?



COLLINS: Well, it is outrageous that we didn't have aged care workers properly trained in

infection control and how to don and doff protection equipment. That is now being done, it

needs to hasten and it needs to happen quickly, particularly in those areas that are

vulnerable and more prone to outbreaks. We need to make sure that the aged care

response centres are able to be stood up quickly in days, not weeks, like it took in Victoria.

We need to make sure that there's actually a national plan for aged care like the Royal

Commission told the Government it needed. There still appears to be no national

coordinated plan for aged care in Australia today. And we are in the middle of a crisis in

aged care facilities in Victoria and my concern is if there are outbreaks in other parts of the

country, that we're simply not ready.



JOURNALIST: The Government said they had learned lessons from Newmarch House a

few months ago. A lot of the same errors and mistakes and issues were also raised in the

St Basils and other sort of outbreaks in Melbourne. Are you confident that I guess lessons

might have finally been learned from those numerous outbreaks when something happens

in other parts of the country, that they can respond to it and not have the same issues

cropping up?



COLLINS: Clearly, the Government didn't learn from the outbreaks in New South Wales.

Clearly, the Government was not prepared for further outbreaks around the country after

we saw the outbreaks in New South Wales. The alarm bells were ringing and the

Government just wasn't listening. We never got a proper national plan. We still to this day

don't have a proper national plan. We still have aged care workers not properly trained in

infection control and how to put on protection equipment. It's not good enough and for the

Prime Minister to be boasting in his party room yesterday that aged care has done this well

is simply not true. And it's also not fair to those families, to the loved ones who've lost

people in this pandemic when we've got over 3,000 aged care recipients and workers who

have been infected by COVID-19, I don't think that's a success. And when we've got over

335 deaths, I don't think that's a success for those families and those loved ones. Thanks.



ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119



