







The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology  Federal Member for McPherson

MEDIA RELEASE

GRANTS TO MODERNISE AUSTRALIAN MANUFACTURING

4 December 2020

The Morrison Government is backing Australian manufacturers with shovel-ready  projects that will create jobs and drive the country’s COVID-19 comeback, with  applications now open for round two of the $52.8 million Manufacturing  Modernisation Fund (MMF).

Businesses will be able to apply for grants of between $100,000 and $1 million to  invest in new technology to increase their productivity, create new jobs and drive  economic growth.

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said the MMF Round  Two was a key element of the Government’s $1.5 billion Modern Manufacturing  Strategy.

“The Morrison Government knows that manufacturing is central to our nation’s  economic future and creating jobs for the recovery from COVID-19 and for future  generations,” Minister Andrews said.

“In these uncertain times, we’re giving manufacturing businesses the confidence and  certainty they need to invest in themselves to deliver new and innovative products and  services.

“We want to deliver more products for Australians, and beyond that, we want to open up  more opportunities for manufacturers to take on the world with their top quality products.

“Round One of the MMF is already helping manufacturers to become more  competitive and productive, with many already creating new jobs during the COVID-19 pandemic.

“The big change between Round One and Round Two is that this time we will play to our  nation’s strengths, with the projects needing to align with the National Manufacturing  Priorities announced as part of our Modern Manufacturing Strategy.”





The National Manufacturing Priorities are Resources Technology & Critical Minerals  Processing; Food & Beverage; Medical Products; Recycling & Clean Energy; Defence; and  Space.

Minister Andrews said successful businesses would be required to match any government  funding at least three-to-one.

“This is part of our Government’s mantra of providing a hand-up, not a hand-out. This is  about backing businesses to back themselves and grow,” she said.

Round One of the MMF in April saw the Government invest $48.3 million into nearly  200 projects valued at more than $215 million. These projects are expected to create  about 2,600 new jobs.

Applications for Round Two of the MMF will be open until 21 January 2021.

For more information on the MMF, including how to apply, visit business.gov.au/mmf.



Media Contact: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846 / Jen Jennings 0435 121 347

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

