

CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





2020 EARLE PAGE POLITICS LECTURE



STRONGER ON THE OTHER SIDE: A HEALTHIER SOCIETY AFTER

COVID-19



ARMIDALE

WEDNESDAY, 14 OCTOBER 2020



*** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY ***



Long before this place was an important university, it was the home of the Anewan People,

who inhabited the lands and waters for millennia and passed their teachings down from

generation to generation.



I pay my respects to the Anewan elders past, present and emerging.



It’s time - past time - to match those words with deeds.



The sad fact is that we are not on track to close the gap in life expectancy or health

outcomes, as we as a nation have promised to do.



We can and we must do better.



It is an enormous honour to have been asked to give the 2020 Earle Page Lecture.



I particularly want to thank the University for persevering. I was originally slated to be here

earlier in the year, and we’ve had a few false starts for obvious reasons.



A particular hello to the people who would normally be here in person but are instead

joining us online.



There are really three reasons I’m honoured to be with you.



First, I’m proud to join the list of distinguished Australians who have given this lecture -

which of course includes Malcolm Fraser, John Howard, Julia Gillard, Tony Abbott,

Anthony Albanese and Penny Wong.



Second, tonight is a chance to celebrate the Earle Page College and the University of New

England, and not just because both my wife and I are proud to have UNE degrees.



Strong regional economies are vital to a strong national economy - and universities like

UNE play an absolutely vital role in nurturing regional communities and innovation.



On a personal note, I also want to pay particular tribute to UNE for its ongoing commitment

to teaching Indonesian.



When I decided to learn Indonesian several years ago, I turned to UNE.



More and more Australian universities have closed their Indonesian programs, in a

massive backwards step for our understanding of our region.



We live in uncertain and unstable times.



A better understanding of - and closer, less transactional relationships with - countries in

our region are vital.



And to my UNE Indonesian lecturers, it gives me a chance tonight to say:



Ibu Indra dan Pak Zi.  Terima kasih atas mengajariky Bahasa Indonesia. Saya akan

melakukan yang terbaik untuk terus belajar dan mendukung hubungan Australia dengan

Indonesia.



Third, I’m also pleased to honour Earle Page himself.



It’s not obvious that the Labor Shadow Health Minister from Western Sydney should be

invited to give a lecture honouring a former Country Party Prime Minister from New

England.



But in these hyper-partisan times, we should recognise that people of good will and

achievement have sat and continue to sit on both sides of Parliament.



When I wrote my book “The Money Men”, which focusses on Australia’s twelve most

notable treasurers, I chose Page to be one of them.



Indeed I gave him mention as one of the upper rank of treasurers and said of him “he was

an anchor of stability in a long term Government and engineered long lasting reforms to

Commonwealth-state financial relations”



And I’ll share a secret with you. I hope to emulate Earle Page and join him in a very small

club.



You see, Page is one of two Australians to have served as both Treasurer and Minister for

Health.



The other was Stanley Bruce. Two conservatives.



No-one in the Labor Party has held both offices. (The great Bill Hayden was Treasurer and

also introduced Medibank, but he did so as Minister for Social Security).



Both Page and Bruce served as Treasurer first, then Health Minister - exactly the pattern of

service I hope to emulate.



I want to do this because I understand that a healthier society and stronger economy go

hand in hand.



A healthier society is a more productive one. A good economy is a good society.



This is really what I want to talk about tonight: using the jolt of COVID-19 to rebuild our

economy and renew our society.



Tonight, I essentially want to offer three propositions.



First, that we must be better prepared for the next pandemic, and must tackle other health

threats with the same urgency as COVID-19.



Second, that our health is shaped by our economy and our society, and that we must

address the pandemic of insecurity.



The phenomenon of insecure work - the ‘gig economy’ - has real implications for the

health of individuals and our society as a whole, and we have to be honest about this.



And third, that all of this relies on good government, and that governments and alternative

governments must learn the broader lessons of 2020.



More, that we take the misery and dislocation of COVID-19 and make it a “hinge moment”.

We have to use the pandemic as a rare opportunity to reset our approach to governing.



COVID-19 and future pandemics



Unfortunately, pandemics aren’t ‘black swan events’.



In the last two decades alone, we’ve seen SARS, H1N1, MERS, Ebola and Zika.



And the most obvious lesson out of this pandemic is that we need to be better prepared for

the next one.



The global world we live in, along with changing habitats and environments, makes

pandemics a certainty into the future.



There’s no reason to think a future pandemic won’t also present challenges even bigger

than this one.



We have given bipartisan support to the Government, indeed to all governments state and

federal, for the steps that have been necessary to tackle COVID-19.



But it is also incumbent on us to point out that we could have been better prepared.



We went into the pandemic with less than one mask for every Australian in our National

Stockpile, an overreliance on global supply chains, and badly stretched aged and health

care systems.



And the pandemic further exposed well known weaknesses in our health care

infrastructure, like chronically under-funded and under-valued aged care.



As the President of the AMA put it recently, “COVID-19 took the world by surprise, but its

effects on the aged care system were entirely predictable”.



Other health threats



But as important as pandemic preparedness is, we also need to have a broader

conversation about the health of our nation.



We have to treat some of the other threats to our country’s health with the same sense of

urgency.



Since January, we’ve spared no effort or expense in the fight against this virus.



But year after year, we fail to tackle other health threats that are killing Australians.



We spend a miniscule proportion of our nation’s health budgets on preventing chronic

disease, despite the fact it afflicts one in two Australians, and contributes to 90 per cent of

deaths in this country.



Every year, 1.3 million Australians skip primary care because they can’t afford it, and

another two million skip dental care.



In our public hospitals, one in three emergency patients are not seen on time.



And perhaps most damning of all, we’ve taken no real action on climate change, despite

the World Health Organisation calling it the defining health issue of the 21st Century.



I’ve already mentioned the impacts of these failures on First Nations peoples.



But they’re also on stark display in Armidale and other regional and rural areas.



Because it’s a tragic fact that life expectancy falls as remoteness increases.



It’s 82 years in our cities, 80 in our regions, 76 in remote areas, and just 67 in very remote

areas.



People in regional, rural and remote Australia die up to 15 years earlier on average.



According to the Commonwealth Fund, Equity and Access are the areas pulling us back

from becoming the best health system in the world.



We have all the tools of an excellent health system - but where you live and what you earn

too often determine your ability to use those tools.



So we must be better prepared for the next pandemic. But we also need to treat other

health threats with the same urgency as COVID-19.



Centre for Disease Control



That’s why last week, Anthony Albanese and I announced that a Labor Government would

establish an Australian Centre for Disease Control.



Australia is the only OECD country without a CDC equivalent, and experts have been

calling for one for over three decades.



Now, a CDC isn’t a silver bullet. As we’ve seen tragically in the US, a CDC must be

accompanied by strong political leadership.



But an Australian CDC would focus on pandemics all the time - after COVID-19, and

before the next one, making sure we are better prepared.



When outbreaks do occur, it would provide rapid and consistent advice to all governments

- Commonwealth, state and territory.



And as in other countries, an Australian CDC would have a broader public health role.



It would work to control all diseases - be they infectious like COVID-19, or non-communicable like heart disease and diabetes.



Because as I’ve said, other challenges threaten our health at least as much as COVID-19,

and both deserve an ongoing focus.



Social determinants of health



When we talk about health, we tend to talk about health care.



As a country, we think less - much less - about why we stay healthy or get sick in the first

place.



But the conditions in which we grow, live, work, and age - and the political, social, and

economic forces that shape them - determine our health outcomes.



One of the most important health thought leaders in the world is Sir Michael Marmot, who

incidentally trained at the University of Sydney and Royal Prince Alfred Hospital like Earle

Page.



Marmot calls these forces  the “causes of the causes’.



Not just whether we smoke, or carry too much weight, or eat badly - the causes of ill-health.



But why we do those things.



More than a third of the health gap between First Nations and other Australians is due to

the social determinants - like differences in incomes, employment and schooling.



When you add health risk factors like smoking, you account for more than half the health

gap between First Nations and other Australians.



Or to put it another way - less than half the gap relates to access to health services.



So, to improve the health of First Nations peoples, and all Australians, we need to address

not just access to health care.



Not just the direct causes of ill-health.



But the causes of the causes.



Socioeconomic position. Early life and education. Social exclusion. Employment and work.

Housing and homelessness. The built environment.



All of these shape our health in powerful ways.



If we are going to make a real difference to the health of Australians, we are going to need

to move closer to a ‘Health in All Policies’ approach.



The World Health Organisation says “health in all policies” “improves the accountability of

policy makers for health impacts at all levels of policy making”.



This approach recognises that policy decisions way beyond the health portfolio have health

implications which must be considered when they are being made.



Unemployment



And tonight, I want to focus on one of the most fundamental determinants of health, and

that’s employment - both its existence, and its nature.



The first economic responsibility of any government is to keep unemployment as low as

practically possible.



This is particularly important as Australia suffers its first recession in three decades.



That’s why wage subsidies - which Labor suggested and the Government resisted - have

been so important in 2020.



And it’s why it makes no sense to cut them while we’re still in the middle of a pandemic.



Because jobs - good jobs - are important for any number of reasons - including that they

shape our health.



It’s well-established that unemployment is terrible for both mental and physical health.



And right now, that’s particularly bad news for young people.



Between March and April, almost one in three workers aged 18 to 24 lost their jobs.



And while things have improved slightly as our economy has begun to reopen, the actual

rate of employment for young Australians remains under 60 per cent.



Partly that’s because young Australians make up more than half the workforce in the

industries that have been hit hardest - hospitality, retail, culture and leisure.



And partly it’s because half of all young workers - and 80 per cent of young workers in

those particular industries - are on casual contracts.



And I’m concerned that as young people gradually return to employment, that figure of

casualisation might actually grow even higher, as employers hire young people back.



Not only is unemployment bad for your health, so is insecure work.



If we are to adopt a “health in all policies” approach, we should be very concerned about

the health impacts of increasing casualisation and insecurity.



More and more, when someone enters or re-enters the job market, they get an insecure

job.



In fact, as the Melbourne Institute has recently highlighted, Australia has one of the highest

rates of casualisation in the OECD.



One in four Australian workers is a casual. Half of those have no guaranteed hours.



That’s a problem for very many reasons, including what Marmot describes as the

“overwhelming evidence that job insecurity damages health”.



It’s not surprising that insecure workers face increased stress, anxiety, and other mental

health challenges.



Studies show that the fear of losing your job is just as harmful as the actual experience of

unemployment.



Not as obvious, but equally proven, is that this sort of work has physical implications too.



Taken together, 21 studies show a 34 per cent increased risk of heart disease for insecure

workers.



And these health impacts are most prominent where job insecurity is thrust on people by

circumstances beyond their control - in other words, exactly what we have seen this year.



It’s critical we pay attention to this, the nature of work, in our shaping of Australia on the

other side of COVID.



We live in the age of the gig economy, of omni-present Uber and other platforms to

connect labour with people who need labour.



These have brought convenience and efficiency for everyone - and that’s pretty much all

of us - who have used one or more of these new platforms.



And it’s true that some gig workers, like Uber drivers, welcome the flexibility and enjoy the

social interaction that comes with the job.



Some, but by no means all.



These platforms have stretched the relevance of industrial conditions and protections to

breaking point.



And that has real downsides for many of those who have no choice but to subject

themselves to this working environment.



In her book ‘Uberland’, Alex Rosenblat argues that Uber and similar services have “created

a fundamental shift in what it means to be employed”.



In particular, she argues that these services brand themselves as job creators, but have

decoupled employment from employment rights.



And a recent survey of Australian rideshare and delivery drivers by the Transport Workers

Union bears that out.



Three in four of these drivers wish the way they were engaged in work was different -

that  they were employees, not independent contractors.



When you take into account all of the variable and fixed costs and income, these workers

make an average $10.42 an hour.



$10.42 an hour. In Australia. One of the wealthiest countries in the world. In 2020.



Not even $100 for more than a full day’s work.



That’s consistent with broader evidence that 38 per cent of Australians who live below the

poverty line are actually in work.



It’s no wonder 71 per cent of these drivers are struggling just to pay the bills and buy

groceries.



And even at the most basic level, the health implications of insecure casual work are there

for all to see.



Sick leave is used for medical appointments and stops infectious people coming to work.



Gig workers without sick leave, reliant on every gig to make up a basic income, are likely to

put off medical appointments - leading to them being sicker.



And they are more likely to come to work when ill, putting their work colleagues and clients

at risk of illness.



If COVID has taught us anything, it is that these precarious employment arrangements are

an increasing risk to public health.



Pandemic leave has had to be introduced in the teeth of COVID-19, but we have hundreds

of thousands of workers without access to sick leave every day in the non-pandemic

environment and that is just as dangerous.



And if and when these workers do become seriously ill or injured, they don’t enjoy nearly

the same safety net.



Employees covered by NSW workers’ compensation laws are entitled to up to $110,000 in

payments for medical costs, and ongoing weekly payments of up to $2,200.



But for Uber Eats drivers for example, medical payments are capped at $5,000, and

weekly payments are half as much, and for only 30 days.



And it’s not just that.



Shift work has real health implications.



Plenty of studies show it. But I know it.



My Dad was a shift worker all through my childhood.  For many years, he worked

permanent midnight shift, catching up on sleep as well as he could during the day.



The health impacts are inescapable.



But at least my Dad and the thousands of other shift workers worked in a regulated

environment, in which health impacts were considered in rostering and things like minimum

breaks.



Insecure workers, catching as many shifts as they can with different platforms and at all

hours receive no such consideration.



Of course, insecure work can look different in different places.



Rideshare and food delivery services are less common in regional and rural areas, which

don’t always have a critical mass of demand.



But as you know all too well, these areas have faced a different challenge in recent

decades - the flight of human capital to cities, and increasingly precarious work for those

who remain.



And many young people who do leave the regions for the cities find they are thrown into

precarious and insecure work on arrival.



Whatever its causes, when the nature of work creates conditions where people cannot

meet their basic living requirements, then that is a problem for our health, our economy

and our society.



So jobs - good jobs - are vital to Australia’s health.



Now I’m no luddite. I’m not suggesting we can or should wind back the clock to the era

before we could tap our phones for an Uber or ask Airtasker to help us find someone to do

some paving around the house.



But we must recognise the real and cancerous impacts of the growing workplace

insecurity.



And governments must consider how our regulatory system needs to be updated to deal

with it.



To me, this really comes down to a basic question.



What kind of society do we want?



A big part of Labor’s mission has been to avoid the development of an Australian under-class.



Our system of industrial arbitration and protections and our highly targeted social welfare

system were both designed with this explicit objective.



Are we to now stand quietly by and say we are happy for such an under-class to develop

because we think technology gives us no choice?



I say, no.



This is not impossible. Unions NSW and Airtasker showed a couple of years ago what is

possible when they, to the credit of both parties, struck a deal around basic protections for

service providers on Airtasker.



And as in so many areas, New Zealand is currently showing us a way forward.



Jacinda Ardern has invited one of her National Party predecessors as Prime Minister, Jim

Bolger, to advise her Government on how better to regulate the labour market in this

environment.



And Bolger has freely recognised that a laissez-faire approach like the one he once

championed is not fit for purpose in this gig economy.



In Australia, we need a federal Government which doesn’t use COVID to wind back

industrial protections.



We need a Government that recognises those protections should be refreshed and

updated to reflect these massive socio-economic changes.



We’ve dealt with the COVID pandemic well so far.



We haven’t even started to tackle the pandemic of insecurity, with all the implications that it

has for the health of individuals and the health of our society.



Good government



Some might argue that I’m asking for a lot tonight.



Well, I plead guilty. I’m ambitious for our nation.



And my third and final point is that COVID-19 has shown that governments can still do

good things - great things - with force of will.



For a decade or so, Australian politics has been consumed by a series of toxic debates -

most spectacularly on climate change, but on other issues too.



Many Australians have come to believe that government is no longer interested in their

lives, or able to improve them.



That’s one of the major drivers behind the political disengagement that is now well

documented.



But COVID-19 gives us an opportunity to reset the political discussion and offer a new

compact with the Australian people.



Because our response to the pandemic shows what is possible when governments actually

apply force of will to seemingly intractable problems.



Let’s take an international example.



In Britain, the Conservative Government had a target of reducing homelessness by 90 per

cent in five years.



When the COVID crisis hit and Whitehall was concerned that rough sleepers would

become a vector for the virus, this target was met in two days.



An ambitious government target, met in 48 hours.



It was a similar story in Australia.



Out of the estimated 8,200 rough sleepers here, an impressive 5,000 were temporarily

sheltered in the early weeks of the pandemic.



And a final example. Australia entered this crisis with around 2,000 intensive care beds

and ventilators.



That was less per head of population than Italy. The fear that ICUs would be overwhelmed

here - as they were there - drove much of the effort to ‘bend the curve’ in Australia.



To the credit of all involved, we now have around 7,000 intensive care beds. That’s a big

achievement in a few months.



Martin Luther King talked of the fierce of urgency of now. We have all been living the fierce

urgency of now this year.



When this approach is applied, when ideology is set aside, when prime ministers and

premiers of good will work together to fix an urgent problem, a lot can be achieved.



But here’s the caveat.



Our response to COVID-19 has been effective because we have focussed almost

exclusively on the pandemic.



Too often, governments try to do too many things.



That’s a particular problem for Labor and other parties of the centre-left, who rightly see

problems everywhere and want to fix them all.



But when we try to boil the ocean, we fail.



That’s one of the lessons of our time in Government, and particularly of the last election.



I’m not arguing for less ambition.



But I am arguing for more focus, so that effort and investment can be concentrated on the

greatest challenges.



And I’ve nominated some starting points tonight.



It’s often been said that you should never let a crisis go to waste.



It’s often said, because it’s true.



The COVID crisis has taught us many things.



That we weren’t as ready for this crisis as we could have been.



That we need to be more ready for next time.



That investments in public health, including aged care, are just that: investments that pay

back many times over when it counts.



That more and more of our fellow Australians are facing precarious, insecure employment

and this has implications for their health, and the health of our country.



And that when governments turn their mind to something, focus on it and co-operate with

other levels of government, seemingly intractable problems can be tackled and solved.





We should be less willing to accept that some problems are “just too hard”.  We can make

a real difference.



All this leads me to the conclusion that we can and must come through this crisis a

stronger society. An even better country.



With stronger public health and more security in our working lives.



It’s down to all of us to make it happen.



Thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ELIZA MITCHELL 0413 410 931



