

SENATOR THE HON LINDA REYNOLDS CSC  Minister for Defence  Senator for Western Australia



THE HON MELISSA PRICE MP  Minister for Defence Industry  Member for Durack



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE



COLLINS CLASS SUBMARINES TO RECEIVE SONAR  UPGRADES



29 December 2020



Navy’s Collins Class submarines will undergo significant upgrades to its sonar systems here in Australia  through a multi-million dollar contract with Thales Australia.

The two contracts, worth around $23.7 million, are for the design and implementation of the Mine and  Obstacle Avoidance System and the High Frequency Intercept Array for the submarine fleet.

The upgrades will not only enhance the capability of the Collins Class fleet but will provide a boost to  Australian Defence industry and support Australian jobs.

Minister for Defence, Senator the Hon Linda Reynolds CSC said both the Mine and Obstacle Avoidance  System and High Frequency Intercept Array are important parts of the upgrades to the Collins sonar  system.

“Our six Collins Class submarines are a highly capable and regionally superior capability that are only  halfway through their operational life,” Minister Reynolds said.

“To ensure this capability maintains its edge, we are upgrading and improving its systems including  through sonar upgrades.

“The purpose of a Mine and Obstacle Avoidance System is to acoustically detect obstacles, including  mines, which pose a threat to the submarine. The High Frequency Intercept Array detects high frequency  noises including sonar transmissions.

“With more than 20 years of investment in Australia by Thales and Defence, these upgrades will  complement broader improvements to the sonar capability of the Collins Class, ensuring the regional  superiority of the fleet into the future.

“Because of this Government’s action, we have a Collins Class submarine that is now exceeding the  Royal Australian Navy’s availability requirement.”

Minister for Defence Industry Melissa Price said Thales had extensive experience working on the Collins  fleet and other Australian-based companies would be engaged throughout the contracts.

“These contracts will include about 80 per cent of work being completed by Australian industry,” Minister  Price said.

“We can expect these contracts to support 30 new jobs with Thales Australia in Rydalmere, NSW and  additional jobs along the supply chain - jobs that will continue throughout the contracts.

“Once again, we are backing Aussie businesses and creating jobs in our defence industry, which is in turn  helping the national economy on its road to recovery after COVID-19.”

NSW Minister for Jobs, Investment, Tourism and Western Sydney, Stuart Ayres said, “Thales Australia  has a long history of supporting the Royal Australian Navy with sonars, periscopes and other electronic  systems proven with the fleet at sea.

“The sonar systems developed by Thales Australia represents a major contribution to an enduring  sovereign sonar capability for the nation.”

Imagery is available at: https://images.defence.gov.au/S20204034

Vision is available at: https://innovatehub.sharepoint.com/:f:/s/mediahub/EvJTLiw486xFrGOmu5-Xy8YBTfz1YP1pkaKJQ-rbtprx-w?e=J2OPsj

Media Contacts  Ben Martin (Minister Reynolds’ Office): +61 447 219 902  Ben Spencer (Minister Price’s Office): +61 412 754 310  Defence Media: media@defence.gov.au



