



THE HON ANDREW GEE MP  Federal Member for Calare  Minister for Decentralisation and Regional Education   Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Investment



STATEMENT

6 August 2020

Audit of Charles Sturt University’s Financial Position



“The announcement made by Charles Sturt University (CSU) on 5 August 2020, falls well short of  delivering the rigorous, open and transparent audit of the financial performance and financial  position of the University,” Mr Gee said.

“CSU’s statement is inadequate and fails to commit to the audit in the terms set out in the  resolution agreed by the University Council.

“The Charles Sturt University Council’s resolution which was passed on 2 June 2020, specifically  stated that the financial audit would assess the impact of the University’s Sustainable Futures  Program and would include a pre, during and post COVID-19 data analysis of student enrolments.

“The resolution also stated that the Council would report the results of the audit to the Australian  and New South Wales Governments.

“The University’s statement is silent on all of the key points contained in the resolution which were  agreed almost two months ago.

“Students and staff have been approaching my office and are increasing concerned about the  apparent disarray that is stemming from the lack of open and transparent information about the  University’s financial positon.

“Now is the time for the University to open up the books and to shine some light on its finances,  management and operations. Sunlight is the best form of disinfectant.

“The Council needs to get on and implement the resolution and audit in full.

“Only then will students, staff and the communities which CSU serves have a clear picture about its  sustainability and how the University will navigate the future which is vital in maintaining community  confidence and government trust.”

Media Contact: Gabi Phipps 0400 917 405, Gabrielle.Phipps@dfat.gov.au



































