

SUSAN TEMPLEMAN MP  MEMBER FOR MACQUARIE



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA   TUESDAY, 20 OCTOBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Bushfire Regional Recovery Partnership funding; Western Sydney  Airport.

SUSAN TEMPLEMAN MP: I’m Susan Templeman the Member for Macquarie  representing the Blue Mountains and Hawkesbury. The government’s announced a $100  million fund for regional partnerships, regional recovery partnerships it’s called. Now mine’s  a region, the Blue Mountains and Hawkesbury, which has had drought. We’ve had  bushfires on a scale never before seen. We’ve had COVID, a tourism industry massively  hit by COVID, yet my area’s been excluded from these regions. We’re not one of the picks  of the 10 regions for this $100 million fund. The Blue Mountains tourism industry wants to  know why not. What we heard last night at Senate Estimates is that there is no reason,  there’s no criteria that’s clear about how these picks were made. The National Bushfire  Recovery Agency wasn’t even asked for its advice on which regions needed it most. Now  the Blue Mountains, from bushfires alone, took a $66 million hit, the Hawkesbury a $33  million hit to the economy in the space of a couple of months. Yet neither of these areas  were chosen.

These weren’t captain’s picks, these were vice captain’s picks. And that vice captain, the  Deputy Prime Minister, is the man who thinks a $30 million deal for a $3 million block of  land in Western Sydney is a great deal. So you’ve really got to question; how  is this  Deputy Prime Minister choosing these regions? What’s the criteria? Why did the Blue  Mountains miss out?

And just while we’re on the subject of Badgerys Creek. The land deal, the Leppington  Triangle land deal, the first deal that the Auditor General has revealed that he’s referred to  the Australia Federal Police shows why we need far more scrutiny on this project. This is a  massive project, it involves huge land purchases, big tenders. We need to be able to look  closely at what the people making these decisions are doing. We need an integrity  commission to be able to thoroughly and forensically investigate where things have a smell  about them.

That’s what you get with this government. You get sports rorts, you get land deals that  smell rotten, and you get really deeply affected areas like the Blue Mountains and the  Hawkesbury being excluded from recovery funds. These things all have to be answered  for.



ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KRYSTYNA POLLARD 0406 693 735









