

TONY BURKE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ARTS  MANAGER OF OPPOSITION BUSINESS  MEMBER FOR WATSON



CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  SYDNEY  SATURDAY, 14 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Good morning,  everybody and thanks for coming. I'll make a few comments before my friend  and colleague Tony Burke.

Obviously we know from international experience that the earlier substantial  measures are taken to avoid social contact, minimise social contact, then  spread of this disease can be minimised. It's absolutely vital we stop this  disease taking hold in Australia. Tough decisions now can avoid much tougher  times for the country in the weeks and months ahead.

That's why yesterday we suggested that event organisers seriously consider  cancelling postponing events or making them spectator free. That's why  Anthony Albanese and I urged the Australian Health Protection Principal  Committee to advise Government and the Australian people urgently about  cancelling events and we're very glad that they did so yesterday afternoon. This  is a tough call but the right call. I understand many people are disappointed  about various events.

But as I said, tough decisions now avoid much tougher times later.

I was disappointed in fact, gobsmacked, that the Prime Minister indicated he  would still be attending the football after the advice from Australia's chief

medical officers. Yes, the advice only formally comes into effect on Monday.  But leadership is about more than rules and regulations. It's about the example  you set. I understand that Scott Morrison wanted to go football so did Anthony  Albanese. I like to go to the football too. But as soon as that was clear as that  advice was clear, I thought it was a gobsmacking lack of judgement for Scott  Morrison to continue to insist that he was going to go the football sending a  terrible signal and message to the Australian people.

And then, now that Scott Morrison has changed his mind, he's saying it's  because it could be ‘misrepresented’. So apparently it's the fault of the Labor  Party, or the media, or somebody who might misrepresent his views. Well, the  fact of the matter is, it's right that he doesn't go to football but he should have  made that decision much earlier and of his own volition.

Secondly, of course, we have the news that Peter Dutton has been diagnosed  with COVID-19. Now, of course, we wish him the best. This is not a pleasant  disease. And you know, he's in our thoughts. We wish him all the very best and  his family.

I've been concerned about the mixed messaging and the apparent  inconsistency that the approach that the Prime Minister and Cabinet are taking,  which is different to the approach recommended to members of the  public. We're told the Government has advice that they don't need to be tested  or self-isolated, because there was no immediate contact in the 24 hours prior  to symptoms emerging. Now the public advice the isolation guidance, the  guidance to people who have close contact with a confirmed case says nothing  about any 24 hour period. It simply says that anybody who's been in close  contact should be self-isolated.

Now, there is a lack of information before the Australian people and this  confusion makes it worse.

It is not appropriate that there's any double standards at play. It's not  appropriate that there are any different rules put in place for the Prime Minister  or the Cabinet than every other Australian. There's plenty of Australians,  whether they've been on the Diamond Princess or come from overseas or been  in close contact, who have had to self-isolate out of an abundance of caution.  Scott Morrison must clarify and confirm today, whether the advice has changed  to the rest of Australians.

If he doesn't need to be tested and self-isolated. If the cabinet doesn't need to  be tested and self-isolated. Then the way the rest of the Australian people  respond should also be amended to reflect that advice.

Again, I stress with Peter Dutton the best, but this confusion and this apparent

disconnect between what they are doing and what they are telling others is very  concerning, it is not good enough for Scott Morrison to say ‘do as I say not as I  do’, he must lead by example.

Now we've been clear, we give the Government support for the steps they've  taken. We have called for more. There needs to be much more public  information and advertising much more quickly. The first Australian diagnosis  was January 25. We've been dealing with this for weeks. Ads can be turned  around quickly, ads can be placed quickly. We're only now seeing a trickle of  advertisements and public information, much more could have and should have  been done. The telehealth rebate does not go far enough. The fever, the  respiratory clinics are too slow in rolling out. Much more can and should be  done. We will support the Government in what they do, but we will also do the  responsible thing and call on them to do more.

Tony is going to deal with some industrial relations aspects and then we'll take  your questions.

TONY BURKE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS:  Thanks Chris. I want to touch first on some issues about the workforce  generally and then specifically on those working in the arts, entertainment and  major events industries.

First of all, on the workforce generally, there is a problem that arises for people  who do not get sick leave that has still not been resolved by the Government.  The Government, I appreciate, doesn’t understand how casuals live, and  people who are in the gig economy. We had the comments, the breathtaking  comments, from Christian Porter claiming that people get their casual loading  for these sorts of circumstances. I’m yet to meet the checkout operator who  tells me they’re working because they’re saving up for the pandemic. But the  challenge that the Government needs to fix is not simply an industrial relations  one, it is a health one.

We cannot have a situation where people have a financial incentive to turn up  for work when it’s in the interests of everyone’s health that they don’t turn up.  And we still have a situation where, for casuals, as long as what they would  earn by going to work is more than $40 a day, they have an incentive to turn  up, and are being forced to choose between paying their bills  or protecting the  health of their fellow workers. Don’t forget, the most casualised industries are  the industries generally where you have the most contact with the public. So  there is a huge interest, national interest, in making sure that this incentive is  fixed. But at the moment, with the way the Government has designed their  current proposals, we still have a problem that casuals have an incentive, even  when sick, to turn up to work at the risk of their fellow workers and at the risk of  every member of the public they come in contact with.



I’d also say with respect to members of the public when you’re in those  situations … I’ve heard it anecdotally, I heard it personally yesterday from a  checkout operator I had a conversation with at a Coles supermarket, please for  all the frustration that people are feeling at the moment, don’t take it out on the  checkout operator, don’t take it out on the retail worker, don’t take it out on the  workers who are simply doing their job. Levels of abuse always arise in busy  times but what is coming through now is much worse than in the worst of the  Christmas period in terms of the abuse people are taking on the front line.  Please, please treat the workforce with respect, they’re just doing their job in a  difficult time even when they become the front line of having to enforce limits on  purchases and things like that.

The final thing I want to say is with respect to the arts and entertainment  industries. People in these industries live gig to gig, they live shift to shift, they  live event to event. With every major event cancellation, the public attention  goes straightaway to what does that mean for the people who were going to  attend and making sure they get their ticket money back and I completely  understand that. But what’s happening now is a series of artists, of road crew,  of people who run the food stalls - they are watching the next few months  where they had a line of income locked in, they’re watching it disappear. And  this government still has no plan for that sector. These are the same people,  the same industry that only months ago was providing free benefits for bushfire  victims. They are about to face an extraordinary challenge.

The Government needs to have a plan to deal with the people whose  employment relies on festivals, on gigs, on major events, on sporting events.  These are people who are always the first go to when we’re asking people to  work for free to benefit in other good charitable causes. Right now they are  about to face … and whenever they normally hit a gap, a whole lot of these  individuals are people who then turn to the hospitality industry for a job, the  exact industry that’s going through significant downturn. So, the Government  must come up with a plan to deal with this section of the workforce. We only  think of it often in terms of the superstars, as being the ones reliant on the  entertainment industry, this is a huge industry and event after event is now  being cancelled, there needs to be a plan for the workers in that industry.

BOWEN: Thanks Tony, over to you folks.

JOURNALIST: Are there members of the Federal Labor Party being tested for  Coronavirus or in self-isolation?

BOWEN: I am aware of only one, Tanya Plibersek attended the Universities  Australia conference. There was a report that somebody was at their  conference had tested positive. Tanya immediately sought advice, self-isolated

immediately, had the test. I'm very happy to say the test was negative and  she's now back to normal, but she followed the advice to the letter self-isolated,  tested, that is the only case I'm aware of it. And I think she tweeted that this  morning.

JOURNALIST: Not Anthony Albanese, where is he today?

BOWEN: He is in Sydney and I'm certainly not aware of any tests.

JOURNALIST: When - we have been following this for a couple of months  now, and I've never heard anything about 24 hours preceding this when  someone is symptomatic when you isolate - until the Prime Minister's office  statement last night, that was the first I've heard of it. Are you in the same  boat?

BOWEN: Yes. I mean, based on the public advice, the public information,  which is pretty clear and says nothing about 24 hours. Now there's different  advice for primary health care workers. Peter Dutton is not a primary health  care worker last time I checked. So the public advice, he is a member the  public as well as a cabinet minister. This is what I'm concerned about, the  apparent misinformation or the confusion that will be caused. If Scott Morrison  says he doesn't need to be tested and self-isolated and the rest of the Cabinet  don't need to go through it. What about people who are going about their  normal business, trying to get as Tony says, food on the table, they might - self  isolation for them means a loss of wages in some instances. They're going to  be confused. This has to be cleaned up really quickly, really quickly.

JOURNALIST: Are you suggesting the Cabinet or much of it should be self-isolating?

BOWEN: Well, they should follow the public advice unless they've explained to  the Australian people today, why they're not, or the public advice has changed.  I mean, these things can’t all be right. The public advice can't be right. The  Prime Minister's actions cannot be right. They can't all be right. Something is  different. Something is being applied differently. As I said, I stress, the  Government's in our thoughts, Peter Dutton, is in our thoughts, I wish him all  the very best.

This is about the message this sends. Particularly as there is such a dearth of  advertising and public health information out there. I mean, the states are doing  it. Western Australia has daily ads in the newspaper about public information,  the state government. The New South Wales Liberal Government's doing it  here. They've got information campaigns out there. This is not about partisan  politics. There needs to be a federally, nationally coordinated information  campaign.



And this confusion on a very clear reading of the public advice is not being  followed by the Cabinet of Australia. Justin Trudeau has in self-isolation as we  speak.

JOURNALIST: Should the Cabinet isolate?

BOWEN: They should follow the advice that has been given to every single  Australian, they should follow that as well. And if they have some explanation  as to what's different about them, I want to hear it today. And I think the  Australian people deserve to hear today.

JOURNALIST: Do you think the Chief Medical Officer has given the Cabinet a  different set of instructions?

BOWEN: That's a matter for the Chief Medical Officer to deal with and the  Deputy Chief Medical Officer, I'm not critical of them. I am critical of a different  approach being taken, on the face of it, from everything I can see. If they have  got an explanation and it's a good explanation. We'll accept it. I haven't seen  any good explanation. And my main concern here is the confusion that this will  cause in the public that there is what appears to be one set of rules for them.  And another set of rules for everyone else.

JOURNALIST: Does it really hurt to just get tested?

BOWEN: Well, it's not a painful test. And it's not. It's not particularly pleasant  test from what I understand.

JOURNALIST: But peace of mind, just do it?

BOWEN: Again, I mean, guidance has been given Australian people, nothing  here about 24 hours. Nothing. I checked last night because I was confused. If  I'm confused. The Australian people have every right to be confused as well.

JOURNALIST: Should Marise Payne self-isolate on her return?

BOWEN: Well, she should follow the public advice. I don't know where she's  been. I don't know what, what exposures she's had, but she should follow the  public advice.

JOURNALIST: Can I ask Mr Burke as the Manager of Opposition Business, if  we’ve got a situation where the federal cabinet has been potentially exposed to  coronavirus, what can the Parliament do when you’re supposed to sit Monday  week in the event that a few of these members may have to sit out and can’t go  to Parliament?



BURKE: We frequently deal with pairing arrangements when someone’s not  well and can’t attend, so that concept itself isn’t problematic. Certainly, the way  the virus is spreading, it’s pretty clear that the sooner Parliament sits, that is in  everyone’s interest in making sure the stimulus package gets through. That’s  why Anthony Albanese put that to the Government. Within an hour they just  dismissed it out of hand. So that now means we’ll be waiting for the extra week,  but in terms of individuals who can’t attend, pairing arrangements have always  dealt with that.

JOURNALIST: But can a Parliament sit without an Executive?

BURKE: Without any Executive? You need to have someone from the  Executive there. The Executive…

JOURNALIST: But what if they’re all out?

BURKE: The Executive is much bigger than the Cabinet. But I mean there’s a  whole series of what-ifs that you’ve added there. The first line though is the  sooner the Parliament sits, the less likely we are to face those sorts of  problems, and the stimulus package requires the Parliament to sit, so it’s in  everyone’s interests for the Parliament to sit early, that’s why we put it forward  as a constructive suggestion. But Scott Morrison’s nature is if the idea didn’t  come from himself then he throws it out pretty quickly.

JOURNALIST: Aren’t MPs sitting in Parliament, isn’t that by its very nature, a  risk? It’s a mass gathering.

BURKE: And this is why the sooner the meeting happens the more effective …  there is no stimulus package without the Parliament sitting.

JOURNALIST: Just on that advice with mass gatherings, would it have been  better to take effect yesterday rather than waiting until Monday and following a  weekend of fairly large events?

BOWEN: Yeah, I don't quibble with the advice of the Australian Health  Protection Principal Committee. I do say though - the advice of the Committee  is not a ceiling. It should be a floor. It should be the minimum of what is done. It  should be the minimum action put in time in place by governments,  governments can and should decide to do more.

I don't understand how an event, which is a bad idea on Monday is a fine idea  on Saturday. I do not understand how that can be the case. This is my point  about the Prime Minister's lack of leadership with the football tonight. I mean, a  mass gathering on a Saturday night is to my mind of a similar nature to a mass

gathering on Monday night.

Particularly as we know, the sooner action is taken, as I said in my first words, I  said here. We know the sooner and more substantial action is taken on social  isolation, the more effective it is in stopping COVID-19 taking hold in a  community and we must stop it taking hold in our community.

JOURNALIST: This is not a ban, on mass gatherings. What do you say to  organisers of events who plan to continue, do you think that they should be  banned?

BOWEN: The situation is that these events, the Government's advice is very  clear, the Chief Medical Officer's advice was very clear - they should not  proceed. If there are events which do proceed against the advice of the  Government, the Chief Medical Officer, as Director of Biosecurity has certain  powers. That's a matter for him to outline whether he would contemplate using  them or not. But it shouldn't get to that and my expectation won't get to that.  Most people are patriotic Australians who want to see us get through this. And  as disappointing as it is for many people we've met with large events planned  that had to be cancelled with short notice. I mean, I've had speeches cancelled  and conferences I was going to speak at I'm sure Tony has, and you know,  there were going to be good speeches and we're all very disappointed.

And there are big events that have been cancelled as well which is  disappointing for people who were going to be involved - most particularly the  Easter Show I mean the kids and the Easter show. It's very disappointing, but  it's the right decision.

JOURNALIST: On the Easter show, there are a lot of hospitality workers,  casual workers paying their way through university or paying rent. That is really,  really tough for people. In your mind is there any social safety net here?

BURKE: The challenge that we’ve got here is a whole lot of people who rely on  these events and while we all look at the Easter Show you need to remember  the stall holders there go from show to show, a lot of them, on a network of  shows that goes all around, at least the state and some of them, around the  country. Now they’re not just out of work for the Easter Show. Their income,  their livelihood, their business, or their employer, is now a problem for some  time, and this is why I say there needs to be a plan for this as an industry. For  each of us, we’ll think of it in terms of the festival we were going to go to, the  concert we were going to go to, the match we were going to go to, the show we  were going to go to, but for the workforce, it’s not just the ones we were going  to go to, it is their entire livelihood that is now at risk, in a way that, in a way that  never happens. You know they are all precarious industries. They’re industries  where people will occasionally get a shift cancelled, but the arts, entertainment

and major events industry is about to go through something that it has never  gone through and you can’t see anything in the Government’s package at the  moment that speaks to these people.

JOURNALIST: Is this a broader issue - I know you guys have been talking  about it for years and years and years - the casualisation of the workforce, and  now we’re seeing it in a very, very serious way.

BURKE: When people don’t have job security, at moments like this, it affects  the security of the country.

JOURNALIST: Do you do you feel safe in this building? We've obviously seen  people in Hazmat suits disinfecting after Dutton was here?

BOWEN: Well, look, we're just like every other Australian are going about our  daily business but maximising of course our hygiene as we do so, and  protection of us and our families and every other person we come into contact  with. I think what you're referring to in this building is again symptomatic of the  urgent need for the Government to explain what steps it has taken here.

There is appears some fumigation going on in this building, if that's regarded as  necessary. That seems to me to be somewhat at odds with the rather blasÃÂ©  attitude that has been taken that the Prime Minister and the Cabinet don't need  to be tested, don't need to be self-isolated and can just go about their  business.

JOURNALIST: Do you think it would be a massive blow to the nation's  confidence if it emerged that the Prime Minister was tested?

BOWEN: No, no, I don't. I think, I think actually, the Prime Minister showing  leadership and setting an example of taking precaution would be seen as a  good thing, as Justin Trudeau has done. I mean, I saw Justin Trudeau on  television this morning convening a Cabinet meeting over the over Skype from  his home office because he's self-isolated, showing that the country is  continuing to be governed, but he was taking responsible precautions. That's  what leadership looks like.

JOURNALIST: Is it time for the Government to close schools? There's a lot of  commentary today.

BOWEN: Look, I think state and federal governments should advise parents as  soon as possible whether such action is going to be taken. You know, I see the  public reports that it's possible. I understand why it might be done. I understand  the benefits of it being done. I also understand the dislocation it would it would  cause and I think the sooner that information can be made available to



Australians the better.

JOURNALIST: I heard Senator Abetz earlier today calling for some sort of  unity, for suspension of what he called political sniping, as we face what looks  to be a fairly serious crisis. Is that a fair call and if so, where does a statement  like this fit?

BOWEN: Well, we have provided a lot of bipartisan support to the Government.  We've acknowledged briefings we've received, we've acknowledged our  support for their actions, some of which were controversial. And then, you  know, way back this sounds like a long time ago, but way back when the  Government instigated Christmas Island as a detention centre, and they were  getting criticised uphill and down dale, not from us, not from us, because we  recognised how difficult the situation was at short notice. So we had provided  that support, but it's never stopped us calling for more. We say the health  package is good, but not good enough. And that's the role of a constructive  opposition, to provide suggestions as to what can and should be done better.  And that is, I think, the appropriate thing to do. And I think you could not  characterise our approach as being necessarily negative, far from it, what you  can characterise our approach as being critical but constructive.

ENDS

LIZ FITCH (BOWEN) 0424 512 512  ADAM GARTRELL (BURKE) 0427 008 525









