Senator the Hon. Simon Birmingham, Minister for Finance, Adelaide



SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM   Minister for Finance  Leader of the Government in the Senate

SENATOR THE HON MICHAELIA CASH   Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business  Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate



Monday, 7 December 2020

NEW PROCUREMENT RULES TO BACK AUSSIE SMALL BUSINESSES

The Morrison Government is making it easier for small and medium businesses to engage  with Commonwealth agencies as part of our plan to support Australia’s economic recovery.

Updates to the Commonwealth Procurement Rules (CPRs) will streamlines processes and  reduce costs for small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in the Government procurement  market.

As part of the new rules, an exemption will allow agencies to directly engage SMEs for  procurements valued up to $200,000, which will reduce tendering costs and work in  conjunction with the Indigenous Procurement Policy.

Minister for Finance Simon Birmingham said the updated policy will cut red tape, reduce  costs and provide quicker payment times to Australian small businesses who are engaged  with Commonwealth agencies.

“Small businesses are the engine room of our economy, and this change will cut red tape and  reduce costs for small businesses within the government procurement market,” Minister  Birmingham said.

“We expect these changes will put more small businesses in the mix for government  procurement work, and that will help them grow their own operations and create more jobs  for Australians.”

Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business, Michaelia Cash said the  Morrison Government is focussing on reducing the barriers for small and family businesses.

“Many small businesses supply goods and services to the Australian Government. This  change is all about providing more procurement opportunities to small businesses, so that  they can grow and employ more Australians,” she said.

“These policies reflect the Morrison Government’s commitment to support small and family  business and ensure that it continues to play a critical role in driving Australia’s economic  recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic.”

Senator the Hon. Simon Birmingham, Minister for Finance, Adelaide

These changes also support the Government’s Supplier Pay On-Time or Pay Interest Policy,  which was updated earlier this year and includes five day payment terms for e-Invoicing.

The Government is also progressing implementation of the Payment Times Procurement  Connected Policy and delivering on our promise to reduce payment times and improve  business cash flow for small businesses.

The updated CPRs take effect from 14 December 2020 and can be found on the Department  of Finance website.

[ENDS]

Media Contact  Minister Birmingham: Benn Ayre - 0428 342 325  Minister Cash: Guy Creighton - 0438 815 302





