

The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

Senator the Hon Mathias Cormann  Minister for Finance   Leader of the Government in the Senate  Senator for Western Australia



The Hon Mark Coulton MP

Minister for Regional Health, Regional Communications and Local Government   Federal Member for Parkes



MEDIA RELEASE

17 August 2020

CALL FOR LOCAL IDEAS TO MAXIMISE INLAND RAIL  CONNECTIVITY

The second round of Expression of Interest for the $44 million Inland Rail Interface Improvement  Program has opened.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack called on farmers, local and state governments, industry and community to put forward  project ideas to better connect to Inland Rail and maximise the benefits of fast, efficient and cost-competitive freight rail.

“Inland Rail is a game-changer for regional Australia — it will fundamentally change the way freight  moves around our nation at the same time as generating more than 16,000 jobs across Victoria,   New South Wales and Queensland,” Mr McCormack said.

“At a time when the COVID-19 pandemic is taking such a toll on our economy, Inland Rail is poised to  boost regional economies now and into the future.

“This Program is about exploring ideas and options to get the most out of Inland Rail for  communities along the alignment. It takes project ideas from local innovators and matches them  with specialist business advisors, helping them meet industry requirements to bring projects one  step closer to attracting funding — turning ideas into bricks and mortar infrastructure.

“The second round of EOI is another chance to bring local knowledge and expertise to the table to  support more efficient supply chains, improve connectivity to country rail lines and ensure  opportunities from Inland Rail are realised for towns and communities around the nation.”

Finance Minister Mathias Cormann said the Interface Improvement Program would improve  connectivity to Inland Rail, allowing for more efficient supply chain movements.

“Connectivity is key to future proofing the Inland Rail - improved connectivity will maximise the  return Inland Rail delivers to national productivity.

“Through the Interface Improvement Program we are taking important steps to invest in the broader  national freight network and in doing so, increase the market opportunities for Australian  manufacturers, producers and growers,” Minister Cormann said.

Minister for Regional Health, Regional Communications and Local Government Mark Coulton said  that project proposals put forward in the first round of the Program have made significant progress  through the assessment process.

“From an intermodal facility at Mangalore, expanded freight infrastructure in the Riverina, road  upgrades for a rail spur in Croppa Creek to rail upgrades between Kurumbul to Thallon — the  projects that are moving forward under the Program can make a real difference to local  communities,” Minister Coulton said.

“With the second round of EOI now open, we could see even more innovative ideas that will change  the game for regional businesses and supply chain operators who are persevering through the  compounded economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and 2020 bushfires - providing a way for  the Government to help people plan for the future.

“With the commitment of industry, community and governments, we will see the return of rail to  our regions, along with the opportunities and benefits it brings for our producers and  manufacturers.”

By providing business case support, the Program helps local organisations, governments and  communities make a case for further investment. Participation in the Program does not guarantee  projects will receive future funding.

The Interface Improvement Program does not provide or guarantee funding for projects.

Interested parties are encouraged to submit their project proposals to the Department of  Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Communications by 18 September 2020.

For more information on Inland Rail and the Interface Improvement Program, or to submit a  proposal visit www.InlandRail.gov.au

Ends.

Media Contact:  Mr McCormack - Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Minister Cormann - Karen Wu - 0428 350 139  Minister Coulton - Steph Nicholls 0417 314 920

