

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2CC DRIVE SHOW WITH LEON DELANEY

TUESDAY, 27 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Ongoing issues with the MRH-90; Government’s hidden cost

blow outs on Defence acquisitions; Future Submarines cost blow outs;

the need for a federal ICAC.



LEON DELANEY, HOST Senate Estimates have today revealed the strange

world of the Australian Government's military spending. It's been found that $4

billion was spent on helicopters that actually can't shoot while troops are getting

out of the vehicle. And at the same time, the government has also admitted it

did not announce the increase in cost of the biggest ever government purchase

to the public for three years after a cost blowout. Joining me now Deputy

Leader of the Opposition and Shadow Minister for Defence, Richard Marles,

good afternoon.



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR

PARTY: Good afternoon, Leon, how are you?



DELANEY: Very well, thanks. Thanks for joining us today, first of all the

helicopters, what's wrong with them and how did we spend so much on

helicopters that are not fit for purpose?



MARLES: Well, that's an excellent question and, you know, what we learned

today is that there's been a number of attempts to get these helicopters right in

terms of the capability of lowering people, winching things down in a way, which

is fit for purpose. And, we've discovered the helicopters can't do that whilst

firing at the same time, which means that two helicopters need to be sent out in

a given operation and we're talking about a remarkable amount of money which

has been spent on all this over a considerable amount of time and it is just an

example, across the government's handling of the Defence procurement space,

where really what we've got is a shambles. And you mentioned, we've got a

situation now where the better part of $40 billion worth of cost blowouts - that's

a phenomenally big number - have been kept from the Australian public for

more than two years and that really is an outrage and it begs the question as to

what additional cost blowouts have been kept from us right now.



DELANEY: Okay.



MARLES: So, the government has to come clean on all this.



DELANEY: Let's have a look at that question of cost blowouts. Now,

apparently, the government's explanation is that we arrive at two different

figures here and the cost blowouts relate to submarines and frigates. We arrive

at two different figures here, by applying different accounting practices. Now

one figure is arrived at by quoting costs in today's dollars, a different figure is

arrived by quoting costs in future dollars indexed for inflation. Surely people can

understand there's a difference and that's not really a blowout, is it?



MARLES: What we've got here is smoke and mirrors. So, the way in which this

has been accounted for, which is the way in which it is always done on a

standard basis is that the value of the dollar in the year that it is being spent is

estimated. And in that way, so it’s called out-turn dollars, and in that way, the

figure associated with the cost of any project shouldn't change over time. Now

what we know is that five years ago, with the Submarine Programme, it was

estimated to cost $50 billion in out-turn dollars. Now, five years later, it's gone

up to $90 billion in out-turn dollars. So, we're comparing apples with apples

here, the same method of accounting. That's an 80% increase in the cost of the

Submarine Programme in just five years. And that's in a context where we

haven't even started cutting steel where we're still in the design phase. That's

not a cost blowout, that is a supernova in terms of the additional cost

associated with this, given this moment in the Programme. And this is a

Programme which is going to run for decades. I mean, the other thing that we

learned with the submarines is that the last of the submarines, that is currently

a part of this Programme is not going to count - get into the water until 2054. 34

years from now.



DELANEY: Yes, it’s a very long-term programme, which in itself prompts a few

questions. But before I get to that, surely cost blowouts in, in projects of this

scale and nature are nothing new? The last lot of submarines were subject to

cost blowouts. Every major project seems to be subject to cost blowouts. Why

are we constantly surprised by this?



MARLES: Well, this is a different order of magnitude. And we're also talking

about the most expensive thing that Australia has ever bought in any context

since Federation. So that this one is blowing out is of enormous concern to the

Australian public, it's of enormous concern to all of us here. And it is of

prodigious proportions. The other point to make in relation to the subs and this

is a you know, again, a real concern, we've seen the Program's slipped by 10

years in the last 7. So when this government came to power back in 2013, they

we're talking about the first of the subs being in the water in the mid 2020s. To

avoid there being a gap in capability between the existing submarines, which is

the Collins class submarines, and the Future Submarines.  We're now being

told that the first of the new submarines won't be in the water until 2035. The

fourth and that's the point at which most of the work will be done by the Future

Submarines is not until 2040, 20 years from now and the last 2054. However

long that felt this time last year, now, it seems an eternity and, in a post COVID

world or in a COVID world where our strategic circumstances have become so

much more complicated. In fact, what we really need to be seeing is, all of

these Programmes sped up, we need this capability sooner rather than later.

But it's all going in the wrong direction.



DELANEY: Now, when we talk about things like submarines, and some of the

other big acquisitions like the F-35 Fighters and so forth, a lot of people

question the need for those particular capabilities in first place, especially with

submarines. But some people say, well, what does Australia need submarines

for? But if we accept there's a need for submarines, shouldn't we get the best

submarines we possibly can which would be nuclear submarines? I mean,

what's the point of having submarines that are already obsolete before they're

even off the drawing board?



MARLES: Well, I mean, nuclear submarines is a very difficult question. I mean,

the fact of the matter is that there's not a country in the world without a

domestic nuclear industry, which has a nuclear submarine, all those that have

them have a domestic nuclear industry to support them and we don’t.  The

reality is where conventional submarines is the space that we're in, but

conventional submarines  -



DELANEY: - but compared to what everybody else has got, there’s no contest,

is there?



MARLES: No, that isn't right. The conventional submarines are highly capable,

indeed the Collins class submarines that we've got right now, are highly

capable and I think it is, it's a good question as to why do we need it and it's not

the most obvious question for people to understand. But I think the way to think

about it, or at least the way I think about it is, you know, what a submarine

does, which virtually no other platform that we have can do, is to put a question

mark in any adversaries mind, the idea that, you know, we've got a long range

capability that can be a long way north of Australia or a long way west of

Australia, such that it can create a concern in the mind of anybody who seeks

to send a navy in our direction, that is a hugely important platform for us to

have, the question mark, that we would put in any adversaries mind is

enormous and so in that sense, I understand why, you know, so much focus is

put on submarines, it is it is a unique capability. But, that is a reason why we

need to be getting it right now and given that our strategic circumstances are

becoming much more complicated, they were before COVID struck, they’re

more now so, we need these capabilities sooner rather than later and really

what I said before the plan was originally to get the submarines in the mid

2020’s because that's when it was imagined that the Collins Class would come

to the end of its life. What's now being planned is to extend the life of the

Collins class submarines, well, that's okay, but what we're going to be talking

about is submarines that were built in the 1990’s, operating in the 2040’s, that's

actually what we’re now talking about and that is a huge ask, it’s a huge ask to

expect that that's going to have us in a position where we've got a regionally

superior capability.



DELANEY:  I guess the underlying question, though, is, are these the right

submarines, are these what we need?



MARLES: Well, I think that Naval is - the company that are building the

submarines, who are based in France - are an excellent company and I think

they can provide for us the capability that we need. We've though had a lot of

criticisms of the government in the way in which they've handled the process of

this procurement. We don't blame Naval, we don’t blame France, we blame the

way in which the government handled it. I think they put us at a competitive

disadvantage in our negotiations with Naval, I think that is why we've got a

situation where, you know, time, cost, and I might say, the level of Australian

industry content in this programme, that all those three measures are going in

the wrong direction. I mean, I think if this can be put on track, we can get the

right capability here, and I think it can be delivered. But our problem now is that

on the government's own timing, we're not getting the first one till the mid

2030s. That is an age away and really, we are now as a nation faced with a

wicked problem, because this government has completely bungled the handling

of this programme. And during senate estimates, you know, we're learning that

the frigates which is again, a very important programme, that that's now

slipping, both in terms of costs and in terms of time, you mentioned the

helicopters, at the end of the day, I mean, the whole procurement programme is

being badly handled by this government, and they are compromising our

national security in the process and what that means is that a result of the

Morrison government Australians are less safe.



DELANEY:  It seems though that all of our large scale procurement projects

run into controversy at one point or another, whether it's the submarines, the

frigates, the helicopters, the jet fighters, the F35s, whatever it might be, there's

always a problem, there’s always a complication, a controversy, is there

something we need to be doing differently about procurement process?



MARLES:  Well, look, I think that's a reasonable point that you make and it is

kind of a question of scale. Yes, there have been a lot of capabilities over the

journey, which have had some teething problems, and taking a bit of time to get

right, but to see the submarine programme in that context is to not properly

understand the scale of the problems that we are facing right now. I think it's,

it's bigger than that, I mean, Australia does have some unique requirements

given by virtue of our size and geography in essence, you know, we are trying

to run a long range conventional submarine, there aren't a lot of them, you can't

really buy them off the shelf in the world and so they have to be designed for

us. So we take it as read that there are going to be some teething issues, but

what we're seeing now is much more fundamental than that. And you can point

to, not issues of sort of bugs in the system which are being ironed out, but real

problems in the way in which this government has handled the management of

the procurement process, you know, down selecting to one tenderer - making a

choice of one tenderer - well before the competition should have been properly

over. I mean, these are things that we can all see up front and are costing the

country tens of billions of dollars, and that at a time when our strategic

circumstances are as complicated as they have ever been.



DELANEY: Indeed, and just quickly before you go today, what we've heard in

Senate Estimates over the last few days, surely that highlights more than ever

now the need for some sort of Commonwealth Integrity Commission, Helen

Haines has put forward her Bill as an Independent member. Do you support her

Bill and do you, do you think it's time?



MARLES:  Well, we have been calling for an Integrity Commission at a

Commonwealth level now for a number of years. I mean, what we would like to

see is what the Government is planning to do, they apparently have done an

exposure draft, they haven’t exposed it to anyone though. I mean, no one's

actually seen it, but apparently they've got a draft, which is there for us to see.

They're saying they've been too busy with the management of the Coronavirus



to do anything about it. Well, I mean, I certainly understand the challenges of

Coronavirus and the Government does need to be focused on that but I don't

think it stops them going down to the print room and pushing the print button so

that we can actually have a look at the draft of the Integrity Commission Bill

which they've already written, that would help get this moving along. And we

really think at the end of the day the Government needs to get off its behind

and get moving here because as you say, when you look at what's come out in

Senate Estimates over the last couple of weeks, we desperately need this.



DELANEY: We do, but do you support Helen Haines’ Bill?



MARLES:  We want to have a look, I mean, I think where the real world is at is

where the government is at and the Government needs to actually come

forward with its exposure draft. That's what we've been calling for for a long

time, apparently they support this, but they've been sitting on their hands.

Helen Haines’ Bill is all well and good but the way in which we're actually going

to get an Integrity Commission at a federal level is if the Government acts and

the Government says that it wants to, it's actually time for it to follow through on

that.



DELANEY: Thanks very much for your time today.



MARLES:  Thanks, Leon.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363



