

BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRY SHADOW  MINISTER FOR SCIENCE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  MEMBER FOR GORTON





SMALL BUSINESS RELIEF TOO LITTLE

Labor holds serious concerns the economic package for small business is not  substantial enough to keep businesses afloat.

The Boosting Cash Flow for Employers measure is not adequate and isn’t  being deployed quickly enough for small and medium enterprises to survive this  unfolding economic crisis.

A number of businesses across the nation have contacted federal Labor  outlining their concerns about the shortcomings of the package.

If an SME is employing staff that are roughly around median employee income  of $50,000, each year that employer will withhold about $7,800 in income tax.  That is about $1,950 a quarter, or per BAS statement, per employee.

The withholding is only about 20 per cent of the workers wage, well below the  UK’s 80 per cent subsidy and won’t hit pockets until late April, and by then  there will be thousands of Australians already out of work.

The economic package has no substantial incentive to protect jobs as the  support received by businesses is not nearly enough and is not conditional on  keeping workers employed.

We need this government to learn from the mistakes made in getting cash to  businesses during the Bushfires.  The money for bushfire affected businesses  is still not getting out the door, and they should not be forgotten as they are now  facing the compounding effects of the fires and the virus.

The lack of more substantial support for sole traders and the self-employed to  help them stay in business is also a problem. Sole traders, like staff that have  been stood down, can access the coronavirus supplement, however this



support is subject to an income test, which takes into account a partners  income and may prove redundant.

And for the future health of our economy it is essential we keep as many  Australians connected to the labour market as possible.

Businesses are already closing, workers are already being laid off and many  vulnerable Australians are at serious risk.

We understand the people are anxious at the moment which is why Labor will  continue to be supportive, responsible and constructive and that means  injecting a sense of urgency where it is lacking or absent.

WEDNESDAY, 25 MARCH 2020

MEDIA CONTACTS: ERIN SMITH 0458 950 010













