

The Hon Mark Coulton MP

Minister for Regional Health, Regional Communication and Local Government  Federal Member for Parkes



The Hon Mark Coulton MP  Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7495|  Mark.Coulton.MP@aph.gov.aumailto:minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Shop 3, 153 Brisbane Street, Dubbo NSW 2830| (02) 6882 0999



TRANSCRIPT

ABC Breakfast Eyre Peninsula, Mon 9 November 2020

Subjects: health workforce challenges in rural SA

* * Check against delivery * *

GEORGIA ROBERTS:

So how long does it take you to get a doctor's appointment?

As I said on Friday, we opened up our text line and Facebook pages and they blew up with comments  surrounding incredibly long waits in our major regional cities.

We've also heard from a number of frustrated GPs just like Dr Tony Lian-Lloyd there, that are calling  on the State and Federal Government to do more to entice doctors out to the regions and stay there.  Federal Minister for Regional Health Mark Coulton, good morning.

MARK COULTON:

Morning, Georgia.

GEORGIA ROBERTS:

Minister, we heard there from Dr Tony Lian-Lloyd who feels as though he can't even retire as a GP.  We've also heard from Vice President of the Rural Doctors Association South Australia Scott Lewis  who says regional doctors are feeling stressed and the pressure from high workloads is getting to be  a lot; some of them suffering from burnout.

We also heard this morning from Dr Anna Kearney who’s from Yorke Peninsula. She made several  recommendations to the Government to help improve GP numbers.

Are any of these concerns news to you?

MARK COULTON:

No, they're not. Dr Lian-Lloyd’s story is very common right across regional Australia and particularly  in those one-practice-towns and a lot of the comments you made are correct.

The junior doctors coming through want a better work-life balance. So sometimes to replace a doctor  like Dr Lian-Lloyd, you might need two or three doctors working on a work-life balance because they  don't want to be that 24/7 service.

And so, there is that recognition and we, as the Federal Government, understand that.

We've got a very strong rural health program and we've got two parts really, Georgia.

We've got the issue at the moment where we have this shortage of rural doctors and then we've got  policies that are coming through to address that.

We're training (rural) generalists now; so doctors with a broader range of skills that can work in a  regional area.

We're training more and more junior doctors in Regional Australia.

And we've just started in the last budget, some trials in partnership with the State Government and  local GPs to look at innovative models.

I’ve had discussions with Rowan Ramsey numerous times about the issues in his electorate and very  keen to work with the State Government and Rural Health Commissioner, Professor Ruth Stewart to  fund some innovative models where we're working on a more of a team approach, a  multidisciplinary team where doctors can support each other, where they can have a better work-life  balance.

But particularly the younger doctors have got older, more experienced members of the team where  they can go to where they need that support and advice.

GEORGIA ROBERTS:

So where do you see the pitfalls here, Minister?

I mean what can be done by the Federal Government to provide more incentives to GP trainees that  are entering the workforce to remain in the regions? I know- I mean, a lot of GP trainees are sent out  to learn- to kind of earn their stripes in the regions. They stay there; they get taught by those more  experienced doctors that have maybe stuck around but they do tend to float back to the city.

MARK COULTON:

Well we need to not just bring them out; we need to be to be training people holus-bolus in the  regions. Because it takes so long to train as a doctor that other life issues tend to coincide.

So generally, by the time a doctor’s fully qualified, they’ve found a partner, in some cases, they've  got children, so to relocate everyone at that stage out of the capital city does present some  problems.

I've got a bit of an insight into that. One of my daughter's is a GP and when they moved, she moved  to work out of Sydney into the country areas, her husband had to find a job, which was the hard part  of it.

I understand the issue. And some of the doctor’s comments are correct that, right back to the  university, there's a feeling that if you’re going to go rural, that's like second prize.

We need to change that so that rural doctors are supported right across the GP disciplines across  Australia this year, there's 30 per cent vacancies in the places we fund to train GPs and so it's not just  rural GPs, it’s GPs in general.

So that's why we’re funding the broader skills with a generalist pathway and looking at innovative  models.

It’s got to be seen as a career advantage to go to the rural areas, not second prize.

The rural towns are the ones that appreciate their doctors the most; their ones generally that have  the higher area of need and so we've got to work up with a level of not only renumeration but also  support so that those doctors, particularly the younger ones, don't feel like they’ve been cast aside  and are having to deal with issues that they don't really want to deal with on their own.

GEORGIA ROBERTS:

Well, we're talking a lot about the GPs’ side of things here, Minister Coulton, but let's talk about who  this is directly affecting.

We heard on Friday from a woman named Janet who lives 500 kilometres north of Adelaide. Now  she bypasses closer regional towns in the mid-north.

She bypasses towns near her with medical centres to go to Port Augusta because she doesn't want to  burden the health system or the small towns near her that have low doctor numbers.

Now, even then, she's had to wait for up to three months to get an appointment in a big regional city  like Port Augusta. Do you just think it just doesn't seem good enough that our regional, I guess,  citizens are having to have these massive waits to get into GPs?

MARK COULTON:

And that's exactly right.

And that’s why we need to create an environment where doctors, you know, we don't have a  shortage of doctors right across the country.

We graduate about 7,000 a year. We've just got to change the dynamic around rural medicine.

The Government can't force doctors to go rural. We've had overseas trained doctors that have to  work under a moratorium; 75 per cent of those now are back in the city because many of them left  their families in the city.

And so now, we're getting more and more doctors in the city that we've actually bought into the  country to do rural medicine.

So we need to change the complete dynamic.

Professor Ruth Stewart, the Rural Health Commissioner, was a generalist, an obstetrician GP for  many, many years in rural Australia and she’s tasked with the job of looking at innovative ways to do  that.

I've had a brief discussion with Minister Wade before the lockdown and I've got to say COVID has  made it difficult for us to get around and actually be on the ground and talk to the people.

I speak on a very regular basis with the Rural Doctors Association of Australia and the rural health  networks right across Indigenous health, allied health and nursing. Right across the broad spectrum  on a regular basis in my role.

But it's not the same as actually being on the ground and speaking to people about the challenges.

So we are planning to get out and we are planning to address this problem.

As you know, Georgia, my electorate is half of New South Wales and I live in a small town where  we've got a husband and wife (GP) team who are very close to retirement and my hometown is  facing exactly the same problem as Quorn is.

GEORGIA ROBERTS:

Alright. Minister Coulton, something tells me that this isn't going to be fixed in a day and I'm sure  we'll talk on this issue again.

MARK COULTON:

I’m looking forward to it. I think we can.

I think we can turn this around and that it's going to take the colleges, right through to the  universities and then State and Federal Governments working together.

For too long, Georgia, we've been working in silos between the State and Federal Governments; we  need to make better use of the resources we've got in a country town, and that's the space I'm  working in.

So it's great to discuss it. And it's a top priority not only for this Government, but particularly for me.

GEORGIA ROBERTS:

Alright, Minister. Thank you so much for your time this morning.

MARK COULTON:

Thanks, Georgia.





Media Contact:  Mr Coulton - Steph Nicholls 0417 314 920



