



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

The Hon Josh Frydenberg MP   Treasurer  Federal Member for Kooyong



MEDIA STATEMENT



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au

4 September 2020

VIRGIN AUSTRALIA



The Australian Government welcomes news of the successful completion of the Virgin Australia  voluntary administration process.

Creditors today voted overwhelmingly in support of the Bain Capital proposal that will see Virgin  continue to operate as Australia’s second major domestic airline.

We recognise this has been a difficult period for employees. We understand that Bain Capital has agreed  to cover employee entitlements for both ongoing staff and those in impacted roles. Travel credits will  also be honoured.

The Government’s preference has always been for a market-led solution. The voluntary administration  process offered that market-led opportunity to restructure and recapitalise Virgin Australia into a viable  and profitable commercial entity.

The Government recognises the efforts of the administrator, Deloitte and the constructive engagement  that we have had with them and other interested parties throughout this process via Mr Nicholas  Moore, former Macquarie Group CEO.

Domestic airlines will play an important role in supporting the economic recovery following the COVID-19 pandemic.

The Government is continuing to support the domestic aviation sector by providing more than  $1.3 billion across a range of initiatives, including ensuring domestic services and essential air services to  regional communities continue.

We have also directed the ACCC to monitor the prices, costs and profits of the sector for three years and  to provide quarterly reports to Government that will assist in protecting competition in the domestic  passenger airline market for the benefit of all Australian airline travellers.

Ends.

Media Contacts:  Deputy Prime Minister - Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Treasurer - Leanne Jones 02 6277 7340

