

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

Media contact: Douglas Ferguson, 0455 448 985



Wednesday 11th March 2020



E & OE Transcript - Bushfire Doorstop - Merimbula

Topic: Bushfire Small Business Recovery

The Hon. David Littleproud MP  Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management

Senator the Hon. Michaelia Cash  Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business

The Hon. John Barilaro MP  NSW Deputy Premier, Minister for Regional NSW, Industry and Trade

The Hon. Damien Tudehope MLC  NSW Minister for Finance and Small Business

Cr Kristy McBain  Mayor, Bega Valley Shire Council

Senator Jim Molan



DEPUTY PREMIER BARILARO: Look, firstly, can I just say thank you for making time this  morning, and we know we're here in Merimbula, part of the South Coast, a region that we  know over the summer, summer from hell, has been impacted not just in the loss of home  and property, but a real impact on the local economy, especially small businesses that  underpin this economy. I do want to acknowledge and welcome a number of people here  today. Of course, the Minister responsible for recovery federally, Minister Littleproud;  Minister for Small Business Minister Michaelia Cash. Can I also acknowledge Minister  Tudehope, the Minister for Small Business in New South Wales, Kristy McBain, the Mayor  of this region, and of course to our regional coordinators and our recovery coordinators,  especially Andrew Colvin, for what has been a mighty effort to get to today's  announcement. I also want to acknowledge Senator Jim Molan.

Today, the New South Wales Government and the Federal Government are re-announcing the package to support small businesses that have been impacted by the  fires. This has been an issue that we know has extensive impacts right across the supply  chain. Our small businesses on the South Coast and in those regions are at the heartbeat

Transcript



Transcript



of our local economy. But important to small business is cash flow, important to small  business is the ability which is to withstand a period when there is a downturn. But we  know in this region for many businesses, the six to eight-week summer trade can  represent anywhere between 40 to 60 per cent of the revenue earned by that business for  the entire 12 months. To lose the peak of your business trading period over summer  means- for some businesses, that will mean you may not sustain and last the following 12  months. And we know for this region, our small businesses are important.

That's why today with the New South Wales and Federal Government, we are re-announcing the small business package. Firstly, the evaluation and why we're defining fire  impacted areas. Of course, there's the $50,000 loan and the $500,000 loan. Previously,  you weren't able to use any of that money for refinancing. Well, that criteria has changed.  There's also changes around security against the larger line, and of course, minimising the  red tape. And at the heart of everything we're announcing today is minimising the red tape.  When it comes to the $50,000 direct grant to businesses directly impacted, the definition of  directly impacted has also moved away from just being burnt out to other impacts like  being impacted by ash. More of that detail will be part of the press release. And a new  category, of course known to much of our areas, many of our small businesses who may  not be directly impacted but have felt the impact in an indirect way, in those areas that are  significantly been impacted by fires, there's a new category for a $10,000 grant. Again for  the criteria around that, it will be very broad. More importantly, the red tape and the  application process will be minimised. As the Minister responsible for recovery here in New  South Wales, I welcome this announcement. This is the sort of feedback we were hearing  on the ground, the feedback that we put forward to Federal Government. And today can I  say and acknowledge to all members of the Federal Government, how wonderful it is to  see the response in a timely manner and in a way that you’ve responded beyond, I think,  even our wildest expectations. This will see genuine support for small businesses here on  the South Coast, and those other LGAs that have been impacted by the fires. And that is  important for all of us, and I do welcome that.

I've already advised my agency to start re-processing those applications that we have in  front of us. Something like 800 plus businesses have applied under the previous  conditions and guidelines. I've asked my agency to go back through, reassess all those  applications so that we can see more money get out the door in an urgent fashion. So with  that, I'll ask, of course, the Minister to talk from a Federal perspective.

MINISTER LITTLEPROUD: Well thanks, John. And to all my Parliamentary colleagues  and the mayor, can I say what an exemplar example of recovery that I saw here about a  month ago straight after the fires, the way that they looked after their people. Local  government is alive and well when you have mayors and local councils that were at the  forefront of looking after their own, and did it in such a compassionate way. So  congratulations for all you've done.

But today is making sure that we reset; we reset and we continue to be agile in the way  that we respond to this bushfire recovery. So the $10,000 grant is acknowledgement that  not just those that lost everything and had damage to their businesses, but those  businesses that have been impacted. Like right here in Merimbula, where they had an  order not to come, and to leave and to vacate, that had their income stripped from them  because of these bushfires. We are saying you're going to be eligible for $10,000 grants.  All you have to prove is that you had 40 per cent or more of your income taken away over  a two to three-month period, and we'll continue to be pragmatic and use some common  sense with that. We’ve built into some- that some discretion for the New South Wales

Transcript



Transcript



Government, Victorian Government and South Australian Government to be able to show  some common sense on individual cases. We don't want to get to a stage where we're  blocking people that really are in need and that have been impacted. So we're doing it in a  common sense way.

But what we're also announcing today is more people on the ground. The Federal  Government is committing 71 new people across the burn scar to go out and to help these  people, to take the burden away from them, to help them fill out the paperwork whether it  be for this $10,000 grant or whether it be for our primary producer grants or the small  business recovery grants, or the loans. We want to have people around their kitchen table  helping them taking away that burden. And they'll be across 25 new areas that we'll be  putting them across. That's about us listening and understanding that we've got to help  these people, take the burden away and get them back to business as quickly as they  possibly- get them to focus on their business rather than on the burden of paperwork. So  the Commonwealth will be making sure those, through Andrew Colvin, will be rolled out  very quickly right across the regions that have been impacted to ensure that we can help  the states get this money out the door quicker. That's what we need. We need to ensure  that this money that the Australian taxpayer is putting up is out the door to those that most  need it. But it's an acknowledgement today that this disaster didn't just take the lives of 33  Australians - three who I call dual nationals, they were- while they from the United States,  they lost their lives in Australia, and they’re now Australians. And we lost over 3000  homes. We will help rebuild these communities and the lives of each and every one of  those people that have been impacted. And to these businesses that have been impacted  here in such a beautiful location, they need to understand that the Australian taxpayer and  the Australian Government and the New South Wales Government is standing shoulder to  shoulder with you. And the best thing you can do is come out, visit and spend a quid.  Do you want to say something?

MINISTER CASH: I do. And David, it’s really fantastic to join you here today in the  absolutely beautiful coastal town of Merimbula. But in particular, to be here with my state  colleagues that I have great respect for, Damien Tudehope, we speak regularly, Damien,  about the impact of the bushfire on small businesses. And I’m absolutely delighted that  whilst the Government earlier this year announced a comprehensive package to assist  small businesses directly impacted by the bushfire’s recover, we have continued to listen,  to take on board the feedback that we have all received. And today to be here in  Merimbula, a town that, as we know, it was not directly impacted by the fires. But as  Minister Littleproud has already stated, and Minister Barilaro, they were impacted because  people were not coming here. When you are a tourist town and you rely on the tourist  trade, it is so important that people come here. And if they're not, you are going to have  impact.

And of course, that is why today we're here to announce a new grant of $10,000 to  businesses that have been impacted by the fires, and in particular, businesses like those  here in Merimbula who have lost income. It is a- 40 per cent or more of your income has  been lost as a result of a downturn in trade. What I really like about the new package is  that it's up to the small business as to where they spend it. If they want to spend it on  paying their bills, they can. Their wages, they can. Their rent, they can. We have listened,  we have learned, and we are really introducing flexibility into this package. So, absolutely  delighted to be here today. We've listened, we've learned, and really pleased that we're  now able to announce additional measures that are going to ensure that even more small  businesses have access to the funding they need, because as we all know, they are the

Transcript



Transcript



lifeblood of the Australian economy. But when you're here in towns like Merimbula, it is  even more evident that they literally are the lifeblood of the local community.

MAYOR MCBAIN: Thank you. I want to thank Federal and State Government for actually  listening to local councils, to councillors, to Chambers of Commerce, to tourism industry,  and to small business on the ground. We've been asking for additional measures to assist  small business in our economy for some weeks now, and I'm proud to be here, and I know  my state colleague, the Member for Bega Andrew Constance, will be very happy with this  announcement given the work he's also done on the ground. It really is a huge difference  that it will make to a number of small businesses in this region. And when we talk about  impact, everybody has been impacted in a number of these areas, some to different  degrees than others. But this small business grant is going to help a number of small  businesses in our region and also in the wider region. And for me, it shows the  commitment that state and federal governments have to regional economies, to regional  Australia, and most importantly to regional New South Wales. So I appreciate and thank  you for the announcement.

DEPTY PREMIER BARILARO: Alright. Questions? Sorry- [indistinct].

MINISTER TUDEHOPE: Thanks. This is a great announcement today and it's great to be  in Merimbula to do it. The Small Business Commission has conducted forums around the  state, whether it's north or south, in relation to the bushfire. And the resounding response  has been that the packages which were being offered and delivered in good faith were not  sufficient to be able to help businesses recover. We know that regional communities need  regional small businesses to survive this period of time, and they are essential for the  survival of regional towns. So this package today is saying to each one of those  businesses who have come to those forums and expressed the view we can't survive, then  this is a package which is responding to you. So from the perspective of New South Wales  small businesses, this is a response to representations which the Deputy Premier was  making some time ago, and which the Federal Government has responded to, and we are  delighted to be able to say that we want to see small businesses in regional towns survive,  and this is the best guarantee we've had to date to make those businesses survive.

SENATOR JIM MOLAN: Deputy Premier, mayor, ministers. As someone who was  involved in this almost as long as our mayor here in the fires, both as a politician and as a  bush firefighter, I am so grateful for the advocacy that has come up from small businesses,  from the chambers, and also from the mayor. It's come up through the state and it's come  to the federal level, and it's come from local members and it's come from all of us who  have been involved in it. I congratulate those who conducted the advocacy and I  congratulate certainly the Federal Government and the State Government for listening to  that advocacy. This is a tremendous scheme and will do wonders for places like  Merimbula. Thank you.

UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: Let’s go to questions. Any questions?

QUESTION: Minister Littleproud. Minister, does this announcement of a new grant show  that the Federal Government didn’t hit the right note with the original package?

MINISTER LITTLEPROUD: The original package was based off long standing  arrangements between state and federal governments with recovery. We've had these in  place for many, many years. What this is acknowledgement is that, yes, we sat and  listened because this is a disaster of a different scale that we hadn't seen. And we work

Transcript



Transcript



with- both through Andrew Colvin and through John Barilaro listening. That's what good  governments should do whether they be local, state or federal. They should listen and they  should act. So what we've done is we've acted after listening and acknowledging that the  parameters were put in place previously weren't fit for purpose for this disaster. That's  what the Australian taxpayer expects. That's what we've delivered today.

QUESTION: What do you say to people who are waiting for urgent funds and running out  of cash?

MINISTER LITTLEPROUD: Well, that's why we're here today about to roll this out. And as  the Deputy Premier just said, he's instructed his office to get on with the job, and we'll have  71 new pairs of boots around the burn scar to be able to help those people get the  paperwork done, to help our state authorities be able to process these loans quicker.  That's what this is about. This isn't about blame; this is about collaboration. This is about  getting results, results for the people that are being impacted by this directly and indirectly.

QUESTION: Minister, if it’s not about blame, where do you go to regarding delays in other  grants and [indistinct] loans?

MINISTER LITTLEPROUD: Well, obviously, it's about making sure we provide the  resources, whatever resources the states require, no matter which state they are, the  Commonwealth Government will support them. The longstanding arrangements are the  states are the service level of government and they do a damn good job. Now, when  there's peaks that’ll require extra resources, the Federal Government, the Australian  taxpayer, expects us to support them in making sure the delivery of those programs are  expedited as quickly as we possibly can. And if there's more required, then they'll get it. It's  as simple as that. This isn't about money; this is about people. And the Prime Minister has  made that clear from the start. We both have and will continue to keep that as our ethos  moving through this and we'll continue to be agile as we need to in whatever circumstance  is thrown at us.

QUESTION: Minister, how quickly-

QUESTION: [indistinct] New South Wales. Has Service New South Wales failed  [indistinct]?

DEPUTY PREMIER BARILARO: Well, no. If you look at what Service New South Wales  has done, in excess of 6000 people registered, case managers appointed to everybody in  relation to the clean-up and the recovery. We've seen more resources going to Service  New South Wales. Actually, it's the opposite. We hear a lot of compliments about the effort  of Service New South Wales. And can we always do things better? Yeah. What keeps me  awake at night? I know people are falling through the cracks. But the scale of this disaster  and this crisis, when you look at the government's response, by state, federal, even local  government, with the recovery meetings that have happened right across the board, the  contract with Laing O’Rourke. Additional sort of people on the ground are dealing directly  with landholders and property owners as we begin this massive clean-up. I'm not going to  stand here today and attack Service New South Wales, who are good public servants  doing an absolute fantastic job in serving the community.

QUESTION: Minister, are you frustrated with the Federal Government's response to the  bushfire crisis and that small businesses are struggling?

Transcript



Transcript



DEPUTY PREMIER BARILARO: Well, look, we're here today because the Federal  Government has actually listened to those on the ground and they've got their own people  on the ground, from their own local members and senators, to the local councils, and to  mayors, to Andrew Constance, to myself as the Recovery Minister in New South Wales, to  Mick Willing, our recovery coordinator, working with of course Andrew Colvin. At the end of  the day, we're here today because we have to respond often. You had unique crises and  unique situations. Well, today, a very unique solution. The additional $10,000 grant  actually picks up on an area that hadn't previously been addressed. It also looks at  lessening the red tape and making it easier to apply. I'm confident now that we've met  those- the criteria that will actually see money hit those that need it most - and they are  our small businesses and I'm confident of that.

And you've got to acknowledge the Federal Government. They were quick out of the block  with the initial announcement. There was no pressure at the time to do it, we were in the  middle of a crisis. But they went straight out of the block. And like everything, at the time, it  was right, but as this has progressed, it was a longer crisis and there are greater impacts.  The impact on community by shutting down roads, especially the main roads from the  Kings Highway, the Princes Highway, all the highways that lead here, and yet, the Federal  Government have turned up today with the response being flexible and they must be  acknowledged and they must be recognised for that effort.

QUESTION: How quickly can local businesses start to see this money flow through?

DEPUTY PREMIER BARILARO: Well as I said, right now, we've got in excess of 800 plus  applications that have come through Service New South Wales. They were assessed  previously under the old criteria. We have now an opportunity to reassess that without  those small businesses reapplying. I've already asked my agents to get onto it. I want to  start seeing money flow out the door in the next 48 hours, in the next three or four days.  We need that money in the businesses’ bank accounts. Why? Because cash flow is the  lifeblood of small business. We want the doors to remain open. We're rushing into the  Easter long weekend. It'd be great to see people come down to this region and we want to  make sure small businesses have cash in the bank to keep buying their supplies and  hiring local people.

QUESTION: Minister, just one more if that’s alright. With the coronavirus situation  intensifying, are bushfire communities being forgotten?

DEPUTY PREMIER BARILARO: No. I mean, we're here talking about bushfire. And my  message is also for those communities that are suffering drought: you haven't been  forgotten. I was on a drought tour recently. I'm looking after bushfires as well, and that's  what we're here today for. And we've already set an unprecedented approach by the  Federal Government. The Prime Minister's address yesterday clearly defines a path  forward how the Federal Government will support businesses and community through  what is a crisis at a level that we've never seen in this country. And at the state level, the  Treasurer made commentary yesterday, that we're also addressing what we can do to  address the coronavirus impact on business.

But at the heart of all this is actually the wellbeing and health of our people, of the  Australian people, and that was fantastic to see, again, the announcement this morning -  over $2.4 billion from the Federal Government to set up a whole heap of pop-up clinics. I  think it's been an unprecedented issue. Again, an unprecedented response by the Federal  Government.

Transcript



Transcript





QUESTION: As a small business that has applied for the working capital loan and being  told I probably won’t be able to get it because my cash flow doesn’t… should I reapply?…

DEPUTY PREMIER BARILARO: Yep.

QUESTION: …Should I reapply?

DEPUTY PREMIER BARILARO: If your application is already in, we’ll reassess that but I'll  get your details at the end of this.

QUESTION:  [Indistinct].

DEPUTY PREMIER BARILARO: Yeah. We’ll get that. We work together. So, I'll- but I’ll get  your details before we go because I want to make sure that you are one of the ones that  gets the money.

QUESTION: Thank you.

DEPUTY PREMIER BARILARO: No problem.

QUESTION: Mayor McBain, what were some of the stories you were hearing from small  business people and community members on the back of this, I guess, while we waited for  this assistance?

MAYOR MCBAIN: Yeah. Look, we've had a number of small businesses that have been  directly impacted and I'm going to use that word directly impacted. There are varying  degrees of that impact. Some have been flame affected. Some have been affected by the  overall disaster, and the overall disaster was a tourist evacuation notice. It was the right  thing to do by New South Wales RFS. We want to make sure everyone's safe, but  evacuating 90,000 tourists along our coastline, obviously, has a continual flow on effect.  We've had businesses who have geared up for a huge summer who are now left with  paying their suppliers back, who are left with employees who would have been expecting  additional hours. And in some cases, I know my business owners are actually putting  themselves into debt to keep people employed, and they do that because they're part of a  small community and they're part of the flow-on effect. Most of these small businesses  sponsor kids cricket, or they- they sponsor the local schools’ P&C.

So, it has a continual flow-on effect in our community so it's fantastic that the governments  have listened to what's happening on the ground. They have made some changes to the  criteria and they've also added an additional $10,000 to all businesses. And whilst I think  it's fabulous, what I want to see is that it's not just one and all; that this perhaps is a start  and there will be ongoing conversations that will continue with state and federal  governments about what we're going to say in the next 3, 6 and 12 months down the line.

QUESTION: Senator Cash, the modernising manufacturing grants that are underway at  the moment, is there any consideration or special consideration for bushfire-affected  areas?

MINISTER CASH: That's actually a matter for the Minister for Industry at this point in time.  The package that we're announcing today is obviously the additional $10,000 grant. The

Transcript



Transcript



freeing up of the red tape, which I think- it has been welcomed by so many people, in  particular in relation to the application for the loan for up to half a million dollars. But as the  Prime Minister has always said, this is an evolving package. As new information comes to  light, we will consider it and that is certainly something that I can take back to the Minister.

QUESTION:  Thank you.

QUESTION:  Minister-

UNIDENTIFIED SPEAKER: Final questions. Thank you.

QUESTION: Is it inevitable that some small businesses will lose staff and possibly their  own jobs, Minister Cash, due to the impact of the fires?

MINISTER CASH: Well again, that is why we are here today. We rolled out or we  announced initially a very comprehensive package based on feedback that we had at the  time and obviously, based on practices that were already in place, as a result of the  feedback that we had continued to receive. That is why you see us all here today,  announcing those further measures. I think the Prime Minister has made it very, very clear.  The focus of the Federal Government is to keep businesses open and to keep people in  employment. And again, this $10,000 grant will go, I hope, a long way towards ensuring  that we meet those objectives.

Thank you very much.



*** ENDS ***



Media contact  Douglas Ferguson, 0455 448 985





























