

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

MELBOURNE

FRIDAY, 11 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Aged Care, Scott Morrison heckling from the sides;

Australia’s relationship with China; Victoria; Hekmatullah.



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR

PARTY: It's almost a week since we saw the Victorian Roadmap announced

last Sunday. Obviously Victoria is a state which is going through a very difficult

situation. But the good news is that the measures that have been put in place

by the State Government are working. The numbers are coming down and

Victorians deserve so much credit for dealing with this really difficult situation

and their efforts in managing the restrictions which are seeing this state move

past this crisis. But during the week where has the Prime Minister been? Where

are the Prime Minister's comments in relation to aged care, for example?

Where are the Prime Minister's statements in relation to infection control?

Where is the Prime Minister giving us assurances that there are no longer

people working between multiple aged care facilities? Where is the Prime

Minister in giving assurances that the sector will be properly funded going

forward? Aged care remains the most lethal, the most terrifying aspect of this

pandemic here in Victoria and around Australia- we've seen more than 550

deaths nationally in relation to aged care and yet there is complete silence from

our Prime Minister. When we're talking about aspects of life in this state for

which the Commonwealth Government is responsible, the Prime Minister is

nowhere to be seen.



But we have seen the Prime Minister do this week is lead a chorus of derision

from around the country in relation to State Premiers in relation to Annastacia

Palaszczuk, in relation to Dan Andrews, that's what the Prime Minister's been

doing. Rather than rolling up his sleeves and standing shoulder-to-shoulder

with the Victorian Government in a moment of crisis which is what John Howard

would have done, the Prime Minister has been the complete opposite. The

Prime Minister has all the powers of the Commonwealth Government at his

disposal and yet he's relegated himself to being a heckler from the sidelines.



And here we are within four weeks of the Federal Budget and we still don't

have any inkling from the Commonwealth about what its jobs plan is to lead this

country out of the recession that we're now in, the seeds of which were sown

by Scott Morrison's Government well before COVID-19 struck. So that's what

the Prime Minister's been doing. Rather than helping, he's been blaming. And

we need a Prime Minister who is a leader, sadly we've got a Prime Minister

who is a whinger.



Any questions?



JOURNALIST: Mr. Marles, thanks very much for your time this morning. Can I

just ask you in relation to what we've seen this week with the ABC journalist Bill

Birtles, Australian Financial Review's Mike Smith coming home from China and

then revelations of ASIO raids on the homes of Chinese journalists. Do you

think this is the time for the government to concede that the relationship with

China is no longer comprehensive, strategic nor a partnership?



MARLES: Well firstly, I think we are all grateful that Bill Birtles and Mike Smith

are safely back in Australia. And I do think that the way in which the

Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade have handled this matter has been

first class. And we're all grateful for the efforts of Australian diplomats in in

handling what was obviously a very difficult matter. The relationship between

Australia and China is obviously in a very difficult place. What we've seen this

week is obviously of enormous concern. And let me be clear; the freedom of

the press is central to Australian society, it is central to us as a democracy and

it's central to who we are as a people. It's also true to say that we need to see

the relationship with China be put back on track. This is actually a really critical

relationship for our country. They are- they remain our largest trading partner.

And what I want to hear from Scott Morrison and from Marise Payne is; what is

the plan to get this relationship back on track? In fact it would be good to hear

from them about the issue of China, full stop, given that so much of the space

in relation to this is left to fringe dwellers on the Government side and that

doesn't help. We actually need to hear from our Prime Minister about what is

the plan to get the bilateral relationship with our largest trading partner back on

track.



JOURNALIST: Has Australia done anything offensive that could have upset

China? I mean who do you think is responsible for putting the relationship off

track? If you say it needs to get back on track.



MARLES: Well this is a very complex and difficult relationship. It presents

many challenges to us. And obviously it's critically important that in the context

of our bilateral relationship with China we are able to speak to our values and

most importantly we're able to speak to Australia's national interest when it

differs from Chinese action. That's been the case in the South China Sea for

example. So, it's critically important that we do all of that. It's also important

though that we have a relationship which is functional because they are our

largest trading partner. And in that sense to have a situation for example where

there is not one single relationship of substance which exists between a

member of the Morrison Government and a member of the Chinese

Government, I think is clearly a major problem. And the Morrison government's

been in power for seven years now. They have no relationship to show for it.

There are obviously criticisms that we can make of China and it's important that

we do that. But ultimately the side of the relationship that Australia gets to

control is the Australian side. And it is for this Government to explain what its

plan is to get the relationship back on track because China is our largest trading

partner.



JOURNALIST: Mr. Marles, Hekmatullah has reportedly been moved to Qatar,

do you think that this is an indication that his release could be imminent? And is

there anything Australian authorities or the government can do to try and

prevent it from happening?



MARLES: Look, I think the less that is said in the public domain about this

situation beyond what has already been said, the better. We have made our

view clear that we do not want to see Hekmatullah released, given those brave

Australians who lost their lives at his hands. And it's important that that point be

made. I do believe the Government understand that. From there, you know, we

should be leaving the negotiations and the processes in place to those who are

undertaking them, to get the best outcome here possible. We do want to see

peace in Afghanistan, that's actually the best way that we can honour the

legacy of every Australian who has served in Afghanistan since 2001. It's really

important that that happens. None of us want to see Hekmatullah released. I

think it's important that we leave the detail of this from there in the hands of

those who are conducting those negotiations.



JOURNALIST: Mr Marles, you are obviously are in Victoria, in Melbourne right

now where there is a night time curfew in place. The Chief Health Officer there

said it wasn't his responsibility. Victoria Police said under a State of Disaster,

they weren’t briefed on it either. Do you think there should, there is as of now

medical advice that should mean that this curfew should remain in place?



MARLES: I'm not going to comment about the details of which advice came

from where in relation to any particular aspect of the restrictions that are in

place in Victoria right now. The important point to observe when we take a step

back is, when you look at the restrictions that have been in place over the last

few weeks, they're working. I mean the numbers are coming down and Victoria

is getting to the other side of this. And actually what I think we need to be doing

right now is standing shoulder-to-shoulder with the Victorian Government in

what is obviously a very difficult set of circumstances, to try and get the state

onto the other side of this. You know because people in Victoria do want to see

their loved ones in aged care. People in Victoria who are running small

businesses want to see those businesses get up and running again. And none

of that happens until we get to the other side of this most recent wave and that

requires us to work through the restrictions which have been put in place. So

you know, I give enormous credit to the people of Victoria for dealing with what

has been a really difficult set of circumstances over the last few weeks. But the

State is getting there and I think that is the important point to note. And in that

sense I think what's really important for Governments around Australia, and for

the Commonwealth Government particularly is rather than to heckle the

Victorian Government, is actually to stand shoulder-to-shoulder with them to

help the Victorian people through this crisis.



JOURNALIST: Mr. Marles, its Pablo here from SBS. Just back on China, do

you reject Beijing’s assertions that Australian diplomats obstructed Chinese

legal system when they were sheltering the two Australian journalists last

week?



MARLES: I am very grateful that Bill Birtles and Mike Smith are both back in

Australia, that they are both safe. And I think that the work that was done by

Australian diplomats in looking after Bill Birtles and Mike Smith was first class.



JOURNALIST: So it wasn’t obstructing China's legal system, as they’re

asserting?



MARLES: Well I think that our diplomats did everything that they needed to do

and there is no criticism I would make of them at all. In fact, I think that the work

that the Australian diplomats have done in bringing about this result has been

absolutely first class. And I am very grateful that Bill Birtles and Mike Smith are

safely in Australia right now.



JOURNALIST: Mr Birtles described the feeling of like a pawn in a game of

diplomatic chess. Do you think that Cheng Lei is very much in that same

situation? And what concerns do you have around her safety now that this is

continuing to escalate?



MARLES: We've expressed our concerns in relation to Cheng Lei and we

retain those concerns. It comes back to the situation that the relationship is not

in the place that we would want it to be and it's very important that we get the

relationship back into a better place. In relation to Cheng Lei specifically; yes,

we retain concerns about her situation.



JOURNALIST: Mr Marles, are you concerned about possible investigations into



Chinese journalists here and whether they are actively involved in foreign

interference?



MARLES: I trust our agencies, absolutely. And I trust that our security agencies

are operating in the way they should to keep Australia safe and to protect us all.

And so, you know, I don't have any criticism for the manner in which Australian

agencies have been carrying out their duties at all.



Thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











