

SENATOR MALARNDIRRI MCCARTHY  SENATOR FOR THE NORTHERN TERRITORY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT   RADIO INTERVIEW  TODAY SHOW NEWSCHAT  FRIDAY 31 JANUARY 2020

SUBJECT: Coronavirus and Christmas Island evacuation; bushfire aid not  reaching people

KARL STEFANOVIC, TODAY SHOW: Well the rescue mission is underway to  evacuate Australians from Wuhan, the Chinese epicentre of the Corona virus  outbreak while in Queensland, authorities are hunting passengers who were on  a Tiger Airways flight from Melbourne to the Gold Coast who may have been  effected by the virus. For more we’re joined by Stellar magazine’s Sarrah Le  Marquand. Sarah good morning to you, and Senator Malarndirri McCarthy.  Senator good morning to you, lovely to see you both.

MALARNDIRRI MCCARTHY, SENATOR FOR THE NORTHERN  TERRITORY: Good morning.

LA MARQUAND: Good morning.

STEFANOVIC: Ok Senator, Christmas Island is in your neck of the woods, in  your electorate. Are you happy with the outcome, with those people potentially  going to the island?

MCCARTHY: Look Karl, certainly the residents on Christmas Island, and yes  they do come under the electorate of Lingiari here in the Northern Territory,  have expressed real concern. They’re asking lots of questions. And that’s  certainly something that Warren Snowdon as member for Lingiari and myself  are asking the Government, is to ensure what kind of information is getting to  the residents who live there and there’s quite a lot of people who live in  Christmas Island Karl.

STEFANOVIC: Not much you can do about it if the Federal Government says

they’re coming, they’re coming aren’t they?

MCCARTHY: Well that’s right, they are coming but I think too we still need to  remember the people on Christmas Island are citizens of Australia and they  deserve to be treated with the respect and dignity of knowing what’s actually  happening and I certainly will be encouraging the Federal Government to make  sure that those conversations are happening with the people who always live  on Christmas Island.

STEFANOVIC: Were you spoken to about it, did you hear about it before  everyone else did?

MCCARTHY: No, no, like everyone else, we heard it through social media, on  the news screens. It’s not the best way certainly when you’re representatives  federally for the members on Christmas Island. We also have to remember Karl  there’s also a young family that’s still waiting for their future with the Biloela  family who are there, just so many questions, and going back to Parliament  next week, I’ll certainly be asking a lot of those.

STEFANOVIC: Well we’re just hearing some news now Senator, just trying to  get it up but the World Health Organisation has just declared an international  emergency so we’ll try to get to the bottom of what that will mean in terms of  ramifications for the world, but Sarah it has been in some ways poorly handled  by the various Governments, the miscommunication, the confusion among  parents, has been very present.

LA MARQUAND: It has, I mean the lack of consultation among parents.  Obviously families have come out and they have commended the Government  for acting so quickly and for taking things so seriously and for offering to  evacuate affected citizens back home but there’s clearly been a terrible lack of  consultation with the residents of Christmas Island as we’ve just heard there  but also with these families, a lot of them are really concerned about the  medical facilities. And the child friendly facilities that are available on Christmas  Island. As you are saying Karl a lot of families are saying that they actually think  they would prefer their children stay in Wuhan than be repatriated to Christmas  Island. They also have to contribute towards the cost of the evacuation as  much as $1000 per child.

STEFANOVIC: Well effectively the Federal Government is saying if you want to  get out we’ll get you out but it’s not going to be pleasant and you’re going to  have to pay for it.

LA MARQUAND: That’s right and I would also make the point that the  Australian Medical Association have also said that they have concerns and that  they feel that the children should be repatriated to the mainland of Australia so I



think if the AMA are saying that the Government may need to rethink their  decision.

STEFANOVIC: That is such a big story and it’s only going to get bigger. Peter  Dutton is coming up after 7 o clock. There’s all sorts of ramifications for  businesses and travel and look it’s going to change the world a little bit. Moving  on, it’s the case of too little too late for many communities impacted by  bushfires but while the threat has subsided for now locals are still working at  rebuilding their lives and this morning there are new fears aid to fire ravaged  communities is taking too long. Senator, we visited East Gippsland, Ally and I  other the other day, these people are just pleading for people to visit. But there  are also communities that are crying out for money why hasn’t the aid got  through?

MCCARTHY: Good question Karl and you would have heard that first hand  from people there, those complaints, and I think that what we’re seeing here in  Australia and in fact there’s probably a crossover of all these issues. We’re  facing major crisis nationally and internationally and the question is how are we  coping as a nation in trying to deal with all that and for those people on the  ground, those families who desperately need something right now, clearly there  has to be something else going on. Even if there’s just a coordinator straight  away who’s trying to assist with the basic needs of food, of paying for fuel, how  are things going with Centrelink? And trying to get money that’s required for  people to get them back on their feet. Clearly there needs to be something right  now happening for those people.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MARTHA TATTERSALL 0417 387 775











