

SENATOR THE HON KRISTINA KENEALLY

DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

SYDNEY

SUNDAY, 1 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; AUSTRAC; Senate Estimates and the Morrison

Government’s allergy to scrutiny; Iran travel ban; surplus; stimulus

measures; proposed ASIO powers; Peter Dutton’s failure to understand

the rising threat of right-wing extremism; Josh Frydenberg.



KRISTINA KENEALLY, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE AND

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Well, first and foremost, I want to

say that Labor supports and wants to work constructively with the

Government's actions to keep Australians safe from the threat to the

coronavirus. We will always rely upon the advice of Chief Medical Officer

Brendan Murphy and I commend him for the work that he has done to advise all

Australians about the progression of the coronavirus and steps that we as a

country and individuals can take to keep ourselves safe. Now, of course,

Australians should be mindful that the actions taken to date have been

responsible and have been to the benefit of the Australian community and

Australians should feel confident to go about their daily lives. To go to shopping

centres and restaurants, particularly your local Chinese restaurant, to go to the

NRL grand final coming up in - or the NRL season that is coming up in a few

weeks’ time, and also of course, last night I was at the Gay and Lesbian Mardi

Gras with the entire Labor leadership team. There were hundreds of thousands

of people there; it was a great celebration. It was fantastic to see Sydneysiders

and Australians and tourists coming out as part of that celebration. It's an

indication that community spirit here Australia remains very strong.



I also want to comment on some concerning reports in News Corp papers

today regarding AUSTRAC and I'm mindful that there are matters before the

courts, I'll be limited in what I will say. But AUSTRAC is on the frontline when it

comes to tackling some of the most serious crime - terrorism, money

laundering and the vile crime of child sexual exploitation and abuse. There are

serious questions about AUSTRAC's protocols and processes when it becomes

aware of suspected child abuse. These are serious matters that Labor will

pursue and inquire about at the upcoming Senate Estimates this week. And I

am concerned that it seems to demonstrate that the Minister, Peter Dutton, is

not across all aspects of his portfolio in matters as serious as these.



Now Estimates is this week and this Government, with its allergy to

transparency and accountability has demonstrated both in the Parliament and

in Estimates and in public, at media conferences and the like, it's unwilling to

give straight answers to questions. Dodging questions, taking them on notice,

seeking to bury reports such as the Philip Gaetjens report into the sports rorts

scandal. This is the approach of this Government and Prime Minister Scott

Morrison who doesn't have a plan for economic growth, who doesn't have a

plan to arrest stagnant wages, who doesn't have a plan to tackle climate

change, who doesn't have a plan for the future of our energy sector. Australians

are rightly disappointed in Scott Morrison; he's not showing leadership. He's an

ad man with a marketing strategy; he's not a Prime Minister with a plan. I'm

happy to take questions.



JOURNALIST: Just on coronavirus, that Government has imposed a travel ban

on Iran but given there are more cases in places like South Korea and Italy,

what do you make of that? Should there be travel bans on those places as

well? Why has Iran been singled out?



KENEALLY: We'll always rely upon the advice of the Chief Medical Officer

Brendan Murphy and what he has made clear is that both the death rate and

capacity of the health system in Iran does raise significant enough concerns to

impose a travel ban. When it comes to other parts of the world, the Chief

Medical Officer's advice is clear that we cannot shut down Australia from the

rest of the world and that there are appropriate measures in place at our

borders to screen passengers as needed.



JOURNALIST: Are you satisfied with the measures in place at Australia's

borders? Do you think the Government should be doing more to slow the

spread of coronavirus?



KENEALLY: I'm quite confident in the work of our public servants, particularly

the Chief Medical Officer Brendan Murphy who has shown leadership and

transparency; a willingness to stand up in front of the Australian people and to

make clear the steps the Government, though our public service agencies, are

taking to ensure that Australia is protected as best as possible from this global

health emergency. Australia, through Mr Murphy's leadership, has been at the

forefront of this now-emerging pandemic. When it comes to those measures

and when it comes to Australia's preparedness for a pandemic, we will continue

to seek the assurance of the Government that they are prepared for a

pandemic should it arise here but we do agree with Mr Murphy and others

when they assure Australians that they should continue to go about their daily

lives.



JOURNALIST: The Government's considering a targeted stimulus package for

industries affected by the coronavirus outbreak. Do you think that will be

enough? Do we need broader stimulus measures?



KENEALLY: Let's be clear that the idea of a budget surplus is a test that Scott

Morrison and Josh Frydenberg set for themselves. It will be up to them to see if

they achieve it. It would be humiliating for them if they do not and let's also bear

in mind that the budget was in very bad shape before the bushfires and before

the coronavirus challenge arose to our economy. That is, we already had

economic circumstances that were affecting the budget. We already had

Australians experiencing poor economic circumstances such as the lack of a

pay rise, such as underemployment. Australians know that their bills are going

up and their wages aren't, families are worried and, quite frankly, when it

comes to both encouraging growth within the economy and looking after

Australia's best interests, there are things that the Government could have

been doing all along, such as raising Newstart. That would be a significant way

to inject growth in the economy, to inject a surplus into the economy. Our view

is that the Government should be taking steps to assist Australians, whether or

not they meet a budget surplus is a test they set for themselves and it will be

humiliating for them if they fail to meet that.



JOURNALIST: The Government is also reportedly considering new powers for

ASIO to allow the agency to apprehend and question foreign spies without a

warrant. Are these powers needed?



KENEALLY: When it comes to the questioning and detention powers, this is a

matter that has been before the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence

and Security and, in fact, the committee has been asking the Government to

bring forward reforms now for a number of years. Just last year, Labor moved

amendments in Parliament asking that the Government bring forward these

reforms more quickly. Now, when it comes to the powers that are in the papers

today we will await the legislation and we would expect, as Mr Dutton appears

to have confirmed this morning, that those new powers in that legislation will go

through a Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security process.

When it comes to keeping Australians safe from the threats that Mr Burgess,

the Director General of ASIO, outlined in this first Annual Threat Assessment -

that is terrorism, foreign interference and espionage - we will always seek to

work first and foremost in a bipartisan manner with the Government to ensure

Australia's national security. Any other questions? May I make two other

points? Thank you.



Reflecting upon Mr Dutton's interview this morning on Insiders, and particularly

the questions about right-wing extremism, what was clear is that Mr Dutton

does not quite understand how it is that right-wing extremism is spread online

or indeed why people are being attracted to it. Now the Director General of

ASIO Mike Burgess has made clear to the Australian people, in his first Annual

Threat Assessment, that when it comes to terrorism Australia faces two forms

of threats- Islamic fundamentalism and right-wing extremism. Now when it

comes to right-wing extremism, Mr Dutton was asked this morning, why do

people, why are people attracted to this and what can be done about it? Mr

Dutton said, first of all, that this is something that has been spread on the dark

web. Well quite frankly, it is something that is being spread on social media

platforms. It is something that is being spread quite publicly and openly. Right-wing extremist organisations and groups use specific symbols or language to

send signals to one another about what they are really talking about. That's

where we need to get in and disrupt these organisations. That's where we need

to get in and disrupt this radicalisation- where it's happening often out in the

open, on social media platforms, we need to disrupt and divert at that point.

The second thing is Mr Dutton seems to be unable to explain why it is that

people are attracted to right-wing extremism as an ideology. Now the experts

that I speak to, including from Exit Australia, point out that right-wing extremists

cells use patriotism and populism, anti-elitism and quite nakedly xenophobia at

times to appeal to people's prejudices and to seek to divert them to darker and

more extreme places. The fact of the matter is, if we are going to curb right-wing extremism in Australia we have to first and foremost understand it. We

have to understand why people are attracted to it, it's motivating factors and we

have to understand how they are recruited and targeted. I am concerned that

the Minister seems to lack a basic understanding of that this morning. This is an

issue that Ed Husic and Anne Any and I and Andrew Giles and others, Michelle

Rowland, in our Labor team have been working on for some time and

something we will have more to say about in coming months.



I also want to just touch upon the call by the Hindu Council of Australia for the

Treasurer Josh Frydenberg to apologise for what the Hindu Council calls

"brazen, racist, and Hindu-phobic" antics in the Parliament last week. And the

Hindu Council of Australia also makes clear that they are extremely concerned

about the fact that the Prime Minister and others in the Government were

laughing along with Mr Frydenberg mocking the Hindu religion on the floor of

the Parliament last week. Now I don't think that Josh Frydenberg is a racist

person. No, I don't think he's a bad person. I think he just exhibited bad

judgment and from time to time all of us do. What I would encourage for Mr

Frydenberg today is to read and reflect upon the call of the Hindu Council of

Australia to consider his actions and, quite quickly, just fix this. He is, I think, a

fundamentally good person and I would expect Josh Frydenberg to do the right

thing. Thank you.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110



