

JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW   PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  WEDNESDAY, 2 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Morrison Government’s failures in aged care; Former Liberal PM’s  comments; GDP figures.

JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS: We now have  over 455 older Australians who have died in residential aged care due to COVID and we  still have over 800 active cases in aged care today. What we've seen from this  Government of course is a series of neglect and failures, failures particularly from the  Minister for Aged Care. What we saw yesterday in the Senate was a protection racket from  the Government around the Minister for Aged Care. What the Government should be  focusing on is protecting older Australians who are vulnerable, rather than protecting their  failing Minister. It is not okay to hear the stories that we have been hearing about the  infections and the neglect that has occurred in residential aged care facilities around  Australia.

This Government was warned that this could happen and we continue to see failures. We  had announcements this week. The Government is still scrambling to come up with an  aged care plan. The Royal Commission, the New South Wales Liberal Government, have  both said the Federal Government did not have a comprehensive plan. And the fact that  we had the Government come out with some announcements this week shows clearly the  Government had no comprehensive plan to deal with COVID outbreaks in residential aged  care.

We've also got reports today about the lack of transparency. Lack of transparency when it  comes to funding for aged care. How do we know the money the Government is investing  is going to improve the quality of care for older Australians? We don't, we need to. We also  need more transparency around the regulator and the Minister's revelation that the  regulator ceased to do inspections in person during the COVID-19 outbreak. We also  heard the Deputy Chief Medical Officer say yesterday that this was not on advice provided  by him, so clearly there are some issues around the regulator and inspections and  transparency, that the Government needs to answer today.

JOURNALIST: Is the Government just trying to throw money at this problem to make it go  away?



COLLINS: The point is we get a whole heap of splashy announcements from Scott  Morrison and the Government, but what we don't get is change on the ground that is  critical. When we are still hearing stories of ants crawling on resident's wounds, we know  we have a serious problem. Why did the Government not do more sooner? The fact that it  got to this point, the fact that we still have older Australians dying in residential aged care  today is a reflection of the ineptitude of the Government and particularly the Minister.

JOURNALIST: Yesterday, a censure motion in the Senate failed. Labor couldn't convince  the crossbenchers to agree with it on this one?

COLLINS: Well, clearly, the Minister has failed. Clearly, the Australian public has lost faith  in the Minister. We've had the Prime Minister sideline him from critical decisions in his own  portfolio. I mean, when to stand up an aged care response centre in other states and  territories when there's an outbreak I would have thought would be a primary role for the  Minister himself. What we saw yesterday was the Government trying to protect the Minister  instead of focusing on protecting older Australians and putting somebody in the job that's  up to it.

JOURNALIST: And Tony Abbott's spoken in the UK overnight. He said the COVID,  lockdowns are dictatorial. What's your response to that?

COLLINS: I was particularly concerned about Mr Abbott's comments for those 455 families  that have lost older Australians. For him to say that this could be a health economics  decision and that older Australians should be able to die comfortably. The message is,  they are not dying comfortably, they are dying from COVID, they're dying alone, often  without their family members. And frankly, I think that those families that have lost loved  ones or those families that are dealing with infected residents in aged care will think that  Tony Abbott's quite disgusting.

JOURNALIST: GDP figures are due out today, which will confirm Australia's in its first  recession in 30 years, does Labor think that this is going to be the low point? That the  turnaround is now on its way?

COLLINS: We don't need the figures to know we're already in a recession. We knew the  economy was in trouble prior to COVID-19. What we haven't seen from this Government is  a comprehensive plan to deal with where we are today. We have over a million Australians  unemployed. We have another 400,000 Australians expected to become unemployed by  Christmas. And what we don't have from the Government is an employment plan. We have  a slogan: JobMaker. But my question to the Government is, how many jobs has JobMaker  actually made?

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119





