SENATOR MALARNDIRRI MCCARTHY

DEPUTY OPPOSITION WHIP IN THE SENATE

CHAIR OF FIRST NATIONS CAUCUS COMMITTEE

SENATOR FOR THE NORTHERN TERRITORY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

TODAY SHOW

MONDAY, 10 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: COVID-19 crisis; PPE equipment in Victoria; strain on healthcare

workers; Afghan prisoner deal brokered by the USA; AFL Grand Final.



KARL STEFANOVIC, HOST: Senator Malarndirri McCarthy and Gus Worland from Triple

M join us now. Good morning, guys. Nice to have your company today. Malarndirri to you

first of all. This is simply relentless, isn't it, for Daniel Andrews? And the strain is showing.



MALARNDIRRI MCCARTHY: Look, it's absolutely unhelpful this kind of unnecessary

attacks, personal attacks really on the Premier. And while I have the opportunity, Karl, I

certainly want to say: keep up such a great job, Premier Andrews. We're certainly

enormously watching closely what's going on there and feeling very much for all Victorians.

But it's not the time to make personal attacks at this time. We have to be working together,

whatever party we are, and I think it's, some of those backbenchers in the Liberal

opposition down there, I think  they need to put their heads in.



STEFANOVIC: Well, and look, to be honest. I think that they're going to struggle if they if

they think attacking him at this point is going to work for them in the long run. I mean

obviously we need to find out what went wrong, but right now, in the middle of this

pandemic.



MCCARTHY: Sure, sure, Karl.



STEFANOVIC: He's a guy that is showing up every day, he's fronting up. He's fronting up

to the questions. But you can see how much of a toll it is taking.



MCCARTHY: Absolutely, it is taking its toll. And I think all Australians need to recognise

that our leaders need support as well. And they certainly do need to see the Victorian

people get through this safely and we've got enough families who are suffering and having

to bury their loved ones.



STEFANOVIC: Yeah, it was interesting Josh Frydenberg over the weekend seemed to be

escalating his attacks. Gus, there are now 1000 health care workers in Victoria with

COVID-19. That's a terrible number, isn't it, yet we can't even provide them with enough

masks.



GUS WORLAND, TRIPLE M: Yeah, when you hear this sort of news, I... Everything the

Senator said I totally agree with in terms of looking out for the Premier and there's no time

at the moment to be start throwing stuff at him. Yeah. No masks for these people. I mean,

they are absolute heroes without capes. There's no doubt about it. They've done an

amazing job and now we can't look after them so they can do their job, which is to look

after us. It's just unacceptable. So whoever's making those masks, please just do it as

quick as possible, get it to them as A.S.A.P., because we're in a situation now where

they're getting the disease when they're meant to be looking after us. So please, time to

step up. This is Australia. This is not some third world nation. This is Australia. We've got

to do better.



STEFANOVIC: Gus, how do you think Sydney's going? And I'll get to Malarndirri in a

second but round town in restaurants, at the beaches, and in the inner west. How do you

think they're going with masks and their application to fighting this?



WORLAND: Look I said it last week, I think with the mask thing, we've just got to be told by

our Premier that you've got to wear them all the time.



STEFANOVIC: I think so.



WORLAND: If you get a situation where it's like, oh, we'd quite like you to do it and have it

at a certain time, it just won't work. It's either got to be straight up, black or white. Simple

as that on this case. And in terms of Sydney, I feel as if we sort of feel like the COVID

things over. I get the feeling that we're very relaxed about it. We're right on a knife's edge

and everyone's sort of pretty much gone oh look what's happening in Victoria. But us in

Sydney, we're sweet. I think we've got to be very, very careful or we could be in that

situation, too.



STEFANOVIC: I had to go to Bondi yesterday and I got myself a healthy thick shake and I

was the only person -- why are you laughing? There's such a thing as a healthy thick

shake. OK, the diet's off all right. But I was the only person who had a mask on. And I think

it's a real issue anyway. If anyone ever doubted the dedication and bravery of our frontline

health workers, just take a look at this. Sydney COVID nurse Ashlei Peters. Today's Daily

Telegraph. This is a great story. Reveals the huge physical and emotional burden she

faces everyday saving lives on Westmead Hospital's special coronavirus ward. Malarndirri,

Ashleigh just one of the many heroes in this pandemic.



MCCARTHY: Absolutely, Karl. And we need to see more of those stories because these

are our frontline workers and a huge thanks to them right across Australia. And I notice

that even our West Australian nurses are heading over to Victoria. I think that here in the

Northern Territory, we were incredibly pleased with what happened here and there's still

vigilance, obviously, but those stories, can we just see more of those stories of our health

care workers because they do need to be recognised and supported.



STEFANOVIC: I agree. Gus?



WORLAND: Absolutely right. We should have a ticker tape parade once this, all this is

over, for these guys. Me and my family will be the first ones there on the front line, just

cheering them and just waving the flag. They're absolute legends as far as I'm concerned.

And their stories afterwards, they deserve to all be knighted or whatever we do these days.

They should do, lots of love to them.



STEFANOVIC: You know, it's been the year of - as bad as its been across all fields - it's

been the year for emergency services. They've stepped up, haven't they? Disturbing  front

page report on today's Australian, Malarndirri, I want to get your thoughts on this.



MCCARTHY: Sure.



STEFANOVIC: An Afghan soldier who murdered three Australians at their Afghan military

base will walk free from jail after just seven years thanks to a prisoner swap deal brokered

by the US. Now, the victims' families here in Australia are outraged, frustrated. I mean, you

can imagine so.



MCCARTHY: Absolutely, Karl. And, you know you know, my thoughts certainly go to the

families of these soldiers. Those families, I understand, were sort of reassured earlier this

year that this wouldn't occur. So I think they're going to be and they are incredibly

disappointed and angry. And that's totally understandable but I would call on the Morrison

government to continue negotiations. I know that this has not taken place yet. There's still

some time but I would certainly urge the Morrison government to ensure that this particular

prisoner does not leave that prison.



STEFANOVIC: Here here. Gus?



GUS WORLAND, TRIPLE M: Look absolutely. How dare someone like Trump have a say

in what happens to a bloke who killed three Aussie blokes. End of story. Put the line in the

sand. The Prime Minister's got to ring up Trump today and say that's unacceptable to us,

unacceptable to us Australians, and that poor family. What an absolute disgrace. That

bloke is a murderer, should stay in jail for the rest of his life.



STEFANOVIC: Here. Here. Here. Here. Well said, Gus. Now, finally, let's end on the footy

and the battle to host this year's AFL grand final. Wow. Adelaide.



MCCARTHY: Is the Northern Territory!



STEFANOVIC: Hey. Hey, hang on. Wait for it. Malarndirri I've done some research here.

And Brizzi obviously in contention as well, which is where I think it'll go. Unbiased. I think

everyone's forgetting the outside contender and I agree with you, Malarndirri, the beautiful

Marrara Oval in your hometown of Darwin. It's the biggest stadium in the Top End. Tick.

The Northern Territory is gloriously COVID-free, perfect for an AFL bubble. Tick. The locals

would love it. Tick. But wait a minute. The average temperature on Saturday in October

last year in the shade, in the freezer was 35.5 degrees. I mean, how can it possibly be?



MCCARTHY: Perfection. Perfection. Bring it up here you mob! Come on! Look, I've got the



Tigers on me, look: Black and Gold. They're coming up in a couple of weeks to play

Essendon.



WORLAND: There you go.



MCCARTHY: So look just come!



STEFANOVIC: What an invitation, Gus, how can we say no?



WORLAND: Look, it sounds fantastic. But that temperature's a little bit too high. Looks like

Brisbane, doesn't it? They've done an amazing job just trying to keep the AFL going so it

might be food to give them some love and give it to them and Sydney can have the Boxing

Day Test match, the Melbourne Cup and a few other things as well. We're all ready for

that.



STEFANOVIC: Looks like you can have something that involves a lot of water behind you

Gus.



WORLAND: It is very rainy in Sydney today.



STEFANOVIC: There you go. Thank you, Gus. Malarndirri, thank you so much.



MCCARTHY: Thank you Karl.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MARTHA TATTERSALL 0417 387 775



