

TONY BURKE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ARTS  MANAGER OF OPPOSITION BUSINESS  MEMBER FOR WATSON



SENATOR TONY SHELDON  SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES



LABOR SECURES INQUIRY INTO INSECURE WORK

Australians in insecure and precarious work will be the focus of a new Senate  inquiry established by Labor.

The Senate Select Committee on Job Security will investigate and report on the  impact of insecure and precarious work across all sectors of the Australian  economy.

The inquiry comes after the COVID-19 pandemic highlighted the growing  number of Australians who lack secure work, are forced to juggle multiple jobs  and are often denied basic protections like minimum wages, sick leave or  access to superannuation.

The inquiry also comes after the Morrison Government put forward an industrial  relations bill that does nothing to fix the problems of insecure work. It will  actually wind back pay and protections for workers whose livelihoods have been  hit hard by COVID, and who made sacrifices to help get Australia through the  pandemic.

The inquiry will examine the impacts on the aspirations of Australians for  income security, housing security and dignity in retirement.

The inquiry also comes amid a spike in home delivery services during the  pandemic - services that are needed by the community and which will remain  popular.

But the deaths of five food delivery workers in Australia in recent months has



exposed the dire impact on safety for workers and the community due to lack of  regulation in the gig economy and the denial of worker’s compensation for injury  and death.

Shadow Industrial Relations Minister Tony Burke said:

“Some Australians like the flexibility of casual or gig work. But Labor wants to  see more people in secure work, with good reliable pay and the highest of  safety standards.

Around 3.7 million Australians don’t have access to the rights and protections of  permanent employment. Many of them ended up in Centrelink queues across  the country earlier this year.

And if the COVID-19 pandemic has shown us anything it’s that insecure work is  not just a threat to the wellbeing of individuals - it’s a threat to the wellbeing of  our society. A high number of Australia’s coronavirus infections came from  people turning up to work sick because they simply couldn’t afford to stay home  and lose pay.”

Senator for NSW Tony Sheldon, who will chair the inquiry, said:

“Insecure work is the pandemic that will stay with us - long after the COVID-19  threat has passed. It is not acceptable that an underclass of work has been  spawned where workers are denied the basic rights and minimum protections  all Australians deserve.

Insecure work is not just found in food delivery and ride share - it is expanding  across the economy including the mining, retail, hospitality, health and aged  care, university and IT sectors. This inquiry comes at a critical time for our  economy and for the future of work.”

The committee will include members of the government, opposition and  crossbench. It is expected to commence public hearings early next year with a  reporting date of November 2021.

FRIDAY, 11 DECEMBER 2020

MEDIA CONTACTS:   ADAM GARTRELL (BURKE) 0427 008 525  KATH CUMMINS (SHELDON) 0422 366 037









