







Media | Minister Birmingham | Benn Ayre | 0428 342 325  Minister Colbeck | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.









Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment

Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck   Minister for Aged Care and Senior Australians  Minister for Youth and Sport



31 October 2020



Major bid to bring the Rugby World Cup Down Under

The Morrison Government is backing Australia’s efforts to bring the 2027 Rugby  World Cup Down Under, with an $8.8 million funding injection to support our  bid to host the event and provide a major economic and tourism boost.

It’s estimated hosting the 2027 Rugby World Cup will bring over 200,000  international visitors to Australia, generate an estimated $2.2 billion in economic  activity and create 12,000 jobs.

Federal Tourism Minister Simon Birmingham said the Rugby World Cup was the  second largest single-sport event in the world, and hosting it would be a major  shot in the arm for the Australian tourism industry, paving the way for new  infrastructure projects and jobs.

“Australia has a proud history of hosting major international sporting events and  winning this bid would be another vote of confidence in our ability to host big-ticket events as well as provide a major economic boost for our tourism industry  and the broader economy,” Minister Birmingham said.

“Australia’s hosting of the 2027 Rugby World Cup would bring visitors from all  around the globe to our shores, inject millions into the local economy and support  thousands of jobs across the country.









Media | Minister Birmingham | Benn Ayre | 0428 342 325  Minister Colbeck | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.





“Events of this magnitude have huge flow-on effects through the entire economy  - whether it be accommodation providers, tourism operators, car hire companies,  restaurants and bars or the retail sector.

“While we are not in a position to welcome international visitors right now, any  in-roads we can make to secure large-events that will bring more tourists to  Australia will be critical to the overall rebound of our tourism industry.”

Minister Colbeck said the funding will help Rugby Australia develop the best  possible bid with the greatest chance of success, and further cement Australia as  a world-leading sporting nation.

“As a country, we have an incredible track record of successfully hosting sporting  events on a global scale. An event of this size is expected to have a national  footprint and regional benefits, so all Australians can feel part of the excitement.”

“It’s been a challenging time for the Australian sporting community, with the  rescheduling of the Tokyo 2020 Olympic and Paralympic Games to 2021, and a  number of other high-profile sporting events cancelled or postponed,” Minister  Colbeck said.

“A successful bid will bolster the community spirit, and significantly contribute  to the country’s long-term recovery from COVID-19, with Rugby Australia  projecting over $2 billion in economic and social benefits from hosting the  event.”

This funding injection builds on the initial funding of $1 million provided in 2019  to scope the viability of the bid, bringing Rugby Australia’s funding to almost  $10 million.

Hosting the Rugby World Cup in 2027 will complement the FIFA Women’s  World Cup which will be co-hosted by Australia and New Zealand in 2023. It  will create a pipeline of two of the world’s largest international sporting events  to lead into a possible 2032 Olympic and Paralympic Games in Queensland.

It will also promote the game of Rugby, and build on its growing participation  rates, particularly among women.

It's expected the bid deadline will be the end of 2021, with a decision on  successful host by mid-2022.

