

JIM CHALMERS

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC BRISBANE DRIVE

MONDAY, 31 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Beenleigh testing clinic; JobKeeper and JobSeeker; National Accounts;

Agricultural labour; State borders; Pensioners and self-funded retirees.



STEVE AUSTIN, HOST: Jim Chalmers, thanks for coming back on.



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: Thank you Steve. I apologise to your listeners

if they can hear those bells ringing here in Parliament House. They'll finish soon.



AUSTIN: So they're not tolling for you?



CHALMERS: Not on this occasion, no. It's not for a vote in the House of Representatives.



AUSTIN: How do you tell the Senate bells from the House of Reps bells?



CHALMERS: This little light comes on on our clocks. There're hundreds if not thousands of

clocks through the building and they're all synchronized together. They've got a little red

light and a little green light. When the green light flashes it's for the House of Reps and the

red light's for the Senate.



AUSTIN: Matching the colour of each chamber basically?



CHALMERS: Correct.



AUSTIN: Okay. Just a quick one before we get to Federal Parliament, there's a COVID-19

testing clinic in Beenleigh that's being booted out because of fears by other business

people. It's federally funded. Are you doing anything to help that clinic stay?



CHALMERS: To be honest with you, Steve, I wasn't aware of it. It's a bit south of my

electorate, but having been made aware of it I'm happy to speak with the State Health

Minister and anyone else who is prepared to listen. I think it's really important that we make

those testing facilities available to people. We want to encourage people to get tested.

That would be an unfortunate development, but let me have some conversations with my

colleagues.



AUSTIN: I thought that was in your electorate. I'll be fascinated to know what comes of

that. Thank you very much. A lot of listeners are asking some different questions at the

moment, but I'll just ask you generally about the JobSeeker and JobKeeper payments.

You've been on about this for a while now, that the payment starts to wind back somewhat

on September 24th/25th and then disappears altogether at the end of December - in other

words, at the end of this year. Just restate for me briefly what your concerns are when this

happens, if you would please?



CHALMERS: First of all, both JobKeeper and the JobSeeker supplement were supposed

to end at the end on that last weekend in September. That was based on an assumption

that the economy was going to come roaring back which we now know unfortunately is not

going to be the case -



AUSTIN: Because we don't have a vaccine yet, basically?



CHALMERS: We don't have a vaccine, the economy's got worse, the jobs markets got

worse, Victoria hasn't helped but also -



AUSTIN: Victoria's dragging the country down economically, isn't it?



CHALMERS: It is the most concerning part of the economy, there's no question about that.

But it's not the only concern. There are parts of other states which are not performing as

well as we'd like. The argument we've put for some time now is don't, in the Prime

Minister's words, just snap back those payments and that welcome support in the

economy. The parliament this week will be debating and legislating to extend those

payments, which is a good outcome. A little over a month ago now the Government said

they would start to wind back the JobKeeper payment. We've said maybe they should

reconsider that given the economy's got worse since they made those announcements.



AUSTIN: I learned last week that analysis by AlphaBeta, part of the Accenture company,

showed that net household income has actually increased since all of the stimulus stuff

came in. It's hard to get your head around but apparently it's true. You've got the stimulus

payments, the deferral of mortgages, rents and the like, superannuation withdrawals, and

in total it actually amounts to a net increase in household cash flow. Are you aware of that,

Jim Chalmers?



CHALMERS: I've seen that research from AlphaBeta. They typically produce research of a

really high quality so we pay close attention to it. One of the purposes of this welcome

support in the economy is to encourage people to spend in businesses that might

otherwise really struggle through this recession. We want people spending. We've got our

issues with the early access to superannuation but when it comes to JobKeeper or the

JobSeeker supplement we need to make sure that there's enough spending power in the

economy to keep it going and to keep the wheels turning so that we can get through this

most difficult part of this crisis.



AUSTIN: As I read your plan though, Jim Chalmers, the plan is for the taxpayer, i.e.

through borrowings from Treasury, to carry the economy in an almost unlimited fashion

until a coronavirus vaccine is found. How long into next year do you want the JobSeeker

and JobKeeper payments to keep going for?



CHALMERS: Not unlimited, Steve. We should point out that it's also the Government's

policy to borrow heavily to support the economy. We do think that all of these payments

need to be tailored to what's actually going on in the economy. One of the issues that

we've been raising, including today, is that it doesn't make a lot of sense when

unemployment is rising to have support in the economy from the Government falling.



AUSTIN: But in a sense the States have the Government by the short and curlies? The

States can just keep their borders closed, and that's what's affecting the state economies.



CHALMERS: I don't think that's true, Steve, to say that that's the only thing that's

problematic in our economy at the moment.



AUSTIN: What's the bigger one?



CHALMERS: There's not a lot of confidence in the economy for obvious reasons -



AUSTIN: Well that's because of the virus, isn't it?



CHALMERS: The point I'm making, Steve, is that it isn't just the borders being closed

which is causing problems in the economy. There are shutdowns absent the borders.

We're going to get some new numbers on Wednesday which are really important; they're

called the National Accounts. They are going to show that in April, May and June of this

year we actually had the biggest contraction in the economy ever on record. That isn't just

a function of state borders. It's a function of the shutdown more broadly. I think we need to

acknowledge that. But if our priority is jobs, and it's certainly our priority, then we need to

do what we responsibly can, affordably can, to support the economy through the roughest

part of it. It doesn't make a lot of sense for the Government to be saying on one hand that

things are getting worse in the economy at the same time as they're saying we're going to

pull some of the support out.



AUSTIN: My guest is Jim Chalmers, the Labor member for Rankin on the south side of

Brisbane. He's also the Shadow Treasury spokesperson. This is ABC Radio. It's 4:42.

News at five. On Friday I interviewed someone who has a labour hire company that hires

strawberry pickers up around Caboolture. I think they're looking for about 600 pickers

today, otherwise they're going to start churning the strawberry crops into the ground. At a

very minimum, a worker can earn $500 a week, or if you're really good at it you can earn

up to $3000 a week. Shouldn't the Government be winding back the JobSeeker allowance

to try and encourage people not to cruise, but actually actively seek work, actually go after

work, employment?



CHALMERS: I missed your show on Friday, Steve, which I know is absolutely unforgivable

-



AUSTIN: There's a shock.



CHALMERS: I didn't hear the full story, but I did hear the talkback caller you had on that

summarised it moment ago. It's heartbreaking for these businesses, often family

businesses -



AUSTIN: They're not alone. The whole of the fruit and veggie industry is in the same

position.



CHALMERS: Yeah. In the last month or so I've done two fairly substantial trips into

regional Queensland, partly to speak to growers in a range of parts of the industry, apples

most recently but also up and down the coast. I know this is a huge problem. Their

workforce challenges are really quite substantial. They were told about a year ago that

there'd be a plan for the workforce by July of this year. We haven't seen it yet from the

Government. We need to see that. Clearly there's an issue there. They've relied very

heavily on backpackers for a long time. Obviously the flow of backpackers is not going to

be what it was -



AUSTIN: Or interstate picking teams now, because they can't get through the borders.



CHALMERS: Right. There are big challenges there. The nature of the work unfortunately

means that we haven't been able to attract enough particularly young people in areas of

high youth unemployment. I do acknowledge all of that. It does need to be done differently.

We were told that there would be something that we could engage with in July and we

haven't seen it yet. When we see that workforce plan we will engage with it properly. I also

know a little bit about strawberry picking, Steve. My mum used to make strawberry jam for

fruit shops around Rochedale and Rochedale South. She used to drag us along to pick the

strawberries for that jam. I know that it's actually quite difficult work -



AUSTIN: Yes it is.



CHALMERS: What the caller said a moment ago about maybe rotating so you're not doing

eight or nine hours of straight picking, that makes a bit of sense to me too.



AUSTIN: Yeah, it's hard. Yes, I agree. All right. My question was actually about

JobSeeker. There's got to be a way of encouraging people to fill the gaps that are

appearing. There are very large gaps appearing in the workforce.



CHALMERS: Yeah. A couple of things about that again. I do understand that this issue

has been raised as a concern by some growers, including raised directly with me. I don't

dismiss that lightly. I don't like the idea pushed by the Prime Minister frankly and the

Treasurer that right around Australia there are all of these opportunities going begging.

There are some opportunities in picking. We do need to work out how we get more local

people engaged in that. We do need to take the feedback from the industry seriously, but

job opportunities are not exactly thick on the ground at the moment. I think there's

something like 13 people on unemployment benefits for every vacancy in Australia at the

moment. We need to be realistic and honest about that too.



AUSTIN: Jim Chalmers is Labor's member for Rankin on the south side of Brisbane.

William of Burpengary has sent me a message with a question for you. Could I ask Jim

Chalmers why self-funded retirees did not get one cent despite a huge drop in our super

balance, he asks. I think he might be referring to the deeming rate, although I could be

wrong.



CHALMERS: I think he's making a broader point. You said William didn't you Steve?



AUSTIN: Yes, William of Burpengary.



CHALMERS: I think William is making a broader point here. I accept that there's not a lot

for self-funded retirees in what the Government's proposed so -



AUSTIN: They must be in a world of pain at the moment?



CHALMERS: Absolutely. The Government to their credit, frankly, did make a change to

what's called the minimum drawdown requirements, which is how much you're supposed

to take out of your super each year. The Government, with our support, said we won't

make that as substantial as usual because we recognise that the stock market has taken a

massive hit. It is recovering, the stock market. Superannuation is obviously a longer term

proposition. For William, if I'm guessing correctly, he's probably in the drawdown phase

and he's one of hundreds of thousands of Australians who are really worried about the

impact of this crisis on their balances. We understand where they're coming from.



AUSTIN: Peter from Salisbury sent us a message about his mum's pension increase. She

believes it's not going to go through in September. Is this the case? And what's Labor's

position on this?



CHALMERS: This is a huge issue Steve. I'm glad that Peter raised it. Despite all of our

efforts we can't make this more prominently understood. The pension is based on one of

two calculations which is inflation, which has gone backwards, or a special pension

calculation which has also gone backwards. This will be the first time in 23 years in

September, that the pension hasn't gone up. When we ask the Government about why

they can't do more for pensioners, they always say, oh but the pension goes up twice a

year to keep up with the cost of living for pensioners. But this will be the first time in 23

years that that hasn't happened. Peter is bang on. We need to keep the pressure up here

because we think that the Government should be able to look through this short-term fall

and inflation and see that now's the worst time for the Government to freeze the pension

for millions of Australians. They should come to an arrangement where we see that rise in

the pension in September like we normally would, by looking through that temporary

reduction in inflation.



AUSTIN: So it will be a normal rise in September, but the Federal Government's frozen it?



CHALMERS: By a straight interpretation of the inflation number and the other number, the

pension in September should go backwards.



AUSTIN: I'm sorry. Right, my apologies.



CHALMERS: And we've said now's not the time for that to happen. We've said that they

shouldn't be freezing the pension in September because people are doing it really tough,

they're really anxious, and the economy needs more support rather than less. We're

hoping we can convince the Government to change their mind.





AUSTIN: Thanks for coming on once again.



CHALMERS: Thank you Steve.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













