

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY

DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS FIRST EDITION

WEDNESDAY, 28 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Treatment of Australian women at Qatar airport and TWU response;

Senate Estimates; dodgy Government deals; National Integrity Commission; US

election.



LAURA JAYES, HOST: Joining me now is the Shadow Minister for Home Affairs, Senator

Kristina Keneally. Thank you for your time. What did you think when you first heard this

story Senator?



KRISTINA KENEALLY, Deputy Labor Leader in the Senate And Shadow Minister for

Home Affairs: As a woman, I was absolutely horrified. This is sexual assault; it's a gross

violation of 13 Australian women. It demands explanation and it demands apology. And I

want to applaud the Transport Workers’ Union in New South Wales who are stepping up,

giving a voice, and making clear what we as Australians will tolerate and won't tolerate. I

want to say Laura I am particularly moved with compassion for the thirteen Australian

women who faced this horrific experience, and I'm also moved to compassion that

somewhere whether, whatever nationality the mother of this baby is, she went through a

horrific experience too. This is a terrible circumstance, it demands an explanation and it

demands an apology.



JAYES: What is within the Federal Government's power to do here other than asking for

an apology? Does it risk, I guess, diplomatic tensions here?



KENEALLY: Well of course we would expect the Australian Government to act

appropriately - to stand up for Australian citizens when they face this sort of violation in

foreign jurisdictions. And we continue to, as the Labor Opposition, ask them, demand

them, to do so. My colleague Senator Penny Wong has spoken quite clearly and forcefully

on this.



JAYES: Yes, she certainly has. Certainly something that's very concerning. We do hear

that these women, for our viewers' benefit, have received some support on their return

because also they had to go into self-quarantine in hotels as well. Let me move now to

Senate Estimates. It was revealed yesterday that there's been $3 billion spent on MRH-90

helicopters but they can't actually be used by Special Forces. Do Departments ever take

responsibility for such a stuff up?



KENEALLY: Laura what we've seen through Senate Estimates last week and this week is

a Government that is allergic to accountability, allergic to transparency. Whether it is these

helicopters. Whether it is a Defence Minister who doesn't know when the submarines - the

$90 billion program she's in charge of - when those submarines will be coming online. We

have an Aged Care Minister in Richard Colbeck - nearly 700 people have died in aged

care from COVID-19 on his watch - and yet he refuses to resign, says he wants to stay on

in the job as Aged Care Minister. I mean Laura we've got a circumstance where the Prime

Minister says he is appalled and outraged and shocked because the Australia Post CEO

bought for Cartier watches. Now that is terrible, that is bad, that is a poor use of taxpayer

dollars. But we have within the Prime Minister's own Cabinet the likes of Richard Colbeck

presiding over 700 deaths. The likes of Linda Reynolds delivering submarines at some

point, delivering helicopters that aren't going to work. We've got a Government that is,

frankly, spending money flying private jets for Clive Palmer around...



JAYES: Yeah and look Senator this is all leading to Labor really pushing, pushing for a

Federal ICAC. But you know the New South Wales, how New South Wales’ works, you

know how the New South Wales ICAC works. Is that really the best model?



KENEALLY: Laura what the New South Wales ICAC does, is it brings sunshine where

there is darkness. It exposes corruption to light. It ensures that the people of New South

Wales can have confidence that where a politician or a public official has acted corruptly,

there are the powers and the capacity to bring that to light and where appropriate to bring

criminal charges. Quite frankly, we have a Government that has presided over a string of

scandals, whether it's the Western Sydney Airport land deal, the sports rorts scandal, and

we continue to see with this Government day after day. In my own portfolio of Home Affairs

we learnt this last week that Australian Border Force is brought up in a correction inquiry in

relation to the procurement of the Cape Class patrol boats that patrol our maritime borders.

Quite frankly, every day seems to bring another corruption scandal and it demands a

national anti-corruption commission.



JAYES: Before I let you go, I'll ask you, I guess comment, on your motherland that we're a

week out from the US election. Joe Biden, Donald Trump going head to head. Joe Biden is

apparently ahead in the polls but it's fair to say he's been a pretty uninspiring candidate.

Do you think he can get there?



KENEALLY: Laura I used to have a job sitting at this very desk; in fact hosted the 2016

Sky News coverage of the US election. I've got a very different role now. I think I'll leave

the commentary on US politics to people who are paid to do so.



JAYES: You're not tempted at all? What are your family saying to you?



KENEALLY: Laura like many an American family, mine back in the States is quite divided.

I can reveal exclusively here on Sky News, there are two American citizens here in

Australia in the Keneally family and they have cast their votes. And I am not one of them

for those Section 44 conspiracy theorists.



JAYES: We'll have to get your family on the Skype or zoom or something from Ohio. We'll

do our best. Kristina Keneally thanks for your time.



KENEALLY: Thank you.



ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













