





THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP  MINISTER FOR POPULATION, CITIES AND URBAN  INFRASTRUCTURE

HON CHRISTIAN PORTER  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR PEARCE



THE HON RITA SAFFIOTI MLA  WA MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT

THE HON JOHN QUIGLEY MLA  STATE MEMBER FOR BUTLER









MEDIA RELEASE

The Hon Alan Tudge MP, Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure   WANTIRNA SOUTH, VICTORIA



Thursday, 22 October 2020

Mitchell Freeway Extension a step closer with preferred proponent named

The Mitchell Extension Joint Venture (MEJV) has today been named as the preferred  proponent to deliver the $215 million Mitchell Freeway extension.

MEJV consists of Australian companies BMD Construction and Georgiou Group.

The project is expected to create and support 1,200 local jobs and involves extending the  Mitchell Freeway 5.6 kilometres from Hester Avenue in Clarkson to Romeo Road in Alkimos.

The final contract is expected to be awarded in coming weeks with early works to commence in  early 2021.

The extension will alleviate pressure on the local road network, reducing travel times and  improving safety and connectivity for commuters and local residents.

Federal Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure Alan Tudge said the Mitchell  Freeway Extension Project would create more jobs for hard-working Western Australians.

“The Morrison Government has prioritised funding for critical road and rail infrastructure in  WA,” Mr Tudge said.

“That funding means a huge amount of construction activity is underway across Perth on  targeted infrastructure that is helping the economy out right now, and building for the future.”

WA Transport Minister Rita Saffioti said this was just one of the major infrastructure projects  the McGowan Government had fast-tracked as part of the road out of COVID-19.

“It’s fantastic to see these Australian-based companies, both of which have a significant WA  presence and employ local workers, deliver one of our major infrastructure projects,” she said.

“This is one of eleven major road projects, in our Building for Tomorrow infrastructure program,  where we have fast tracked to get works underway and workers on the ground as soon as  possible.

“Along with the METRONET Yanchep Rail Extension and other major road projects, such as  the Wanneroo Road and Joondalup Drive Interchange we are delivering key infrastructure for  the northern suburbs.”

“We will also be optimising the performance of the Mitchell Freeway southbound from Hester  Avenue to Perth by introducing the same smart technology that has worked so well on the  Kwinana Freeway.”

Federal Member for Pearce Christian Porter said the extension would provide more  opportunities for local residents heading in and out of the City.

“The northern suburbs are booming and the population growth is only going to continue over  the next decade,” he said.

“It’s vital we deliver these much needed infrastructure upgrades now.

“I, along with my community, have been calling out for this extension so it’s fantastic to see the  project taking shape.”

State Member for Butler John Quigley said the extension would make a huge difference for  local Butler residents.

“Extending the Mitchell Freeway to Alkimos will slash travel times and make commuting safer  for northern suburbs residents,” he said.

“We’ve been waiting a long time for this project and I’m proud to be a part of a Government  that is finally getting on with the job of building our northern suburbs.”

The Mitchell Freeway Extension Project - Hester to Romeo Road, is jointly-funded by the  Australian and Western Australian Governments, with each contributing $107.5 million.

[ENDS]

Media Contact:  Mr Tudge - Michael Bennett 0434 782 923  Ms Saffioti - Caitlin Goddard 0437 234 249









