

LINDA BURNEY MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AUSTRALIANS  MEMBER FOR BARTON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   TELEVISION INTERVIEW   ABC AFTERNOON BRIEFING WITH PATRICIA KARVELAS   THURSDAY, 3 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Aboriginal flag; COVID19 in Indigenous communities.

PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: Linda Burney, welcome.

LINDA BURNEY, SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AUSTRALIANS: Thank you,  Patricia.

KARVELAS: What are you hoping this inquiry will achieve?

BURNEY: The inquiry has passed unanimously in the Senate, just a few moments ago.  What we wanted to achieve is to look at ways to make sure we protect the copyright of the  author of the flag, that's Harold Thomas. But to also explore the issues, particularly around  the capacity for the flag and the image of the flag to be used freely and respectfully for all  Australians. And in particular, Aboriginal organisations and Aboriginal people.

KARVELAS: The Minister, Wyatt, says he's working to resolve this issue. Why do you feel  a Senate inquiry is needed given the Government is already doing work here?

BURNEY: The Government is doing some work. I don't know how long that's going to take  and I do wish the Minister well in his negotiations. That would be a great outcome if  something could be landed in terms of particularly the licensing of the flag. But we believe  that a Senate inquiry is necessary to hear from a variety of people out there in the  community, people that are running campaigns about the flag, academics, people from  organisations that have received ‘cease and desist’ letters in relation to reproducing the  flag. There's also a very big number of large sports codes that have made decisions not to  use the image of the flag because of the licensing issues. So there is a very broad range of  people who have an interest in the flag, not just Aboriginal people, and that's what the  inquiry is going to explore.

KARVELAS: How do you balance the rights of the man who owns the copyright against  the view that the flag belongs to all Aboriginal people? Because this is essentially at the  heart of the problem, isn't it?

BURNEY: The problem is very much around the protection of Harold Thomas and his  copyright. Now his actions in relation to licensing the flag to a company walled WAM which

in my view has a lot to explain, is perfectly legal under the law in Australia. But is it morally  right, is the question? If Aboriginal organisations; if the AFL for example in the Dreamtime  round; can't use images of the flag, I think that raises a number of questions. But you’re  right, the balance is important. It's important that the flag be available which is freeing the  flag so that people can use it, including schoolchildren. Can you imagine the 2000  Olympics when Cathy won the 400m, without the image of her with the Aboriginal and the  Australian flag around her shoulders? In preschools when children are learning colours,  they might look at the Aboriginal flag to understand what those colours represent. There  are so many uses and important aspects to the flag. Apart from the value that it has for  First Nations people, Patricia. The fact that it is the one symbol that in the diversity of our  cultures, unites all First Peoples together. It's important.

KARVELAS: Do you support the compulsory acquisition of the flag by the Federal  Government?

BURNEY: There is going to be that question raised in the inquiry. Compulsory acquisition  is one of them. But under the Australian Constitution, just terms compensation is a very  important part of the Constitution. I support the protection of Harold Thomas' copyright but  support the notion that the flag should not be held hostage by private companies that have  profit at their heart.

KARVELAS: Do you welcome the Federal Government's move to stamp out the sale of  fake Indigenous art?

BURNEY: I think the work that is going to be undertaken by Minister Wyatt and by Minister  Fletcher in relation to fake Indigenous art is a very welcomed move. It's something that  Labor endorses. We've held a number of inquiries over the years into the misappropriation  of Indigenous art. In fact, one  of the problems I have with the company that now has the  licence for the flag is they were fined $2.3 million by the ACCC last year - Birubi Arts or  Biruba Arts or something along those lines - because 18,000 items were sold purporting to  be Aboriginal art, actually made in Indonesia. And of course at the heart of this Patricia is  to make sure that the remuneration of Aboriginal artists, genuine artists is made. And it's a  very important undertaking by Minister Fletcher and by Minister Wyatt.

KARVELAS: Linda Burney, just finally the Victorian Aboriginal Community Controlled  Health Organisation has written to the Prime Minister asking for more COVID-19 funding.  Should urban Indigenous communities in Victoria be given a higher priority than they are?

BURNEY: I think what the Victorian Aboriginal Controlled Health Organisation have done  is very important. I welcome very much the support that's been given through the Andrews  Government in protection of urban communities and regional communities throughout  Victoria from COVID-19. I mean, I don't need to express to you because I know you have  explored it Patricia, just how devastating it would be for COVID to get a foothold in our  communities, be they remote or regional or urban. It's a very important undertaking.

KARVELAS: More than 50,000 people have accessed specialised training for Indigenous  health workers. How successful has the response to the pandemic been in Indigenous  communities and what are you worried about moving to the future? I know you said you  think there has been success. Do you feel we're at a tipping point or there could be further  risks?

BURNEY: I think the risk is always there. And I think it has been a remarkably successful



part of Australia's response to the pandemic. That it has not got its foothold particularly in  remote Aboriginal communities which are incredibly vulnerable, incredibly localised. And  right across this country we know that most Aboriginal people have co-morbidities when it  comes to health issues. So the worry is constantly there but I do celebrate very much that  there has not been a serious outbreak of COVID in any Aboriginal communities thus far.  But the risk is always there and we cannot sit back and rest and say the job is done. It is  not done for the broader community and in particular for vulnerable communities like First  Nation communities.

KARVELAS: Linda Burney, lovely to speak to you.

BURNEY: Thank you, Patricia.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DARYL TAN 0422 028 222









