EMBARGOED UNTIL 12.01AM AEDT - WEDNESDAY 25 NOVEMBER 2020





The Hon Ken Wyatt AM MP

Minister for Indigenous Australians  Member for Hasluck

MEDIA RELEASE

25 November 2020

$100 MILLION STIMULUS FOR INDIGENOUS BUSINESSES AND JOBS IN THE NT

The Australian Government is creating jobs and driving economic recovery through COVID-19  and is continually working through a number of avenues to cushion the impact of the pandemic  on all Australians.

The Minister for Indigenous Australians, the Hon Ken Wyatt AM, MP, today announced a  $100 million Northern Territory (NT) Indigenous Economic Stimulus Package, developed in  partnership with the four Northern Territory Land Councils, to provide immediate support for  Aboriginal businesses and jobs in the NT.

The Package will be delivered over two financial years with $60 million in tranche one and $40  million in tranche two.

“Indigenous businesses in the NT are struggling and the Morrison Government is committed to  supporting their recovery through the COVID-19,” Minister Wyatt said.

“Working with the NT Land Councils, we are releasing $100 million from the Aboriginals Benefit  Account (ABA) for Aboriginal people to create and sustain jobs through capital injections in  ‘shovel-ready’ economic, social and infrastructure projects.”

“The money will flow quickly through targeted investments that will connect Aboriginal people to  pastoral, tourism, gas and mining opportunities, and help businesses prepare for an expected  surge in domestic tourism over the coming period.”

“This is part of our ongoing work to empower Aboriginal people in the NT to build economic  opportunities and activate the great potential of their land.”

The funding will be provided to Aboriginal businesses and infrastructure projects through the  NT Land Councils, which will identify projects that are ready to commence now so the funding  can flow into communities as soon as possible.

Chair of the Northern Land Council, Samuel Bush-Blanasi, said the package is an example of  Aboriginal people and Government coming together in shared decision-making.

“The four Land Councils in the NT are strong organisations that are well connected to all of  their communities and know how ABA funding can be used effectively,” Mr Bush-Blanasi said.

“By investing in small scale Aboriginal-owned infrastructure projects with short or no lead time,  we can have an immediate and lasting effect on our people.”

Chair of the Central Land Council, Sammy Wilson, said the funding will be a welcome boost  across the NT.

“This package will see projects that are ready to go be delivered, such as improving homeland  infrastructure, upgrading ranger accommodation to look after country and create more jobs,  building or repairing fences, or maintenance projects, all drawing on an Indigenous supply  chain,” Mr Wilson said.

For tranche 1, the Northern and Central Land Council regions will each have $22 million  available, and $8 million is being made available for each of the Tiwi Land Council and the  Anindilyakwa Land Council regions.

Following this, tranche 2 will provide $14.7 million each to the Northern and Central Land  Council regions and $5.3 million to the Tiwi Land Council and the Anindilyakwa Land Council  regions.

This package builds on the $123 million national stimulus package provided by the Government  to support Indigenous Australians in April 2020. This included $10 million for the four NT Land  Councils to support their response to COVID-19.



Media contact: Luke Nayna, Senior Media Adviser, 0438 231 687

Authorised by Ken Wyatt AM, MP, Member for Hasluck.

