

THE HON JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES

MEMBER FOR HUNTER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SUNRISE

MONDAY, 27 JANUARY 2020



SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; Bridget McKenzie.



DAVID KOCH, HOST: As we've heard, four cases of China's deadly

coronavirus have been confirmed in Australia and it's feared that number will

rise with experts warning the disease is spreading rapidly.



SAMANTHA ARMYTAGE, HOST: There are also concerns for Aussies

stranded in the pandemic’s epicentre. So, is Australia doing enough amid by

the growing global fears? For more, we're joined by Nationals MP, Barnaby

Joyce, and Labor MP, Joel Fitzgibbon - good morning to you both gents.

Barnaby, this is worrying. This has apparently been, you know, going on in

China for the best part of a month and now it’s finally reached Australia. Is

Australia doing all it can to combat viruses like this coming in from overseas on

planeloads of people?



BARNABY JOYCE, MEMBER FOR NEW ENGLAND: Well, we have to look at

the fundamentals the disease. The RO, which is the actual spread rate infection

capacity is about 1.4. Your flu, your influenza, is about 1.3 - it goes from

1.4 to 2.4-2.5 for this.  So, it is more infectious and has a greater capacity than

the flu. The fatality rates is around about 3 per cent, so not everyone who gets

it dies but that is still remarkably high. And what we know is it’s basically in

every corner of the globe as we speak. The four, apparently possibly five cases

we have, some of those have been not diagnosed in the first instance. So, what

you have in Australia is the best chance of anywhere in the world but nothing is

perfect. That is so important. You’ve got to take so many of the precautions

yourself, like wash your hands, cover your mouth, make sure food, especially

eggs and meat, are properly cooked. The government can do as much as it

possibly can, or do more than any government, as much as any other

government in the world, but the responsibility also lies on everybody and I

don’t think it’s a matter of being alarmist but just being cautious. We really won’t

know what is exactly happening with the spread of this disease probably until

around about mid-February.

KOCH: And Joel, a lot of precautions have been taken, particularly in China.

They have closed down cities; I know they are closing schools until 14th of

February I think. And even some schools here in Australia are contacting their

parents saying if you’ve holidayed with your kids in China over summer, keep

them away from school for two weeks.



JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: Well, obviously by necessity,

Kochie, the Chinese authorities are taking it very seriously and acting

substantially. Ahead of our chat this morning, I spoke to our Shadow Minister

for Health, Chris Bowen, here in Australia who has had two briefings from the

Chief Medical Officer and he seems satisfied we are doing here everything we

can at this stage. But I think there is an opportunity here for more messaging

out in the public. I have the benefit of being able to ring people like Chris

Bowen, but I think the public more generally is thirsty and hungry for more

information, and I think the government has been strangely quiet on this issue.

We have seen some media releases and one or two stand-ups. But I think the

public is looking for more reassurance from its senior political leaders. I think

we should be seeing more of them and I think, quite frankly, they are largely in

hiding as this Bridget McKenzie controversy rolls on.



ARMYTAGE: Yeah, look we are running out of time…



JOYCE: Amazing pivot there.



ARMYTAGE: … yep. Barnaby, Bridget McKenzie has got more controversy

around her this week. She’s bought a $2 million investment property in

Melbourne apparently, and she hasn’t declared it in the right timeframe. What’s

going to happen with Bridget McKenzie this week do you think?



JOYCE: Well, Bridget McKenzie will keep her job. Basically, I have been taking

bets with people who have all been running out saying she’ll lose her job - no

she won’t. She will keep her job and this issue - she hasn’t broken the law; she

hasn’t done anything that would actually put her at odds with what her job is as

a Minister. She’s made Ministerial decisions; obviously people have every right

to comment on that. She bought an investment - ok, she’s not the first person

to have done that. This will be a rough time in her career, but I bet you she’ll

see it through.



KOCH: Ok, Joel, this is the Senator’s second Melbourne property purchase; is

she really representing the bush? Should she have declared it earlier?



FITZGIBBON: The saga grows worse, and I disagree with Barnaby, she will go.

The Prime Minister cannot afford to have a Senate enquiry on this issue

because it will drag him and his office right into the scandal. She should be this



honest with regional Australia; if she wants to live in ritzy Melbourne well she

should just say so. But the last point is, and this is another pivot, Bridget

McKenzie is the Minister for Biosecurity.

She should be very much part of our action against the coronavirus and, again,

she’s not capable of standing up and speaking to the public, in front of the

media, because of this ongoing controversy. She needs to go and she should

have gone long before today.



ARMYTAGE: Ok, we should see this week.



JOYCE: Well, that’s - biosecurity…



KOCH: Ok gents.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











