



SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women



MEDIA RELEASE

AMBASSADOR TO JAPAN

Today I announce the appointment of Ms Jan Adams AO, PSM as Australia’s next  Ambassador to Japan.

Australia’s relationship with Japan has never been stronger, and our engagement is  fundamental to both countries’ strategic and economic interests.

The value of our Special Strategic Partnership has increased as we face the challenges posed  by COVID-19. Together, Australia and Japan are responding to the health and economic  impacts of the pandemic, including on vaccines, supply chains, and quality infrastructure  investment.

Australia and Japan share similar visions for an open and prosperous region, based on  our common values of democracy and human rights, and shared approaches to  international security. This includes working together with Japan to shape global  outcomes through multilateral cooperation, including to ensure multilateral institutions  are transparent and effective.

We continue to deepen our defence cooperation with Japan. Our ongoing work with  Japan and other Indo-Pacific partners, including the United States, will help support  peace and stability in our region.

Japan is our second-largest trading partner, with two-way trade in 2019 totalling $87  billion. Japanese investment has played a pivotal role in the development of Australia’s  economy and is vital to some of our largest export industries, including LNG, iron ore,  coal and agriculture. We continue to deepen cooperation in emerging areas, including  low emissions technology, digital economy, and critical minerals.

Ms Adams is a senior career officer with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade  and was most recently Australia’s Ambassador to China. She has previously served  overseas in Washington and in the OECD Secretariat, Paris.

Ms Adams holds a Bachelor of Laws (Honours), and a Bachelor of Economics  (Honours), from Monash University.

I thank outgoing Ambassador Richard Court AC for his contribution to advancing Australia’s  interests in Japan since 2017.

Media Contact  David Wroe: 0429 531 143  Melanie Ruiz: 0427 888 392

