



The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister



The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE



Tuesday 18 February 2020

BACKING IMPORTANT CORONAVIRUS RESEARCH

The Morrison Government is fast tracking $2 million in funding to support Australia’s best researchers as  they work to understand and respond to the outbreak of novel coronavirus, now known as COVID-19.

Our government’s priority is to keep Australians safe and this $2 million investment will help develop a  coronavirus vaccine.

Following a meeting of leading Australian researchers last week, the Government is providing the  funding from the Medical Research Future Fund (MRFF) for an open and competitive Grant Opportunity  to develop a coronavirus vaccine.

This Grant Opportunity will complement the world-leading work already undertaken by the Doherty  Institute, CSIRO and University of Queensland and their collaboration.

The ability to swiftly react to emerging health issues is a key strength of the MRFF, which was  established in 2015 to support health and medical research and innovation for the benefit of all  Australians.

Research plays a critical role in ensuring Australia maintains its world-class health system and is  particularly important as the world responds to coronavirus.

Last week’s meeting, chaired by Deputy Chief Medical Officer Professor Paul Kelly, included eminent  experts from across Australia including the three centres of research excellence working on epidemic  preparedness, the WHO Collaborating Centre on Influenza, the CSIRO and states and territories.

The open and competitive grant opportunity - under the MRFF Emerging Priorities and Consumer  Driven Research Initiative will open soon and information will be available on GrantConnect at  https://www.grants.gov.au



For more information about coronavirus, visit the Department of Health website.

[END]

Media Contacts:  Prime Minister’s office: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  Minister Hunt’s office: James Perrin, 0447 534 427  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

Press Office of the Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Prime Minister, Canberra





