

LINDA BURNEY MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND SOCIAL SERVICES  MEMBER FOR BARTON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RN BREAKFAST WITH FRAN KELLY   TUESDAY, 24 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Social security & Centrelink.

FRAN KELLY, HOST: Linda Burney welcome to breakfast.

LINDA BURNEY, SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND SOCIAL SERVICES: Good  morning Fran.

KELLY: Linda Burney, before we get to the Australian economy, there’s breaking news out  of the UK: Prime Minister Boris Johnson has announced there that Brits can only leave  home to shop for basic essentials; one form of exercise per day; and to get to work only if  necessary. Is Australia heading towards that path?

BURNEY: The escalation; the speed; the changes that are taking place hour by hour I  think Australia is heading for a much more difficult experience than what we’re having now  Fran. I do think that.

KELLY: I’ll come to the Centrelink and how it’s coping. We heard the Minister Anne Ruston  there saying they’ve been working on this for weeks. But before we get to that, it does look  as though one million Australians will lose their jobs, or will be working reduced hours in  the short term. That seemed to be the implication of what the Treasurer said yesterday.  Already, we’re seeing mass layoffs, in tourism and hospitality sectors. But else where too.  How bad do you see it getting on the jobs front? Are we heading to unemployment at over  10 per cent?

BURNEY: I think we’re heading for massive unemployment. And that’s what is being  played out and that’s why the lines around Centrelink were so long yesterday. It strikes me  that there are some things that the government can do urgently to ameliorate as much as  possible the pain that people are experiencing. I’m in an electorate office, and right across  this country people are ringing. They are scared. They are confused. And they are  stressed, because of drastic changes to their financial situation and what they thought was  going to be their future. What they want is care. What they want is answers. And what they  want is urgency.

KELLY: Yes, it’s the speed of this that has really shocked people. And you can see the  shock and disbelief and fear and distress of all those people queuing yesterday. What are

the urgent measures that you are recommending to the government?

BURNEY: Well first thing, the government needs to be absolutely clear and honest with  people. And we saw the ridiculous performance by the Minister Stuart Robert yesterday,  giving wrong information yesterday. Ministers need to be absolutely across their portfolio  and they need to be able to clearly articulate to people honestly and with care what they  are eligible for and what they are not eligible for. The measures Fran that I think Centrelink  should be immediately putting in place are fairly simple. There should be a hotline. There is  not a hotline at the moment for people seeking information at the moment. There are up to  ten numbers you ring for different payments, and whether it’s unemployment, disability,  age pension - that has to be a single number in my view. I think the other thing is that  there needs to be an understanding that people will queue today because they are  confused. They are confused as to whether they have to attend Centrelink offices or  whether they have to go online, and whether everyone has the capacity to go online. That  government needs to understand that. I think the other thing that would be extremely  useful is the urgent bringing on of more staff. Centrelink was broken well before this virus.  Let’s be honest about that.

KELLY: The Minister has said there will be an extra 5,000 staff employed by Centrelink.  Obviously that’s going to take a little bit of time to gear up. But is it the hands on deck or is  it the technology? We saw MyGov crash so quickly yesterday because more than 50,000  people rung up - tried to get on rather - at once.

BURNEY: I think it is both Fran. It’s hands on deck. I mean, observing social distancing  and so forth - there is no reason why cannot advise people who are lining up for hours on  how long they’re going to be there. And they’re doing their best -

KELLY: Can I just ask you about the lining up? Why are people lining up for Centrelink?  The ATO presumably has details for every worker who’s lost their job because they’ve  been paying tax. Why can’t the ATO coordinate with Centrelink? I think they share  information - they’re linked anyway to streamline this process. Why was there any need for  anyone to line up to go to a Centrelink office?

BURNEY: Because people are confused. And people are frightened. And I can absolutely  understand if you’re suddenly both - you and your partner have been laid off - or your  partner’s been laid off to know exactly what you’re eligible for. And I am pleased to see  overnight that the government has expanded the Coronavirus Supplement to include  students. But there is mass confusion in the public and people are worried about their  future. And that’s why they’re lining up.

KELLY: Okay, but just to be clear on that. Should they be lining up? Or should Centrelink  and the ATO have it covered so everybody can apply for their payment online or over the  phone?

BURNEY: Well, not everyone has the capacity to apply online, particularly older  Australians. And the other thing of course is that Centrelink is incredibly bureaucratic. And  it would appear to me that people need assistance and clear information and not to have to  go through the incredible red tape that is tied up with payments. I mean the payment - the  fortnightly supplement that’s going to be introduced - effectively the doubling of Newstart -

KELLY: The $550 Coronavirus Supplement but that’s not paid until April the 27th - is there  anyway that can be pushed up earlier? Is the government considering that do you know?





BURNEY: Labor is arguing that that is ridiculous that it’s five weeks away before people  can get that supplement. People are self-isolating now. People are getting sick. And the  exponential growth and change in the virus and the information and what states and  territories are doing are feeding into the anxiety. And five weeks away is a very long time  for some families. We’re arguing very strongly - get the payments out - cut the red tape -  and worry about the paperwork later. People need help now.

KELLY: It’s hard - I mean this is all happening so quickly. It’s not surprising I suppose that  our Centrelink and social welfare systems are overwhelmed in the short term. The Minister  says they have been preparing for this for weeks. He did fail at the first hurdle. But let’s  give the government the benefit of the doubt on that front. But in terms of eligibility, there’s  some confusion too. The Finance Minister Mathias Cormann said yesterday I think that if a  person loses their job, they would receive the new bolstered JobSeeker Payment, the  Coronavirus Supplement, even if their partner was earning $70,000. Now I asked the  Treasurer yesterday about a sacked QANTAS worker. He told us they’d be paid even if  their partner is earning. Are you clear? Is there an income test per family applied to this  Coronavirus Supplement? Do you know the answer?

BURNEY: Yes, I do. The answer is yes, there is an income test. And that is one of the  giant holes in the social security or the changes that have been made. If there is a couple,  the liquid assets test has been waived. That is if you’ve got money in the bank. Or shares  or something. But the income test still applies. So that means if the main breadwinner  loses their job and the second partner is on less salary, it is that salary that will be  assessed. So Minister Cormann was absolutely wrong about saying that they would be  eligible for the payment.

KELLY: So just to be clear what is the income test then of the other person in the house  who still has a job? What’s the income limit?

BURNEY: It’s unclear. My understanding is that it is around $70,000 - but we’re trying to  seek clarification on that today. But it is definitely - the income test still definitely applies.

KELLY: Okay, so if someone is earning a $100,000 or $120,000 so then the other person  would not be eligible for that Coronavirus Supplement.

BURNEY: That’s correct.

KELLY: All right, well you try and clarify that. We’ll try and clarify that. Because I think a lot  of people are standing by to understand that. Linda Burney, thank you very much for  joining us on breakfast.

BURNEY: Thank you Fran.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DARYL TAN 0422 028 222









