JULIAN HILL MP

DEPUTY CHAIR OF THE JOINT COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS AND

AUDITS

MEMBER FOR BRUCE





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

WEDNESDAY, 2 DECEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Changes to partner visas; 143 Contributory Parent Visas; Alan Tudge.



JULIAN HILL, DEPUTY CHAIR, JOINT COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT;

FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BRUCE: I’m here today to call out Minister Tudge for the growing

mess he’s making of the family visa program. After months of inaction, he has still failed to fix

the fiasco of the partner visas. But today - this is astounding, I thought it was April Fools’ Day,

then I checked the calendar - astounding that the Minister yesterday seriously declared that

the parents of Australian citizens are not their immediate family members. Parents are not

Australians’ immediate family members. Now, the Minister is someone as we learned, who

was elected on a platform of family values. Well, that’s a pretty funny idea of family, because if

you ask anyone in Australia, they’d say their parents are part of their family.



Now, the context of this is that the Minister’s own arbitrary visa regulations require people who

are already safe here in Australia, many of whom have been here for years, to fly off shore,

then fly back, just so the computer will spit out their visa.



Now, before the pandemic I suppose that made sense. Historically, it was a bureaucratic

function, people would go away to Bali or New Zealand for the weekend, they’d go away and

come back again, that’s what happened, and people got used to it.



But we are in the middle of a global pandemic. This makes no sense to force thousands of

people who are safe here in Australia the family member of Australians - people who have

been waiting for years to get a personal visa and the government are offering them a

permanent visa to stay in Australia, and yet at the same time they’re forcing them to fly

overseas making a risky, expensive trip: often to countries rife with COVID-19 and come back

again, wasting a quarantine pace that should be used for a stranded Australian. We have

36,000 stranded Australians around the world - many of whom in the countries the

government is flying these people backward and forward from - desperate to come home, and

yet the government is wasting these precious quarantine places on people who are already

safe here.



Now, I have been calling for months for the Minister to change this rule - it’s a ridiculous rule to

have in the middle of a pandemic. I had a Private Member’s Bill that I introduced to the House

on Monday to fix this problem for thousands of partners. The minster must have panicked on

Saturday - Saturday night panic - and said: “oh, alright, I don’t really like the negative media

stories and I don’t really want the parliamentary debate, so I’ll fix it.” But he hasn’t actually fixed

it. All he said was: “sometime in 2021 I might get around to looking at the rule.” Now, he’s got

the power to change it tomorrow with his pen - the minster can change the regulations, he can

fix this, and he should do so.



I just want to put a human face to this, because maybe he thinks these are numbers. He said:

“oh, this will help about 4000 people.” Well, this is Loveleen - Loveleen is pregnant, their child

will be Australian - she’s due soon. How is she meant to leave? Now, they would be travelling

on an Indian passport, so if the Minister doesn’t fix this rule, Loveleen will be forced to fly to a

country that recently recorded 9,000,000 COVID-19 infections and then fly back again, taking a

quarantine spot. It’s unclear if her baby can even go with her given the travel restrictions. This

is ridiculous. It should be fixed. Of course, people on Indian passports can’t just go to

Singapore and many countries - they have to go back to their home country.



Darren and Isabella. Darren is a FIFO worker. I have hundreds of these cases on a

spreadsheet in my office - these are just five. Darren is a FIFO worker. Their big concern, for

his family, is when he’s away, who will take care of the dogs if Isabella is stuck overseas?

They can’t afford business class flights to be guaranteed to be come back.



Leslie and Juliette. Juliette is from the UK. She has no work rights, so she is waiting for the

computer to spit out her visa, waiting for the Minister to do his job. Leslie is having knee

surgery before Christmas. They’re terrified she’ll be told to bugger off, go back to the UK and

face god knows how long to actually come back here, using a quarantine spot. They deserve

certainty before Christmas. They deserve the Minster to do his job.



We’ve also got John and Laurie. Laurie is form Canberra and is the primary carer for their two

children. They’ve been waiting over a year for their visa. Why should their family not have the

certainty they deserve before Christmas? Just give them their visa.



And there’s Mark and Annette. Annette’s tourist visa expires in January. Now, what this means

- if the Minister doesn’t fix this problem - is that they’re going to have to pay another $1000 for

a tourist visa. They don’t have a lot of money. They’re going to have to update their medical

checks, update security clearances and update the police clearances - all more money just

because the Minster can’t get out his pen and do his job.



Now, as I said, astoundingly, the little-known visa, the 143 Contributory Parent Visa. People

pay over 50,000 for this visa to come and be with their children - they’re for seniors. Now, I

spoke to a person overnight called Trevor, from the Sutherland Shire down Scott Morrison’s

way. He came to Australia 10 years ago, he paid over $10,000 for his visa for he and his wife.

He paid $86,000 in August to the Department of Home Affairs, then his son paid $10,000 more

as an assurance. So, they’ve paid over $110,000 and the Department of Home Affairs is

saying to them: “where’s your travel itinerary to go home to the UK and come back again,

because otherwise we might cancel your visa.” It’s ridiculous. This affects thousands of people

- and then the Minster says: “oh well they’re not immediate family members.” He should

change the rule.



I’ve ranted on about this, and I am out here telling people’s stories because I’ve concluded

after months of talking to Minsters, after months of writing to them, after months of dealing with

these people personally, that this government doesn’t operate on common sense and they

don’t actually fix basic problems. They’re a marketing department masquerading as a

government. I mean, the Prime Minister has been holed up with his photographer. He didn’t

take anyone serious with him to actually do his job, he took a photographer. They’re a

marketing department masquerading as a government, and the only thing that seems to get

action from them is media pressure. So, I don’t just think - with my greatest respect to my

friends at SBS - these are not just SBS stories. These are stories that should be told by every

media outlet to pressure the government. Because if ever a thing called ‘the common-sense

pub test’ exists in this country, surely this would not pass it.





There are thousands of people in the country who are being forced to fly over seas and come

back and take quarantine spots because the Minster fails to do his job. If he can’t fix it this

week, or commit to it, then the Prime Minster should sack him in the reshuffle and get

someone who will.



JOURNALIST: Why was this rule here historically, what was the purpose of it?



HILL: Well, it’s for the government to explain. But there’s a complex history over many

decades where initially, decades ago, all visas were offshore applicants. Then, some years

ago, they introduced the ability to apply for most visas onshore. So, there’s these weird

anomalies.



Now, I think the Minister should actually look at all of them - it’s a global pandemic, why should

we force anyone who is safe in this country to fly away and come back again? But that’s up to

the Minister to explain. The fact is there’s no good reason these people should have to leave

the country now, risking their health and COVID-19 infection.



JOURNALIST: You mentioned the incident with the close family member, why can’t that be

appealed if they blatantly are a close family member?



HILL: Well, it’s actually in the migration regulations. I have spoken to a dozen people with the

parent problem over the last couple of days - most of them actually from Liberal electorates. I

represent a pretty socio-economically disadvantaged electorate, so I don’t have a lot of people

who actually pay $50,000 for a visa and that’s fine, its part of the visa system.



I spoke to one woman, Juliette, she’s from Mandurah in WA - I spoke to her last night - she

went and saw Andrew Hastie, he’s her local member, and he said: “it’s just the law.” Well it’s

not just the law, the Minister can change it and he should.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: CAM GREEN 0406 507 727

