

Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE GOVERNMENT IN THE SENATE  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA



MEDIA RELEASE



3 November 2020

LOCAL RECOVERY FUND OPEN FOR LOCAL JOBS PATHWAYS

The Morrison Government’s Local Recovery Fund is now open for 25 select regions  experiencing high unemployment to develop local and tailored projects, to help Australians  get back into work and assist communities recover from the economic impact of COVID-19.

Applications are now open for local groups and organisations to apply to receive funding  ranging from $10,000 to $200,000, to develop projects, including mentoring, training and  reskilling, in line with local employment needs.

The Local Recovery Fund is a key component of the Local Jobs Program and will fund  projects, or parts of larger projects, that are not being supported through existing programs or  activities.

Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business, Senator the Hon Michaelia  Cash, said the fund will help drive job outcomes in the selected regions with locally led  initiatives aimed at getting more Australians back into work.

“Local Jobs is focused on reskilling, upskilling and creating employment pathways to help  people move back into jobs as the economy recovers from COVID-19,” Minister Cash said.

“Projects supported under the Local Recovery Fund will be locally driven initiatives that are  aligned to each regions employment related priorities, as identified in a Local Job Plan.

“I strongly encourage stakeholders in each of the eligible employment regions to work  together and put forward innovative project ideas under the Local Recovery Fund.

As part of the Local Jobs Program 25 Employment Facilitators, have been engaged to help  connect job seekers to local employment opportunities.

The Employment Facilitators will chair Local Jobs and Skills Taskforces across Australia.  The taskforces will bring together local employers, employment and training providers and  other local stakeholders, to collaborate and develop projects funded by the Local Recovery  Fund to get job seekers back into work.

“We will do this by getting Australians back to work and by supporting locally-driven  pathways to jobs.”

Applications for the Local Recovery Fund will open from 3 November with funding available  from mid-December 2020.



The employment regions included in this program are listed below.

State/Territory Employment Region

New South Wales Sydney South West

Illawarra South Coast

Hunter

New England and North West

Mid North Coast

North Coast

Sydney Greater West

Queensland Gold Coast

Cairns

Wide Bay and Sunshine Coast

Townsville

Wivenhoe

Tasmania Hobart and Southern Tasmania

North and North Western Tasmania

Victoria South Eastern Melbourne and Peninsula

Gippsland

Western Melbourne

Inner Metropolitan Melbourne

North Western Melbourne

South Australia Adelaide North

Murray and South East

North West Country

Western Australia South West WA

Perth South

Northern Territory Darwin and Alice Springs



Further details on how to apply can be found at www.dese.gov.au/local-jobs-program

MEDIA CONTACTS  Guy Creighton - Guy.Creighton@dese.gov.au - 0438 815 302  Brittany Higgins - Brittany.Higgins@dese.gov.au - 0449 171 294

