

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY  DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW   SKY NEWS FIRST EDITION  THURSDAY, 26 NOVEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: The release of Dr Kylie Moore-Gilbert; Scott Morrison’s broken promise  to bring stranded Australians home by Christmas; Meghan Markle’s essay on  miscarriage.

LAURA JAYES, HOST: Let's go live to Canberra now. Kristina Keneally joins me. She's  the Shadow Home Affairs Minister. Kristina Keneally, thanks so much for your time. First,  this wonderful news out of Iran that Kylie Moore-Gilbert has been released after two years.  What do you know about her status and when she will be home?

KRISTINA KENEALLY, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE AND SHADOW  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Let me just say that we welcome greatly that Dr Kylie  Moore-Gilbert has been released after two years of detention. We have consistently  rejected the charges against her and acknowledge that she and her family have shown  great courage and forbearance and we do hope that very soon, she will be able to be  reunited with her family.

JAYES: Absolutely. What kind of support do you think she needs when she returns home.  And, we have to, again, pay tribute to the diplomats that have worked so hard to get her  released as well.

KENEALLY: Absolutely, Laura. We very much acknowledge the diplomatic efforts and all  of those who have worked to secure this very good outcome for Dr Kylie Moore-Gilbert.  Can I just say that our hearts go out to her and I think one of the most important things is  that we give her and her family the time and the space that they need and the privacy that  they need after this traumatic ordeal. And I'm quite confident that they will have the support  that they need as well and we anticipate that the Australian Government will be providing  that support.

JAYES: OK. You are in Canberra today for the COVID Committee, and you'll be hearing  from Australians that are stranded abroad. There is a plane arriving from Singapore today,  but there's still how many Australians stranded in your estimation? I think it was around

30,000?

KENEALLY: It's not my estimation, it's the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade's  numbers and it's 36,000 Australians, stranded Australians across the globe in the middle of  a global pandemic with the northern hemisphere winter approaching. And these are  Australians who have been trying to get home since March. These are Australians who  were buoyed in September when the Prime Minister promised he would get them all home  by Christmas. Since he's made that promise, the list has only increased. In fact, the first  publicly available figures back in August were that there were about 18,000 stranded  Australians. Now we've had an 89% increase in that list of people, and the Commonwealth  is doing very little to get all of these people home by Christmas. If the Prime Minister is  going to make a promise back in September to stranded Australians, to our fellow mates,  that he's going to have them home by Christmas, he needs to deliver on it. Quite frankly, I  find this whole situation infuriating. We have, Laura, people who are stranded overseas  who are losing their jobs, who are losing their houses back in Australia, who have been  told by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade to go to homeless shelters, and yet  the Commonwealth Government is doing almost nothing. The Morrison Government is  doing so little to move so many tens of thousands of Australians back home during this  global pandemic.

JAYES: What should it be doing? There's not a lot of commercial flight options at the  moment, do you think it should be sending military planes overseas and where?

KENEALLY: If we can send a military plane to shoot Mathias Cormann around the globe,  so that he can apply for a new job, surely we can send out military planes to bring our  fellow Australians home. I mean, what kind of government is this it has one rule for them  and their mates and another rule for everyone else that just leaves stranded Australians  behind. Now, Jane Halton, the Prime Minister's hand-picked expert, over a month ago  handed a Review of Hotel Quarantine to Scott Morrison, and in that Review she makes  several sensible recommendations about how to expand quarantine capacity, how to apply  better risk management and, specifically, that the Commonwealth should stand up a  Commonwealth Federal quarantine facility for surge capacity, a "human health response  zone" she calls it. She says and makes the point that these stranded Australians are facing  the northern hemisphere winter when COVID is going to be more of a risk, and she makes  some very clear recommendations on how on how to get these people home, back to  Australia. Now, flight capacity isn't the biggest constraint, quite frankly, the biggest  constraint is quarantine. It is a Federal responsibility, Jane Halton makes that clear and  she makes a very clear recommendation on what Scott Morrison should be doing. Radio  silence from our Prime Minister since he's received that report.

JAYES: So would you offer bipartisan support for quarantine facilities to be set up,  whether they are in Tamworth as Barnaby Joyce has offered this morning or Darwin or  other remote areas?

KENEALLY: We have been calling for the this for months---

JAYES: As well as for the flight, and the quarantine---

KENEALLY: We have been--- Laura, we have been calling for this for months. We put a  motion through the Senate, that was passed by the Senate, calling for this. We have been  saying for months that this is a growing problem. Scott Morrison made a big promise back



in September and, yet again, he didn't deliver. This is so emblematic of this Prime Minister:  big promise, no delivery. And leaving Australians behind, literally leaving 36,000  Australians stranded around the globe. Now the Commonwealth have the resources to do  this. They have put some resources into it. I acknowledge the one plane that's arrived  today. Fantastic. Let's get lots more planes but, more importantly, let's get a Federal  quarantine facility set up so that we can get these people home, through quarantine, and  back to their families by Christmas.

JAYES: Just quickly, who should bear the cost?

KENEALLY: Laura, we've got a Commonwealth Government, we've got stranded  Australians who are willing to put up their hands and pay a reasonable cost to get home  right now. They're facing charges of eight, ten, twenty thousand dollars. We had stranded  Australians in front of the COVID Committee who told us they have spent fifty, sixty  thousand dollars on flights that have been cancelled. Now, come on. These people are  willing to pay a reasonable cost, the Commonwealth Government has a responsibility to do  what the governments of Canada, the UK, even Donald Trump sent out planes and  brought his citizens home during this global pandemic. Our Prime Minister Scott Morrison  promised it, but he has not done it.

JAYES: Just finally and quickly, you would have seen Meghan Markle's essay and you  have spoke and got so much change through Parliament when it comes to stillbirths and  conversations about miscarriage, so her intervention today and her private pain is  encouraging that conversation, isn't she?

KENEALLY: She is and I pay great tribute to the Duchess of Sussex for speaking so  honestly. So starkly. So movingly. I myself was taken back to the day that my daughter  Caroline was diagnosed and it was clear she was going to die. And I have to say, every  time we have someone who is willing to speak about this grief, about this pain, it just  enables it for so many other Australian families to be able to talk openly, to be able to heal  and to be able to acknowledge their children. I think one of the most difficult questions for a  mother who has lost a baby, whether through stillbirth or miscarriage is "how many children  do you have?" And, about 10 years ago, I decided I was just going to start saying that I had  three, because I do, and what Meghan Markle has done, I think, will create a lot of  conversations for families, for friends, and hopefully for governments and public health  systems and doctors and nurses to be able to talk more openly with expectant mothers  about the things that can happen in pregnancy and the ways that they can prevent it. Right  now in Australia we are finally rolling out what we call the Safer Baby Bundle that is aimed  to reduce stillbirth in pregnancy. We've got a draft National Action Stillbirth Plan that arose  out of the Senate Select Committee on Stillbirth, there are things that we can tell parents  that we're still not telling them, though, in pregnancy, that can help reduce the risk of  stillbirth. It's good to see this work starting and hopefully what the Duchess has done today  encourages it.

JAYES: Kristina Keneally, thank you.

KENEALLY: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: CHRIS OWENS 0409 945 476









