

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

SYDNEY

SATURDAY, 7 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Impact of coronavirus on small businesses, encouraging the visiting of

communities; coronavirus; Scot Morrison’s lies; sports rorts saga.



LINDA BURNEY, MEMBER FOR BARTON: Well, good morning everyone. And thank you

for coming out to Hurstville. I am here with Anthony Albanese, the Leader of the Labor

Party, Jason Yatsen Li, Kevin Greene, who is the local mayor, and Jenny McAllister. We

are here to show solidarity with the local businesses in Hurstville. Hurstville has a very,

very high Chinese population. And our role today is to show support, to encourage people

to come to Hurstville, and support businesses that are doing it very hard. I am not going to

say anything more than that except to say that I am so pleased as the Local Member, the

Member for Barton, to have Anthony, Jason, Kevin and Jenny here today to show our

support and solidarity with the Chinese community and in particular, the businesses that

are here today. I am going to ask Jason to say a few words.



JASON YATSEN LI, PRESIDENT OF THE CHINESE AUSTRALIAN FORUM: Thanks,

Linda. We're here today to support the local Hurstville business community. I think it's

really important to remember that these are not Chinese businesses, they're not Asian

businesses. These are Aussie businesses. The local Chinese restaurant has been part of

local suburban Australian culture for generations. And we ask the community to support

them as much as possible. Don't be racist, come and support your local businesses. And

wash your hands. Normal personal hygiene is a much better protection against the virus.



ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Thanks very

much, Jason. It's great to be here with Linda, the local Member, and Senator McAllister,

and also Kevin Greene from the council. We wanted to come today to show in a really

practical way, our support for local small businesses. And also, to get the message out

there that Australians don't need to do anything extraordinary. If there's a message that's

clear from the Chief Medical Officer, it is keep calm and wash your hands. It is that simple.

People should be going about their everyday lives. There's no need to panic-buy products

like toilet paper and tissues. People need to be able to go about and support our economy.

Because the fact is, this economy was tanking well before the bushfires and the

coronavirus. The fact is that there were three interest rate decreases and three

downgrades of our economic growth. Consumer demand was falling. Productivity was

going backwards. The economy needed support much earlier. But one of the things that

defines the Morrison Government is complacency. They were complacent about the

bushfires. And they've been complacent about the slowing economy. They've been

obsessed with the surplus, which they said Australia was already in well before the reality

hit. So, what we need to do is to provide that support for businesses. We need the

Government to not promote fear and concern. We need them to ensure that people can go

about their everyday lives and people can support small businesses in communities like

here in Hurstville. We've heard firsthand today of declines in activity at some of these

restaurants, furniture shops and other businesses of between 50 and 80 per cent. That

simply means if that continues over a prolonged period of time, we'll see more and more

businesses lose their capacity to be ongoing concerns. And that's why we need to provide

support for our economy. To have a Government that promotes confidence rather than

engages in the complacent attitude that they've had that saw us have now four interest rate

decreases, three of which were before bushfires and coronavirus. Happy to take questions.



JOURNALIST: Mr Albanese, what should the Government specifically be doing to help

support these businesses?



ALBANESE: Well, there are some practical measures that they could put in place. One is

in terms of the messages that go out there. We need for there to be messages, even in

terms of visuals, it would be good if Government ministers were out there talking to people

rather than giving press conferences in rooms which don't give the impression that it's okay

to be out there amongst the people. So, one of the things that we'll be doing, not just today,

but over the coming period, is giving that confidence out there to communities. I'll be in

Melbourne tomorrow, here in Hurstville today, showing the confidence that people should

go about their everyday business. Secondly, as well, they should be talking to larger

businesses about providing support for small business. We had some practical examples

today, for example, of whether some of the suppliers could take a little bit of a haircut, for

example, the delivery of food could take a bit of a haircut in order to provide support for

some of these businesses. We need the banks to be cautious with regard to how they

engage with these small businesses to make sure that they can be given support when

they need it. But when you lose a small business from a community, that provides a real

hit. And to then have to invest the capital and the funds to get a business going again, it's

much better if we can keep businesses alive, keep them functioning, keep them trading

during this difficult period.



JOURNALIST: The AMA has suggested that if Australia had a centre for disease control,

we would have been in a better position to handle this virus. What do you make of that?



ALBANESE: Well, I've said throughout this issue that we need to listen to the medical

advice. And the Australian Medical Association, of course, the peak organisation for

doctors in this country, is a body that should always be listened to when it comes to advice

on health matters. I've spoken to people from the AMA. I have spoken to the Chief Medical

Officer, who I think is an outstanding Australian, and is providing advice out there each and

every day about how to get through this period.



JOURNALIST: Victoria Health has just revealed a Toorak doctor has potentially exposed

his case of COVID to up to 70 patients and some people in an aged-care centre. What are

your thoughts on that? And do you think our health system is equipped to deal with this

outbreak?



ALBANESE: Look, I have every confidence in our health system. Our health system,

thanks to Medicare, is equal or better than any health system throughout the world. And I

have every confidence that we can come through this. All the evidence is that in most

cases, there are very minor impacts of the coronavirus. Of course, that doesn't mean we

should be complacent about it. We should be making sure we do everything we can. If

someone is, even if they're in doubt, they should be tested, and early action taken in order



to minimise the impact of this virus. Thank you.



Could I just make one more comment about the Prime Minister and his refusal to answer

questions yesterday about the sport rorts saga. This is a Prime Minister who refuses to be

accountable to the Australian people. Bridget McKenzie has said very clearly that she

didn't sign off or make any changes to the list that she says she prepared and signed on

the 4th of April. The Australian people deserve to know exactly what has happened here.

How it is that funding was given to organisations which the Minister, who the Prime

Minister has consistently said was responsible for signing off on these grants, says she

didn't do it. So, who did? Was it the Prime Minister's office? Someone in her office?

Another minister? We need to know in a transparent way. One of the issues that is causing

a lack of confidence in this country is that we have a Prime Minister who won't be straight

with the people. You get more answers out of Humphrey B. Bear than you get out of this

Prime Minister. And the Prime Minister needs to come clean about the sports rorts scandal

and exactly what happened. Thanks.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: FIONA SUGDEN 0419 917 016



