



TRANSCRIPT



Senator James Paterson

Liberal Senator for Victoria



Tuesday 08 September 2020



Sky News: Bolt Report



Subjects: Victorian Lockdown



Andrew Bolt: Politicians from Victoria, Labor Senator Kimberley Kitching and Liberal

Senator James Paterson. James. Victoria should it learn from what may now be the lesson

from Europe. Europe was once, you know, well learn the terrible lessons, should it now

learn a better lesson - ease the bans on the young and the healthy workers and protect the

old.



Senator James Paterson: I do understand the point that you're making Andrew, and I

think you're probably right about the improved treatment options for people now that we've

learnt a bit more about this virus, but there's a couple of notes of caution that I would add.

It's possible that the second waves that we're seeing in Spain and Italy and France are

less deadly because their first waves were so deadly. In effect, Australia didn't really have

a first wave at all. We had a very small outbreak, which we controlled and what we're

calling the second wave in Victoria now is the real first wave, the real first uncontrolled

community transmission, which we avoided the first time. I don't think that emulating

Europe's experience in totality is something that any Australian would want to do, because

our deaths per million from Covid-19 is about 30. In Spain it's over 600 in Italy, it's almost

600. In France, it's almost 500. So, you'd have to, if you wanted their experience...



Bolt: Against that note of caution, against that note of caution, James. I would just say

this. Japan per head of population has had fewer deaths than we have. Same pattern

there, basically.



Paterson: Yes, that's right Andrew, although they did have more significant initial

transmission as we did. But I think again as I said you're right about the treatment options

being better. Personally, I think the better and more interesting international comparison is

Taiwan, which has the...



Bolt: Yes.



Paterson: ...rare combination of both extremely low rates of deaths. They’re at 0.29

deaths per one million. And they've also had very few controls on society and the economy

and it's relatively open now in Taiwan. That's the real lesson, I think, for most of the

Western world where you could have potentially both of those things.



Bolt: That I think that's absolutely correct. But people don't seem to want to look at Taiwan

- I've plugged it from the start. Kimberley, the crackdown in Victoria, I mean, surely federal

Labor politicians must be looking at that with horror.



Senator Kimberley Kitching: Well, I think, Andrew, that, you know, we are where we are.

I think we can all say that the hotel quarantine, you know, there were obviously significant

issues there and there's evidence coming out of the Coates inquiry. And, in fact, further

evidence today. But this is a temporary health public health measure - the current

lockdown. I think that, you know, we are hoping that -.



Bolt: Kimberley, what's so temporary about a lockdown that's been most of the last six

months, will go on for another two months, at least, probably much longer, because the

trigger for releasing us from this terrible, terrible crackdown are performance targets that

Queensland doesn't even meet.



Kitching: Well, can I, what I would say to you, Andrew, about a month, a month ago,

almost exactly. There were seven hundred, 700 cases. Today there were 50. Now.



Bolt:  Yes, it would work. I said at the time it was going to work.



Kitching: Lives will have been saved, lives will have been saved.



Bolt: It would work if you locked up every single Victorian in solitary confinement and fed

them bread and water and not let them go out in the sunshine. That, too, would work. The

question is the cost. And is there a better way of doing this? Are you telling me there's not?



Kitching: Well, I think that what we're seeing in Europe, as James has said, is what what

we first saw in Australia was actually returned cases from return travellers. What we are

really experiencing is really a first wave in in effect, in effect. And what we are trying to do

is now control community transmission.



Bolt: Kimberley, you guys have got to cut those Victorians loose. This is a disaster, I'll tell

you something, I'll tell you why this is so useless - James I want to point this to you and

Kimberley I will give you the last word. Don't you worry. The curfew on Victorian's, right, is

incredible. Almost no other country has a curfew to fight this virus. And the state's chief

health officer said it wasn't even his idea. Here he is.



MEDIA CLIP



Bolt: Now, asked about that today, Premier Daniel Andrews, who claims to act on medical

advice. He said this is all on medical advice, suggesting this curfew may, in fact, have

been something suggested by police to suit the police. Here he is.



MEDIA CLIP.



Bolt: James, should laws limiting our freedoms so drastically be imposed by police just to

make life easier for police?



Paterson: Andrew, this is a very disturbing revelation today, because we've been told

throughout this crisis that everything is based on medical advice. Everything is based on

scientific evidence. And we can't question it. We can't debate it because to do so would be

to argue with the experts. And they can't be argued with. This proves today that, in fact,

that's not the case for at least one restriction and who knows about any others. It's been

essentially imposed for the convenience of the police and the convenience of the state

government. And it is an incredibly repressive, authoritarian thing to do. And it could only

be justified, in my view, with the most extensive and generous and comprehensive medical

advice to justify it. Now, we learnt that not only is there not very good advice, there's no

advice at all of the medical efficacy of this - it is just to allow, make the police’s job easier.

Well, that's not a good enough reason to confine every Victorian into their homes

effectively under house arrest.



Bolt: Kimberley Kitching.



Kitching: I have just finished writing an article for ASPI, the Australian Strategic Policy

Institute, in which I do in part examine social contract theory. So what? What kind of

society do we want to be? What rights and freedoms are we willing to give up in order to

live safely in a society? So I think I have given a lot of consideration to this issue, and I do

think, Andrew, that going forward, we do need to think about, you know, the the rights and

freedoms we have, what we're willing to give up in order to have a safe and secure society

in a public health sense -



Bolt: But here's the point, Kimberley we've just heard today. We've just heard today this

was not done on the advice of the top health expert advising the premier. This was

something to make it easier for the police. It was it seems to have been a police

recommendation.



Kitching: And I think what they're what the state government is doing is taking in advice

from many, many corners of the government. And that's what they are, that is all coming

out in a plan, you know what is often just a page document. But there's obviously a lot of

consideration that is being given to different elements of that. I think that, you know, I think

that that is. I mean, it really I mean, that is the way the government has to act: it is taking

advice from lots and lots of different places and trying to formulate the best response.



Bolt: Unbelievable. The police are not there to give health advice. Right. If I wanted health

advice, I do not go to the police. They have given advice to make life easier for them. This

is the makings of a police state. And if Labor doesn't draw a line under this and say to Dan

Andrews, you've got to be able to say to Dan Andrews, please, you're trashing our brand.

You're making us defend the indefensible. Daniel Andrews is out of control. And Labor's

got to recognise this. He'll drag all of you over a cliff because this is not going to end up

very well. It is a stain on Labor's reputation, in my view. I'm sorry. I've got to a bit

passionate about this because I think it's just so dangerous what's going on here and not

enough people calling it out. Kimberley Kitching, James Paterson, thank you nevertheless,

Kimberley, I'm sorry for giving you a hard time - next week, much sweeter.



Kitching: Oh, lovely. Thanks Andrew.



Paterson: Thanks, Andrew.



ENDS



