

SENATOR PENNY WONG

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA



STRANDED AUSTRALIANS NEED A PLAN FOR ASSISTED DEPARTURES

The Morrison Government is running out of time to help repatriate many  thousands of Australians stranded overseas - who are unable to comply with its  advice that they return home because they cannot arrange transport.

On 30 March, Qantas and Virgin will cease international commercial  operations.

It currently appears that many thousands of Australians who are seeking to  follow the Government’s advice and return home will remain stranded overseas  at that time.

Closing borders and airports, changing travel warnings, and cancelled flights  are leaving many Australians with no commercial travel options.

It’s not just countries like Peru that are in lockdown; major hubs like Singapore  have banned transit altogether by non-citizens.

Australians overseas and their families are deeply worried for their safety and  welfare.

Scott Morrison must act now, while the airlines are still operating, to address  this problem.

And he must take Australians into his confidence and explain his plans, if he  wants Australians to have confidence in his Government.

With just six days before a further serious reduction in commercial options,  Labor urges the Morrison Government to:



1. Follow the lead of other countries in providing direct support to bring  stranded Australians home, including subsidised and assisted  departures where commercial options are not viable.

2. Engage in clear and active communication with Australians overseas  including updates on action being taken so they know they are not on  their own.

3. Expedite the processing of visas for immediate family members of  Australian citizens who are rushing to return home.  4. Properly resource our consular teams in the Department of Foreign  Affairs and Trade and visa processing teams in the Department of Home

Affairs to meet the unprecedented demands to assist Australians and  their families overseas.

The situation for around 3,000 Australians on cruise ships is especially  challenging, given the heightened risk for exposure of passengers to COVID-19. We urge the Australian Government to communicate a clear plan to help  them get to safety, including appropriate quarantine and health care.

TUESDAY, 24 MARCH 2020

MEDIA CONTACT: JOHN OLENICH 0447 270 785









