Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Cyber Safety and the Arts, Sydney.





THE HON KAREN ANDREWS MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology

THE HON PAUL FLETCHER MP  Minister for Communications, Cyber Safety and the Arts

MEDIA RELEASE

24 March 2020

Tech sector & Government back Australian businesses during COVID-19

The Morrison Government welcomes the launch of a new website brought together by the technology  sector to support Australian businesses with staff working remotely during the COVID-19 outbreak.

Australian Business Continuity - by the Australian Information Industry Association (AIIA) and its  technology partners - provides free practical tools to support the continuity of Australia’s small-to-medium businesses, including advice on how to best use teleworking services.

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology, the Hon Karen Andrews MP, said the new site offers  clear and targeted information to support businesses using alternative work arrangements and new  technologies during this period.

“This is just another example of how our business community - in this case the tech sector - is  stepping up to help other Australian SMEs navigate the unprecedented challenges of coronavirus,”  Minister Andrews said.

“The new hub sees industry working together to keep our businesses running, with the AIIA  partnering with Microsoft, Cisco, ServiceNow, Adobe, Telstra, Google, Facebook, SAP, Salesforce  and others to provide guidance and free access to tools for video-conferencing, virtual meetings and  other remote business services.

“Working remotely is foreign to many businesses but is now essential as they practice social  distancing and I encourage all businesses to explore the new hub and see how it could help them  make it to the other side of this outbreak.”

Minister for Communications, Cyber Safety and the Arts, the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, said he was  pleased to see the tech sector mobilising quickly to offer tangible support for Australian businesses so  they can sustain the important work they do via teleworking, video conferencing and other remote  working productivity platforms.

“Businesses are well placed to take advantage of remote working solutions with the National  Broadband Network now 95 per cent complete, providing more than 11 million homes and businesses  across Australia with access to fast, reliable and affordable broadband,” Minister Fletcher said.



“NBN Co has made 40 per cent more network capacity available to retail service providers at no

Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Cyber Safety and the Arts, Sydney.

additional charge for at least three months. This additional capacity allows more data to move  through the network at high speed, which will underpin people’s productivity and connectivity  requirements as they shift their work habits in response to COVID-19.”

AIIA’s new hub complements business.gov.au - the Government’s existing comprehensive website  for small to medium enterprises.

business.gov.au is a whole-of-Government digital entry point for information, services and support to  help businesses succeed in Australia, simplifying access to important information, tools and advice  across all levels of Government, particularly during this difficult time.

The Government’s business hotline - 13 28 46 - has this week expanded its operation and is now  taking calls from 7am to 9pm, 7 days per week. Additional agents, including dedicated specialists,  have been added to the team to provide support on Government assistance to businesses during the  COVID-19 pandemic, including information on access to the stimulus package and assistance for  employees.

Find out more at: www.australianbusinesscontinuity.com.au and www.business.gov.au.

Media contacts:



Minister Andrews:   Keegan Buzza | 0447 697 846 | keegan.buzza@industry.gov.au

Minister Fletcher:  Brad Hatch | 0448 162 679 | Brad.Hatch@communications.gov.au  Rebecca Papillo | 0439 892 771 | Rebecca.Papillo@communications.gov.au





