

MURRAY WATT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR NORTHERN AUSTRALIA

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DISASTER AND EMERGENCY

MANAGEMENT

LABOR SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND



NORTHERN AUSTRALIA FORGOTTEN IN BUDGET UPDATE



The Morrison Government’s Budget Update has missed the opportunity to outline a plan for the  recovery and job creation in Northern Australia, with the Federal Government once again failing to  deliver for the region.

It is frustrating to see not one mention of a jobs plan for Northern Australia.

The most important test of this Government’s management of the recession and its aftermath is  what happens to jobs and the businesses which create them.

Australians already know the economy is in bad shape - they need to hear what the Morrison  Government is going to do about it.

Communities in Northern Australia have been some of the hardest hit by the economic fallout of  the COVID-19 pandemic, and the high rate of seasonal work will make it even harder for industries  to get back on their feet.

Across northern Queensland and Western Australia and throughout the Northern Territory, tens of  thousands of businesses are being kept afloat by JobKeeper and even more workers are likely to  find themselves joining the unemployment queue by Christmas.

State and Territory Governments are doing their part, and now the Federal Government needs to  come to the table.

What Northern Australia needs most right now is a plan for jobs, and projects to create them.  Without more jobs, unemployment will be higher for longer and the recovery will be slower than it  should be.

There is a wealth of possibility to turbo-charge the region and tap into its potential, but instead the



Morrison Government has continued the Coalition’s tradition of turning its back on Northern  Australia.

It has been five years since former Prime Minister Tony Abbott released the Northern Australia  White Paper.

Years on, Northern Australians have been continually let down and forgotten by the LNP  Government with very little progress made on their Northern Australian agenda.

Northern Australians deserve better.

It’s time we saw critical infrastructure get up off the ground, and investment made in skills and  training - a genuine plan for jobs in Northern Australia.

So let's get on with it. People need action now.

SUNDAY, 26 JULY 2020

MEDIA CONTACT: TALI ELEY 0448 078 456







