SENATOR DON FARRELL

SHADOW SPECIAL MINISTER OF STATE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR SPORT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR TOURISM

SHADOW MINISTER ASSISTING THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA





TOURISM LEFT BEHIND AGAIN IN BUDGET



The Morrison Government has abandoned hundreds of thousands of Australian tourism

workers, delivering re-announcements instead of assistance in the Federal Budget.



Already more than 136,000 tourism jobs have been lost while the sector was forced to wait

for the government’s pre-Budget headline schedule.



Those are real people, out of work and struggling because the government left too many

behind through its poorly designed JobKeeper criteria.



Tourism employed more than a million Australians, supported around 300,000 local

businesses and was growing, before the combined impacts of bushfires and the global

COVID-19 pandemic.



But the Morrison Government’s inaction has put it in reverse.



Promised bushfire recovery funding has been delivered at a snail’s pace.



JobKeeper criteria disproportionately excluded the tourism sector because of the casual

and mobile nature of much of its workforce, and for those who were lucky enough to get

JobKeeper, the cuts to this support come at a time when the industry is hurting more than

ever.



Billions of dollars in revenue have been lost, most international borders are unlikely to re-



open any time soon and tourism infrastructure funding, while long overdue, won’t deliver

new, additional tourism jobs until projects are complete.



There is no “snap back” in sight for tourism.



The impending impact on the sector was obvious months ago.



But despite peak bodies and operators across the country crying out for more targeted

support, the Morrison Government’s response has been typically designed around

headlines and photo ops.



How many hundreds of thousands more jobs will be lost before the Morrison Government

delivers a clear, consistent plan to drive demand, encourage visitation and support this

vital industry through the worst, so it can play a major role in Australia’s economic recovery

when things improve.



FRIDAY, 9 OCTOBER 2020



MEDIA CONTACT: TOM ZED 0419 227 286



