

MEDIA RELEASE

29 July 2020

REGIONS FAILED AGAIN BY STATE LABOR  GOVERNMENT

The Regional and Rural Affairs Committee Senate Inquiry into the Queensland State  Government’s contentious ‘Reef Regulations’ completed public hearings in Brisbane  today, after hearing evidence LNP Senators described as damning for the State  Government.

The inquiry, initiated by Queensland LNP Senator Susan McDonald in 2019 after  meeting with distressed Queensland farmers, heard evidence from farming groups,  environmentalists, reef scientists and the State Government over two days.

Senator McDonald said the evidence painted a grim picture of the State  Government’s consultation process with the deployment of blunt force regulation to  further demonise agriculture, despite Queensland farmers having always  demonstrated a willingness to engage with scientifically sound environmental and  sustainability programs.

“I was disappointed listening to farmers say how little effort the State Government  put into going on farm and helping them improve land management practices,” she  said.

“These regulations unfairly and incorrectly would have us all believe farmers aren’t  interested in protecting the environment.

“It’s sad to see a State Government cashing in on Queensland’s farmers’ $12.9  billion contribution to our economy, and demonstrating such low regard for the  progress being made by farmers to improve water quality - or for the costs they have  incurred in doing so.

“These regulations have been developed with one purpose: to showcase the  government’s ‘Green’ credentials to win over environment-focused voters in  Brisbane.

“The Queensland Government has ignored the fact that study after study shows that

runoff from farms has been reduced by industry, and that the actual amounts of  runoff reaching the reef proper is minuscule.

“Numerous science witnesses said that agriculture mainly affected inner reefs, and it  was noted that these inner reefs only make up about 3% of the whole Great Barrier  Reef.”

Senator Canavan said that with only 3% of the reef’s corals impacted by farm runoff,  this wouldn’t stop the Labor State government from pushing on with their anti-farming agenda.

“To top it all off, the Queensland government confirmed their Greens-inspired  regulations will cost the average grower $38,000,” Senator Canavan said.

“This is why the Liberals and Nationals fought for this inquiry.  We fought for farmers  so they could have their say about these unjust and ideological regulations, despite  the Katter’s Australian Party MPs’ opposition.

“Katter’s Australian Party professes to stand up for regional Queensland, but every  step of the way they have opposed this inquiry.  They opposed growers and industry  having their say, putting the facts on the public record and exposing Labor’s  destructive actions.”

Senator Gerard Rennick was amazed that the State Government’s regulations were  set to cost farmers billions, at the precise moment when we need our economy  growing to recover from the COVID pandemic.

Rennick said it is obvious that natural weather events such as cyclones and flooding  have a much greater impact on the reef than nutrient runoff.

“The agricultural industry has clearly been singled out despite many other industries  also operating within the GBR basin. The state environment department has  indicated these regulations will not stop the crown of thorns starfish or coral  bleaching, which begs the question as to why they are being implemented other than  to destroy farmer livelihoods?

“Cattle and cane are synonymous with the great State of Queensland. They even  appear on our Coat of Arms. Yet the State Labor Government is determined to drive  a dagger through the heart of these great industries” said Senator Rennick.

KEY FACTS:

1. Agriculture in Queensland contributes $12.9 billion to the economy.  2. Queensland cane farmers have been working alongside government and  scientists for a decade to improve reef health

3. Any impact by the agricultural industry is limited to the inner reefs, which  make up about 3% of the whole Great Barrier Reef area.   4. The reef regulations will reduce the Queensland economy by $1.3 billion over  10 years.



Media contact:

CANAVAN: Alex Scott 0481 343 156  McDONALD: Julian Tomlinson 0421 059187  RENNICK: Brant Rippon 0423 360 207

