

15 October 2020

$80m worth of road works rev up across FNQ   KAP Federal Member for Kennedy Bob Katter and State counterpart Shane Knuth, Member for Hill have  welcomed a barrage of new roadworks announcements with a combined value of $80 million applauding  both the State and Federal Governments for the funding, but warning that local companies must be given  priority to perform the works.

The announcements are part of the jointly funded State and Federal Government’s $415 million Covid-recovery program, the Federal Government’s $12.6 billion program of works which focuses on improving  safety and flood resilience and the Queensland Government’s $112 million Targeted Road Safety Program  (TRSP).

The projects announced by the Department of Transport and Main Roads (TMR) include a $37.5 million  package of works to perform safety upgrades on the Kennedy Highway between Mareeba and Atherton, a  $18.182 million package of safety upgrades on four sections of the Gillies Range Road between Gordonvale  and Atherton, $21.3 million package of roadworks on Boogan Road between the Bruce Highway near  Mourilyan and South Johnstone Road intersections, and a $3.8 million project to upgrade the intersection of  the Bruce Highway and Munro Street, Babinda.

Bob Katter welcomes the funding but said he wouldn’t rest until an alternative to the Kuranda Range was  built.

“We have done the hard yards and believe the Bridle Track is a great alternative that will get Mareeba and  Atherton residents to Cairns in 30 minutes or less,” he said.

“The economic benefit is that food producers can get their produce to market quicker and this road will  unlock the minerals potential of the regions west of Mareeba and Atherton.

“TMR are undertaking a study of potential alternatives to the current dangerous Kuranda route, and we’d  like to see construction start as soon as possible on the best option.”

A further $1.5 million has been announced for the rehabilitation and resealing works on Millaa Millaa -  Malanda Road between Thiaki Creek and Merragallan Roads and another $2.46 million for the rehabilitation  and resealing works on Millaa Millaa Malanda road near Mahoney Road intersection.

Member for Hill Shane Knuth said the Millaa Millaa to Malanda project was particularly welcome given the  ongoing issues of lack of passing lanes and melting tar in the past.

“This is great news for the Tabelands. I’ve been pushing for this for quite some years we’ve made inroads so  far and it’s great that the works have started, but much more needs to be done,” he said.



“We want to prioritise local contractors and make sure they are given priority for the road construction. By  doing this we can be sure that the money flows back into the whole community.”

ENDS

