





TRANSCRIPT

Senator James Paterson

Liberal Senator for Victoria

Tuesday 18 February 2020

ABC News: News 24

Subjects: Technology target, luxury car tax, Coronavirus, Uighurs

Patricia Karvelas: Joined now by my political panel to discuss this and other issues. Ed  Husic from Labor, and also James Paterson from the Liberal Party. Welcome to both of you.



Senator James Paterson: Thank you.



Karvelas: James, I want to start with you. Do you support this technology target, whatever  that might mean?



Paterson: I've always thought that the better pathway for tackling global emissions is  through technology rather than complex and expensive taxation schemes or global  agreements, because we've essentially got a global coordination problem. There's nothing  that any individual country can do to force other countries to take action. But what a small  country like Australia can usefully do is be a centre for innovation and investment and to  share that technology with the world. Imagine if we discovered a new technology that made  solar panels more efficient and that could be exported to the world to bring down global  emissions. That's going to be a much easier and much better pathway than trying to get  some kind of global legally binding agreement to force countries to take action.



Karvelas: So what would a technology target look like? I mean, if you're putting it in a target,  it would involve government money, wouldn't it? You say you're against subsidies or  taxation, but that's what it would be.







Paterson: That's right, Patricia. And I think we have to be very careful on my side of politics  in particular to demonstrate that we're very positive about technological innovation, even if  we're sceptical about government subsidies. Because the great thing about technological  innovation is it doesn't require government to make it happen. I mean, many of the great  technological innovations that we enjoy in our lives today came from things that had nothing  to do with government. They were just private entrepreneurs. And so we've got to make sure  that the basic settings are right to encourage and facilitate that and I'm confident it will  happen.



Karvelas: What do you think of a technology target? It's been speculated in the Australian.  But the prime minister said he didn't hose it entirely down, did he?



Ed Husic MP: A lot of spin and the stats don't bear it out. I mean, if you look at, for example,  the level of technological investment undertaken by some of our major listed firms compared  to their competitors overseas, we rank pretty poorly. So we've got big firms here that won't  invest in technology. If you have in the last 12 months, 40 per cent of surveyed CEOs saying  they won't even give their workforces a pay increase. What hope have we got that they'll pay  for the technology that will reduce emissions in the absence of some sort of government  framework that says this is what we've got to move to, to to reduce it. So we're basically  hoping we cross our fingers via the the prime minister that some sort of technology or some  technological solution will come to reducing emissions when people know in their heart of  hearts this government, they don't they're not really committed to this. And they're held  hostage by a cabal of extreme right wingers in the Liberal Party that don't want to take any  action on climate change. Now, if they do want to and they want to do something serious  about this, then all sides of politics should join in that. But until the coalition can demonstrate  that it is not hostage to this group of right wingers that every time a proposal comes forward  like the NEG to try and deal with energy generation and emissions reduction, that is not  going to be held up by them. I think we've got we've got every reason to be sceptical.



Karvelas: So, James, should the technology target aim towards net zero emissions by  2050? Because that's essentially what Australia has signed up to, anyway, isn't it globally?



Paterson: My view Patricia, is that the burden falls on those who are advocating for a net  zero position by 2050 to explain how we're going to achieve that. And if that can't happen  naturally and won't happen ordinarily through technological innovation, and if it does require  government intervention to mandate that to ensure it happens, what the costs of that are  going to be? I think it's irresponsible of a government to sign up to a on an extraordinary long  timeframe, a 30 year timeframe, a goal like that without understanding what the implications  of that is.







Karvelas: But isn't it the role of government to manage those costs and those interactions if  the science says that it's necessary? Because if the science says it's necessary to save the  planet, isn't it the job of the government to actually put that in to ensure that happens?



Paterson: Well, there’s a lot of people, for example, running campaigns now to advocate  that the government go down this path. And what I'm saying to them is, well, the burden is  on you to demonstrate how we'd achieve that.



Karvelas: But isn't the burden on you as well as politicians? Because if the science says it's  necessary, you've got to find a way through.



Paterson: Well, let's wait and see. I think there's a lot of water to go on a bridge between  now and the Glasgow conference coming up in a few months time. And we've got to see  what the commitment that other countries make up are, because even if, as you say,  Patricia, even it is right that it's necessary for the planet to achieve it, it's also true that  Australia on its own can't achieve that. And in the absence of other countries also taking  action, that collective action problem I referred to earlier, when we're discussing this, then  that's no good. It’s no use to the planet at all. So it does require coordinated global action or  as I favor a more of a technology driven approach.



Karvelas: Ed Husic W.A. frontbencher Matt Keogh has warned Labor will struggle to win the  support of workers across the resources sector if the party is seen as hostile to coal. Do you  agree with that proposition?



Husic: I think Labor leader Anthony Albanese has spelt out that we believe we need to take  strong action in terms of reducing emissions, that we need to obviously support the rollout  and given that Renewable energy has been demonstrated in terms of being able to generate  much more efficiently, much more cleanly energy, and it's playing a bigger role that we  should support that and that in the forseeable future, coal will have a role, particularly coking  coal, as it's relied upon for steel making, which is used as a necessary material for a lot of  the renewable equipment to get manufactured in the first place. So I think we've we've  spelled out fairly strongly and clearly what, where we think things need to head. Matt has got  his view, I don't necessarily subscribe to it, but in the sense that I think we've got to have this  discussion across the public about if we are going to move down a path of net zero to 2050  and some of the people that are advocating it, if I can put it, they're not advocacy groups  they're the UK government. Now, if Boris Johnson can sign up to this and say in the longer  term, this is what we're headed for, now let's work together to do this, we should find a way  to collectively come up with the best way to reach that target with the least impact. And if  people are impacted, what do we do to look after them on the way through? Other than  making a glitzy announcement and hoping that everything will sort itself out. And I think this





is the big problem, there's very little trust in the change process. Very few people believe  that if they are affected, that they'll be looked after. And I think by having a longer term  target, we can actually deal, tackle that issue on the way through and see what can be  done.



Karvelas: I want to change the topic to Holden. And it was a huge story yesterday, of  course, but it is a really significant decision that's been made. James, you and some of your  liberal colleagues are calling for the scrapping of the luxury car tax. Why?



Paterson: Well, my view, Patricia, is that both the remaining tariffs on imported cars plus the  luxury car tax have been implemented in Australia for essentially protectionist reasons. They  were implemented to protect the car manufacturing industry. Now, the car manufacturing  industry has long since departed and now the brand of Holden is also departing. But we still  have taxes on imports from countries that we don't have free trade agreements with and we  still have the luxury car tax. It seems unnecessary to me to continue to have those in the  absence of an industry, even though I admit I didn't support it when we had an industry. I  don't support protectionism.



Karvelas: Do you support the scrapping of the luxury car tax?



Husic: I just think it's a cosmetic move. Like it's, my bigger concern is like many of us that,  you know, there's no point crying after the Holden's bolted, pardon the pun. But, you know,  the fact was we had a car making sector that provided a lot of jobs. We had co-investment  that was a feature of car manufacturing world over. And we had Joe Hockey,and I remember  that day well back in December 2013 when he dared GM to leave and was at the dispatch  box being with all his bravado. And now we're seeing it. And the reason we lost those jobs  and the reason we lost that sector in this country, quite frankly, is because of the coalition  that right now after after saying back then it was inefficient to provide government support for  a sector on its own are now within their ranks, championing a lot of money, going to the  creation of a coal fired power station, using potentially taxpayers money. This is the same  coalition that has done this. It's just astounding. I cannot believe what we've seen the loss of  jobs in one sector. And then suddenly the advocacy for use of government funds that was  argued shouldn't happen many years ago.



Karvelas: I do want to pick you up, I'm going to ask you a question. But on the luxury car  tax, you think it should be scrapped? You said it was just cosmetic, but you still didn't  answer.







Husic: Well, I mean, we'll see what ultimately the government does. But I mean, I think I'm  pretty straight. I'm trying to be as blunt as I possibly can in terms of the tax.



Karvelas: I know the other arguments you make but I'm just wondering what your views are  on the tax?



Husic: I mean, really, in the scheme of things for people like Craig Kelly and others to  suddenly be saying this should be scrapped and in the absence of anything solid to support  the sector as well. Well, you know, people will make their own minds up on that.



Paterson: There's a significant omission from Ed's answer there, which is that Mitsubishi  and Ford announced they were ceasing manufacturing under the previous Labor  government, under the Gillard Rudd governments. So there wasn't any removal of subsidies  on the table then, but they decided to walk away from Australian manufacturing. It's true that  Holden and Toyota subsequently announced they were departing, too, and that was on our  watch. I admit that. But I don't think you can attribute it to the brand of government that was  in power or in fact the removal of subsidies because Mitsubishi and Ford did so under your  government.



Husic: James, I think that, one, we were just as outraged about Mitsubishi and the others  leaving at that point in time and worked furiously to try and help those people that were  affected. The big difference, though, was you had a treasurer at the dispatch box goading  GM.



Karvelas: Do you think that was wrong? Do you think it was wrong that Joe Hockey did  that?



Paterson: I don't agree that that's what he did. And I agree it was prudent that the Abbott  government at the time decided that ongoing subsidies of the car industry weren't  sustainable. And the reason why I agree is that even with subsidies Ford and Mitsubishi said  they were going to end manufacturing. So there was nothing we could do in the long term to  keep Holden or Toyota here either. They were going to go as well. The writing was already  on the wall, even with subsidies. So I don't think taxpayers money should have been thrown  out after that bad project any further.







Karvelas: All right. I want to talk about some international issues, but one that's very much  affecting us and that's coronavirus and the response. What do you think of China's handling  of the coronavirus crisis?



Husic: Well, I think there've been concerns that have been aired about how long it's taken to  respond. If the, some of the stuff that has been said and I'm very cautious about attaching  too much weight to things, because it turns out that, you know, some reports may not  necessarily be backed up, but there are suggestions that this was known back in November  to be an issue and the response was slow. And I was also concerned by some reports  carried by Business Insider that some of the the the scientists and doctors that have been  warning about this have faced heavy sanctions from the government for the Chinese  government on this. And I don't think that's the time that this should happen. I think really we  need to be able to tackle this, need to work together, but it needs to be on the basis of  transparency to understand exactly the situation and what's happening on the ground and  what needs to to occur between nations to contain what is proving to be a truly deadly  circumstance that rightly is having an impact on people and economies as well. So if that is  the case and again, we'll wait and see what the what the situation is,  I'd I'd urge otherwise.



Karvelas: James, are you concerned about the way China's handled this?



Paterson: I basically agree with Ed, which is that the reports that are out there of the  repression of doctors, scientists and other whistleblowers very early on in the outbreak of the  coronavirus are gravely concerning. And if it is subsequently demonstrated that that is true  and that that led to the coronavirus becoming much more out of control than it otherwise  would have been, then that is very worrying. All countries have a responsibility not just to  their own citizens, but citizens of other countries to control these outbreaks in a responsible  way. And suppressing doctors and scientists and whistleblowers is not the right way to go  about it.



Karvelas: Well, still on the topic of China because the BBC has obtained a document  exposing Beijing's tracking and arrests of Uighurs. What do you make of that latest leak?



Paterson: If this can be verified, Patricia, it is probably the most disturbing revelations yet  about the Uighur people in Xinjiang. There have been a lot of disturbing revelations, but this  would be perhaps the most. It's a document which essentially lists the reasons why people  have allegedly been detained. And it includes things such as that a father has daughters  who previously wore hijabs, and that was reason why he needed to be detained, that some  people have been detained because they had visited foreign websites. Now, if that is true,  that is deeply, deeply troubling.







Karvelas: What do you make of those reports?



Husic: Well, I've been concerned about the treatment of Uighurs for a while and written to  the foreign minister in relation to this. And I would put it this way. Just picking up on a a topic  you just raised in terms of coronavirus, the Chinese government is absolutely right to say  that in the midst of this crisis, we should not look to treat the people of China wherever they  live any differently and that you know we shouldn't use this as a reason for xenophobia. I  absolutely agree. And I think we should be absolutely consistent, too, in the treatment of  people, that we shouldn't be basically treating people in a different way within borders like  the Uighurs on the basis of some reason that the Chinese government has selected in  particular people of their faith. And I think people need to be consistent. So it needs to run  both ways. I absolutely agree that Chinese people shouldn't feel or be made to feel any  worse.



Karvelas: And should the Australian government be doing more in terms of international  diplomacy and advocacy, advocating against this practice?



Husic: I think well, in terms of the Uighurs -.



Karvelas: The Uighur issue, yeah.



Husic: I believe that the government is making these and raising these points. And I  certainly,.



Karvelas: Should they be doing it more forcefully.



Husic: And I certainly think that we should take every opportunity to do this. I think we have  had a difficult, you know if you look at it over the period of governments, you know, there  have been it's waxed and waned as to when we actually will make a point of pressing human  rights charges or concerns about, I should say, human rights. We need to be absolutely  consistent about this. And so I do think that where there's that opportunity, we should should  raise it. While we celebrate the success of China in terms of lifting its people out of poverty,  which has been a magnificent achievement. We cannot at the same time turn a blind eye to  these abuses. And in terms of the government, if I may say on Coronavirus, we have a





number of us have been very grateful of the fact that the government has made available, for  example, the chief medical officer for briefings with the opposition. We think we believe this  is a time to stand with the government in dealing with this crisis. You know, for example,  yesterday's announcement with respect to looking after Australians affected and you've  heard the response of some Australians who've been truly grateful for the support. I think  this is a time that as a country we come together to make sure we look after people. And I  think the government should be congratulated on its management of the virus.



Karvelas: James, on that question I put to Ed Husic, should the government be being more  forceful on this issue of the Uighurs. I know it's something you're quite passionate about.  Should it be a bigger issue in terms of putting that on the table, raising these human rights  issues?



Paterson: I think the government has been quite vocal and it needs to continue to be.  Marise Payne gave a very public speech on these matters last year, which was really  welcome. And I know there's been ongoing direct advocacy about the families of Australian  citizens who we believe are detained in Xinjiang, who haven't been able to come home. I've  met with some of the families here in Australia and they just want to be reunited with their  loved ones. And it is a terrible thing that they're not able to.



Karvelas: I want to thank you both for coming into the studio. It's been actually, I've got to  say, amazing to have you both here in Melbourne on the desk with me not talking to you  through whatever we talk through usually.



Paterson: Thank you.



Karvelas: Thank you so much.



Husic: Thanks.



Paterson: Cheers.

ENDS



