1





The Hon. Christian Porter MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Industrial Relations  Leader of the House



TRANSCRIPT  Doorstop Sydney

Meeting with union and employer representatives re coronavirus  Tuesday, 10th March 2020

E&OE

Subjects: coronavirus - meeting union and employer representatives

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   It was a very productive session.  The Government is preparing a range of potential responses  to real-world conditions that may arise.  There are some known knowns and some known  unknowns and this was a very important early stage in trying to get the best information from  businesses - from employer and employee associations as to what is actually happening on  the ground. There's clearly some challenges that we’ll all confront over the next several  months. The way in which those challenges have to be responded to is by having an absolute  priority of outcomes - the first outcome is the health and safety of the Australian community.   Those who’ll need the most serious services inside the health system, but everyone who turns  up to work - their health and safety is absolutely paramount.  Allied to that we want to ensure  that the businesses in Australia producing the goods and services that we all rely on every day  continue to be able to produce those goods and services and are able to weather what will be  difficult economic conditions.  So we've heard a lot of information from a range of organisations - employer employee  groups. Some people already have the solutions they will say to problems that we don't quite  fully understand the scope, scale and dimensions of yet.  We listened to everyone's solutions.  But today, first and foremost, we were trying to understand the dimensions of the challenges  and the problems that are likely to arise.

QUESTION:  The union's called more support for casual workers in particular, is that something that the  government is looking at adopting?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:

2



Well the challenges that will be faced by casual workers and the challenges that will be faced  by businesses that employ casual workers are clearly one of the things that needs to be  considered.

But what needs to be understood is what is likely to be the scale and dimensions of those  challenges.  Different businesses at different points in time are going to find that they're  either going to have so much demand and they can't meet up with a workforce who might be  isolated or unwell at any given point in time.  Other businesses are going to find that the  demand for their product, whether that's in tourism or other sectors has just dropped away  and they've got a surplus of people that they would usually employ to provide that service.   And businesses at different points in time may suffer each of those problems - those problems  might differ across the country. So I think we're preferring to see this problem as about how  we make sure that businesses keep employing people and provide the goods and services that  we rely on during challenging times. Of course there's a sectorial component to that with  different parts of the workforce being affected differently. We listened very carefully to what  the unions have had to say, obviously, but they certainly weren't the only voice in the room.

QUESTION:  How confident are you that workers on the sharp edge of the crisis such as nurse, aged care  workers and doctors will remain on duty?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, we obviously want to say that as the ultimate outcome. And this is not the first time of  course that doctors and nurses have had to work during challenging times, whether that be a  flu season or in other problems that we've experienced in terms of Australia's national health.   But this will be more acute.  We are listening to all of the representatives of health workers  and allied health workers from nurses to doctors and everything in between to understand  what they think it is that they need to ensure the highest maximum workforce participation.   But a lot of this is going to be based on common sense and goodwill between employers,  employees, and government. So when we see the need to ensure that services are delivered in  aged care or an intensive care unit or in a ward or in one of the respiratory clinics that we will  establish - workforce is absolutely critical to that.

QUESTION:  You're speaking a lot about the idea of employers and employees coming together. Would  you like to see a moratorium on industrial action in kind of critical industries while this crisis  occurs?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well I think this is a very bad time for industrial action. I mean, there will always be a  temptation to have industrial action when it has the greatest effect.  Industrial action of any  type at the moment would have a very, very large and negative effect. The reality is that there  are already businesses suffering from disruptions to supply chains - that will mean that it will  become harder for them to produce the goods and services that we all rely on every day.  No  doubt there will be disruptions to the labour force and to the employees that businesses rely  on - again that will cause potential disruptions to the goods and services we rely on. So the  most important thing is a.) the health and safety of the Australian community - in and out of  the work environment and b.) ensuring that businesses - large, medium, small - in all sectors   to the best of their ability, are to keep producing the goods and services that we rely on.

3



Industrial action at that sort of time would be a very major additional and significant  difficulty that we just really don't need.

QUESTION:  Was that discussed with Sally McManus in the meeting?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well in actual fact that wasn't a matter that was raised specifically.  I've got to say I would  have thought it would be a matter of common sense that in the challenging times that we've  got coming ahead that people aren’t scheduling large scale industrial action.

QUESTION:  While you're calling on that kind of peace to be brokered for the, for the medium term does  that mean taking your foot off the gas on ensuring integrity?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well the legislative agenda reminds the legislative agenda. That's about ensuring compliance  with workplace laws and civil and criminal laws in the construction industry. But I think the  reality is that a lot of focus is now going to be placed on responses to an emerging challenge  that we will face over the next several months.  But that doesn't stop the legislative agenda of  government I mean the business of government goes on.  The whole point of this is we want  to see the business of business go on in Australia notwithstanding that there are going to be  all sorts of challenges. Many of a type that we've not experienced before.

QUESTION:  Should alternative arrangements be in place if workers do decide, or to refuse to go to their  workplace.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well when you talk about workers refusing to go to their workplace that is a very broad  statement. Now there will be any number of instances under the existing law in Australia that  governs the relationship between employers and employees - where either directions can be  given by an employer, because in their best assessment the health and safety of the workplace  requires someone to stay at home. There can be directions given by governments - state and  federal - to that extent. There will be people complying with directions of immigration and  self-isolation. So there's a variety of circumstances over the next coming period of time - the  next several months - where people will be absent from work. The reasons for that may be a  variety of types - some people will get ill and have to stay home because they're too unwell to  go to work. The question is, how do we ensure the most cooperative response from the  business and employees - for instance we discussed today that if a direction were needed to  be given by an employer to an employee to self-isolate because of a reasonable suspicion that  they’ve come into contact with a virus and health and safety is an issue - the first port of call  should be to determine how it is that that person can work from home.  But that won't be  possible in all businesses - but it might be the first time that some people in some businesses  have worked from home because they've been directed to stay home for a period of isolation.  So part of this is the common-sense goodwill and adaptability that exists already in Australia  between employers and employees and stretching that out as far as we can for as long as we  can to make sure that everything keeps ticking over in a way in which we ensure that goods  and services are being produced for the Australian people.

4



QUESTION:   When can we expect a decision about assistance for casual and contract workers and what  are the next steps in that decision making process?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well the first thing that we want to do is understand to the best of our predictive ability what  is the likely scale of problem and the dimensions of the problem.  And that is yet not quite  certain. And that is because it is difficult to determine the epidemiology of the disease. And  it's also to determine how and where that will affect different businesses at different points in  time. We're aware of the issue that pertains to casuals - just as we're aware of the issue that  pertains to small business who might find a fall off in demand or fall off in the number of  people who are there able to produce the goods and services to meet the demand. So it's one  dimension of a problem. I don't think that that dimension sits in front or behind any other  parts of the problem. But we are in the stages now where we're getting a much better picture  of the sort of challenges that we will likely to encounter and we would be responding to each  of those in turn.  And I think that what needs to be understood is responses will be scale-able.   This is not the time for people to come in and back pocket-out things that they’ve always  wanted to see and ask for them under the banner of a health response. This is the time to think  sensibly - right across all business and industry sectors in Australia - plan for a variety of  alternative challenges that we're going to face - have responses ready to go - and scale them  up as needs but.

Okay, thank you very much. Thanks.

Ends///



Authorised by Christian Porter, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

