



Senator the Hon Zed Seselja

Assistant Minister for Finance, Charities and Electoral

Matters



Senator for the Australian Capital Territory

Rachel Stephen-Smith MLA

Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs

Minister for Children, Youth and Families

Minister for Health

Member of Kurrajong



8 September 2020

$13.5 million to expand Intensive Care Unit at Canberra Hospital

Senator for the ACT Zed Seselja and ACT Minister for Health Rachel Stephen-Smith today announced an

additional 8 beds for Canberra Hospital’s Intensive Care Unit.

Senator Seselja said the expansion of Canberra Hospital’s Intensive Care Unit will boost critical care capacity

across the ACT.

“Canberra Hospital is the major tertiary hospital for the ACT and southern NSW, providing high quality care to the

sickest and most critical patients. This expansion will ensure people from Canberra and surrounding areas have

access to lifesaving care, acute medical treatment and intensive care monitoring as the region’s population

continues to grow.”

“Last year the Federal Government committed $13.5 million for the much needed expansion of Canberra

Hospital’s ICU as part of our $68 million Health Plan, delivering support for patients in Canberra who need it. The

expansion fills an urgent need to address capacity shortfall and it is great to see the expansion plans unveiled

today.”

“I am proud the Federal Government has more than doubled funding for our hospitals in the ACT, and will

continue to deliver for the health of Canberrans.”

Minister for Health Stephen-Smith said the additional ICU beds will increase critical care capacity while the

design and construction of the Canberra Hospital Expansion is underway.

“This funding increases ICU beds at Canberra Hospital to 39, ensuring our health system is well prepared and

equipped to respond to the needs of the community.

“The expansion will connect to the existing ICU and includes improved amenities for staff, patients and their

families. Design will focus on providing patients and staff with a contemporary, safe and comfortable

environment,” said Minister Stephen-Smith.

Funding for the ICU expansion has been provided through the Commonwealth Community Health and Hospitals

Program, additional projects included are:

Â·         $10 million for mental health initiatives, including a ten-bed low dependency mental health unit at the

Canberra Hospital.

Â·         $4.5 million to complete the build and fit-out of a new purpose-built facility at Winnunga     Nimmityjah

Aboriginal Health and Community Services.

Â·         $1 million for a hospital discharge liaison pilot program.

“Across the ACT, we are investing in our health infrastructure, services and programs to ensure Canberrans

have access to the right healthcare, when and where they need it.

“This program of work will future-proof our health system and grow local jobs as our city recovers from the

impacts of COVID-19,” said Minister Stephen-Smith.

Construction of the ICU expansion will begin later this year with completion scheduled for the third quarter of

2021.

Statement ends

Media Contact:

Minister Stephen-Smith  - Caitlin Cook 0434 702 827

Senator Seselja - Cassandra Choake 0427 839 164

Zed Seselja, Liberal Party of Australia, Canberra

ACT Legislative Assembly

Phone (02) 6205 0011

Email:

steel@act.gov.au







