

BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRY   SHADOW MINISTER FOR SCIENCE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  MEMBER FOR GORTON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS AFTERNOON BRIEFING  THURSDAY, 19 NOVEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: ABS labour force figures; Staffing of hotel quarantine.

PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: Brendan O'Connor is the Shadow Minister for  Employment and Industry and my guest this afternoon. Brendan O'Connor, welcome.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, INDUSTRY,  SMALL BUSINESS & SCIENCE: Good afternoon, Patricia.

KARVELAS: Australia's unemployment rate rose last month as more people looked for  work. But what's really interesting here is there was also a strong increase in the number of  people hired, and that I suppose was as Victoria's coronavirus lockdown eased. What's  your assessment? Is this an indication that the economy is recovering?

O’CONNOR: Well, there's no doubt that there's signs of recovery in parts of the country.  And there's no doubt that the correlation between easing restrictions once we've got on top  of the health challenge has a bearing on employment opportunities. So it's good to see the  fact that there's been, even though unemployment has gone up, that means more people  are looking and there's more unemployed last month as compared with the month before.

The fact is there are a lot of jobs that just been restored because businesses can go back  to operating and that's a wonderful thing. But we still have a 7 per cent unemployment rate.  We have underemployment of 10.4 per cent. There's a very, very high underutilisation rate  of the labour market - 17.4 per cent.

So I think it's fair that I expect the Treasurer to congratulate Victorians and Victorian  businesses and the Victorian Government because without suppressing the second wave,  there's no way in which we would have been able to operate the way we have and see the  employment numbers improve. And to that extent, Labor is very, very happy to see that  happen.

KARVELAS: These figures are mainly because people on the JobKeeper wage subsidy  program now have to look for work. And so they are counted as part of the workforce.

Does that demonstrate that the changes that the government has made is actually about  getting people engaged again to look for new and genuine jobs?

O’CONNOR: Yes, certainly there's no doubt that once you can open up you get  businesses thriving, you have consumers buying goods and services, and that allows  businesses to recover. Once they recover to a certain extent they lose the JobKeeper  support, which is exactly how it should occur. The concern Labor still has is that there is  still a very, very high proportion of businesses that are in need of JobKeeper. It cuts out in  March. And I think the significant question, Patricia, will be will the hiring credit JobMaker in  any way properly replace the JobKeeper payments once that ends in March. That's going  to be a very big question.

I've spoken to a lot of businesses today and yesterday and certainly since the  unemployment rate and indeed banks, their major concern has been that once JopKeeper  disappears there isn't anything that's comparable to deal with recovering businesses and  the actual hiring credit JobMaker scheme is not actually built for recovering businesses, it's  built for businesses that have either fully recovered or weren't affected by the pandemic.

KARVELAS: Brendan O'Connor, before I let you go, I just want to talk briefly about hotel  quarantining, the staffing of hotel quarantining. Obviously we've seen this issue in South  Australia, we had the issue in Victoria. Now there's a discussion going on about workers in  hotel quarantine working secondary jobs. The Victorian Premier wants to address that. He  sees that as an issue. Clearly it was in South Australia in and in Victoria it's an issue as  well. What do you think should happen here? I mean, should there be a sort of national  approach where people who are working in these quarantine hotels don't work secondary  jobs?

O’CONNOR: Look, people can have two jobs. But I think it does point to the fact that we  have a precarious labour market. We have a very, very high proportion of people  precariously employed in casual work, not just those uni students that are doing work in  hospitality. Increasingly jobs where there was some levels of security have disappeared.  And I think what the pandemic has done has exposed the fault line in so far as people don't  have sufficient hours in a job therefore have to have two. And it's hard to believe that even  to this day, we have security guards looking after people with a contagion that still are  going to other workplaces, but that needs to be stopped-

KARVELAS: So it does need to be stopped nationally?

O’CONNOR: I think there needs to be - certainly that has to be dealt with as a matter of  urgency. But I think then a deeper question is about how do we deal with this precarious  employment as we go forward where we can because obviously, nobody wants to be so  insecure at work as to worry about paying their bills and looking out for their family.

So of course you need to have a flexible labour market, but not one that is sacrificing levels  of security of employment. And that has been on the rise over decades now. And certainly  Labor would like to see some rebalancing so workers can feel more secure. But no doubt  the pandemic has exposed the problem in such a dramatic way. And I do think that needs  to be redressed by all governments across the country as we deal with this very vicious  virus.

KARVELAS: Brendan thank you.



ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KYLIE JENSEN 0402 298 728







