

T h e  H o n . D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T



Tuesday 22nd December 2020

Minister Littleproud iv with Qld Breakfast Statewide

DAVID ILIFE: Good morning to you, Minister.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Good morning. Good to be with you.

DAVID ILIFE: Yeah. Can I ask what does Fraser Island look like?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, pretty scarred. It's pretty tragic over here. Thankfully, no  homes or premises were destroyed, but the landscape is severely scarred. And it's going  to take time, but they're open for business, and I think that's what Queenslanders need to  understand is they can go to Fraser Island and still enjoy it - there's plenty of people over  here now enjoying it. And the best way to support them is to go over and to spend a dollar  in the community and keep those tourist operators going. But it'll just take some time.  We've had some rain over here, which is good, and that means that the landscape will  recover quicker than normal. But the fires are out thanks to the rain. And this- we're  looking up, I think, is the way we should think about it.

DAVID ILIFE: Minister, some new grants for 23 communities impacted by bushfires last  year. Why? Why now? What's that about?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: So, this is a- the next phase of recovery. So, there's support when  the bushfires hit between ourself and the state government - I congratulate the state  government in partnering with us. So, there's disaster recovery arrangements that we have  longstanding with all the states, but the Queensland Government and the Federal  Government have partnered. So, when the bushfires hit, there's immediate support in  terms of putting money in people's pockets just to give them the essentials and to give  them some dignity and respect.  And then we look to the long term recovery, not just in terms of infrastructure, but looking  to the community. And we think the best way to recover is not lead by Brisbane or from  Canberra, from bureaucrats in those places, but actually let the community decide. So  we're saying to small community groups, to local councils, non-government organisation;  here's your opportunity to build back better, build your community with betterment and to  get those projects that you wanted to build a more resilient society. So, that's projects up  to $100,000, big or small. And we're saying to those community groups: come forward,  make your community stronger and better. And we acknowledge the fact this is part of the  recovery process.



TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T



DAVID ILIFE:Gee, it's an enormous area [indistinct]. I mean, it's Brisbane City all the way  up to Townsville, I mean, even the Whitsundays is on the list. It's a lot of communities

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: It is, and that just showed the extent of the bushfires. And more- a  lot of the emphasis was on New South Wales, Victoria, and South Australia, quite rightly.  We had our fair share here in Queensland - and I know, I live near Stanthorpe, and I can  tell you it was devastating what happened through there. And so, we've got to understand,  we haven't forgotten Queenslanders. And that's why I thank the Queensland Government  for partnering with us. We've made sure that they aren't the forgotten ones out of the  bushfire of the Black Summer that we went through, so it's important that those  communities now come forward and build back better.

DAVID ILIFE: Alright. And, Minister, just with those grants that are available, they're up  and running now. I guess you've got to apply now, that sort of thing?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: That's right. Exactly. So, you can put your application in now  through the Queensland Rural Adjustment Authority, I think they call themselves these  days - they change their names, like most departments, very often. But we let the state run  these programs in terms of putting applications through, and then we sit through together  and we'll assess those.  But we're just encouraging community groups to come forward. Don't be shy. This is an  acknowledgement of the leadership role that you play in your community. So come  forward, put forward those community projects so that we can hopefully support you and  your community into the future.

DAVID ILIFE: Minister, can I ask you, I mean, the Federal Minister for Agriculture have  seen all sorts of things happen in the last couple of months on the international trade  scene. Are you a bit worried about the Australian wine sides of things?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, we are. And that's why we're saying to Australians this year:  do your bit for the Australian wine industry, go and buy an extra bottle, have an extra  glass, drink responsibly. But make sure you go to the bottle-o, or more importantly, even  go to the local winery, because those little wineries have hurt because of COVID  restrictions; people haven't been able to visit. And many of them have smoke taint as well,  so, I mean, a lot of the 2020 vintage is, in fact, not there.  So, it's important that we all put our shoulder to the wheel, we support the wine industry  this year, go and buy an extra bottle of Australian wine. Celebrate Christmas responsibly,  but support Australian wineries, because they done it probably tougher than most - they've  lost about $1.2 billion out of the Chinese market. And we're now working with them, and I'll  be making actually an announcement tomorrow around further support on trade and  diversification. So, we're working with industry, we've sat down and talked to them about  how do we make things a little bit better and diversify these new markets. It's a quality  product, and that's what you've got to understand; we will be able to sell it into other  markets, it's just going to take time.

DAVID ILIFE: Yeah. Now, just on that, though, so I'm buying a bottle of wine at my local  rubbity-dub, in the bottle-o that might have ended up in Wuhan or Shanghai, something  like that. Will that price of it, though, be redressed to Australian prices? Because none of  us are going to pay a couple hundred bucks, surely?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No. And this is the thing is, this is where some of the pain will be  for the wine industry is the recalibration of prices. And there was a premium that they were

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T



getting in China. And we will continue to work through with them whether we go the WTO  or not. There was some internal processes we need to exhaust before we go to the WTO  on wine - we're going there on barley, obviously.  And we'll take the advice of the wine industry. And I've got to congratulate them for their  maturity and leadership. Tony Battaglene, the chair of Wine and Grape Australia has done  an outstanding job in leading his industry through some very tough, trying time. So, we'll  work with them about what we do next in terms of formal processes with China, but you  will see a recalibration of prices.

DAVID ILIFE: What a year, Minister, aye?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah. 2020 can bugger off.

DAVID ILIFE: Yeah, exactly. Yeah. Don't let the door hit you on the way out sort of thing,  aye? Alright.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yes, exactly.

DAVID ILIFE: Alright. Look, thanks for having a chat to us. I know you're a fairly busy lad  this morning but thank you for your input into the program.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Anytime. Thanks. And thanks to the ABC for all your support,  particularly through emergency management period, through disasters, you play a pivotal  role in keeping Australians safe. So, thanks for all your support as well.

DAVID ILIFE: Good on you, Minister. Cheers. Minister David Littleproud, the Federal  Minister for Agriculture, live from Fraser Island this morning on ABC Radio Queensland.

Media contact  Douglas Ferguson, 0455 448 985

