



Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra





THE HON DAN TEHAN MP  Minister for Education

THE HON ANDREW GEE MP  Minister for Decentralisation and Regional Education  Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Investment

MEDIA RELEASE

13 December 2020

Ensuring mental health professionals are job ready

Australians who want to support their community as psychologists, social workers, youth  workers, counsellors and community workers will now pay less for their degree through a  new professional pathway.

The Morrison McCormack Government has accepted the recommendations of a working  group established to implement a Professional Pathway Psychology discipline and a  Professional Pathway Social Work discipline.

The working group, chaired by Swinburne University of Technology previous   Vice-Chancellor and President Professor Linda Kristjanson AO, recommended a  professional pathway stream for psychology and social work, including for students in youth  work, counselling and community work degrees.

Students on the professional pathway will now pay $7,950 for a full year of study in those  disciplines, a saving of $6,550 compared to student contributions in student contribution  band four.

Minister for Education Dan Tehan said the new professional pathway would direct more  Australians to become job-ready graduates in the field of mental health.

“The challenges of the bushfires and COVID-19 have demonstrated that Australia needs  more Australians qualified to provide professional mental health support to their fellow  Australians that need help,” Mr Tehan said.

“The changes made today will ensure students obtain qualifications that make them   job-ready to provide that essential mental health support to their communities.

“Our Job-ready Graduates package combined with the $298.5 million for additional  Commonwealth supported places in national priority areas in the Budget will create up to  30,000 additional university places for Australian students next year.”

Minister for Decentralisation and Regional Education Andrew Gee said the professional  pathway for psychology couldn’t have come soon enough for country students and  communities.





Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

“The devastating impacts of the drought, bushfires and COVID-19 pandemic have hit country  communities hard. We must not underestimate the heavy mental toll this year has taken,”  Minister Gee said.

“The professional pathway for psychologists, social workers, youth workers, counsellors and  community workers will ensure that we have vital mental health professionals in the bush to  support the recovery of rural and regional Australia.

“We know that students who study in regional Australia are more likely to stay on to work  and live in the bush following graduation. To put it simply, we are turning country students  into country mental health professionals.

“These changes will help bridge the education divide between the city and the country and  will be welcomed by country universities and country communities.”



ENDS



Media contact:  Tehan: Byron Vale 02 6277 7350 | minister.tehan.media@dese.gov.au  Gee: Gabrielle Phipps 0400 917 405 | Gabrielle.phipps@dfat.gov.au



