

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

Media contact: Douglas Ferguson, 0455 448 985



Tuesday 31st March 2020



Interview with Queensland Country Hour

AMY PHILLIPS: Now the buck ultimately stops with Queensland Health, I understand. We  have sought an interview with Queensland Health. So far, they say they've been  overwhelmed with requests of many varieties from the media. And so far, I haven't been  able to secure an interview. We will endeavour to keep trying. But Federal Agriculture  Minister David Littleproud may assure you. He's very confident the likes of processing  plants will be able to restart operating as soon as the employees in close contact with the  positively tested person are isolated, and the facility cleaned.



DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well that is not the case, under the FSANZ standard, which all the  states and Commonwealth and New Zealand all sign up to. They have a protocol in place.  And in fact, the industry themselves, I have to congratulate for the way that they've already  made sure they're putting in place pre-emptive measures to keep distance amongst staff.  But if someone is to contract COVID-19, that person and those in the close proximity will  be isolated from the workplace. They are the only ones that'll be isolated from the  workplace and the business will continue on. They'll obviously be continuing testing, but  there is no need for any abattoir or processing plant to shut down because we have  worked with industry and the food standards to make sure that there can be continuity.   And all the processors, as I understand, are adhering to those strict distancing rules,  whether it be lunch hours, and in fact the Department of Agriculture - with respect to our  vets and biosecurity officers - are being a little bit more pragmatic around letting floor times  change so that staff can be isolated in lunch rooms away from one another and in small  groups. So, there is a whole lot of work being done, and as well as around protective  clothing. So, the continuity is for our processing plants to continue no matter what, and that  all the precautions, predicated by medical advice, have been undertaken. And if there is  someone that has contracted, that there is a continuity plan in place to ensure that those  processing plants do not need to shut down.

AMY PHILLIPS: What is close proximity, though? Because some of these plants, let's say  the egg processing industry, everybody's standing in one room. Is that close proximity?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well obviously, some of those people will be wearing protective  clothing.

AMY PHILLIPS: All of them, yip.

Transcript



Transcript



DAVID LITTLEPROUD: So obviously, those outside that, there's been a directive from the  health of one person every four square metres. So obviously, that is if they're not wearing  protective clothing. So, in essence, there are measures put in place, practical measures  put in place, to protect the employees and protect our food. So FSANZ is the standard,  and it is world-class standard that we all adhere to. That we- and in fact I took to the  ministerial council of ag ministers last week for them all to tick off on. The states will be the  ones that will actually enforce this, but they are all party to FSANZ and all were party to  that agreement in terms of creating that protocol under COVID-19.

AMY PHILLIPS: But what's close proximity?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well again, if you're not within protective clothing, then it's meant-  you're meant to be one within every four square metres. And that's why there's been  staggered lunches of small groups so that that can be adhered to. And then obviously, if  they're working closer together, then there's protective clothing that would be required.  And as I understand, all the processors are working through that to ensure that their  employees have the necessary equipment to continue on.

AMY PHILLIPS: So who could the likes of a Queensland meat processor expect to hear  from if they do report a positive COVID-19 test?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, the state health departments are the ones that will make  contact, and we'll obviously work through their arrangements with them. As I say, the  states are the ones that will ultimately enforce this and make sure that if there are  outbreaks, they'll work with the employer to keep that continuity. But under the FSANZ  standard, there is no need for that processing plant to be shut down if all the protocols  have been met.

AMY PHILLIPS: So you're a Queensland-based Federal Member. Are you able to  guarantee Queenslanders that Queensland Health will- will not override that or any health-  or any state health authority?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No. State governments have their own sovereign right. Despite  contrary belief that the Federal Government has all power in this country, we actually don't.  The state- every state has their own sovereign right. But that's why I took this to the  Ministerial Council of State AG ministers to make sure that there was agreement and  consistency across all the states.

But FSANZ and members of FSANZ and the food safety standards in this country have  members from each state and territory so they themselves are the ones that created this  standard in conjunction with the Commonwealth and New Zealand Government. So there  is- so they were party to what the COVID-19 protocols would look like.

So they're are already party to it and understand it and are being active in it from what I  understand and I had no pushback from any of the AG ministers. I think they've been very  forward leaning on those issues and we continue to meet every week to make sure that if  there are any roadblocks, we look to get rid of them in a practical and safe way.

AMY PHILLIPS: So for the likes of a fruit processing factory, let's say, if they have an  employee that tests positive to COVID, they can expect a phone call from Queensland  Health but there's already strict, you know, food standards in terms of cleanliness that they

Transcript



Transcript

abide by in cleaning. Let's say, you know, the meat processing industry has to disinfect  after every shift. So theoretically, these plants exempt of the people that were in close  proximity to the person with a positive test could restart the moment they- they cleaned the  place.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: And that is the practical application of the FSANZ standard that  you just articulated it beautifully. That is exactly what would happen. Effectively, they'd be  disinfected and off they go again, the next shift would come in. Those that were in close  proximity to the person that tested positive would be isolated. It's just common sense.

We will not- we will not let safety standards and health standards slip but it can be done in  a practical way and that's- that's the beauty and the professionalism that we should take  great pride in our processing sector that they've established these world class standards  not just for COVID but for- for the way in which they process our food.

AMY PHILLIPS: Do you think the state health authorities appreciate the animal welfare  implications for animal processing facilities?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: I think so. I think this is- this is a time where I think there is a  greater understanding by no matter your political persuasion of the necessities to keep the  continuity from animal welfare all the way through to food safety. I think that we've worked  collaboratively together. While we haven't always agreed, we've got to a point where  practical solutions can be put in place that protect our food security because that  underpins our nation's security.

If we lose our food security, our nation's security is at risk and we should take great pride  that our farmers are calmly going about it, our processing sectors' going calmly about it  doing it in a professional way to make sure food will be on our plates. But we're also  continuing to export and I think that's something Australians should reflect on what  agriculture is doing. We're going to get this nation through COVID-19 and probably help us  rebound quicker than any other industry will. And so I think we should take great pride in  our primary industries.

AMY PHILLIPS: Has this situation happened yet? Has a COVID-19 positive test been  detected in a food processing employee? You know, we're talking about hypotheticals but  has this been put to the test yet anywhere in Australia?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Not from my understanding that anyone has tested positive.  Obviously, we'd be- I would appreciate that the states would more than likely make the  Department of Agriculture aware of that. No formal announcement has been made by any  state that any staff member has been tested positive.

AMY PHILLIPS: So I hope you can be reassured by Federal Agriculture Minister David  Littleproud that if you have an employee test positive for COVID-19, your plant will be able  to restart as soon as the employees in close contact with the positively tested person are  isolated and the facility cleaned.



Media contact  Douglas Ferguson, 0455 448 985

