



Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra





THE HON DAN TEHAN MP  Minister for Education

THE HON KAREN ANDREWS MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology

GEORGE CHRISTENSEN MP  Federal Member for Dawson

MEDIA RELEASE

23 November 2020

Research to protect and preserve the Great Barrier Reef

North Queensland’s iconic Great Barrier Reef will be better protected thanks to the Morrison  Government’s investment in a $36.3 million research facility near Townsville.

In this year’s Budget the Government provided funding to expand the National Sea Simulator  (SeaSim), a specially designed facility for climate related coral reef research.

Member for Dawson George Christensen said research conducted at SeaSim would help  protect and preserve the Great Barrier Reef for all Queenslanders, tourists and future  generations.

“SeaSim is a unique, world-class research aquarium for tropical marine organisms that  allows researchers to control and manipulate conditions not feasible in the field,”   Mr Christensen said.

“Protecting the Great Barrier Reef is a priority issue for our Government.

“The Morrison Government’s $36.3 million investment will fund an expansion to increase the  capacity of SeaSim’s large tank systems by five-fold and associated physical containment  and culture laboratories.”

Minister for Education Dan Tehan said the Government was investing in Australia’s  researchers to tackle the problems that will improve our lives, grow our economy and  generate new knowledge.

“In this year’s Budget, our Government provided an additional $1 billion for university  research and $157 million for research infrastructure to support our smartest minds to  continue their work in the national interest,” Mr Tehan said.

“Our Government is investing in research that’s in the national interest and we have a plan to  turn that research into jobs, productivity gains and economic growth as part of our economic  recovery from COVID-19.”





Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said SeaSim is a world-class  facility in high demand.

“Facilities like this demonstrate the importance of our research infrastructure to the work of  Australia’s amazing scientists and researchers,” Minister Andrews said.

“This investment will not only lead to further scientific discoveries, but also provide economic  benefits to the region by supporting local business and creating jobs, especially in the  agriculture and tourism sectors.”

More information about Australia’s National Research Infrastructure Investment Plan is  available at https://www.education.gov.au/2020-research-infrastructure-investment-plan.



ENDS





Media contact:  Tehan: Lauren Fitzpatrick 02 6277 7350 | minister.tehan.media@dese.gov.au  Andrews: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846  Christensen: James Moyes 0407 776 556

