







SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Deputy Leader of the Government in the  Senate Senator for South Australia



TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Interview on Radio National, Breakfast with Fran Kelly        Topics: Tourism sector in Australia  13/08/2020  08:20AM

Fran Kelly: There’s no relief in sight for the country’s beleaguered tourism sector. With no foreigners  coming in and restrictions on state and territory borders now hampering domestic tourism, the industry’s, well  in some quarters, ground to a halt. Now, the Federal Government says if states and territories keep their  gates shut longer than needed, it will be up to those jurisdictions to prop up businesses that rely on tourism.  Simon Birmingham is the Federal Tourism Minister. Simon Birmingham, welcome back to Breakfast.

Simon Birmingham: Good morning, Fran. Nice to be with you.

Fran Kelly: You've told the Nine papers that your Government won't be picking up the tab to prop up the  tourism sector if the borders are kept closed for longer than needed, for one day longer than needed. But  every border closure is based on health advice at the moment, isn’t it? Are you challenging that?

Simon Birmingham: No. I'm not at all, Fran. And that's not exactly an accurate interpretation of what I told  the Nine papers. Our Government's committed to keeping JobKeeper in place all the way through until the  end of March; that's providing a huge lifeline to the tourism industry. And there's no doubt about that. That will  flow to any business who meets the eligibility criteria across the country.

What I was observing was that borders have a place, but they should be proportionate to the risks across  different jurisdictions. Nobody's quibbling at all with the fact that the quarantine is there in Victoria at present.  All the states are making fair judgments across the board. But if we get to a point where some states choose  to keep their border restrictions in place longer than even reasonable health advice would suggest, well then  those states need to stump up and also help to support the tourism industry.

The Federal Government's providing many billions of dollars of assistance to those tourism businesses and to  the employees. And if the states are going to cripple their markets even further than is necessary, then they  should be helping out too.

Fran Kelly: Yeah. But there's a lot of qualifiers there - even further than necessary, shouldn't keep them  shut longer than the health advice- I mean who's judging this? How do you judge this? That's the issue here,  isn’t it? We’re a federation. The states and territories are making their own decisions.

Simon Birmingham: The states and territories are making their own decisions. But they also need to be  responsible for those decisions. So if we end up in a circumstance where some states and territories are  applying tougher restrictions than seems to be necessary and than any of the other states and territories are,  well then it's going to be hard to structure federal programs just for that state or territory. That's why a state  will have to take more responsibility for assistance.

Obviously, right now, the Victorian situation means the assistance there has to flow through. So we're seeing  in the states that have relaxed their internal restrictions, big movements of people willing to get out to the  regions in Western Australia and South Australia. It would be nice to think that at some stage, perhaps sooner  than Premier McGowan has suggested, people might be able to cross that Western Australian-South  Australian border. They’re two states with very similar health outcomes.







Fran Kelly: Yeah. I understand what you’re saying. It'd be nice to think that and tourism operators might  think that too. But generally, the citizens of those states seem to be really backing their premiers and chief  ministers who are keeping the borders closed and the, as you say, people are moving around WA, the  economy does seem to be doing alright. You know, a lot of people in WA think: well let's keep it as it is; keep  this virus out. Can you understand that? Or is that frustrating for you?

Simon Birmingham: I understand that. Well, it's frustrating for many tourism operators who rely on-

Fran Kelly: Well, of course. Yes.

Simon Birmingham: … cross border flows. And, Fran, we had a situation where South Australia has  opened up to Western Australia, but WA is retaining a quarantine on those returning. The other states have  very similar outcomes in terms of their management of COVID - they’ve done incredibly well in that regard.  And it would make sense that at some stage, far sooner than either of them could open up to Victoria, that  they should be able to completely open up with two-way travel to one another. And there would be other  examples across the country where that should be the case, and that is important to tourism businesses who  rely on that sort of cross-border travel - not just the ability to try to get people out of their own capital cities.

Fran Kelly: As I say though; the federation - many states and Premiers and Chief Ministers can do this as  they see fit. Is that frustrating for you? And do we need to, I don't know if you can do this through a National  Cabinet, or needs to- perhaps some kind of agreement - I think this is what the tourism sector would like -  where you get national standards, national agreed standards over what triggers a border closure? Are you  trying to work towards something like that? Or not?

Simon Birmingham: I would hope that the Premiers might be able to give some more clarity to the tourism  industry and the travel sector around that so that people can plan with greater confidence for these things and  have some idea of the fact that perhaps WA could open up to South Australia before it opens up to Victoria. It  would be good to hear that was a possibility rather than keeping the blanket national restrictions in place.

Fran Kelly: What did you think about the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory, Michael Gunner, this  week who said it’s likely that the Northern Territory border will be shut for 18 months?

Simon Birmingham: Well, that just seems to be a very long period of time to make that prediction when-  what happens if you have no community transmission occur in Western Australia throughout the entire time?  Why would the Northern Territory need to keep its borders to WA shut if it was achieving the same health  outcomes as that jurisdiction? Now, this is not something that we're seeking to expect states to move on in a  hurry, or to resolve quickly. We respect the decisions that are being made at a state and territory level, but I  do think they've got to be thinking about the economic consequences for the many, many tourism businesses;  who, prior to this pandemic, supported around one in 13 Australian jobs. It's a huge, huge employer. We are  providing billions of dollars of lifeline assistance from the Federal Government through JobKeeper, but we do  want to make sure that people can get back to viable businesses and real jobs as soon as it's safe to do s o.

Fran Kelly: Yeah, but what are you saying? Are you saying that if the Northern Territory does stick to that,  that suggestion - that the border be closed for 18 months - that the Federal Government will cut off support  that is there generally for the national tourism sector? Is that what you're saying?

Simon Birmingham: Well, the JobKeeper is there until the end of March.

Fran Kelly: Not JobKeeper, beyond that?

Simon Birmingham: Well, JobKeeper is there until the end of March. We will assess what's necessary  when we get closer to it in that point in time in terms of any assistance that's required across the nation. But if  you do have one jurisdiction operating completely out of whack, potentially, with all others then it is less likely  that that sort of assistance might continue in the same ways, and more necessary for that jurisdiction to take  responsibility for providing assistance. But they’re hypotheticals - it’s a long way away.

I hope that we continue to see the enormous success that most other states are having, outside of Victoria, in  suppressing that community transmission. But particularly those outside of the big two states enjoy a really  great success they're having, and that they may find pathways to be able to better open up to one another. As  I say, a number of jurisdictions have done so outside of opening up to Victoria and New South Wales and I  think they've shown a proportionate approach in terms of opening up to those states and territories who are  having very similar results in terms of their outcomes.





Fran Kelly: With the elections coming up in the Northern Territory Queensland and the WA, and WA in  the not too distant future, there are plenty who accuse the state and territory leaders of keeping their borders  closed because it's electorally popular. Do you think that's what's happening?

Simon Birmingham: Well, I hope not, Fran. I'm not going to try to get into the minds of state leaders, I think  they have all done a pretty good job, particularly outside of Victoria, a very good job in terms of managing the  pandemic to date. But they have to be mindful of the business viability and the jobs as well. And so you keep  the restrictions in place as long as it's necessary to keep your population safe - that's entirely understandable.  But, you shouldn’t have them there longer -

Fran Kelly: And that’s subjective to interpretation though, isn’t it? I mean, that can be interpreted? Your  health advice can be interpreted?

Simon Birmingham: Well, these things can always be interpreted, Fran, but at some point it passes the  point of being reasonable or acceptable. And so, we can't predict when the restrictions need to come off but I  would hope that based on the success most of our states have had; based on the fact that some states, like  SA who had complete border controls in place before but has now opened up to Queensland, the Northern  Territory, WA and Tasmania - done so successfully; done so without any detrimental impacts - provides an  example for the other states to at least think about similarly opening up, opening up to other states that have  similar health outcomes.

Fran Kelly: Just one final question, Minister, on another issue, well same issue another jurisdiction. New  Zealand this week recorded its first infections of COVID-19 in more than three months. Has that scuttled  hopes of a travel bubble this year? The industry is still hoping there could be a New Zealand-Australia travel  bubble before Christmas?

Simon Birmingham: I remain hopeful that we can see something in place before Christmas, but nobody  should get ahead of themselves or expect that there'll be movement within weeks, or even the next couple of  months. I think this is obviously a case where New Zealand will have been watching closely what's been  happening in Victoria in particular, and equally now they have their own challenges which is a reminder that,  that even with the tightest of border restrictions in place, you need all of the other protections there. And that  is a point that we've emphasized to the states and territories - you need your high levels of testing, you need  highly capable tracing units, you need to enforce isolation when it's there. You can't just rely on border  controls because you may just find that you have, as New Zealand has, got a case that pops up by unknown  means. And if you don't get on top of it quickly that's when you can end up in a Victorian situation.

Fran Kelly: That takes us back to border closures. Simon Birmingham, thank you very much for joining  us.

Simon Birmingham: My pleasure, Fran. Thank you.

Fran Kelly: Simon Birmingham is the Federal Tourism and Trade Minister.

Media Contacts  Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.

