Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



The Hon Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health



MEDIA RELEASE

3 December 2020



Strengthening Australia's immunisation program

The Australian Government is continuing to improve Australia’s world leading vaccination  program through the Australian Immunisation Register Amendment (Reporting) Bill 2020,  which enters parliament today.

This Bill supports and builds upon the longstanding action of the successive Governments to  ensure that Australians have access to safe and effective vaccines and that we maintain world  leading immunisation rates.

Currently, not all vaccine providers make a record in the Australian Immunisation Register  (the AIR) when a vaccine is administered, which means that individuals or health  professionals may not have access to vaccination history. This information could be vital in  an emergency, when undertaking medical treatment and in managing an individual’s health  and wellbeing.

The effect of the amendments in the Bill is to ensure all vaccination providers report vaccines  given, including any COVID-19 vaccine, to the AIR.

These changes will ensure that every Australian can access their vaccine history through this  safe and secure register and support the administration of COVID-19 vaccines and other  lifesaving vaccines, including those against the flu and meningococcal.

While the Government strongly supports immunisation, it is not mandatory. Vaccination will  remain voluntary and individuals will retain the fundamental choice to choose not to  vaccinate.

The Australian Government is a strong supporter of immunisation in that it is a safe and  effective way to prevent the spread of many diseases in the community that can cause  hospitalisation, serious ongoing health conditions, or even death.

The Australian Government has acted decisively to secure production and supply agreements  to secure early access to 134 million doses of a COVID-19 vaccine to Australians in 2021-21  and 2021-22 through an investment so far of $3.3 billion.

In addition to the significant investment in COVID-19 Vaccines, the Australian Government  invests over $400 million each year though the National Immunisation Program (NIP) to  protect Australians against 17 vaccine preventable diseases.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



The NIP provides free vaccines to eligible people, including children, adolescents, the  elderly, pregnant women and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people against conditions  such as pneumococcal, meningococcal, measles, mumps, rubella, pertussis, shingles, human  papillomavirus (HPV) and influenza amongst others.

The need for the Australian Immunisation Register Amendment (Reporting) Bill 2020 arose  from the need to provide more Australians with information about their immunisation history,  to support the roll out of a COVID-19 vaccine and the ongoing administration of the NIP.

Australia continues to have a high level of vaccination reporting and the AIR data entered is  sufficiently reliable for the administration of childhood immunisations due to a number of  policy and program settings which encourage reporting.

For example, Australia’s immunisation coverage rates for children continue to be at a record  high, compared to the rest of the world. As at September 2020: 94.90 per cent of all  Australian children aged five years and 97.03 per cent of Aboriginal and Torres Strait  Islander children aged five years were fully vaccinated.

However, reporting of adolescent and other adult vaccines is lower and less reliable. For  example, the reporting of vaccinations against Herpes Zoster and Pneumococcal for older  Australians is around 40 per cent and reporting for seasonal influenza is around 50 per cent.

The AIR provides Australians with an Immunisation History Statement (IHS) which displays  all immunisations that an individual has had that are recorded on the AIR. The IHS is can be  viewed and printed via Medicare Online, myGov, the Express Plus Medicare mobile app, or  My Health Record. Vaccination providers can print an IHS on behalf of their patient.

Public consultation on the proposed changes indicated a high level of community support for  these improvements and it is pleasing to note that key stakeholders, including health peak  bodies have indicated their public support.

ENDS

