

SENATOR JENNY MCALLISTER  SHADOW CABINET SECRETARY  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER TO THE LABOR LEADER IN THE  SENATE

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA  TUESDAY, 4 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Restrictions in Victoria, Aged care, paid pandemic leave.

ANNALIESE NIELSEN, HOST: More now on this, we're joined live by Liberal Senator  Gerard Rennick and Labor Senator Jenny McAllister. Thank you both for your time.

JENNY MCALLISTER, SHADOW CABINET SECRETARY:  Thank you.

NIELSEN: Now we're all enjoying freedoms in that we're not anywhere near Victoria, but  our hearts go out to every single one of them. Gerard Rennick, do you think the  government's done the right thing here in Victoria?

SENATOR GERARD RENNICK: When you say government, you mean federal  government or state government?

NIELSEN: Well, take your pick.

RENNICK: Well, look, I think we're, you know, doing all that we can. Look, it's obviously a  very difficult time at the moment. I think Scott Morrison IS showing a great deal of  leadership and he's trying to keep the team unified. Look, there's always ways we can  improve and we're obviously open to improvement. But look, you know, one… I've sort of  got to go slightly off topic here. Obviously, I think something that's been a little bit  controversial in the last week is roles and responsibilities. I’ve always pushed that we need  clear roles and responsibilities between the federal and state government, especially when  it comes to health. I called for a constitutional convention last year in my maiden speech.  And I thought, you know, I back that view that we should have a constitutional convention  to define the roles and responsibilities between state and federal governments. But I  accept that's not for now. But going forward look, you know, in terms of providing funding,  we provided help through the military, we’re providing the paid leave if people do get  COVID, so I think we're doing a fairly good job.

NIELSEN: Jenny McAllister, that is an interesting point in that a lot of especially voters,  taxpayers, normal people will often say they don't care if it's a state or federal  responsibility, they want to see action on it. And there have been some really key gaps

here in the approach, especially in aged care.

MCALLISTER: I am really concerned about the government’s -the federal government’s -  unwillingness to take responsibility for the aged care crisis that's unfolding. Connie  Fierravanti-Wells, Senator for NSW, belled the cat this morning, and she points to a lack of  action over seven years. That meant that we went into this crisis with an aged care sector  that we knew had problems. But the government did nothing about it for seven years,  seven wasted years. And since the crisis, there's no real sign that the government accepts  its responsibilities. There are lessons to be learned from what happened inNewmarch  House.  It's really disappointing, that those lessons do not seem to be applied in Victoria.  Why was it that the government was not more prepared for the outbreaks in Victorian  homes? What are they doing now to prepare nursing homes in other parts of Australia for  second wave? We are calling on the government to step up and to take responsibility for  ensuring that homes all across Australia are ready should there be an outbreak.

NIELSEN: Gerard Rennick, Concetta Fierravanti-Wells did single out quite a few of her  former colleagues and saying that the buck had really been passed on a number of times  in aged care and that's led to these systemic failures in the system. What did you make of  her comments?

RENNICK: I haven't read them, sorry Annaliese. I wasn’t aware of them coming in here  this morning. I do reject Senator McAllister allegations that we haven't done anything in the  last seven years. We've added 130,000 places to aged care. We fund aged care, we  regulate aged care, but aged care is run by a lot of different operators, including state  governments, including private operators, including religious organisations and including  charitable groups. It's a disperse range of responsibilities and look, as I said earlier, it is  very difficult when you've got a number of different organisations, managing aged care so  we obviously have to work with a lot of groups. I don't think the blame game is helping  anyone right now. And we are totally committed to looking after our elderly. As to being  unprepared well, we had COVID under control until Daniel Andrews let this cat out of the  bag by, you know, not following, not using the military that we offered to provide. And  obviously Victoria is now suffered for it. And these, you know, the number of cases and a  number of deaths, unfortunately, has blown up. So, you know, look, we can only react to  what's happened on the ground. Look, one area that probably didn't help is when all the  people got pulled out of one of the nursing homes, all the staff that obviously left a lack of  organisational capital. So there's ways there maybe we need to bring in some temperature  checks so that people even if an outbreak does occur in an age nursing home, staff can be  tested so that those staff who don't have COVID can stay there, so that they don't lose the  knowledge of their patients. So, I think pulling out all the staff in that aged care wasn't the  smartest thing to do. But we tried to help there by bringing in other stuff. That wasn't our  decision, that was the decision by State governments. But you know, look, one of the  things I would like to see the State premiers do is provide an exit plan as to how many  cases that they day are going to tolerate, because we've got other states where there's  next to no cases, they're in single digits. There's been, you know, it's been months since a  single death. And, you know, we've got no clear vision or when we are going to reopen  those States that have businesses can get going again. So yeah.

NIELSEN: Well, this is that kind of competing priorities, isn't it, when you have this health  crisis that can change as we've seen so quickly, everyone does want to focus on the  economy and getting businesses back open. Jenny McAlister, just on this, do you think this  paid pandemic leave it's $1500 dollars a fortnight for anyone who needs to self-isolate and  wouldn't have any other support otherwise. The Government said it's going to Victoria



because they need that support in a disaster situation, but they're not expanding it to the  rest of the country.

MCALLISTER: Yes. Well, it's been five months since Labor pointed to this problem.  People shouldn’t have to choose between looking after their family and the material needs  of their family and protecting their co-workers. We don't want to see people going to work if  they are unwell. But there are many, many people in Australian workplaces who do not  have access to any leave at all for one reason or another. This virus isn't contained to  Victoria. This is a virus that is present across Australia. We need to get ahead of it. Labor’s  view is that there needs to be a universal leave arrangement and the Commonwealth  needs to contribute to that. So it's good, that they’ve finally stepped in months later to  make arrangements in Victoria. But that does nothing for the workers in Sydney who might  be right now making choices about whether they go and earn some money to look after  their family or whether to stay home and isolate, because they are concerned they have  symptoms. That's not good enough and it is not what we need during a pandemic.

NIELSEN: We're almost out of time, Gerard Rennick, should we be expanding the paid  pandemic leave nationwide not just Victoria.

RENNICK: Look, we will just play that one by ear. But at this stage, we are ahead of the  curve in the other states. We've taken appropriate action because obviously there's  enough demand on services because of the outbreak in Victoria. The other states are  doing a very good job of keeping the cases low with the exception in New South Wales,  active cases in single digits in every other state. So, and I reject the premise that we  haven't provided any money because we’ve provided tens of billions of dollars for  JobKeeper and tens of billions of dollars of JobSeeker. We've also provided free childcare  for a period of time. Now we've stepped in and provided paid leave people who get COVID.  So, I reject the allegations that we haven't done enough. And I'll finish with this, saying that  I think the Federal Government has provided fantastic support to the State Governments  and its about time the State Government’s started providing a roadmap out of this because  you know, the country as a whole can’t continue to stay in lockdown and those States  where the case number is very low.

NIELSEN: We will have to leave it there Liberal Senator Gerard Rennick and Labor  Senator Jenny McAllister,  thank you both for your time.

MCALLISTER: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEILA STENNETT: 0436 632 388







