Organised crime syndicate charged and more than  500kg of cocaine seized in PNG   afp.gov.au/news-media/media-releases/organised-crime-syndicate-charged-and-more-500kg-cocaine-seized-  png

Saturday, 1 August 2020, Publish time: 10:29am   Editor's note: Vision and images of the operation can be downloaded from Hightail.

Members of a Melbourne-based criminal syndicate, with alleged links to Italian  organised crime, have been charged for conspiring to import over 500 kilograms of  cocaine from PNG into Australia.

The Australian Federal Police (AFP), working with Queensland and Victoria Police,  Australian Border Force (ABF), Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission (ACIC) and  the Royal Papua New Guinea Constabulary (RPNGC), have charged five men, all facing  life imprisonment. The cocaine was seized last night by the RPNGC - and never made  it to Australian shores, preventing significant harm to the Australian community.

The five alleged conspirators were arrested in Queensland and Victoria on 26 July after  a Cessna model light aircraft departed Mareeba Airport for PNG. In a coordinated  effort across multiple locations, several search warrants were executed across  Victoria, NSW, Queensland and PNG.

The Queensland Joint Organised Crime Taskforce, working closely with Victoria Police  and RPNGC, will allege the group travelled from Melbourne and Sydney to Atherton  between 19 and 25 July, with the aim of carrying out the importation and collection of  cocaine from PNG, estimated to be valued at more than $80 million - the equivalent of  about 500,000 street deals.

The group then allegedly facilitated a flight on the light aircraft to PNG on the morning  of 26 July 2020, where a member of the group (a pilot) attempted to collect the illicit  cargo.

The AFP alleges the aircraft flew at about 3000 feet from Mareeba to PNG, in an effort  to avoid radar detection. These flights are dangerous for other aircraft as well as those  on board, in addition to being illegal and unauthorised.

On 26 July 2020, between 1pm and 2.30pm, the aircraft crashed while attempting to  take-off from a remote airstrip at Papa Lea Lea, north of Port Moresby, PNG. The AFP  alleges greed played a significant part in the syndicate's activities and cannot rule out  that the weight of the cocaine had an impact on the planes ability to take off.

About 11.45am on 28 July 2020, the pilot, an Australian national, presented himself to  the Australian Consulate in PNG. He has been arrested and charged with a PNG  Immigration offence.

Following ongoing international cooperation, the investigation into the location of the  cocaine continued in PNG, with the Royal Papua New Guinea Constabulary (RPNGC)  being assisted by the AFP. Late on Friday, 31 July 2020, the RPNGC located a number  of items it will be alleged were linked to the flight, including 28 bags believed to  contain 500 plus kilogram haul of cocaine. RPNGC analysis of the seizure is continuing  and a number of men are assisting RPNGC with their inquiries.

In Australia, a 31-year-old Maribyrnong (Victoria) man arrested at Atherton on 26 July  faced the Cairns Magistrates Court on 27 July, charged with:

• Conspiracy to import commercial quantities of border controlled drugs, contrary  to section 307.1(1) and Section 11.5(1) Criminal Code Act 1995 (Cth);  • Importing commercial quantities of border controlled drugs, contrary to Section  307.1() Criminal Code Act 1995 (Cth);  • Directing activities of a criminal syndicate, contrary to Section 390.6 Criminal

Code Act 1995 (Cth);  • Money laundering over $1 million, contrary to Section 400.3 Criminal Code Act  1995 (Cth);  • Two charges of dealing in proceeds of crime over $100,000, contrary to Section

400.4 Criminal Code Act 1995 (Cth).

The maximum penalty if convicted is life imprisonment.

• A 36-year-old Liverpool (NSW) man arrested at Atherton on 26 July faced the  Cairns Magistrates Court yesterday, charged with:  • Conspiracy to import commercial quantities of border controlled drugs., contrary  to Section 307.1(1) and Section 11.5(1) Criminal Code Act 1995 (Cth);  • Providing material support or resources to a criminal organisation, contrary to

section 390.41 Criminal Code Act 1995 (Cth).

The maximum penalty if convicted of these offences is life imprisonment.

A 31-year-old Hoppers Crossing (Victoria) man arrested in the Atherton area, was  charged with attempting to possess border controlled drugs, contrary to Section 307.5  and 11.1 Criminal Code Act 1995 (Cth). The maximum penalty if convicted is life  imprisonment.

It will be alleged this man was tasked by the syndicate to transport the drugs south  via heavy vehicle.

Two men arrested in Melbourne in joint AFP and Victoria Police action - a 33-year-old  Niddrie man and a 61-year-old Melbourne man - appeared in Melbourne Magistrates  Court on 27 July 2020 charged with conspiring to import commercial quantities border  controlled drugs, contrary to Section 307.1(1) Criminal Code (Cth). The men will  reappear again on 10 August 2020 to face an extradition hearing to Queensland. The  maximum penalty if convicted is life imprisonment.

As part of the operation the AFP-led Criminal Assets Confiscation Taskforce (CACT)  restrained property and financial assets suspected to be under the effective control of  a syndicate member, with an estimated total value of $3.5 million AUD.

The assets include three properties, shares, account funds, and a motor vehicle, all  restrained under the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (Cth), by orders made by the County  Court of Victoria on 27 July, 2020.

AFP Deputy Commissioner Investigations Ian McCartney said the resolution of the  almost two-year multi-agency operation demonstrated a commitment by Australian  authorities working collaboratively with international law enforcement to prevent illicit  drugs from reaching the streets and suburbs and causing harm to the Australian  community.

"These arrests prove no matter how sophisticated or opportunistic organised crime's  attempts are, or the methods they use, law enforcement is keeping pace and causing  maximum damage to these criminal ventures," Deputy Commissioner McCartney said.

"With current interstate travel restrictions in place due to COVID-19, the attempt to  import illicit drugs into Australia shows how opportunistic and greedy organised crime  can be. Australian law enforcement remains committed to working collectively to  protect Australia, which is especially important now, due to the ongoing impact of the  pandemic on the community."

Deputy Commissioner Tracy Linford, Queensland Police Service, said partner agencies  were committed to working together to disrupt serious and organised crime.

"Law enforcement is united in the fight against organised criminal behaviour that  crosses jurisdictions and we will continue our joint approach with state, national and  international partners to stop dangerous drugs impacting the Australian community,"  Deputy Commissioner Linford said.

Assistant Commissioner Tess Walsh, Victoria Police Crime Command, said these  arrests were the results of months of hard work from across a number of agencies.

"This outcome has only been possible due to the incredible cooperation we've had  between law enforcement agencies who were all committed to a single goal, which  was to dismantle this syndicate," she said.

"We strongly believe these arrests will notably reduce the amount of illegal drugs  being distributed along the eastern seaboard and should serve as a warning for  anyone who believes this type of offending is acceptable.

"The pursuit of drug manufacturers and traffickers is something that never ends for  police."

ABF Assistant Commissioner, Peter Timson, said that the ABF was resolutely focused  on the protection of Australia's borders to prevent the appalling community impact of  illegal drug importation.

"This particularly audacious attempt shows just how brazen criminal enterprises can  be, but it also highlights just how effective the law enforcement response can be when  we all work together," he said.

Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission (ACIC) Acting CEO Matthew Rippon said  that the ACIC's National Wastewater Drug Monitoring Program clearly showed us that  Australians still have an insatiable appetite for illicit substances.

"The evidence through our wastewater analysis indicates that large law enforcement  disruptions such as this have a significant impact on community consumption. I  congratulate our partner agencies on this disruption and making our local communities  safer," said Mr Rippon.

RPNGC Commissioner David Manning said the RPNGC had a long and enduring history  of working collaboratively with Australian law-enforcement to combat transnational  crime impacting PNG and Australia.

"These arrests send a clear message that PNG will not tolerate transnational crime  syndicates using our nation as a transit point for illicit commodities intended for

Australia.  We will continue our joint efforts to see that those involved in PNG are  bought to justice," Commissioner Manning said.

The Queensland JOCTF comprises of investigators from the Australian Federal Police  (AFP), Queensland Police Service (QPS), Australian Border Force (ABF), Australian  Criminal Intelligence Commission (ACIC) and the Department of Home Affairs with the  valuable assistance of the Australian Taxation Office and AUSTRAC.

The AFP-led CACT taskforce, which includes staff from the Australian Criminal  Intelligence Commission, AUSTRAC, Australian Border Force and the Australian  Taxation Office, was formed in 2011 as part of a multi-agency crackdown on criminal  assets.

This complex transnational investigation was conducted with the special assistance of  Victoria Police and the Royal Papua New Guinea Constabulary (RPNGC).

Vision and images of the operation can be downloaded from Hightail.

Media enquiries

AFP Media: (02) 5126 9297

Victoria Police Media: (03) 8335 6200

Queensland Police Media: (07) 3015 2444

Australian Border Force: (02) 6264 2211



































































