





The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology  Federal Member for McPherson

TRANSCRIPT

Interview - The Kenny Report - Sky News

18 March 2020

Topics: Manufacturing response to coronavirus and panic buying

E&OE:



Chris Kenny: But for now let’s cross to the Gold Coast and catch up with the Industry  Minister Karen Andrews. Thanks for joining us, Minister.

Karen Andrews: Chris, how are you?

Chris Kenny: Good, thanks. You’ve got a big challenge on your hands, making sure that  this country can supply some of the medical necessities that we don’t have big enough  stocks of, that we can’t get from imports anymore. What are the key products we’re after,  and how are you getting them manufactured in this country?

Karen Andrews: So we’re looking at a range of products. I’ll start with the request for  information that my department has just put out in the last couple of days, but I’d also like to  point out that that request for information is the next step in the work that we’re already  doing. So we’ve already identified a number of manufacturers and they’re up and working  already, as well as we’re continuing to look at bringing in product from overseas. So what  we've gone out, very broadly, to look at is what is our potential to manufacture more  surgical masks, more hand sanitisers, more gowns, those sorts of things. So it's a very  wide-ranging request for information.

We've got some really good responses that have come in to that. If I use the example of  surgical masks, we do have capacity already to manufacture that in Australia. We already  do have stockpiles of that. But we're looking forward to what our usage may well be over  the coming months and quite frankly, beyond that. So we're working very closely with a  local manufacturer, Med-Con in Victoria, and we have brought in the resources from the  Australian Defence Forces to help them to gear up. They've already doubled their  manufacturing output and they're looking to increase that even further. We're looking at  what equipment we can bring into Australia and what other manufacturers there are that  [indistinct] fairly quickly to keep producing the surgical masks and the P2 respirators for us.

Chris Kenny: You sound like they've cranked up very quickly on this stuff and that's great.  You've got to move very fast in all this stuff. But it also shows our vulnerability to imports  and supply chains. Surely, after all this is done, we've got to look at ways to make sure that



state and federal government contracts go to local manufacturers so we can keep this  expertise and this production capability in our country.

Karen Andrews: Look, that's a very good point and it's not just government procurement,  it's actually making sure that we can redevelop, restrengthen our manufacturing capacity  here in Australia because there are some key areas that we've identified that we really do  need to build that capacity. One is surgical masks.

Now, the good thing is that we have a very strong food manufacturing base here in  Australia. So food is not going to be an issue for us in the short or the medium term and  quite frankly, the longer term. So that's actually really positive for us. The issues that we're  facing with food at the moment is really the panic buying and the hoarding that's happening  in supermarkets at the moment. Now, the Prime Minister spoke very strongly about that this  morning and the need for that to stop. I understand. I go into the supermarkets myself and it  is concerning to see that there are some shelves that are empty, that have been cleared out  very quickly. There's really no need for that to happen. If people just went back to their  normal buying behaviours, it would be fine. We do have very good food supply chains here  in Australia so we’re not concerned about food, but there are other parts of manufacturing  that clearly we need to look at.

Chris Kenny: Just two points on that. Just on this misinformation and the panic buying -  it’s shocking what we've seen in the panic buying. It seemed to have been generated by a  lot of social media misinformation. It's another reminder- there are some reminders already  out of this crisis about where we've gone off track. And I think if people were sticking to  mainstream media, be that the Nine Media or the ABC or Sky News, they're going to get a  lot more quality factual information and they're going to behave a lot more rationally.  Instead, they're going off on fake documents on WhatsApp and the like.

Karen Andrews: Look, I couldn't agree more because I think that the mainstream media  has clearly been reporting what's been happening in the supermarkets. But it's when you  get onto the social media platforms that you actually see mass hysteria and that is now self-generating. And it's actually starting to cause harm, particularly to the vulnerable people in  our communities: those with disabilities and the elderly in our community, who are now  quite frightened about whether or not they're going to get the food that they need. And I  would just love to assure them that we do have very good food supplies and we will be  restocking those shelves. I mean, Woolworths, Coles, Aldi, Metcash - they are working as  hard as they possibly can to take stock …

Chris Kenny: … Yeah. Take a chill pill. We'll be right- now just on to the other issue, you  are talking about cranking up quickly the manufacture of masks and the like. When you talk  about respirators, how sophisticated are the respirators you're talking about? I believe that  they're going to be absolutely essential. Do we have enough of those? Can we manufacture  those in Australia?

Karen Andrews: Look, we do have adequate supplies at the moment. So, we are looking  at how we can produce the P2 masks here in Australia so they will be used by the medical  profession primarily. So, the surgical masks will be available more broadly. They will be  used by the health professionals but they can be used for people who have contracted  coronavirus, COVID-19. So, we're looking at both of those. So the surgical masks and the  P2 masks, which are a higher specification. So, we will need more of the surgical masks  and we're modifying our procurement accordingly, and we will be ramping up the production  of the surgical masks here and more likely continue to purchase the P2 masks from our  global suppliers.





Chris Kenny: Finally, a dramatic escalation in the number of unemployed people in this  country. What innovative ideas is the Government looking at to try and re-employ people,  even if temporarily, rather than throw tens of thousands of people onto welfare?

Karen Andrews: Look, we are looking at a coordinated way that we could help people that  are potentially going to lose their jobs to access opportunities and try and match them into  growing areas. Now, we do know that there is certainly job opportunities in supermarkets at  the moment, in distribution centres, in customer service. We know that that's available at  the moment and it may well be short-term. We do know that we're ramping up some of our  production capacity. And of course, in an area such as Shepparton, you’ve got seasonal  workers that- they’re working in the fruit packing industry as well too. They're available.  We’ll start looking at how we can utilise them.

Chris Kenny: Thanks for joining us, Minister.

Karen Andrews: Pleasure.

Chris Kenny: Karen Andrews there, the Industry Minister. Plenty on her plate as well.



Media Contact: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

