MEDIA RELEASE

Greens call for Government to cancel all robodebts and suspend mutual  obligations

The Greens have repeated their calls for the Government to take public health seriously  and suspend mutual obligation responsibilities of all people on Centrelink payments to  protect vulnerable people and public health from COVID-19.

"There are over 600,000 people on Newstart with differing levels of mutual obligations  requirements including attending appointments with their employment service provider  or Centrelink," Senator Rachel Siewert said.

“On any one day around 15,000 job seekers are participating in Work for the Dole.

"There are 30,000 people participating in the Community Development Program and  over 100,000 people on the ParentsNext program who will all be expected to attend  appointments, work sites and activities such as reading time or swimming lessons  during the COVID-19  crisis.

"It  can be very difficult to get an exemption from an activity, even if you are sick. If  people fail to attend appointments or work sites peoples’ payments can be suspended  or cancelled.

"I understand the UK is making moves to suspend activity requirements for jobseekers.

"It's  not fair that the Government are holding illegal robodebts over the heads of people  during the COVID-19 crisis.

“I am calling on the Government to cancel all robodebts, repay and compensate victims.

“People are already struggling to get by on very low payments, they don’t need the  added stress of having a payment suspended because they don’t think they should be  attending an appointment or a work for the dole site during a pandemic, or attending  when they are sick just to keep their payment.

"Our first priority should be looking after people’s health and well-being, including the  mental health of those with robodebts.

No publication date - received by Parl Library 20 March 2020

"The Government should make it clear that they are putting the public health of the  community first, including those on income support and suspend mutual obligation  requirements."

"The sensible and responsible thing to do is to cancel all participation requirements for  the duration of the pandemic and allow people to put their health and safety first."





Media Contact  Lucy Cowcher-Guthrie: 0418 401 180











