

MATT KEOGH MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE INDUSTRY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WA RESOURCES

SHADOW MINISTER ASSISTING FOR SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS

MEMBER FOR BURT



ADDRESS TO THE DEFENCE CONNECT BUDGET LUNCH



CANBERRA



TUESDAY, 13 OCTOBER 2020



***CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY***



I wish to start by acknowledging the traditional custodians of the land on which I

join you from for this event today, the Whadjuk Noongar People of South-Western Australia, and the Nunawal and Gnanbury people of the ACT, and pay

my respects to their elders past and present.



As the coronavirus took hold and many nations experienced supply chain

shocks, so began the ever-mounting calls for increased domestic

manufacturing self-sufficiency.



While it was impressive that our old car factories were reworked to build

ventilators, gin distilleries subbed in sanitiser and prosthetics companies

produced PPE, this was possible in part because sales of many of their usual

goods were quashed.



Australia should be a country that makes things, but we also need good bang

for our investment buck - that means leveraging our existing spends.



We should be making high value, high end manufactured goods and the

supplies required for them.



Reawakening Australian manufacturing need not be protectionist nor

undermine our support for a strong, rules based, global trading system - it must

be focused on what is in our national interest.



Defence industry provides that opportunity.

Right now the Australian Government is embarked upon a $270 billion defence

acquisition program over the next decade.



Unfortunately, despite headline grabbing media releases, their commitment to

Australian industry capability for defence industry has been lacking - not the

“rivers of gold” the Minister claims.



This Government has failed to implement strong, measurable and enforceable

Australian industry capability requirements in our defence contracts, which is

really hurting our local industry, at a time when jobs are desperately needed.



If we spent just 10 percent more of that $270 billion allocated for defence

capability procurement over the next decade in Australia, we would see an

additional $2.7 billion of work go to our local defence industry every year,

potentially supporting thousands of jobs and building our local capabilities.



In last week’s Budget Reply, Labor committed to ensuring major defence

project contracts contain measurable, enforceable, audited and transparent AIC

requirements.



The Federal Government MUST implement contractual requirements that

compel Defence primes to do the work here in Australia, and to work with

Australian companies.



So far there has been a complete lack of enforceable contractual requirements

imposed on defence suppliers to ensure that they meet their Australian industry

content commitments, nor has there been any real effort to ensure that this

work actually contributes to the development of Australian sovereign defence

industry capability.



The more the Australian Government supports our Defence industry, the better

that industry is able to grow its export markets - strategically, it makes sense

for defence builds, sustainment, maintenance and repair work to occur in

Australia

for the ADF, as well as our friends and allies who may be operating in the

region.



We have the skills, the willing labour force and facilities to make it happen.



It is not enough for the Morrison Government to talk up its $270 billion defence

spend as if big headline numbers are the end of the story.



It needs to articulate a plan not just for what those taxpayer dollars will be spent

on but also how they will be leveraged to support Australian high-end

manufacturing jobs, apprenticeships and training, and provide the economic

foundation for further Australian defence industry exports that are globally

competitive.



This could mean billions of dollars added to our economy and would result in

countless jobs.



What we have seen to date is cold comfort for our Australian manufacturing

industry.



It is simply not good enough to see contracts sent offshore without even

considering local companies.



When the government does bow to pressure to specify AIC content for projects,

as they did with future submarines - which started at 90% and has now fallen to

60%, they count spending on Australian travel agents and hotels instead of

Australian motors and switchboards as part of AIC.



The Government needs a plan, not another press release.



The Government recently announced that Aussie businesses would need to be

“considered” for defence work - however this does not carry any significant

weight when it comes to securing defence work overall.



It’s about as useful as putting a screen door on a submarine.



It’s also too late for the billions of dollars in spending already allocated to

overseas companies for large scale projects.



We need enforceable and measurable Aussie capability requirements in all our

defence manufacturing contracts.





Should Labor be elected, this policy would not only create ongoing Australian

jobs, it would further develop Australia’s sovereign capability, ensuring workers

are skilled up and Australia increases its technical know-how to not just build

Defence equipment but maintain and upgrade it into the future.



It is incumbent on Government to consider ways to best avoid the supply chain

shocks we have seen through COVID in the future, as our strategic

circumstances become increasingly complex.



Considering the scope of supplies required by defence, and the capacity to

better spend existing budgets to develop domestic manufacturing, there is an

opportunity right here for the taking.



This Liberal Government has been AWOL when it comes to supporting

Australian defence industry.



If the Morrison Government does not adopt Labor’s approach, we are at risk of

seeing a decrease in local defence work and more work going to offshore

suppliers, with all the international supply chain risk that entails, as has been

highlighted during the COVID-19 pandemic.



Australian companies need to be factored into the defence project supply chain

from the very beginning of the design phase - the longer we let this go on, the

more at-risk Australian companies, jobs and skills become.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHANIE MATHEWS, 0430 595 700





