







SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate  Senator for South Australia



MEDIA RELEASE

28 October 2020

New Board appointments to oversee Tourism Australia’s critical role in  tourism recovery

The Morrison Government has today announced two new appointments and three reappointments  to the Tourism Australia Board, to lead the organisation in its major role in tourism recovery by  encouraging Australians to see their own backyard and when the time is right, showing the world  there is still nothing like Australia.

Harvey Norman Chief Executive Officer, Katie Page, and co-founder and proprietor of The  Landsmith Collection, Alexandra Burt, have both been appointed for three-year terms.

Tourism Australia Chair, Bob East, has also been reappointed to the position, while Board member  Jeffrey Ellison has been appointed Deputy Chair. Board member Bradley Woods has also been  reappointed for another term.

These appointments come at a critical time for Tourism Australia who in the Budget received a  record $231.6 million for 2020-21 to ramp up domestic marketing activities to encourage  Australians to travel again, and ensure they are well placed to aggressively execute new  campaigns to again attract international visitors when overseas travel is back on the table.

Federal Tourism Minister Simon Birmingham said the new appointments would inject further  breadth of experience to the Board, whist the reappointments would bring important stability and  continuity to the leadership of Tourism Australia.

“Australia’s tourism industry will continue to face immense challenges, and clear and decisive  leadership will be crucial to ensuring Tourism Australia plays its part in helping the industry  rebound from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic,” Minister Birmingham said.

“Ms Page and Ms Burt will bring to the Board further knowledge and experience in tourism product,  marketing and advertising, playing an important role in the execution of Tourism Australia’s  strategic and targeted marketing initiatives going forward.

“The reappointments of Mr East, Mr Ellison and Mr Woods will also bring important stability to the  leadership of the organisation through a period of unprecedented upheaval for our tourism  industry.

“I would also like to thank the outgoing Deputy Chair Anna Guillan and fellow Board member David  Seargeant for their significant contributions over the past three years.”

Media Contacts  Benn Ayre: +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs: +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.







Biographies

Bob East (Reappointed as Chair)

Bob East has more than 20 years’ experience in the tourism industry, most recently serving as the  CEO of the Mantra Group for 12 years where he helped shape the Mantra Group into the largest  Australian-based hotel company. He led the company to a successful ASX listing in June 2014  which culminated in its inclusion into the ASX 200 list in 2015 and managed Mantra Group’s $1.3B  acquisition by AccorHotels, one of the world’s largest hotel operators in 2018. Mr East’s experience  includes serving on the boards of the Gold Coast Tourism Corporation, Queensland Tourism  Industry Council, Tourism Accommodation Australia, Tourism and Events Queensland and the  Tourism and Transport Forum.

Mr East holds a Master of Business Administration and is Chair of the Australian Venue Company,  Chair of Experience Co, Deputy Chair of the Gold Coast Suns Football Club and a Board member  of Sydney Metro. He has extensive experience in the accommodation sector, previously holding  senior management roles with the Mirvac portfolio and the Daikyo Group.

Jeffrey Ellison (Appointed as Deputy Chair)

Jeffrey Ellison is the Chairman of the SeaLink Travel Group, where he has also previously held the  position of CEO and Managing Director since 1997. SeaLink is Australia's largest tourism and  marine transport company, transporting over 8.5 million passengers per annum. It employs 1,600  staff and operates a fleet of 77 vessels and 60 coaches across five states and territories.

Mr Ellison is a Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants and the Australian Institute of  Company Directors and has been awarded a Life Membership by TTF Australia. He has also held  appointments on the Adelaide Convention Centre Board, Tourism Australia International Industry  Advisory Panel, TTF Australia, SA Tourism Commission Board and the SA Botanic Gardens and  State Herbarium Board.

Bradley Woods (Reappointed as a Member of the Board)

For nearly 30 years Bradley Woods has been one of Australia’s leading advocates for the hotel,  hospitality and tourism industry. Mr Woods has been the CEO of the WA Australian Hotels  Association (WA) since 1998 and previously held the roles of CEO of the AHA Tasmania and AHA  National Government Relations Manager.

Mr Woods is National Chair of the Commonwealth’s Tourism, Travel and Hospitality Industry  Reference Committee, responsible for the industry’s vocational training packages. He is also Chair  of Hospitality Group Training, which specialises in training and industry placement apprentice  chefs, Chair of the Australia Day Council WA and a Board Member of Ronald McDonald House  Perth and mental health charity, Healthy Mind Menu Inc.

Katie Page (Appointed as a Member of the Board)

Katie Page is the Chief Executive Officer of Harvey Norman, a role she has held since 1999. Ms  Page joined the company in 1983 when the retailer had only one retail complex in Sydney and was  appointed as Board Director when Harvey Norman was publicly listed in 1987.

Ms Page is also on the Board of Pertama Holdings Pty Ltd and The Bradman Foundation, and sits  on the advisory council for The Business Council of Australia’s BizRebuild fund, a five-year  bushfire recovery and rebuilding fund run by business.  Ms Page has also held board positions at  Sydney Cricket & Sports Ground Trust, Place Management NSW Board and Museum of  Contemporary Art. In 2005 Ms Page was appointed to the board of the National Rugby League.  Her appointment made history as she was the first woman to become a member of a major  sporting board in Australia.









Alexandra Burt (Appointed as Member of the Board)

With nearly 20 years’ experience in wine and tourism, Alexandra Burt is the co-founder and  proprietor of The Landsmith Collection which owns and operates businesses that bring together  luxury tourism, the natural world and agriculture in Western Australia and the Top End. These  include Voyager Estate, a leading producer of organically farmed wines in Margaret River, and one  of Australia’s most storied cattle stations, Bullo River Station, in the North Territory which, as well  as a tourism offering, has a unique partnership with the Australian Wildlife Conservancy.

Ms Burt spent 11 years on regional, state and national wine industry boards and committees. She  is currently Chair of Australian Futures Project, a board member of the Australian String Quartet,  and Patron of Private Giving for West Australian Ballet.













