

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T

Wednesday 9th December 2020

Minister Littleproud IV Sky News

CHRIS KENNY: Let's go to Canberra now, and catch up with the Federal Agriculture  Minister David Littleproud. David, thanks for joining us. First up, I just want to follow up on  that report, you don't have to be critical, put it the other way around, we can all be very  proud of the way Australia's kept infections of coronavirus to a minimum, it's very, very  enviable position compared to other countries around the globe. You can have that  position, but also look at what we've done, especially with hard border closures, extreme  lockdowns in Victoria, or in some of the other states, to admit that with hindsight we should  have done less. Especially state governments should have done less to crack down on our  economy in order to manage this pandemic.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah Chris. I think there's some good points there. In reality,  we're always going to learn out of a pandemic, one that we knew very little about when it  hit, but we learnt very quickly. And I think that's the point and that's the point that I've been  making probably since about June, that these arbitrary decisions by state to lock down  borders predicated for political parochialism, and political expediency when elections were  coming up, rather than backing one another with science, we should have a modern  federation where we could have trusted one another with the site, the contact tracing, so  that we had localised lockdowns. And I think that's one of the things out of Federation that  we should learn. That it was tested and tested severely during this. And we shouldn't be  afraid to look at all our actions, not only federal government, but state governments as  well, about what we did and how we did it. And I think a modern federation should trust  one another, work together and work as one. And unfortunately, we had this had this  situation where states acted unilaterally, [Audio skip] particularly, if someone living in the  regions, they had arbitrary decisions predicated on capital city policy, not thinking about  how the regions needed to continue on despite the fact they hadn't even seen a COVID  case within hundreds of kilometres. So I think if there's anything to be learnt, I think - and  there is - is for us to look back and be honest with one another about how we could have  done this better, but we should be proud of what we've done. We've achieved a lot as a  nation, but there should always be time for us to reflect and to put in place proper plans  into the future.

CHRIS KENNY: Yeah, spot on. Look, as Agriculture Minister, you've had a year of real  swings and roundabouts. I mean, the drought has broken for large parts of Australia, which  has been a great thing, and some bumper crops being harvested as we speak. But of  course, the coronavirus pandemic is impacted on, especially when it comes to labor, in the  agricultural sector. But the spat with Beijing, the diplomatic row with Beijing, continues to  hurt our agriculture sector. You know, barley farmers have been hit hard, the wine sector,

Transcript



T R A N S C R I P T

we've had some meat exporters and now timber exporters hit by China, the latest bans on  Australian exports.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, look, and we're continuing to work through that, but we  should be proud of the fact that ABARES's estimated that by June 30 we would be about a  $60 billion industry. We're now looking at $65 billion. And that's on the back of a bumper  winter crop. And despite China's actions on barely, we haven't seen a significant drop.  There's about a $10 to $20 drop per tonne, which is still obviously out of our pockets. But  we've been able to send them into other markets because of the quality of [Audio skip]  product, and that's been important. With respect to the other commodities, wine is  obviously a significant concern to us. There's $1.2 billion worth of exports. It's around 37  per cent of our total wine exports into China. And the timber industry is obviously reeling  as well. And they are probably exposed more than any other agricultural industry. So we're  going to work through with those industries about our next act- piece of action and we're  not afraid to use the independent umpire, we think there's mounting evidence now that this  is not to do with technical trade matters, is to do with other matters that they've raised,  particularly around our sovereignty, which we will not relent on. And we will not  compromise our sovereignty, the values and principles that hundreds of thousands of  Australians have given their lives for. No Australian government will ever do that. But the  only way in which we can rectify this, and in fact, China is able to [Audio skip] not just to  Australia but to the rest of the world, that this is nothing to do with our sovereignty, is to  start dialogue. And to have construction dialogue at ministerial levels. And as I've always  said, my phone is always on and my door is always on. And that is the best way in which  to resolve any issues, whether they be internationally or even in your own home.

CHRIS KENNY: Well, the way things are going at the moment, China will be more likely to  be listening into your phone calls than actually dialling your phone themselves. So let's  hope that changes in the new year. I just want to ask you about the industrial relations  issue, which is up again because of the government's new bill. When you look back to  WorkChoices, long time before you're in parliament, I think. But one of the key mistakes  that John Howard made in WorkChoices was this idea of the better off test. There was the  possibility in the original WorkChoices that workers could be worse off under some of the  deals struck. That's a weakness that you're opening up again with this package, isn't it?  Saying that businesses are affected by coronavirus, then under the arrangements, workers  could do a deal that sees them worse off.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, this is just political desperation of a party that's found  themselves irrelevant and obviously having leadership tensions. This provision was  already coming into legislation, it's just…

CHRIS KENNY: No, no. hang on, I'm not quoting Labor. This is the point. This is a  provision that's in the legislation…

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I'll go and explain it, Chris. And that's why I was about to  explain. They're trying to single out a very small portion of this bill that really already exists  within the current legislation for drought, natural disaster. And it's simply a provision that  allows for COVID-19, this pandemic that has hit the world. It's not something that is new or  anything insurmountable, but it just goes to show that the Australian Labor Party is  desperate to cling on to any juncture whatsoever they can because of the political  desperation they find themselves in. Now, we'll obviously continue to work through and I  know the Industrial Relations Minister will make sure he works through these issues. But  the important point about this also is that that provision can only come into place if the

Transcript



T R A N S C R I P T

employer, the employee, the union themselves, all agree that that provision should be put  into place. So there's safeguards in there, as there already is in the act, but because we're  in the middle of a pandemic and we're trying to get ourselves out of this pandemic  recession, there has been pragmatic moves in which to try and create jobs in this country.  Now, I know the Industrial Relations Minister has shown great conciliation to the union  movement and will continue to do that and he'll work through those issues. But this isn't  anything earth shattering. It's just the fact that Labor are desperate, politically desperate.  They've got a leader on the ropes and there's plenty circling behind that are prepared to  take his job out. And so this is just them trying to save his job, make them finally irrelevant  on something.

CHRIS KENNY: David Littleproud, thanks for joining us. Appreciate it.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks for having me, mate.

CHRIS KENNY: That's the Federal Agricultural Minister, David Littleproud.



Media contact  Douglas Ferguson, 0455 448 985

