



SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment

SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women



MEDIA RELEASE

13 December 2020

Trade agreement with the Pacific enters into force

Farmers, businesses and investors across Australia and the Pacific will have their  trade opportunities boosted from today with the Pacific Agreement on Closer  Economic Relations Plus (PACER Plus) coming into force.

Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment Simon Birmingham said PACER Plus  was a major step in strengthening Australia’s relationship with our Pacific partners  and would play a valuable role in supporting recovery in the region from COVID-19.

“This trade deal ensures greater market access and lower tariffs across a range of  products that will benefit communities, farmers, fishers, businesses and investors in  our region,” Minister Birmingham said.

“We’re committed to working together to ensure businesses in the Pacific and across  Australia take advantage of the new trade and investment opportunities PACER Plus  will bring.”

Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Women, Senator the Hon Marise Payne  said the entry into force of the Agreement offered important opportunities at a time  when the region was focussed on economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic.

“We’ll continue to work closely with our Pacific family to bring the Agreement to life.  The next phase of PACER Plus represents another opportunity to deliver our shared  vision for our Blue Pacific,” said Minister Payne.

Australia will support our Pacific partners to implement the trade agreement,  maximising opportunities for their local businesses to access export markets.

Funding under PACER Plus will allow more countries access to an existing program  focussed on improving market access to Australia for specific horticultural and  agricultural products. By assisting Pacific countries to meet the biosecurity and  quality requirements, countries will be able to maintain and develop their agricultural  export markets - an important opportunity to support livelihoods through trade.

Australia, Cook Islands, Kiribati, Niue, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga and  New Zealand are Parties to the Agreement. The remaining signatories that are yet to  ratify are Nauru, Tuvalu and Vanuatu. Signatories will become Parties to the  Agreement 60 days after they have ratified the Agreement.

For more information on PACER Plus, refer to: https://www.dfat.gov.au/PACER-Plus

Media Contacts  Benn Ayre: +61 428 342 325 (Birmingham)  David Wroe: +61 429 531 143 (Payne)



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment,  Australia.



