



The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT

INTERVIEW WITH CHRIS SMITH, 2GB  SATURDAY 15 AUGUST 2020





EO&E…

CHRIS SMITH: Good morning to you, Prime Minister.

PRIME MINISTER: Good morning, Chris.

SMITH: Commemorations like these don't come around every day. This one holds so much significance  for today's Australian, doesn't it?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah it does. And it reminds us of a time and a generation that was like none other.  We're certainly confronting our own challenges today with what's happening but that was a completely  different experience and the fortitude and the strength and the resilience of Australians whether they  were at the frontline or whether they were working in munitions factories or they were looking after who  was left behind. You know, it was just an incredible generation and I'm always humbled by them.

SMITH: It's interesting when you trace back the stories, what their generation went through, both on the  battlefield and I'm glad you mentioned back home, you realise that this was a period of time where  Australians were so willing to sacrifice and they had tremendous resilience. And we can learn so much  from that generation, can't we?

PRIME MINISTER: Oh, totally. And that was- and I have no doubt that they were frustrated, that they were  angry, that they got down hearted, and I often think at these times, and I was this morning, I was reflecting  on my own grandparents this morning, as I was having a cup of coffee. And I remember the stories my  grandmother told me about growing up in the Depression. And then when she was at home with my  grandfather off at war and she had to look after his father as well, who was elderly. And, you know, they  just went through unimaginable anxiety and uncertainty. And there are a lot of lessons there for us and a  lot of strength we can draw from.

SMITH: I spoke to my teenage son last night about all of this and what we were doing on the programme  today. And I said to him, ‘you know what it tells me mate’, and it was a personal conversation. But I said

to him, ‘it makes me think that a lot of younger people today need to harden up a bit and realise the  history of those generations’.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, history is important and it informs us and it inspires us. And I suppose my message  would be slightly different and a bit more generous, but it would be to be inspired. To take the positive of  those stories. And whether it's Teddy Sheean who we thankfully were able to see honoured by the Queen  acceding to the recommendation we made, these people are just incredible. Their stories, I remember  when I walked Kokoda, it was over a decade ago now and and that has that has stayed with me. And the  treks that I did, the Sandakan death march, and around the Black Cat track, up around Salamaua and Lae.  And to hear those stories, they never left me. And we took young people with us. I did that with Jason  Clare a Labor member. We did it as a bipartisan many years ago and we just loved how it inspired young  people. There's a lot to be inspired by.

SMITH: Very, very true. Very, very true. Just a couple of things off the commemoration today. I've just  received a release coming out of your office, Marise Payne's office, Linda Reynolds’ office. Australia is  delivering urgently needed humanitarian supplies to Beirut. The reality is there are 300,000 people there  who are left homeless.

PRIME MINISTER: It is devastating. I think the images of that explosion, which was about 20 per cent of  the scale of Little Boy, the big bomb in Japan. That's something to reflect on. It is just horrific. We've been  doing a lot of work with the Lebanese community in Australia, Australians with Lebanese heritage, and  they're amazing people. I know many of them incredibly well. They're raising money. They're looking to  help how they could help in Lebanon. But there are people who'll be making their way back from Lebanon  and we’re facilitating that, we’ve put $5 million dollars down and into internationally coordinated aid  efforts. I joined a call the other night, with President Macron, and about 30 others, countries, about how  I mean, we're a long way away and we're not going to solve the problems of the Middle East all the way  here from Australia. But there are things we can do directly to help people.  And we are. And the  communities are opening up their hearts, as I know the Lebanese community does in Australia, they're  amazing people.

SMITH: On another issue, the report into the handling of the Ruby Princess was handed down late  yesterday. The ship has been linked to 900 cases of coronavirus and 28 deaths. The commissioner cleared  Australian Border Force of any wrongdoing, but found staff from New South Wales Health made some  serious mistakes. There are some apologies, I would have thought, need to be up front and centre,  including one from Senator Kristina Keneally?

PRIME MINISTER: Well look it is as we said it was Chris, because, I mean, we were being straight with  people about what happened. The inquiry has borne that out. The Labor party, wanted to snipe and sledge  and throw stones, and that's been their approach. It's disappointing. I don't dwell on it terribly much, I’ve  got too much else to focus on as has Peter Dutton and David Littleproud and Michael McCormack and  Josh Frydenberg and Greg Hunt. You know, we're just getting on with the job and look, for the issues in  New South Wales, at the same time, it was a very difficult time and officials will make mistakes in  pandemics that none of us have had to manage before. And so I think there's been some humble learnings  out of New South Wales. And I've seen New South Wales just go from strength to strength in managing  the pandemic. And you are seeing that right now. In times like this, there will be errors made. But what  you've got to ensure is that you learn from every single one of them and you emerge stronger each time.  And so I'd say to people in New South Wales, that's what I've seen Gladys Berejiklian doing. She just

doubles down, goes back to work and just makes sure it doesn't happen again. And that's that's her  attitude. And I’ve been, I really thank her for taking that leadership role.

SMITH: There are some lessons too to be learned at your level over aged care. I was really impressed with  the health secretary, Professor Brendan Murphy, yesterday putting some context into this debate about  the handling of aged care during this pandemic.

PRIME MINISTER: Oh, look, it's a very complex issue. And I think at the end of the day, the reason we are  having this challenge is because there's widespread community transmission in Victoria. I mean, that's  why, we're not having those problems in New South Wales or in Queensland or elsewhere, because  there's not widespread community transmission. I mean, it's impacting hospitals. It's impacting healthcare  services all over Victoria. And aged care is no exception to that. There's not some special force field, but  the aged care response centre that we've set up down there. There's a bloke doing a terrific job, a guy  called Joe Buffone out of Emergency Management Australia. He's leading that task force team down there.  And you know they are just getting a mountain of work done to just protect people, protect our elderly  residents, to ensure work forces are properly trained. He's just working those issues with all of us every  day. I just got off a call from him about fifteen minutes ago. We go through these issues every single day,  with Brendan and with Paul Kelly. And Greg Hunt and the whole team, Richard Colbeck, they are very  complex issues. And, you know, we've just got to work hard to stay on top of them. As I said yesterday,  some days, the virus gets the better of us. But other days, they're the better ones and they're the ones  we're trying to increase the frequency of.

SMITH: I often think to myself, what an era to be the Prime Minister of the nation. Good luck with all of  those challenges. We'll be listening to your commemorative address and putting it live to air, Prime  Minister thank you very much for your time.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks a lot mate and lest we forget.

SMITH: Thanks.

[END]



Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney



