JOANNE RYAN MP

OPPOSITION WHIP

MEMBER FOR LALOR





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RADIO MELBOURNE MORNINGS WITH VIRGINIA TRIOLI

WEDNESDAY, 2 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Morrison Government’s failures in aged care; BaptCare Wyndham

Lodge.



VIRGINIA TRIOLI, HOST: Right at the top of the program today, we were speaking to the

CEO of BaptCare Wyndham Lodge Community, Graham Dangerfield, about the fact that

Wyndham Lodge - which is a rather large aged care facility there - is still recording new

infections such a long period of time after the first infections were recorded there on the

16th of July.



The Prime Minister spoke in the House - was answering a question yesterday from the

member for Lalor, Joanne Ryan during Question Time. He gave an answer that would

seem to be not completely accurate now according to what Graham Dangerfield told us.



Jo Ryan is the Federal Member for Lalor for Labor and joins you now. JOANNE RYAN,

good morning.



JOANNE RYAN, FEDERAL MEMBER FOR LALOR: Morning, Virginia.



TRIOLI: I think the Prime Minister said in answer to your question there have been 10

deaths at Wyndham Lodge but actually there have been 17. Is that right?



RYAN: Yes, that appears to be the case. It wasn't the only number the Prime Minister had

wrong the other day.



But the most stunning thing, Virginia, for me is that I needed to ask a question in Question

Time because the transparency around these numbers is now gone. I can't find out on a

daily basis how the centres are tracking in my electorate. So, I had to ask a question of the

Prime Minister and he confidently gave an answer that took me back because, from

members of my community, I knew that number 10 was not correct.



He said it so confidently. But then again, he was incorrect in most of his other numbers.



TRIOLI: What were the other numbers that were incorrect?



RYAN: He said that four people were in hospital recovering - four people were in hospital

with COVID. The email says there were seven -



TRIOLI: This is an email that was sent from Wyndham Lodge to its own community, dated

31st of August, I think.



RYAN: That's right, that email. He said there'd been 86 staff tested positive. The number

appears to be 97. So, it's the obfuscation that concerns me the most. We will not get this

under control if the community doesn't know what's happening. And I represent a

community that are in deep mourning. We know; we're attending the virtual funerals of

people who've led this community and people who have lived here their whole lives.



TRIOLI: We also learnt that there are new infections being recorded at that Lodge - not

only of staff but also of the health care workers there. What can we fairly and reasonably

conclude from infection management control there when we factor in the reality that it is a

very, very difficult virus to take control of? Everyone acknowledges that but should we be

critical of Wyndham Lodge when we realise that there are new infections being recorded?



RYAN: I think for me, Virginia, the question is: the strategies that have been put in place at

Wyndham Lodge will have been strategies put in place across the sector. And this is now,

for me, a systemic issue. And again, the Prime Minister and those responsible - the

Minister for Aged Care, Richard Colbeck - have now had in this case, in this Centre, from

July 16 to the 31st of August, when that email was written, to get the systems right and

they are failing.



TRIOLI: We also know that the sector was given more money by the Federal Government,

I think just before the financial year for PPE specifically and in order to make sure that

those places were well resourced with PPE. Do we know if Wyndham Lodge was one that

used that money in that way?



RYAN: I know that I supported Wyndham Lodge in those very early days by ringing the

Minister to get them the PPE that they didn't have on deck. So again, it's a systemic

question. Funding was provided - why wasn't there an audit done so we had certainty that

every centre had the PPE that they needed if they got a positive case? And sadly in this

case, that didn't happen.



TRIOLI: No one wants politics to be played with this - and of course, there'll be those

listening this morning, Joanne Ryan, who say 'well, you know - you would take this

opportunity, wouldn't you? Given that you're the Labor member up against a Coalition

Government, scoring some points against the Prime Minister.' How would you answer that

charge?



RYAN: I would answer that charge by saying I am the member for Lalor and I'm

representing my community; the community where I live and where I've always lived, and

that this is a Federal responsibility. It would be negligent of me not to take this opportunity

to ensure that pressure was applied so that the systems were improved immediately.

Today - the system needs to be improved. We have ten new cases of BaptCare reported

on the 31st of August to their community. Ten new cases. The first case here was on the

16th of July. So it's incumbent upon me to raise these issues.



This is a systemic failure. It is typical of this Prime Minister that he wants to shift the blame;

shift the blame to the centres, shift the blame to the states. The buck stops with the Prime

Minister and his Aged Care Minister.



TRIOLI: Joanne Ryan, good to talk to you. Thanks for your time today.



RYAN: Thank you very much, Virginia.



TRIOLI: Joanne Ryan is a Federal Member for Lalor.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ANDREW MOORE 0401 600 179



