

Open Arms - Veterans & Families Counselling, provides support for current and ex-serving ADF personnel and their families.  Free and confidential help is available 24/7. Phone 1800 011 046 (international: +61 1800 011 046 or +61 8 8241 4546) or  visit www.OpenArms.gov.au





The Hon Darren Chester MP  Minister for Veterans’ Affairs  Minister for Defence Personnel

MEDIA RELEASE

Thursday 5 March 2020

PLANNING AND ARRANGEMENTS FOR   OVERSEAS ANZAC DAY SERVICES 2020

IN the lead-up to Anzac Day, members of the public who are planning to attend services overseas  are encouraged to register their attendance and travel plans.

Minister for Veterans’ Affairs Darren Chester said Anzac Day is very important to all Australians, and  the Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) is still planning to deliver dawn services overseas at  Gallipoli in Turkey and Villers-Bretonneux in France.

“DVA will also support services at Hellfire Pass in Thailand, Sandakan in Malaysia, and Isurava and  the Bomana War Cemetery in Papua New Guinea. The services in the Pacific region will take on a  greater significance this year as we mark 75 years since the end of the Second World War,” Mr  Chester said.

“I understand many people are concerned about the outbreak of COVID-19 and its potential effect  on these international commemorative services. The Government is continuing its planning for these  services, however, this is a rapidly developing situation and we will rely on the most up-to-date  expert medical advice.

“In the lead-up to this year’s services, those attending are reminded to register on the DVA website  and are strongly encouraged to read the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) travel  advice for security and COVID-19 updates at the Smartraveller website, and to subscribe for updates.  Security and health situations can change quickly. Travellers are strongly encouraged to obtain travel  insurance, and to monitor DFAT travel advice before and during their journey for both their  destination country and all countries they intend to transit.

“While these services are run by the Australian Government, we all need to be mindful that they are  delivered in countries other than our own and we need to respect any decisions those countries  make in relation to COVID-19.

“We understand the Anzac Day services in Turkey and France hold a special significance to many  Australians who have relatives that fought and died there during the First World War and we are  closely monitoring the situation and will provide updates as they come to hand.”

Australians travelling to Gallipoli will need to prepare for conditions on the peninsula, including  taking enough food and water, preparing for extreme weather and allowing enough time to transit  through security checkpoints. The service is held in an isolated area within a national park which has



Open Arms - Veterans & Families Counselling, provides support for current and ex-serving ADF personnel and their families.  Free and confidential help is available 24/7. Phone 1800 011 046 (international: +61 1800 011 046 or +61 8 8241 4546) or  visit www.OpenArms.gov.au

no permanent infrastructure or shelter. Visitors are exposed to the elements for up to 24 hours and  should prepare accordingly.

For the Anzac Day Dawn Service in Villers-Bretonneux, visitors need to be well-prepared as the  weather in the Somme region in April can be close to freezing in the morning and hot in the  afternoon, and they should also allow enough time to transit through security checkpoints. Visitors  are also reminded to book their tickets to visit the Sir John Monash Centre early at sjmc.gov.au.

Security screenings at both services are similar to airport style security, and Turkish and French  authorities are responsible for security at Anzac Day commemorations in their respective countries.

“Throughout the Second World War, Australians fought in theatres of war across the globe from  Europe to North Africa, the Mediterranean and the Middle East, to Asia and the Pacific, and  importantly, right here at home,” Mr Chester said.

“While the war in Europe ended on 8 May 1945, Australians would go on to fight in the Pacific region  until 15 August 1945 - now known as Victory in the Pacific Day.

“Seventy-five years on, the friendship between the people of Australia and Papua New Guinea  continues to this day and the services in these areas will highlight the incredible service and sacrifice  of those who served and died there.

“For those organising community services in Australia, I encourage you to reach out to your local RSL  and where possible involve and honour our Second World War veterans this Anzac Day.”

DFAT will continue to organise local Anzac Day services at Australian High Commissions and  Embassies around the world. Additional information of the commemorative services for Anzac Day  in Turkey and France can be found on DVA’s website (www.dva.gov.au). Attendees to all overseas  services are encouraged to subscribe to travel updates on the Smartraveller website  (www.smartraveller.gov.au).

ENDS



MEDIA CONTACTS:  Rachel Tharratt: 02 6277 7820  DVA Media: 02 6289 6466

Office of the Hon. Darren Chester, Canberra ACT.

