

TRANSCRIPT



Senator James Paterson

Liberal Senator for Victoria



Tuesday 18 August 2020



Sky News: Paul Murray live



Subjects: ADF in Victoria



Paul Murray: Senator James Paterson is in batmania right now, of course, where he

was by remote asking questions of the Defence Force today. Put simply, it's clear

slam dunk Andrews lied a couple of weeks ago when he said the ADF wasn't there

for support. Tell us what you were able to get out of the brass today.



Senator James Paterson: Paul, the testimony by Lieutenant General John Frewen

before the COVID-19 Senate Select Committee today was devastating in its brevity

and its directness. It flatly contradicted what Daniel Andrews has been telling

Victorians for weeks, including his sworn testimony before a parliamentary inquiry

where he claimed that there was no specific offer made by the Australian Defence

Force and the federal government to assist in hotel quarantine. Lieutenant General

John Frewean said that's not true, there was a specific offer, it was for the purposes

of hotel quarantine. And indeed, as we all know, given that New South Wales and

Queensland took up that offer and given the Lieutenant General confirmed to the

committee today that the same offer was made to all states and territories. It's

already been fairly obvious that Daniel Andrews has been misleading the public but

now there is no doubt. Daniel Andrews follow up excuse that, well, the extent to

which the ADF has been involved in hotel quarantine in New South Wales has been

very limited, they've basically only been ferrying people from the airport to the hotels

was also, again, flatly contradicted by the evidence by the Lieutenant General. He

confirmed that ADF personnel in New South Wales assisting with hotel

quarantine, who amount to some 360 personnel, have been involved in a range of

activities, including providing security in the hotels themselves for quarantine. So it

was a very bad day for Daniel Andrews.



Murray: What was the smother that was put out by Labor and the Greens trying to

either change the subject or try to poke holes in what was very blatantly and

obviously proven?



Paterson: Well, perhaps Paul it's just because I'm the only Victorian on the

committee, but no Labor senator or Greens senator or crossbench senator, or in fact

any other Senator asked any questions at all to the Lieutenant General about this

matter. Given the enormous public controversy about it that's been raging for weeks,

all the conflicting reports, I would've thought that more interest would have been

shown on this, but they managed to divert the attention to other matters for the

duration of his testimony.



Murray: All right, Senator. Thank you. Do appreciate it.



ENDS

