

JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS BREAKFAST  TUESDAY, 25 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Morrison Government’s failure in aged care; State borders.

MICHAEL ROWLAND, HOST: The Aged Care Minister Richard Colbeck has apologised  after last week being unable to say just how many residents have died from COVID-19.

LISA MILLAR, HOST: The Prime Minister Scott Morrison also apologised, saying the  extent of the outbreaks in nursing homes was unacceptable. For more, Shadow Minister  for Ageing and Seniors, Julie Collins joins us now. Good morning, welcome to Breakfast.

JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS: Good morning,  Lisa.

MILLAR: So we saw both those apologies take place in the Senate and the House of  Representatives yesterday. Were they helpful?

COLLINS: I think for the families and the loved ones who have lost people during this  COVID outbreak the real questions are: why did we end up here? Why weren't the lessons  learnt from the outbreaks that we had previously in New South Wales? Both in the Dorothy  Henderson Lodge and in Newmarch House, where we had clear warnings, and it appears  that nobody was listening, and if they were they certainly didn't do enough and they didn't  do it soon enough. And now tragically we've had 335 people receiving aged care in  Australia who are now deceased. I think the families and the loves ones are owed an  explanation from the Government and some more responsibility for what the Government  should have done that it didn't do.

MILLAR: One of the problems, though, for the Opposition is that the criticisms from the  Royal Commission - and we've seen more just in the last 24 hours from the Royal  Commissioners - who have said there should be independent routine monitoring and  there's no reason why this can't be happening now. But one of the issues for the  Opposition is that they also say these are problems that go back decades, go back to  when Labor was in Government as well. Does Labor admit to any of its failings on this?

COLLINS: Well, the current government has been in government for seven years. They  have had four ministers. Scott Morrison himself ripped billions of dollars out in the high-



care funding for aged care residents. $1.2 in one budget and half a billion in another  budget, cut by Scott Morrison, to aged care services in Australia under this Government.  The Prime Minister called a Royal Commission. What he should do now is listen to his  Royal Commissioners when they said that there was not a national plan and that the  Government hasn't done enough, and the Government should have learnt from what  happened in the New South Wales outbreaks and what happened overseas prior to the  outbreaks in Victoria.

MILLAR: Richard Colbeck - reports today that he's been stripped of some of his decision-making that Greg Hunt, the Health Minister, is going to take over that announcement of  when emergency responses need to be made on some nursing homes. Is that a good  move, as far as you're concerned?

COLLINS: Well, this is incredible, that the Prime Minister after the Aged Care Minister's  performance on Friday and yesterday, that the Prime Minister has removed the Aged Care  Minister from making critical decisions in his own portfolio. Clearly the Prime Minister has  lost faith in his own Minister, otherwise this wouldn't have happened. Why is the Prime  Minister saying that the Aged Care Minister isn't up to the job of making decisions in his  own portfolio? If the Prime Minister has lost faith in the Minister, why should we have any  faith in the Minister and his ability to do his job?

MILLAR: Julie Collins, I just want to ask you one last question because you're a  Tasmanian, and there is a lot of talk today about borders and people saying that they  either raise a lot of issues, economic issues and heartache for a lot of people, or those  within inside these states that have hard borders feeling pretty happy about the situation.  What do you think?

COLLINS: Clearly we support state premiers and territory leaders making decisions in the  best interests of their residents. There have been some issues around some of the  borders, and most of the state and territory leaders are working pretty hard to try and  resolve those. But clearly this is up to the Prime Minister. He is the Prime Minister, he is  leading the country, and he is in charge of his National Cabinet. If there are issues, the  Prime Minister needs to sort them out.

MILLAR: Yeah, well it is a federation though but Julie Collins I will leave you there. Thank  you very much.

COLLINS: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119









