JASON CLARE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR REGIONAL SERVICES,

LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND TERRITORIES

MEMBER FOR BLAXLAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC SOUTH EAST NSW

WEDNESDAY 23 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Bushfire Survivors; Bungled HomeBuilder; NBN Backflip.



SIMON LAUDER, HOST: Now 31st of December 2020, it will be 12 months to the day that

the first of the worst bushfires impacted this region last season. It's also the date when

survivors planning to rebuild have to have their application in to access the Federal

Government's $25,000 HomeBuilder Grant, which was announced as part of the

government's response to the Coronavirus pandemic. Well some are saying it's just too

soon for a range of reasons. And it's a point which has been raised with Federal Labor’s

Shadow Minister for Housing and Homelessness, Jason Clare, and he's in the region at

the moment. Jason Clare, good morning.



JASON CLARE: Good morning Simon.



LAUDER: I understand that you had a meeting with some people in Cobargo just

yesterday. What are some of the concerns you're hearing around bushfire recovery?



CLARE: Yeah, I caught up with about half a dozen people in Cobargo yesterday who had

lost their home in the bushfires with Kristy McBain, the new local MP. These are people

who are living in caravans or living in pods, or just living with friends who, as you would

know, are just terribly traumatised by what happened over summer. In many cases, they've

lived in the same home for 20 years, some cases built the home that was torched in the

fires. And now they're desperately trying to rebuild, but they're caught up in a quagmire of

delays whether it's getting the debris clean, which has now finally happened, or state

planning approvals, which are just so difficult to get over. And if there's anybody that

deserves a little bit of a helping hand to rebuild their home and to rebuild their lives, it's

people that lost their homes in the fires. There’s about 3000 right across the country. The

Federal Government's offering $25,000 to build a new home or to do a big renovation. But

most of these people are going to miss out because it's just going to be impossible to sign

a contract by Christmas.



LAUDER: Yet that home builder grant was announced as part of the response to the

pandemic. But are there a lot of people who survived the bushfires who were hoping to

leverage that as well?



CLARE: Yeah, all of them have their fingers crossed. It's really expensive to rebuild. And

for a lot of people, because of the BAL, the bushfire attack levels, they're going to have to

build a smaller house. Insurance is not going to give them all the money they need to

rebuild the house they once had, so an extra $25,000 would really help. But in order to

qualify, you've got to sign a contract, pick the house and get all the approvals from the

bank, and sign the contract by New Year’s Eve. Now, for anybody that's ever had their

home burned down the bushfire, they'll know that it normally takes two to three years to be

able to rebuild. And for the people I spoke to yesterday, they just threw their hands up in

the air and said “Look, we're not going to be able to do it.”



LAUDER: What are you calling for when it comes to special consideration for people who

lost times in the bush fires and that HomeBuilder grant?



CLARE: I'm just asking Scott Morrison to have a heart. Extend the scheme, provide a

special exemption for bushfire victims, to the 3000 Aussie families that lost their homes.

They should be able to get access to this, whether they sign a contract before New Year's

Eve or not. I think most people listening today would agree - if anybody deserves a bit of

an extra helping hand here, it's them. This is a pandemic scheme to help us get out of

recession. Well we're still in recession. The whole scheme needs to be extended. It's going

to have to be because it's too small and it's rolling out too slowly, no one's got money yet.

But if anybody deserves a bit of help, it's the bushfire victims, it’s the people who had their

homes burnt down.



LAUDER: Now the HomeBuilder scheme, the figures are pretty big. Treasury says it's

going to generate an extra $1.6 billion in residential investment this financial year and for

every 1 million of that, six full time jobs in construction and surrounding industries will be

supported. So this is already a very substantial scheme. Why does it need to be expanded

beyond that?



CLARE: Well just to put it in perspective Simon, there’s about a million Aussies working

building houses across the country, either on the tools at the site where homes are being

built, or in the manufacturing companies that make everything from the cement to the tiles

to the plaster board. So a lot of people working building homes. It's expected that the

amount of homes built in the next 12 months is going to go off a cliff. It could drop by 20 to

25%, so lots of people could lose their jobs. That Treasury number shows that just this

package called HomeBuilder might help about 10,000 tradies or 10,000 people who work

in the industry. The government have been saying it would be helping “hundreds of

thousands”. Well that's obviously not true. Treasury’s now said it's only about 10,000. So

I've said look, you've got to do more. You're going to have to invest more in housing to get

us out of the recession. Every buck we spend on housing creates $3 in the local

community, so it's a great way to stimulate the economy. And one thing that you can do

when there's not a lot of demand out there to build houses, is to build more social housing.

A lot of our government-owned houses are in bad shape, they need to be repaired. And we

need more particularly down here on the south coast.



LAUDER: All right, well we'll see what's announced with the Federal Budget coming up

early next month. And we're learning this morning that NBN Co is going to spend $3.5

billion upgrading the network in the next couple of years. And it's expected that will create

thousands of new jobs and will mean millions of Australians will get access to ultra-fast

broadband under this shake up of the NBN. What do you think of that?



CLARE: Well, look, I think anybody listening that's still struggling with their broadband

connection, that it's still buffering or still complaining about the speeds they're getting,

because they had to put up with this copper system for the last seven years, would be

rightly frustrated and angry this morning. This should have happened seven years ago, but

Abbott, Turnbull and Morrison all thought they knew better and thought that a copper-based system would be good enough. And now today, we've got the biggest backflip in

Australian political history. Remember, Simon, in the last seven years, this Liberal



Government has bought 50,000 kilometres of copper and installed it around Australia.

That's enough copper to wrap around the world and then some. And now we find out that

they shouldn't have bought that, they shouldn't have installed it. They should have done

what was the original plan back over a decade ago and that is install fibre to people's

houses. I think Australians would be rightly frustrated today.



LAUDER: Jason Clare, good to talk to you this morning. Thanks very much.



CLARE: Good on you. Thanks, Simon.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ARLEY BLACK 0458 834 978



