

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SUNRISE

WEDNESDAY, 26 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Federal Government’s response to COVID-19; aged care crisis.



DAVID KOCH, HOST: Joining me now is Opposition Leader, Anthony Albanese. Good

morning to you.



ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Good

morning, Kochie.



KOCH: How much of the current crisis can you blame on Richard Colbeck?



ALBANESE: Well, Kochie, somebody needs to be in charge. And his name is Richard

Colbeck. This is the guy who is the Minister for Aged Care. We had the interim report from

the Royal Commission at the end of last year that was titled ‘Neglect’. That was a hint as to

the problems that were there in that sector. We then had the Dorothy Henderson Lodge in

March. We had Newmarch House in April. Major outbreaks. Six dead in Dorothy

Henderson and 17 directly attributable to COVID in Newmarch. We had reports to the

Government. Still, the Government was not listening and did not put in place the

mechanisms that it should have. There has been no national response here. The Federal

Government fund aged care. They regulate aged care. They are responsible for aged care.



KOCH: It is a bit confusing for average Australians though because you’ve got Health

Department involved in aged care as well and making decisions. Also state governments

too. Isn't it a shared blame?



ALBANESE: What we had, Kochie, was the Prime Minister stand in his courtyard way

back in February and he waved around document saying, ‘This is how we will deal with

this’. It explicitly said of course that aged care was the responsibility of the Federal

Government because it is on a day-to-day basis. The states run the hospital system, the



Federal Government runs aged care. They regulate it, they fund it. They set up the

accreditation agency. It is all a Federal responsibility.



KOCH: The Prime Minister is also saying 97 per cent of aged care facilities have had no

infections at all. Is that a fair point?



ALBANESE: It is a heartless comment, frankly, Kochie. And I was shocked when he said

that. I think it does not pay appropriate respect to the fact that we have 335 people who

were in aged care residence who have passed. And their families are grieving. We have

circumstances whereby, Kochie, I know, I will never forget saying goodbye to my mum. It

was many years ago. She only lived to 65. But I got to say goodbye to her. These people

are saying goodbye to their loved ones on FaceTime. And they deserve better than just the

Prime Minister saying that 97 per cent is okay.



KOCH: What would you do to fix it?



ALBANESE: For a start you have to look at the workforce. You’ve got to look at what the

Aged Care Royal Commission said in its interim report and what they’ve said since. Quite

clearly, there are just not enough workers, be they nurses and carers in these facilities

looking after people. Quite clearly, there are other issues with personal protective

equipment that has not been available enough. We have to have an inspection system that

does not ring up the nursing home and say ‘we will be there next Wednesday’, ‘You have

got a week to clean up your act and to make sure problems are hidden from us when we

they’re there’. There needs to be proper regulation. Older Australians have built this

country. They deserve dignity and respect particularly in their later years.



KOCH: Can't argue with that. Anthony Albanese, good to speak with you. Thank you.



ALBANESE: Thanks very much, Kochie.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.















