





THE HON ALAN TUDGE  MP  MINISTER FOR POPULATION,  CITIES AND URBAN  INFRASTRUCTURE





THE HON STUART  AYRES MP  NSW MINISTER FOR JOBS,  INVESTMENT, TOURISM AND

WESTERN SYDNEY



MAYOR FRANK  CARBONE

MAYOR OF FAIRFIELD CITY





MEDIA RELEASE







20 August 2020

CONSTRUCTION ON FAIRFIELD’S NEW CITY DEAL OUTDOOR HUB

Construction has started on an all-purpose, recreational hub at Deerbush Park as  part of the Western Sydney City Deal.

Funded through the $190 million Western Parkland City Liveability Program, a key  plank of the City Deal, the recreational area will cater for adults and children across  the local area.

The $1.3 million jointly funded project will create local jobs and is scheduled to be  finished by the end of this year.

Federal Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure Alan Tudge said  building and delivering community infrastructure played an important role in the jobs-led recovery from COVID 19.

“This is a critical time to be getting boots on the ground and shovels moving, I can’t  emphasise enough the importance of these grassroots opportunities because they  can make a huge difference to lives and livelihoods,” Mr Tudge said.

NSW Minister for Jobs, Investment, Tourism and Western Sydney Stuart Ayres said  public spaces had never been more important to the people of Western Sydney.

“We all need our open spaces to work for us and our families, giving us the chance to  keep active, play a game, and get some fresh air. These two projects deliver richly on  making day to day life better in the area,” Mr Ayres said.

Fairfield City Mayor Frank Carbone said the redevelopment of Deerbush Park  ensures the showground, the geographic and cultural heart of our City, has  something for everyone to enjoy.

“We are creating spaces in this City for families and friends to come together to enjoy  outdoor activities and be healthy,” Mayor Carbone said.

For the local kids there will be an accessible swing, a ground-level carousel,  trampoline and ropes course, a flying fox, riding track, climbing net fort with slide and

a riverbed crossing with water pump. Accessible public toilets will support these fun  facilities.

For exercising adults, the park will provide new outdoor gym equipment. The  exercise and play facilities will be combined with new picnic tables and bench  seating.

The Western Sydney City Deal is a 20-year partnership between the Australian  Government, NSW Government, and local governments of the Blue Mountains,  Camden, Campbelltown, Fairfield, Hawkesbury, Liverpool, Penrith and Wollondilly.

It aims to transform the region through investment and planning reform, improving  access to employment, housing, health, education and liveability outcomes in  Western Sydney.

The Liveability Program includes projects delivered by all eight Western Parkland  City councils.



[END]

Media Contact:  Minister Tudge - Michael Bennett 0434 782 923  Minister Ayres - Sophie Hull 0447 583 756

