CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





ADDRESS TO BIOPHARMADISPATCH CONFERENCE 2020



SYDNEY

MONDAY, 16 NOVEMBER 2020



*** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY ***



Acknowledgments

I acknowledge the Gadigal people of the Eora nation, and pay my respects to their elders past and  present.

Of course, we need to do more than pay respects. We need to get our national effort to Close the  Gap back on track.

In health, that will depend in large part on addressing the social determinants and preventive health.

But medicines will always play an important part in managing and treating disease among our First  Nations brothers and sisters.

And so I hope to work with you all on this urgent national priority.  Thanks to Paul Cross and BiopharmaDispatch for convening this conference. BiopharmaDispatch is  my favourite media outlet in the category of “Pharmaceutical Industry journals run by former Liberal  staffers”.

In all seriousness, I’m sure you agree with me that Biopharma Dispatch is a very good source of  important news in our sector. I certainly read it every day and I have found it a useful source as I  have got across the detail in the health portfolio over the last 18 months.

And Paul has arranged a very impressive conference program full of heavy-hitters (apart from me),  which is no small feat in this environment, so well done.

And of course, I thank all of you - industry and patient groups alike - for your work in 2020.

At this time last year, Sydney was choking on smoke from the Black Summer bushfires.

I’m sure we all thought that the bushfires would be low point of the year.  Little did we realise they

would be one tragic element of a year that will go down in infamy.

But our health sector has stepped up. Whether you’ve been supporting vulnerable patients or racing  to develop COVID treatments and vaccines, you’ve saved and changed lives. We thank you for it.

The last time Australia faced a crisis of this magnitude was arguably World War Two.

And the history of that time is a reminder that crisis creates opportunities as well as threats.

Because it was in 1944 that John Curtin created the PBS.

It took two court challenges, two referenda, a constitutional amendment and 16 years to embed the  scheme.

It was fought by our political opponents and the predecessor of the AMA.

It was hard work for my side of politics.  But it was worth it.

Real reform is usually hard work. And it is always worth it.

The PBS has served Australia well for more than seven decades.

It remains one of Labor’s proudest achievements - right up there with Medicare, universal  superannuation and the NDIS.

Today, though, I want to look forward.

Because I think the PBS is now at a crossroads.

We as a country face a choice - to pretend that the PBS is fit-for-purpose 76 years later, or to tackle  its contemporary shortcomings head on.

The current Government’s approach goes something like this:

First, claim - against all evidence - to list one new medicine a day.  Then publicise those listings as a personal gift from Government, not an investment by taxpayers.

Also, blame big pharma when drugs aren’t brought to Australia, or aren’t recommended by the  PBAC, or when listing negotiations break down.

They attack patient groups for their advocacy - offensively dismissing it as ‘astroturfing’.

They conveniently ignore the 70 drugs recommended the PBAC that haven’t been listed as we  speak.

They continue to duck a review of the National Medicines Policy - a review that was meant to  commence in February.

But there is, I put to you, a better way.



We can acknowledge that medicine is changing rapidly, and that the PBS hasn’t kept pace.

We can admit that is hurting industry, our economy, and most importantly patients.

And we can work together to tackle those challenges and bring the PBS into the 21st Century.

It won’t surprise you to learn that I favour the second approach.

And judging by more than 160 submissions to the House Health Committee, so do industry, patients  and experts.  I thought Medicines Australia put it well:

“Australia is no longer at the forefront of medicines access …  the systems and processes designed  to support medicines access do not universally do so”.

That’s a damning summary: that the PBS, designed to be one of our most important safety nets is no  longer universal.

I think we see that in at least three ways.

First, in the recommended listings that are delayed or denied.

I said before that 70 medicines have been recommended by the PBAC but not listed by the  Government.

Like the breast cancer drug (Faslodex) recommended four months ago.

The eczema drug (Dupixent) recommended eight months ago.

The migraine drug (Emgality) recommended 16 months ago.

Every one of those delays is hurting patients.

And even when the Government does list drugs on the PBS, it’s slow by global standards.

It takes longer to subsidise a drug in Australia than the OECD average - and much longer than  some countries.

Twice as long as Great Britain. Three times as long as Germany. Four times as long as Japan.

The second sign that the PBS is no longer universal is the drugs that are never recommended.

Now, I’m a believer in the independence and expertise of the PBAC.

But we have to acknowledge the fact that it’s harder to get a recommendation in Australia than most  other OECD countries.

MA highlights 33 examples of drugs that are widely subsidised elsewhere, but not in Australia.



A diabetes drug that’s subsidised in 15 countries.

A heart drug subsidised in 16.

Cancer drugs subsidised in 17 and 18 countries.

None of them listed on the PBS.

I know how frustrating that is for patients, and how tempting it is to blame the PBAC.

But I think the underlying problem is the policy settings that constrain the PBAC’s decision-making -  and I’ll come back to that.

Finally, the third sign that the PBS is no longer universal is the increasing number of drugs that are  never brought to Australia.

Of those 33 examples cited by MA, 24 haven’t even been launched here.

Forget a PBS listing - these drugs simply aren’t available in Australia.

I think most of you know all too well what I’m talking about.

We are a small and distant market to start with. It’s a challenge to convince global headquarters to  send drugs here.

And that challenge is compounded when companies get the message that PBS listings will be  difficult if not impossible.

So our policy settings need to be very well calibrated to overcome these inherent challenges for  medicines in Australia.  And frankly, they are not currently well calibrated.

Way forward

Now, fixing the problems I’ve described and restoring the universality of the PBS won’t be easy.

But at its heart, it comes down to investment and reform.

To be frank, we’ve seen the opposite under this Government.

In real terms, the Government invested less in the PBS last year than the Labor Government  invested in 2012-13.

Put more simply, the PBS has been cut under this Government.

That obviously constrains the Minister’s ability to list new drugs, and the PBAC’s ability to  recommend them.

And the trend is set to continue.



The Budget papers show that PBS spending will grow by just 4 per cent over the next four years.

Over the same period, inflation is set to be 7 per cent - meaning that in real terms, the PBS budget  will be cut again.

Now, governments should always ensure value for taxpayers’ money, and successive governments  have agreed PBS savings with the sector.

But we have reached the point - in fact, we are past the point - where fiscal pressure from the  Government is hurting patients.

You can read in the PBAC minutes that the PBAC feels obliged to have regard these constraints.

It’s in that context that I’ve questioned the so-called New Medicines Funding Guarantee.

To be clear, the removal of the cost offset policy is welcome.

But it’s not surprising in a Budget that racks up half a trillion dollars in deficits.

Nothing in this Budget is offset. There is billions of dollars of non-offset new spending, but the  Government wants a pat on the back for finally including PBS listings in that category.

But the bigger problem with the so-called Guarantee was revealed at Senate Estimates last month.

Officials confirmed that new PBS spending isn’t in the Budget - but that new PBS cuts are.

Excluding spending but including surprise savings is an enormous breach of faith with the sector.

And it poses huge risks going forward.

If the proposed spending is in the agreement, but not the budget, I’m sorry to say it isn’t real.

So I wish MA the very best of luck in its negotiations with the Government on the next Strategic  Agreement.

If it does deliver substantial, meaningful and locked-in reform, I will be a strong supporter of it.

From my perspective, that Agreement must finally reverse the decline in PBS spending.

And it must also achieve reform.

Literally hundreds of reform suggestions have been put to the House Health Committee. I look  forward to its consideration of those.

But let me suggest just a couple of priorities today.

The first is R&D, and particularly clinical trials.

Trials are an important opportunity for Australian patients to gain early access to cutting-edge  therapies.

But for patients, access to clinical trials remains a lottery.

All too often, your condition, your location and even your doctor determine whether you can  participate in a trial.

Now, to be fair, I welcome the Coalition’s election commitment to - and I quote - “prioritise and  accelerate clinical trial reforms”, and particularly to “work with the sector to provide a nationally  coordinated approach to clinical trials”.

Problem is, I’m quoting the Coalition’s election promise from 2013, and we haven’t seen much  progress since.

It’s time to walk the talk on clinical trials.

This is one area where our federation is not working as well as it should. I can think of no higher  priority for a federal minister than getting meaningful reform to clinical trials through the health  ministers council.

If we don’t have more coherent treatment of clinical trials by the time of the next election, getting  reform through the health ministers council will be my number one priority as health minister when it  comes to discussions with my state and territory counterparts.

It’s also time to reform our reimbursement processes.

Now, Government should always ensure clinical and cost effectiveness.

But as I’ve suggested, there are a range of ways in which 20th Century HTA processes don’t match  the 21st Century of personalised medicine.

To take just two examples: the line between services and therapies is increasingly blurred.

And so the strict delineation between the MSAC and PBAC is no longer fit-for purpose, with some  therapies bouncing back and forward between the two, and others falling through the cracks  altogether.

And finally, in an era of personalised medicine, we need a much stronger focus on the person - on  patients - in our reimbursement processes.

The PBS doesn’t exist for Government, or industry, or independent experts.

It exists for patients. And we need to capture their voice - what they think is important - much more  clearly in our processes.

I look forward to working with you on that and the other priorities I’ve suggested today.

And in the meantime, I look forward to your questions.



Thanks very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ELIZA MITCHELL 0413 410 931

