

Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA

MEDIA RELEASE



27 July 2020



EQUIPPING AUSTRALIA’S WORKFORCE WITH CYBER SECURITY  AND DIGITAL SKILLS

The Morrison Government is continuing to tackle urgent workforce needs with a new, fast-tracked training qualifications for the information and communications technology (ICT)  sector.

The Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business, Senator the Hon Michaelia  Cash, said that the Government is committed to ensuring Australians are able to learn the  latest in digital technology and cyber security to meet current labour demands.

“Upskilling our existing IT workers and making sure that those going into the sector have the  right skills needed to address Australia’s ICT challenges and opportunities is imperative.

“The new training products will support the delivery of cyber security and digital skills needs  training across multiple industries.

“This package is a successful outcome of the Australian Government working with state and  territory governments, as well as Industry Reference Committees and the Digital Skills  Organisation Pilot working collaboratively to meet the needs of Australia.”

The new and updated training products were fast-tracked by skills ministers, as well as the  Australian Industry and Skills Committee and its COVID-19 sub-committee, which was  established to drive rapid and flexible development of vocational education and training  products during the COVID-19 crisis.

“The risk has intensified in recent months, with cyber criminals taking advantage of  COVID-19 with increased online fraud, malware and hacking into systems.

“Responding to both COVID-19 and broader industry skills needs, these new skill sets will  help address urgent skill needs in the areas of threat detection and prevention, cyber incident  response, and cyber security governance.

“Urgent digital skills needs will also be addressed by skillsets in the areas of cloud  computing, data analysis and the Internet of things.

The updated qualifications and skill sets are at a Certificate III level to Advanced Diploma  level.

For more information about the Information and Communication Technology Training  Package is available at: https://www.aisc.net.au/content/communiques-and-training-package-updates



MEDIA CONTACTS

Guy Creighton - Guy.Creighton@employment.gov.au - 0438 815 302  Brittany Higgins - Brittany.higgins@employment.gov.au - 0449 171 294



