MEDIA RELEASE  NEWSTART

Greens repeat calls for Newstart changes to be delayed until Centrelink is  fit for purpose

The Greens have repeated their calls for the Government to delay changes to  Newstart and the Sickness Allowance in the face of the COVID-19 crisis saying  that Centrelink lacks the resources to adequately deal with the changes and the  increased workload resulting from the health and economic impacts of the  COVID-19 crisis.

From tomorrow, Newstart Allowance, Sickness Allowance, Wife Pension,  Bereavement Allowance and Widow B Pension are set to cease and most  recipients of these payments will transition to Jobseeker Payment, Age Pension  or Carer Payment.

“Now is not the time for the Centrelink system to be under additional strain.  People are already feeling scared and confused and changing Newstart to  Jobseeker Payment and not having a separate Sickness Allowance is only  going to make things worse,”Senator Rachel Siewert, Australian Greens  spokesperson on Family and Community Services said.

“The Government says that jobseeker applications will be processed in 5 days  which is absolutely farcical. Currently the median time for assessing Newstart is  15 days. The median processing time for Sickness Allowance is 35 days.

“With so many people set to be losing work as a result of the coronavirus, I  cannot believe they will have the capacity to process the additional applications  within 5 days and manage the separate applications for those with Covid19  requiring an exemption from mutual obligations.

“How are sick people meant to know that they have to apply for the jobseeker  payment and then get an exemption?

“I have received advice that the Department hasn't even worked out the  process for people with coronavirus in terms of whether these applications for  jobseeker will be processed separately to regular jobseeker applications.

No publication date - received by Parl Library 19 March 2020





“Centrelink is a mess and so is this Government’s approach to dealing with at  risk and vulnerable people."





Media Contact  Lucy Cowcher-Guthrie: 0418 401 180





