MR JASON FALINSKI MP  Federal Member for Mackellar

TRANSCRIPT  Sky News, AM Agenda (25 November 2020)  Topics: Superannuation

E&OE…

Tom Connell: Let's go now to my political panel, Peta Murphy and Jason Falinski joining me. So much  talk, of course, around superannuation. And I know that you're never shy of making your thoughts  known. Jason Falinski, I can see Peta Murphy's disappeared, I think should be back in a moment, but you  can carry on for now. So review's not going ahead, I should say? Not going ahead with this scheduled  increase is clearly on the table here. What's your view on that?

Jason Falinski: I don't think that's necessarily the case. I think what is on the table is, is this system  actually serving Australians? And is this the best way to provide people with financial security in their  retirement? And the retirement income review, which came out this week, seems to demonstrate that  that's not actually necessarily the case and that home ownership is a far better way of providing  financial security in retirement. On top of that, that the system, while being sustainable, is a very  expensive one, that people are spending 38 billion dollars a year on fund management fees. And, you  know, to give that some context, household spend 13 billion dollars a year on electricity bills.

Tom Connell: So just to my initial question, though, you said you don't think it's necessarily the case. I  mean, clearly this is on the table from the federal government that they wouldn't go ahead with the  scheduled increase to superannuation. What you've looked at the report, what's your view on whether  it's time right now to delay that because of COVID or indeed just scrap it altogether?

Jason Falinski: Look, I don't think that that's we're in a position yet to make that decision. But I think  what we do now have in front of us and look, this is you know, this is not news, Grattan Institute,  ACOSS, RBA, Productivity Commission, they've all come to the same conclusion that, frankly, the Henry  tax review came to the same conclusion, which was in increasing the super guarantee makes people  worse off. Now, what this particular review, the retirement retirement income review showed was that  it doesn't actually benefit people that much and that the alternative is to help people buy their own  home, which has enormous financial impacts, especially around wealth inequality and improving that,  but also security for financial security, for people in retirement. And there also and the report doesn't go  into this, but you and I know, and Peta knows that there's a psychic payoff to people living in a home  that they own. And there's also a Democratic payoff, which is when people own homes, they feel like  they have a stake in the country, in the economy and in the welfare of governments doing better. And  and what we've seen around the world is where democracy prospers really well. And where  governments work really well is where you have a large middle class, a large property-owning middle  class. So there are all these different benefits that the retirement income review talks about. Have I  filled in enough time for Peta to come back to you?

Tom Connell: You have, well for a moment there we had double Falinski on my screen.

Jason Falinski: Oh that is horrible!

Tom Connell: We now have Peta Murphy,

Peta Murphy: [Inaudible] That is terrible.

Tom Connell: I'm not sure... We won't put the blame anywhere...

Jason Falinski: Look what you've inflicted on the people of Australia.

Tom Connell: I'm not sure they saw it was just me. So, but Peta Murphy.

Jason Falinski: Well, Tom, that's enough!

If there is a time to delay this superannuation increase, surely it's now we're going to have very low  wages for quite some time. Clearly, there is an exception with covid. And whatever you say about this  report, you wouldn't argue against, would you, that superannuation comes mostly out of today's wages?  Any increase?

Peta Murphy: Well, Australian experience is that raising the superannuation guarantee that the liberal  governments over the years have done has not led to an increase in wages. The Australian experience is  not that it raises superannuation guarantee and people get wage increases. And as the government's  retirement review said, without compulsory universal superannuation system, middle income earners  will not save enough for an appropriate retirement and a retirement with dignity. The government has  been looking for an excuse for a long time to back away from its election promise about increasing the  superannuation guarantee. And they're just taking this opportunity to do it because we know that the  government is full of a lot of people who don't actually believe in the superannuation system.

Tom Connell: Would you agree, Peta? The most important thing to have in retirement is your own  home?

Peta Murphy: It's one of the most important things. But I also know from my electorate, talking to  people and from the evidence that we hear over and over again in parliamentary inquiries that many  people in Australia are stuck in low wages, insecure work, and it wouldn't matter whether the  superannuation guarantee went up or not. They can't afford their own home. There's a reason why the  fastest growing cohort of homeless people are women over the age of fifty-five. It's because most  women retire, with must much less superannuation than men often are working two or three very  insecure, casual or part-time jobs to try to make up one job but missing out but one-hundred-and-fifty-dollar threshold. So, it is just, not the full picture...  [inaudible] everyone able to own their own home.

Tom Connell: But you don't agree, even when you look at the parameters of retirement and how this  system works, clearly you're in a much better position if you've got your own home.

Peta Murphy: Sure, but scrapping the superannuation guarantee or scrapping the superannuation  system, which is the intention?

Tom Connell: No, I'm talking about whether or not...

Peta Murphy: For many people is not going to be...

Tom Connell: [inaudible] Able to clarify what I'm talking about, whether or not perhaps you can access  as well you super to get into the housing market?

Peta Murphy: We know that if people access their superannuation early, they lose compound interest.  We are going to be seeing the impact of the government's early access superannuation scheme during  the pandemic, in the years to come on people that aren't going to have money to retire. It is not a magic  wand to say that people should be raiding their superannuation.

Tom Connell: OK, Jason, I believe you support this push... Can I put this to you?

Jason Falinski: Oh, sure you can.

Tom Connell: No you can. But if this is going to be rolled out, so this would-be low-income workers  accessing their super to buy their first home, how would that be applied? Can you talk through a  theoretical eligibility? And how many people would be talking about who might suddenly wake up and  have a housing deposit?

Jason Falinski: Tom, I can't speak to that because it's not a proposal that I've seen or that is in front of  us. But let me say, if it's my if you're asking my personal view as many people as possible, literally  everything Peta said and I have enormous respect for Peta, but honestly...

Peta Murphy: That never ends well, when he starts a sentence like that.

Jason Falinski: You know me to open it. However, you know, despite my well, my will regard for Peta,  everything she just said is literally wrong. The retirement income review makes it incredibly clear that  actually people are worse off Mike Callaghan has had to come out again and again and again and say if  industry super and the superannuation lobby, who, by the way, gets 38 billion dollars a year out of the  system, the people who have profited most out of this system are not ordinary Australians, but a  superannuation fund managers. If they want to dispute the economic modelling in the Callahan report,  they say bring it on. And what it shows,

Tom Connell: I just want to I just that I just want to jump in...

Jason Falinski: So this is really clear, Australians have lower wages today because of superannuation  than they otherwise would have. And why wouldn't it be that way? That's how the system was designed.

Tom Connell: Let me go to what you just said...

Peta Murphy: They have lower wages because the industrial relations system isn't working [inaudible]

Tom Connell: Let me go to what you just said Jason Falinski. You said as many people as possible you'd  like to be able to access this super to their first home. How would that not result in hundreds of  thousands of Australians suddenly having enough for a home deposit and then all competing against  each other and anyone else in the market? I mean, that's a recipe for disaster, isn't it?

Jason Falinski: So, Tom, you have now taken this from a discussion about superannuation into housing.  And as you know, because you and I have spoken about this quite a bit, I'd love to have that discussion.  But have you set aside the next 30 minutes to do that? Because the fact is that yes, I know ...

Tom Connell: It's a firm no, I’m getting in my earpiece on that one.

Jason Falinski: Yeah, I can understand...

Peta Murphy: Yeah, i'm going to join the no and look I'm sorry Jason, I know I'm interrupting you and I  have full of respect for you as well. But given that something happened with the NBN and I didn't get to  start, can I just correct one thing you said? Everything I said wasn't literally wrong. I quoted from the  second sentence of the retirement incomes report that without compulsory super... [interrupted]

Jason Falinski: Can I can I humbly suggest you look past the first page...

Peta Murphy: [inaudible] cannot save enough for retirement...

Jason Falinski: Sure, and I'm sure can I can I humbly suggest and read the first page of the report that  shows over and over again people are on lower wages because of superannuation. Now that’s not...

Peta Murphy: People are also lower wages because of enterprise bargaining isn't working and if your  government...

Jason Falinski: No because we introduced the Fair Work Act...

Peta Murphy: Effectively increase a retirement pension and spend a lot more money, taxpayer’s money  on pensions, which is something traditionally your government and your side of politics haven't been  keen to do. You know that and the other thing...

Jason Falinski: The Callaghan report is very.. Sorry.

Peta Murphy: But this conversation is separate from conversations about the housing market. Tom is  right. You can't just butt out superannuation and talk about people buying their first homes and think  that that does have an impact on the housing market now. And it does. Sorry, you can't pick and choose  policies because you don't like them.

Jason Falinski: Well, so so I'm not trying to pick and choose. Let me make it very clear that if people can  access their superannuation for a home deposit, they are more likely to be able to afford a home than if  they can't, that's very clear if you want to get lower house prices, you need to have planning. And you  know, and you read... [inaudible]

Peta Murphy: And if your government steps up... [inaudible]

Jason Falinski: All the talking points provided to you by the ISA.

Tom Connell: I'm going to jump in. I'm going to jump in. We're going to have to end it there. Look, I can't  guarantee half an hour on housing...

Jason Falinski: This is worth it!

Tom Connell: Yes. Well, or better, depending on your view, perhaps if you want that half hour, put a  pitch in to the bosses for the Falinski show and we'll see how it goes...

Peta Murphy: Hang on!

Jason Falinski: Murphy Falinski, thank you.

Tom Connell: I'll tell Patrick Gorman about that. Jason Falinski...

Jason Falinski: Well it was Peta's idea don't blame me please.

Media Contact - Harry Coates 0404 604 487

