

SENATOR PENNY WONG

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC AM  MONDAY, 30 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; Australians stranded overseas.

SABRA LANE, HOST: Penny Wong, good morning.

SENATOR PENNY WONG, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY IN THE  SENATE: Good to be with you, Sabra.

LANE: The Government helped negotiate the approvals for a charter flight out of Peru;  apparently another 170 people are still stranded there. There are Australians trapped in  India. Should there be further government assistance or should these people now just  batten down and ride it out?

WONG: I think the first thing we need to have is more urgent direct help from the  Government. We know that Qantas and Virgin international services are ending as we  speak. We know that there are many, many Australians who need to get out of unsafe  situations. Many of them have been trying for weeks. And we need to follow the lead of  other countries where we've seen, for example, Germany put in place some 70 charter  flights to get their citizens home. We need decisive action from the Morrison Government.

LANE: The Government has warned since March the 9th about getting on cruise ships; it's  warned people not to. It's warned all Australians about the need to reconsider their travel  on the 13th and ramped that up to an outright ban on March the 18th. Hasn't the  Government been clear about the risks of staying overseas?

WONG: Well in relation to the reconsideration of travel, and more importantly, urging  people to come home, my office, and I'm sure Marise Payne's office - but certainly MPs  and senators across the Parliament - have been dealing with hundreds of people who are  seeking to come home. The great many of them have been doing what the Government  asked them to do. That is, they've been overseas, they've heard the advice, they've tried to  get home, but they've been prevented from doing so; often through no fault of their own.  Either because commercial options have dried up so fast to particular locations, or  because there have been lockdowns or travel bans put in place by their host country.  That's why you've seen other countries trying to get their citizens out. I recognise this is a  huge task for the Government. I recognise how hard the Department of Foreign Affairs and



Trade staff are working, but the reality is we have many Australians who need urgent help  and we need decisive action by the Government.

LANE: Have you made representations to either the Minister or the Department?

WONG: We've been making representations regularly. I called for more work on this; for a  plan to get Australians home over a week ago. We also see costs becoming a barrier. I  mean, the Peruvian flight that you were describing; the advice we have from people on the  ground is that a similar fight for residents of the United Kingdom costs about £250;  Australians are looking to stump up $5,000. Now, these are very large amounts of money  for people who are finding it very difficult to get back and we would say to the Government:  cost shouldn't be a barrier to travel in these circumstances. I mean, this is an  unprecedented set of circumstances.

LANE: Australia's diplomatic presence in some countries is quite thin even at the best of  times and sometimes governments are pretty restricted in what they can do. The  department - and previous ministers - have tried to make that point. What do you say to  that argument that there is an inherent risk in traveling and sometimes the government  cannot help everyone all the time?

WONG: The Australians that are contacting my office know that governments can't fix  everything, and of course governments can't. No one is suggesting that they can, but we  can do better. We have really no coherent plan from the Government to urgently help  those who are in unsafe circumstances, and that really is required.

One of the options, for example, that the Government flagged some days ago was Qantas  continuing to certain hubs. We've had no further information about that. I hope the  Government is continuing to do that. I welcome that option because it at least gives  Australian travellers, some options.

LANE: Penny Wong, thanks for talking to AM this morning.

WONG: Good to speak with you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JOHN OLENICH 0447 270 785





