









SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate  Senator for South Australia



MEDIA RELEASE

4 August 2020

Australia’s export sector continues to boom despite ongoing challenges

Australia recorded its largest financial year trade surplus in 2019-20, off the back of booming  goods exports, according to new data released today from the Australian Bureau of Statis tics.

The data shows that despite severe global economic shocks from COVID-19, Australia posted a  record financial year trade surplus of $77.4 billion in 2019-20 with Australian goods exports  growing by $9.29 billion or 2.5 per cent. Australia also recorded its 30th consecutive monthly trade  surplus in June 2020, worth $8.2 billion, the second highest monthly trade surplus.

Federal Trade Minister Simon Birmingham said the COVID-19 pandemic was testing all Australian  producers and businesses, but today’s data highlighted the incredible strength and resilience of our  export sector.

“Despite the ongoing domestic and international challenges, Australian exporters across a range of  sectors like resources, agriculture and advanced manufacturing continue to withstand global  economic shocks and remain highly sought after in our key markets,” Minister Birmingham said.

“It is a credit to our hard-working exporters that even in these incredibly challenging economic  times, their high-quality, safe and reliable product remains in demand around the world.

“Notwithstanding factors such as rising export costs and disruptions to supply-chains, our exporters  continue to show incredible resilience and ability to navigate through these significant global  economic headwinds.

“The continuing strength of our exporting sectors reinforces the importance for Australia of keeping  trading channels open and accessible, expanding market access through even more trade  agreements and continuing to support a global, rules based trading system.

“We also recognise the current COVID-19 crisis continues to place immense pressure on parts of  our services sector, including tourism and education businesses, many of whom felt the earliest  and deepest aspects of the economic downturn.

“That is why our Government has taken significant steps to support businesses and jobs across  the tourism sector through cash payments of up to $100,000 and the extension of the JobKeeper  payment until the end of March next year.

“We’ve also taken action to keep supply chains open for our agricultural and fisheries exporters  through initiatives such as our $350 million International Freight Assistance Mechanism, which has  so far supported over $1 billion in exports and helped to protect regional jobs.

“Our Government’s strong track record of delivering high-quality free trade agreements with our  key-trading partners has helped cushion the blow for our exporters. That is why we continue to  pursue agreements with our key trading partners including with European Union and United  Kingdom, to open up new markets for Australian farmers and businesses.”







Media Contacts  Benn Ayre: +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs: +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment, South  Australia.

