

JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC BRISBANE DRIVE

MONDAY, 7 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: COVID-19 deaths in aged care; Fringe Benefits Tax changes;

JobKeeper; Federal and State Debt.



STEVE AUSTIN, HOST: Jim Chalmers how was your Father’s Day?



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: I had a cracking Father’s Day

Steve. I got some banana pancakes and lots of homemade presents. It was

fantastic, it was my 6th Father’s Day and they get better every year.



AUSTIN: Is it true you are in quarantine?



CHALMERS: Yeah that’s one of the arrangements we had to make if we went

to parliament, when we came back we had to stay home for two weeks so I’m

midway through the first week of that, climbing the walls a bit but I think there

are a lot of people around Australia doing it a lot tougher than I am.



AUSTIN: I was going to ask how do you while away the hours?



CHALMERS: I’m working my tail off to be honest with you.  There’s a lot of

zoom meetings and constituent work.



AUSTIN: Death by zoom meetings.



CHALMERS: That’s right and my better half teed me up a treadmill so

hopefully I won’t put on 30 kegs, because I’ve been hitting the treadmill!



AUSTIN: Is she sending you a message?



CHALMERS: I think so. Pre-emptively I think but it’s a good set up in the

garage I can go and watch the NBA playoffs while I have a bit of a gallop.



AUSTIN: Jim Chalmers is Labor’s Member for Rankin, he is also Shadow

Treasury Spokesperson. This is ABC Brisbane. He’s just come back from a

couple of weeks in Canberra.  I just want to ask about a story that was on the

front page of the Australian a story that I was a little surprised didn't get more

coverage on Saturday. They got data and got it confirmed from the Federal

Department that a surprising result of the coronavirus pandemic is that the

overall number of deaths in aged care centres, has declined, not increased.

What does this reveal?



CHALMERS: A couple of things about that Steve. First of all, I'm told that the

amount of people going into aged care, for obvious and understandable

reasons, has declined.  This year it has gone way down because people are

reluctant to choose now to go into aged care and families are making a

decision to defer that. That's part of it but also I think I'm reminded as you

would have seen those statistics a bit earlier on, the transmission of the regular

flu has gone way down because of all the precautions we're taking and so I

suspect that all of the other precautions are having an impact on the other

types of ways that we unfortunately lose loved ones in in aged care. But having

said all that -



AUSTIN: I noticed in my local supermarket, that the items that are on specials

at the moment are all cold and flu tablets, they can't give them away at the

moment which is a bizarre sort of outcome of the pandemic.



CHALMERS We're learning to be a bit more careful with how we transmit these

things, we've got the personal hygiene, hand washing all of the other things as

well. We're probably being a bit more careful.  But we shouldn't move on from

this without acknowledging that there've been 554 older Australians who

passed away in aged care from COVID-19. That is a tragedy in itself.



AUSTIN: Just clarify something for me, a number of listeners have challenged

me about this saying it's not necessarily from COVID-19, but rather the other

illnesses, COVID-19 weakens their immune system so they might pass away

from another condition, a precondition if you like.



CHALMERS: There's been some prominent contrarians out there on social

media saying that, but the medical community has made it pretty clear that

these 554 people have died of COVID-19, not with COVID-19. When this is all

done and dusted, I mean we're learning a lot about the problems in the aged

care system, when this is all done and dusted obviously the system's going to

need a lot of change.  We've already put out via our leader Anthony Albanese

an 8 point plan for aged care, which goes to things like staffing, transparency,

equipment, all of those sorts of important things.



AUSTIN: My guest is Jim Chalmers, it's 4:39pm, this is ABC Brisbane. Last

week, Kate Carnell, the Small Business and Family Enterprise Ombudsman on

Thursday, released a statement calling for the scrapping of the Fringe Benefits

Tax in Australia, which brings back happy memories of the 80s to me when you

could go to a restaurant, have a business lunch and claim it as a tax deduction,

which was ended by Paul Keating I think if memory serves me correctly.  But

the benefit of it according to Kate Carnell is that it would actually seriously

stimulate the hospitality and restaurant trade post the coronavirus lockdown

and boost employment particularly for younger workers and women, part time

workers. Did you see that call by Kate CarnelI?



CHALMERS: I did and even though Kate's from the other side of politics I try

and take all of these sorts of suggestions at face value and have a think about

them. There might be some issues with fringe benefits tax as they relate to the

fact that more people are working from home and so there's a blurry line

between some of the associated so-called perks of work and how they're taxed,

but I'm not convinced yet or I'm not sure that spending something like $4 billion

a year on her suggestion would get the most bang for buck.  There may be

other things that we could do in those sectors and amongst those workers to

get a better result. $4 billion a year doesn't sound like much compared to some

of the other spending that's been done in recent months, but I still think that's a

hell of a lot of money so let's make sure that we can't do it better some other

way.



AUSTIN: The hospitality restaurant trade has been probably one of the hardest

hit. As a result of the coronavirus, and it does have a tendency to employ

younger workers, and women in particular are also some of the hardest hit and

you've actually highlighted that. There does seem to be some reasonable basis

for this suggestion as a post coronavirus assistance for the restaurant and

hospitality game?



CHALMERS: It definitely diagnoses the problem.  I think as we've talked about

before, we say the virus doesn't discriminate - that's true in health terms - but it

certainly does in terms of economic impacts and women and younger workers

have been the hardest hit, and that sector the hospitality sector amongst the

hardest hit.  I think the most important thing we could do is to make sure that

more of those casual workers in that industry are able to access JobKeeper.

That would be a far more effective way of supporting an industry and

supporting those workers for one reason or another but the Government hasn't

gone down that path.



AUSTIN: The difference is my mind is that for JobKeeper the people of

Australia would be borrowing the money, whereas with scrapping the Fringe

Benefits Tax we wouldn't have to borrow anything, it will be just tax forgone by

the federal government.



CHALMERS: Which has the same impact on debt. You'd still have to make up

that $4 billion by borrowing it.



AUSTIN: And pay the interest on it.



CHALMERS: For the purposes of the budget there would be no difference

between a $4 billion tax cut or $4 billion worth of JobKeeper it has the same

impact. It's all borrowed money at the moment, we've got record debt heading

towards a trillion dollars. There was already recorded before the crisis. So, with

all of these things which cost money it's important that we support jobs. We

need to do what we can. That's going to be our highest priority, but we also

need to remember it has to be paid back at some point, whether it's a tax break

or whether it's money that we spend.



AUSTIN: So clarify for me, you'll have a look at the Fringe Benefits Tax

suggestion, by the Small Business and Family Enterprise Ombudsman?



CHALMERS: I'll certainly have a look at it, I had a look at it when I saw it in the

media and as I said I try to take all these suggestions at face value. The key

test really is bang for buck and what's the best thing for jobs.



AUSTIN: And at this stage you don't consider it to have the best bang for the

buck?



CHALMERS: I think the best thing we could do for hospitality workers

particularly younger female workers would be to hook more casual workers up

to JobKeeper.  That would maintain a connection with their employer which

helps the business pay their wages costs and survive through what is a

horrendously difficult period.



AUSTIN: Jim Chalmers is the Shadow Treasury spokesperson for the Labor

Party, the Federal Opposition in Australia. Let me move on, while in a similar

theme. Andrew Leigh, one of your compatriots has been highlighting in the

House of Representatives examples of where companies are giving their

executives, either bonuses, or share bonuses, or dividend payments whilst

putting staff off on JobKeeper. There's been a few Queensland examples, as

well. Is this rotting if a company gives its executives, some sort of bonus or

financial stimulus, while at the same time they're taking money from the

taxpayer via the JobKeeper program?



CHALMERS: It's legal, that’s the problem.



AUSTIN: Then why is Andrew Leigh your partner highlighting it?



CHALMERS: Because he's pointing out, rightly, that the Treasurer, Josh

Frydenberg sets all of the eligibility for JobKeeper and he's allowing this to go

on. Nobody wants to see this borrowed taxpayer money, which is intended to

keep workers on, go to executive bonuses.  That’s the point Andrew is making,

but not just Andrew, the head of the Business Council of Australia made that

point yesterday on ABC TV that that's not the purpose of JobKeeper. So the

reason Andy's raising it is to point to an issue there where we're not getting

bang for buck, where the rules laid down by the Treasurer are not working as

they should.



AUSTIN: And as a result, Australia company executives are gaming the

system.



CHALMERS: Clearly we’re getting an outcome that the Australian public don't

want to see.



AUSTIN: Do you agree Australian company executives are gaming the

system?



CHALMERS: I'm reluctant to use those kind of labels only because…



AUSTIN: What label would you use Jim?



CHALMERS: Well these are the rules laid down by the Treasurer. My beef is

not necessarily just with the companies and their CEOs I think it is a problem

that we're seeing executive bonuses paid for with taxpayer money. I'd rather

that not happen. The reality is, unfortunately, there's only one guy, not the

parliament, not the legislation, who sets the eligibility for JobKeeper and that's

the Treasurer and he's letting this happen.



AUSTIN: So what does the Treasurer, Josh Frydenberg need to fix?



CHALMERS: We've said all along that JobKeeper money should go to

businesses that genuinely need it. This issue has popped up, Andrew has

raised it, Jennifer Westacott from the BCA has raised it and others have. If

there are ways that he can tighten up, if there are ways that we can exert public

pressure on companies not to do this, then that's a good thing because we

want to see this money, which is all borrowed money, tens of billions of dollars,

in fact 100 billion dollars, we want to make sure it's spent where it can do the

most good and clearly executive bonuses are not the best use of that money.



AUSTIN: This is ABC Radio. It's 4:47pm. JobKeeper 2.0 kicks in soon. There's

been a lot of different issues raised about it but you guys have got a particular

concern that it's dropping off, or it's reducing too quickly why?



CHALMERS: Well because when they announced that they would cut back on

JobKeeper they did that on the assumption that the Victorian economy would

be going fine and the international border would be opening up on the first of

January, and things would be coming back to normal.  Unfortunately that's not

quite the case, clearly that's not the case. The problems in the jobs market are

actually getting worse not better. Victoria's in store for a longer lockdown and

so all we've said is, and we try to be pretty constructive about this, the

JobKeeper amount should reflect the conditions in the economy and the

economy's gotten worse, it's deteriorated, we’re in the worst recession that

we've had for almost 100 years now, and unemployment is rising not falling. So

we think they should reconsider those cuts. That would be a good thing if they

did that.  If the rate wasn't reduced at the end of this month then we would

welcome it.



AUSTIN: Is the level of federal government debt, an issue? You mentioned it

before, nearly a trillion dollars.



CHALMERS: It certainly is Steve, but in the near term the most important issue

is jobs, and making sure that we can try and prevent those unemployment

queues from getting ever longer than they are. But clearly, debt is an issue and

it has to be repaid at some point. We already pay billions of dollars servicing

the debt that was already at record levels before COVID-19. So we need to be

conscious of that and what that means is it puts pressure on all of us to make

sure that all of this money that's borrowed to deal with the crisis in appropriate

ways, this welcome supporting in the economy, we have to make sure we're

getting maximum bang for buck. We measure that effectiveness for what it

means for jobs.



AUSTIN: Then is the $100 billion and counting state debt, also a problem?



CHALMERS: That's an issue that the states have acknowledged as well.  Of

course it is. Of course every state and the Commonwealth would rather have

no debt because it costs money to service that debt, but you've got to work out

what your highest priority is and the highest priority for the states and the

Commonwealth right now is to make sure that we're supporting people and

supporting jobs.



AUSTIN: The Commonwealth has taxation powers, the states don't. So the

states will have to go to the Commonwealth and say give us more money, or

else they're going to have to find ways of saving money.



CHALMERS: It's not entirely true they don't have taxing powers but they don't

have as substantial taxing powers as the Commonwealth, that's true. They've

got their own ways to raise revenue.



AUSTIN: Levies, fees, charges and uping royalties which they promised not to



do.



CHALMERS: Royalties, stamp duty, payroll tax there are a range of state

taxes.



AUSTIN: Payroll tax is a tax on employment they wouldn't won't do that surely?



CHALMERS: Your broader point that the majority of the taxes raised are raised

by the Commonwealth is true. There's a system where the Commonwealth

raises the GST and gives every single cent to the states so that's another really

substantial way that the Commonwealth supports the states.  But everyone and

every budget right around Australia; state, territory, federal or local government,

their budgets are being punished right now in this crisis but the most important

thing is we support jobs now and have a credible plan to pay back the debt

when that's appropriate.



AUSTIN: Appreciate your time I’ll let you get back to your quarantine.



CHALMERS: Thanks so much.



AUSTIN: Good luck on the treadmill!



CHALMERS: Thanks.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949





