

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

TRIPLE M SYDNEY ‘DEADSET LEGENDS’

THURSDAY, 10 DECEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: 2020 in politics; being Leader of the Opposition during a pandemic;

Australia’s response to COVID-19; DJ Albo; South Sydney Rabbitohs.



ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Good morning,

guys. I'm very well.



HOST: That's good. How's 2020 been for you? It's been a difficult year for everyone. But what

I've loved about this year, I spent a lot of time on the Today Show with Bill Shorten on a

Tuesday morning. And I've loved the fact that we've sort of decided to put politics away a little

bit. It's all about Team Australia this year. And I've loved the fact that you've led the Party in

that way, the fact that we're all united as a nation rather than Labor and Liberal.



ALBANESE: Well, this has been a challenge to all of us. And Australians have risen to the

challenge. People have really looked after their neighbours. And it's reminded us of how

interconnected we are. And I think that's been a fantastic thing, whether it be the big scale,

looking after each other, or whether it be measures like in my local neighbourhood, there's a

local system whereby people have been delivering, when it was really tough, delivering food to

all the people who couldn't go outside, people really pitching in. It's a great thing.



HOST: Anthony, Australia has been the gold-standard in terms of the COVID response. We've

seen some low points in terms of the Federal Government in terms of the aged care, as well as

the hotel fiasco at state level in in Victoria. How have you viewed our response on the world

stage?



ALBANESE: Look, I think Australians have been terrific. I think that governments, by and

large, have tried to cooperate. All of the measures that have gone through the Parliament have

gone through with Labor's support. So, measures like wage subsidies, we were saying that

should happen and then the Government came on board for that and created JobKeeper.

Measures like making sure the people get paid pandemic leave. There was a problem, of

course, with workers working in multiple sites or having to choose between going to work sick,

because they didn't have any leave, or doing the right thing and staying home. So, that was an

important provision as well. I think that the trade union movement has been fantastic during

this period. But just a big shout-out to those nurses, cleaners, transport workers who have kept

the country going during a tough time.



HOST: Now, I know during COVID, Albo, you were actually a DJ back in the day is that right?



ALBANESE: Basically, raising money for charity and having a bit of fun, not taking it too

seriously. Playlists a bit like Triple M's playlist, I have got to say.



HOST: Yes. I've got it. I've got his COVID playlist.



(Plays music)



HOST: You've also got a beer named after you. You are a real Inner Westie, aren't you?



ALBANESE: I am indeed. I grew up in Camperdown. When I do citizenship ceremonies, I

finish up with my speech to talk about the bravery of people coming from all over the world to

make Australia their home. And I say that I too have lived all over the world; Camperdown,

Newtown and Marrickville.



HOST: Albo, you love your Bunnies. You love South Sydney. Gus, he loves his Roosters, and

so does Jude. Why do you love the Souths so much?



ALBANESE: I came out of the womb with a red and green eye. I say I was raised with three



great faiths; the Catholic Church, the Labor Party and South Sydney Football Club. I was the

Director of the club when we were kicked out of the comp and fought our way back at the end

of the 90s and the beginning of 2000 there. And that was a great thing to be associated with.

That was a reminder of the importance of community and fighting for what you believe in. I love

rugby league. It's a great sport that gets even better and faster every year. And I think it's also

about your sense of identity and who you are. So, I still see people at the footy that I used to

see at Redfern Oval as a kid.



HOST: Albo, it is great to hear from you. And best of luck for the Christmas time with your

friends and family. And we hope that 2021 gets a little bit easier for you guys. But thanks for

what you're doing and the fact that it's been Team Australia this year and it's lovely to talk to

you on the show.



ALBANESE: Thanks very much.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













