

SENATOR MURRAY WATT  SHADOW MINISTER FOR NORTHERN AUSTRALIA  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DISASTER AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT  LABOR SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  4CA CAIRNS WITH MURRAY JONES  MONDAY, 7 DECEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Northern Australia Senate inquiry interim report; recommendations to fix  Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility.

MURRAY JONES, HOST: Well look, I've spoken to Senator Murray Watt quite a few times  about our concerns about the NAIF - what it's producing on the ground here in tropical  North Queensland and of course, all over northern Australia. He is the Shadow Minister for  Northern Australia, he joins me this morning, Murray Watt, good morning!

MURRAY WATT, SHADOW MINISTER FOR NORTHERN AUSTRALIA: G'day, good to  be with you again.

JONES: Actually, I've had a few Murray's call me in the last couple of days. I like talking to  Murray's on the radio, it seems like we're at one.

WATT: Murray's should have a monopoly on this program I reckon, but we might have to  get a few more of us!

JONES: Most of the blokes tend to be not the best looking ones-

WATT: -there is that.

JONES: At least you change the standard! Look, we have discussed this a few times, and  look, you know, there's been a report that's just dropped - we'll come to that in just a sec.

It's all happening too slow is the bottom line. But this Senate inquiry into the NAIF, and I  guess the distribution of funds and support to businesses right across the country, well  particularly I should say, the northern part of Australia, is just way too slow. But look, before  we start on that, can we just talk about the make-up of this inquiry? I guess I'm keen to find  that it's a balanced report as well.

WATT: Yeah, I think that's one of the things that stands out about this report that was  issued by the Senate inquiry last week. The committee is made up of a mixture of senators  - Government, Opposition, One Nation, the Greens. So we've pretty much got all parties in  the Senate to form part of this committee, and it's actually a unanimous report so I think that

adds some weight to the recommendations that we have all been able to get agreement,  regardless of what party we come from.

And I think it's interesting, therefore, that what this Senate inquiry has found is that the  NAIF has just been far too slow at getting money out the door. And we've come up with a  number of recommendations, again, across all parties about what we think can be done by  this Government to finally start delivering on the promises that it's made to northern  Australia.

JONES: Now look I've seen the list of nine recommendations. If I can just focus on  recommendation number three to start off with; 'the committee recommends that the  Australian government consider converting part of the NAIF to a combination of small  grants, equity stakes and guarantees supported by rigorous guidelines, including caps on  funding and business size, to ensure that small scale projects and First Nation projects are  adequately supported'. And particularly since the pandemic, I should imagine that this is  actually one of the key things that we need to reconsider?

WATT: For sure. I mean, I think that the Northern Australia agenda in general takes on  added importance after COVID-19. You know, even better than I do, how badly affected  Cairns and Far North Queensland has been by COVID-19 and the recession that's followed  through it. So it's even more important than ever that the Morrison Government actually  gets its northern agenda starting to deliver.

What we've seen from this Government just far too often is Scott Morrison loves to get out  there and make a big announcement and get the TV cameras rolling. But the minute the TV  cameras stop, so does the action, there's never any follow up. And unfortunately, the NAIF  is another example of that. So what this recommendation is really based on is the feedback  we consistently got across the hearings that we've done so far, which is the NAIF is just too  focussed on really big projects - the things that are in the tens of millions of dollars or  hundreds of millions of dollars. Now, of course, northern Australia does have projects like  that, but it also has a lot of smaller projects, often led by First Nations communities. And  they're not looking for tens of millions of dollars or hundreds of millions of dollars. But they  find the kind of paperwork, and the approach of the NAIF in general to be just not interested  in what they're trying to do. So from our perspective, whether it's a small project or a big  project it can still create jobs in Far North Queensland and across northern Australia as a  whole. And they're just as deserving of finance. I mean, the whole point for setting up the  NAIF was to overcome the problem that a lot of businesses have in the north, which is that  commercial banks are pretty risk-averse. They like continuing to lend to things that they've  done in the past. But you've got so many new industries emerging in the north and even the  traditional industries like agriculture, mining, tourism, sometimes there is a bit more of a risk  there because of the location and the remoteness of them. But that's where governments  can step in and lend a bit of a hand. So that's why we've made this recommendation to try  to get the NAIF and the Government in general starting to think about those smaller  projects as well as the bigger ones.

JONES: Now, look, when it comes to funding, but also lead time with respect to a lot of  these projects, they take quite a while. It's not as if it's something that you can get  happening in a couple of weeks or a couple of months. So I guess, you know, looking at the  economic impacts that Australia is facing as a result of COVID-19, these projects should be  far further down the track than what they currently are. And as you've just said, there's a lot  of them that aren't even identified at this time.





WATT: That's right. And I mean, I think the further north you go in Queensland, the more of  a disappointment the NAIF and the Government's northern Australia agenda has been. If  you look at Queensland on its own, the Government has actually only released $10 million  over five years for two projects. They're both in Townsville. So not a single project north of  Townsville in Queensland has actually received a dollar from the NAIF. And it's been  running for five years! It's got $5 billion available to lend to projects, I don't see why Far  North Queensland should be left out of it. And, as far as I recall, there's only one project  that's north of Townsville that's even been approved for funding, and that's up in Weipa. So  I think what it comes down to is that if the Government wants to get the headlines for when  it goes out and makes an announcement about how much it cares about Cairns, how much  it cares about northern Australia, they've actually got to deliver it. They can't just put up an  announcement and then run away and forget about it.

JONES: Just moving on to recommendation number seven, just to wrap up - and I know  this is possibly a bit of a controversial one - but there certainly has been some discussion in  the past about the amount of money that's being paid out to the employees that, you know,  are obviously important with respect to actually making this happen. But I do note that  recommendation seven says that the committee recommends that 'the NAIF review its  policy regarding staff remuneration'.

WATT: Yeah, what that's about is particularly looking at the bonuses that are paid to some  of the senior executives in the NAIF. I mean, I think it is just a disgrace that after five years,  the NAIF has spent three times as much on its running costs than it has spent on actual  projects in Queensland. It’s spent $10 million on projects in Queensland so far, but it's  spent over $30 million just on its salaries, its rent, all of its running expenses. And that's just  not what this body was set up to do. When it comes to bonuses for NAIF senior executives,  at the moment they've got to meet a few different KPIs to get a bonus, but none of them  connect with how much money they've got out the door. So we think that there's some  space there to review how NAIF executives are paid and to give them a greater incentive to  actually get money out the door. It's all very well to have all the press releases lined up  about how much you've approved for this project and that project, but if no one actually  ever gets the money, it's not actually creating any jobs. So we've really got to have  everyone putting their shoulder to the wheel. We're very hopeful that the Government will  take these recommendations seriously. They have already announced that they intend to  make some changes to the NAIF in the new year and the fact that we've been able to get a  cross-party report making all of these recommendations, I'd like to think the Government  will take them seriously.

JONES: Let's keep the pressure on. We know that northern Australia needs the support at  this crucial time, and especially as we plan for the future as well. Labor Senator for  Queensland and Shadow Minister for Northern Australia, Murray Watt, as always, great to  talk to you, have a great day.

WATT: Great to talk to you, Muzza!

ENDS  MEDIA CONTACT: TALI ELEY 0448 078 456









