

Higher education reforms deliver financial  certainty to uni sector  6  O c t  2 0 2 0



Centre Alliance will support an amended Jobs-Ready Graduates Package that  delivers funding certainty to the university sector while giving disadvantaged  students and students from regional areas greater access to university education,  the Party’s Education Spokesperson Rebekha Sharkie said today.

“These legislative reforms are by no means perfect but overall Centre Alliance  recognises what the Government is trying to achieve and what the university sector  is calling for which is funding certainty following the 2017 indexation cuts,” the  Federal Member for Mayo said.

“Without change, many universities were at risk of significant job losses and campus  closures going into next year.

"I believe we also need to give the Government the opportunity to incentivise  students to study in fields where we have serious skills shortages. It is ridiculous that  year after year we churn out thousands of law graduates, many of whom will never  work in law, and yet we import engineering graduates. Something has to change".

“We also appreciate that there may be increased costs for students studying the  humanities but we recognise that these reforms will provide a significant increase in  university places from 2021 and that universities have the discretion to set fees that  reflect the delivery of some courses. Students will be able to substantially reduce  their fees if they study subjects or majors in areas that Government has identified as  areas of need, such as studies in English or languages.

As part of negotiations with Centre Alliance, the Government has committed to  providing additional Commonwealth Supported Places for South Australian  universities that will see South Australia receive the same growth rate as Tasmania  and regional Australia.

“This means substantial extra funding for our three universities over four years, over  above current funding allocations, and an additional 12,000 students will have  access to a university education over a four-year period,” said Senator Stirling Griff,  Centre Alliance Senator for South Australia.

“This is an excellent outcome for South Australia and will address the concerns  expressed by the Vice-Chancellors of Flinders University, UniSA and the University  of Adelaide who all pointed out that the original government proposal favoured  universities in regional areas and those in cities experiencing high growth.

“With a high unemployment rate, a smaller population than other states and no  regional universities, using a CPI calculation for new places was just not going to  work for South Australia.”

In addition, Centre Alliance worked with the Government on the weighting of  Commonwealth Supported Places in order to recognise the number of regional, low  socioeconomic status, first-in-family and Indigenous students currently enrolled with  each South Australian university, as well as defining the criteria for ‘special  circumstances’ within the legislation for students who do not successfully complete  their study units.

Centre Alliance has also negotiated funding for four study hubs across regional  South Australia to provide extra support to regional students.

“We also advocated for the reinstatement of a 10 per cent discount for upfront FEE-Help student contributions, the confirmation of a professional pathway for  psychology and social work and a formal independent review of these legislative  reforms after 18 months,” Rebekha said.

Rebekha said the reforms would encourage universities to strengthen industry  relationships and produce “job-ready graduates”.

“Another positive outcome of these reforms will hopefully be a strengthened focus on  domestic students, particularly domestic students from the regions who have under-represented in our universities,” Rebekha said.

“Many Australian universities are on their knees suffering devastating financial  losses due to the loss of international students thanks to COVID-19.

“With South Australian universities close to, or over, their cap of domestic students  with some having been cross-subsidised by international students, we need to  rethink the way in which we approach the domestic student market.”

Rebekha said the reforms had an emphasis on supporting higher education  opportunities for Indigenous students and students from rural and low socio-economic backgrounds through a $500 million a year support program and one-off  support payments of $5,000.

“I am also confident that with special circumstance provisions in place for students,  embedded in legislation, universities will be encouraged to take on more of a  mentoring and counselling role with students to prevent them missing out on

Commonwealth support if they fail to complete at least half their units," Rebekha  said.

“Students experiencing health or personal crises will be protected.”

Professor David Lloyd, Vice-Chancellor University of South Australia, said: “I very  much welcome the efforts of the Centre Alliance team to secure a better deal for  South Australia in the passage of the Job Ready Graduates (JRG) legislation. We  will be best placed now to grow participation and attainment in higher education in  our State.”

Professor Colin Stirling, Vice-Chancellor of Flinders University said: “I welcome the  commitment of Centre Alliance to ensuring that the Job Ready Graduates bill results  in fair and equitable outcomes for South Australians, especially those from regional  and rural areas. The guaranteed increase in funded places means that Flinders  University will be able to continue to meet the growing demand for access to higher  education as we develop the highly skilled graduates required for the future  workforce.”

Professor Mike Brooks, Interim Vice-Chancellor, University of Adelaide said: “I thank  Rebekha Sharkie MP and Senator Stirling Griff for their ongoing advocacy for the  South Australian community. Greater Adelaide and regional South Australia  currently have the lowest proportion of university-qualified adults on the mainland.  Under the status quo, universities face the prospect of continuous decline over the  coming years. The new legislation contains some serious deficiencies, however, the  amendments that Ms Sharkie and Senator Griff have secured are a step in the right  direction. The way in which South Australia will be classified for the purposes of  growth in domestic student enrolments will contribute to addressing the gap in  educational attainment and help build the workforce for the future."

