SUSAN TEMPLEMAN

MEMBER FOR MACQUARIE





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2GB BREAKFAST SHOW WITH BEN FORDHAM

WEDNESDAY, JULY 29 2020



SUBJECTS: Face masks; bushfires.



BEN FORDHAM, HOST: First I’ll go to Susan Templeman. I got a note from the Federal

Member for Macquarie, she was at Windsor station this morning handing out face masks.

She’s on the line, hello Susan.



SUSAN TEMPLEMAN, MEMBER FOR MACQUARIE: G’day Ben.



FORDHAM: Good on you for doing so.



TEMPLEMAN: Look, people came up to me and said “Ben Fordham’s telling people to

wear face masks on public transport, so thanks for being here to give them out”. So the

message is getting through. We had about, I’d say, half the people who passed by took a

face mask and others said, “I’ve already got one”. So the message is slowly getting out

there, especially for people commuting from the outer suburbs of Sydney.



FORDHAM: Why did you decide to hand them out today?



TEMPLEMAN: Look, I think we do need to really encourage people to wear face masks

when they can’t socially distance. If you can keep space between people, well that’s great.

But on a train you really don’t have a lot of control over it and, you know, the Blue

Mountains and Hawkesbury is full of people commuting. They don’t have a choice, they

can’t afford to drive into the city, pay for parking. So they’ve got to take as many steps as

they can to protect themselves and to protect each other. And we had school kids taking

them, and I said to one, “why do you think it’s important?” and he said, “oh you know, for



my family”. So the message is getting through partly because we’re seeing what happens

when things slip. Talking about it, it’s great that you’re talking about it. One woman said to

me, “Last week I was the only person on the train with a face mask”. So I was able to say

to her, “you’re not going to be the only person today, more than half the people on your

train from Windsor station heading into the city are going to have one”.



FORDHAM: Well, you’ve shown great initiative in handing out those face masks. Now, you

lost your home in Winmalee about seven years ago in the bushfires. I think that might have

been a time when spoke about seven years ago, where are you living these days and

how’s all that going?



TEMPLEMAN: Well yeah, look we rebuilt. We did, you and I had a good talk. My brain

cells from that time probably don’t recall a lot of it because when you go through that sort

of trauma, you function but your memory doesn’t help a lot. But we rebuilt, it took us a long

time, it took us nearly five years to move back into the new house on that block. I really feel

for the people who’ve gone through the fires this last summer. You know, we’re all thinking

COVID but those people are still in the depths of trying to sort out “can I rebuild, how do I

rebuild, how do I pay for the rebuild?” So they just had one thing after another and we

shouldn’t forget them, the bushfires victims not just down on the South Coast but also in

the Hawkesbury and Blue Mountains. They’re doing it tough.



FORDHAM: Well, you’re proof that you can rebuild and you did, and good on you for what

you’ve been doing at Windsor station this morning, Susan, thanks so much.



TEMPLEMAN: Pleasure, you too.



FORDHAM: Susan Templeman, who’s the Federal Member for Macquarie, handing out

free face masks at Windsor station this morning.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KRYSTYNA POLLARD 0406 693 735



