

BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR SCIENCE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS

MEMBER FOR GORTON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC NEWS RADIO

MONDAY, 23 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: COVID 19 Economic Package.

GLEN BARTHOLOMEW, HOST: Brendan O'Connor is the spokesman and he has been

asking questions about this matter in Parliament today. He joins us from Canberra. Good

afternoon.



BRENDAN O'CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR SMALL BUSINESS, INDUSTRY,

SCIENCE, AND EMPLOYMENT: Good afternoon, Glen.



BARTHOLOMEW: Does the Government's package go far enough in its attempts to

compensate those who have lost or will lose income?



O'CONNOR: I don't think so. We welcome the package. We voted for it, but we have

raised significant matters that go to the lack of support for workers. Namely there is no

conditions or guarantee in terms of providing support to businesses that they need to keep

their workforce employed.



By way of comparison Glen, if I could, the United Kingdom has provided up to 80 per cent

of income for median wages. The equivalent here, if people were to withhold - in terms of

the current provision that is there for businesses - the equivalent of the Government’s

package if you like, is that it would be up to, at best, 20 per cent of a wage subsidy.



Now that's a very big difference between that here and that of the United Kingdom. And

our concern is this - that small businesses under enormous pressure do need support, of

course they do, but they might use that money to pay, for example, rent or energy bills. Is it

sufficient for them to maintain the employment of their staff in many circumstances? That is

not the case. And, of course, this is in the situation where governments, at two levels at

least, are of course instructing businesses to close. So we're closing them down, but I'm

not sure, Labor is not sure, whether we in fact are providing sufficient support so that they

maintain their employment.



BARTHOLOMEW: Because there's lack of any direct mechanism to guarantee to the

funds will flow to staff. You ask the Prime Minister that question about the UK's direct

subsidy model. He came back and said 'listen, that would have required a fundamental

reconstructing of the way they administered that fund, they considered it and thought it

wasn’t an option here. What did you make of this response?



O’CONNNOR: Well firstly he focussed mainly on the payments provided to those workers

who lose their jobs and frankly of course we support the increase to the Newstart. The

effective temporary doubling of Newstart is a good idea to provide support for workers

losing their jobs, and of course there will be people losing their jobs even if we do more to

provide support for small businesses and have a condition that that support is predicated

on keeping their staff employed.



My concern is the government likes to say the best form of welfare is a job but their focus

here has not been on maintaining employment, it has been on what happens if you don’t.

Now our concern is, when we start to recover, that loss of connection between the

employer and employee is a real problem. The second problem is of course, morale to the

nation if we see a massive spike in unemployment, which is possible because we don’t see

the comparable type of support to maintain employment in this package when we look at

other packages of comparable countries.



BARTHOLOMEW: The National Tertiary Education Union suggested the Morrison

government is simply putting further pressure on an already under resourced social welfare

safety net but even with that measure to say, listen, there is an increased payment now

available for you, won’t the usual asset tests exist? So someone who owns a home or has

savings or investments won’t necessarily qualify for such welfare payments?



O’CONNOR: Well they have removed some of the tests and they have waived delays, not

all of them. They haven’t waived income tests and they should examine that and they are

also not providing an extra payment for those people that are on Youth Allowance, who by

the way could be 20, 21 years old who might be working or looking for work but they don’t

get Newstart because of their age. They don't get extra support either.



BARTHOLOMEW: Alright. Now, the Government says businesses do have some incentive

that the more staff they have the more money they claim, but what's that based on?



O'CONNOR: Well that's obviously the modelling of Treasury, but it’s providing

up to $100,000 to all SMEs with a turn over less than $50 million.



BARTHOLOMEW: My point is it's based on the number of staff they have in the first

quarter of the year, and not necessarily how many they keep on.



O'CONNOR: In fact it has nothing to do with who they keep on, it's only to do with who

they had. So they could keep that withholding tax as a benefit from the Government, but

then they could immediately make the decision to retrench their staff. They could retrench

their staff with that money - they could use it to pay rent and then lay off all their staff.

There is no condition on the money, other than you obviously need to keep them for the

previous quarter in order to get that support. But going forward, there's no need to maintain

employment to have received that.



BARTHOLOMEW: Before I let you go what about this move to let people access some

of their superannuation early if they need to? Slater and Gordon suggest these measures

may mean some people who take advantage it would see them fall below the $6000 mark

in their fund and that would cause their default insurance to be cancelled.



O'CONNOR: Well we do have concerns, again. Firstly, super is taking a hit in the share



market, and at the bottom end of the share market. Your super is effectively falling so it's a

bad time to be accessing your super in that manner if you can avoid it. We understand

these are emergency measures. There already were existing emergency measures, but

we don't like the idea of going there as a first resort when people need, when we get

through this, people need a decent retirement saving.



So we are concerned that people will just start to access super. It also will have an impact

on the super industry, which also may have an impact on the performance of

superannuation generally. So we are concerned. We've raised those concerns with the

Government saying to them that should be the last resort and we didn't support that

particular proposition. There was already that ability in certain circumstances in a limited

way.



BARTHOLOMEW: Extreme times and extreme measures. Brendan O'Connor thanks for

your time today.



O'CONNOR: Thanks Glen



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ERIN SMITH 0458 950 010





