

Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA

MEDIA RELEASE



6 April 2020



FRANCHISORS MUST DEAL IN GOOD FAITH

The spread of the coronavirus has put immense pressure on small businesses to continue  operating and keeping Australians employed.

Minister for Small and Family Business, Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash, said she was very  concerned with reports that some franchisors are continuing to charge their franchisees  regular fees whilst their businesses were temporarily closed or suffering a significant loss of  income.

Minister Cash said that franchisors should be working with their franchisees to waive, reduce  or defer their fees in the coming months, whilst these businesses are affected by the impact of  the coronavirus.

The Minister said she would pursue any reports of franchisors acting unreasonably towards  their franchisees during this time.

“During such challenging times, the last thing small business operators need are for their  franchisors to continue to charge fees while their doors closed,” she said.

“When there is no money coming the door, it is simply unacceptable that big business would  compound small operators’ problem with more bills.”

The Franchising Code of Conduct makes it clear “each party to a franchise agreement must  act towards another party [to the agreement] with good faith”.

Minister Cash said that a franchisor charging a franchisees their full fees while their doors are  closed could potentially be in breach of the obligation to act in good faith. A breach of the  good faith provision of Franchising Code carries a civil penalty of up to $63,000.

There are around 101,000 franchisees operating in Australia, which are predominantly made  up of small and family businesses. They have a revenue in excess of $184.1 billion and  employ over 598,000 people.

“I would encourage franchisors to take this opportunity to step up and assist their franchisees  and employees during this difficult time.”

Franchisees can contact ASBFEO or their small business ombudsman for assistance resolving  a dispute, or make a report to the ACCC (https://www.accc.gov.au/contact-us/contact-the-accc/report-a-small-business-issue).

MEDIA CONTACTS  Minister Cash - Guy Creighton - Guy.Creighton@dese.gov.au - 0438 815 302





