

CATHERINE KING MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT AND

REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR BALLARAT





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

4CA CAIRNS BREAKFAST WITH MURRAY JONES

WEDNESDAY, 26 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Cairns Airport jobs; Qantas and Jetstar; outsourcing and insecure

work; infrastructure.



MURRAY JONES, HOST: An announcement overnight which is impacting directly here in

Cairns, with respect to redundancies for Qantas and Jetstar. She's actually based in

Ballarat, so I'm sure just the thought of the Muddy's Playground and the tropical north is

enough to warm the cockles of her heart this morning. Shadow Minister for Transport,

Catherine King joins us this morning. Good morning Catherine, how are you today?



CATHERINE KING, Shadow Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional

Development: Good morning Murray, great dad joke, very apt as we lead into what is a

serious topic. Lovely to be with you in spirit from cold old Ballarat. I've been up to Cairns, I

know your playground and that boardwork well, I think I've said to you one of the best

family holidays I've ever had has been in Cairns when our little boy was a toddler, it's a

gorgeous place.



JONES: And I tell you we love showing it off and it's been a bit tough, obviously with the

interstate tourism and international tourism pretty much non-existent, relying on intrastate

but at least there's a little bit to keep things ticking over a little bit, because it's not going to

last long. Now interesting but sad to hear the announcement overnight with respect to

Qantas, in a position where they're going to have to do more outsourcing and also

reducing the workforce. Up to 70 people from Qantas and Jetstar likely to be made

redundant here in Cairns. In a lot of ways, and of course, when you consider the bigger

picture, you know, with what's happening around the world with COVID-19, it is

unexpected, but at the end of the day, could the Government have done more to I guess,

make sure that those jobs were kept in position, Catherine?



KING: Look, absolutely they could have. And one of the things we've seen from Qantas,

which I think is incredibly disappointing, is the decision to outsource its ground handling

staff from Qantas and Jetstar. We saw them do that already with their catering staff that

moved out into a company called Dnata which of course there was a lot of controversy

over, and still is, because that company is foreign owned, none of those workers were

eligible for JobKeeper and they've been put in terrible positions. If we've learned anything

from this crisis, it's that people in insecure work need extra assistance. The fact that we've

had people without sick leave and people not eligible for JobKeeper has been a significant

problem. I think the Government should have put more conditions on its JobKeeper

payments. Qantas has benefited, and it's staff have benefited substantially from those, the

idea that these jobs are now being outsourced is just plain wrong. But again, the

Government has stood by with its hands in the air saying, you know, nothing to do with us,

it's all the Coronavirus, which of course it is, but we should be the masters of our own

destiny here. We should be saying, we do want our aviation sector. We know that when

things do start to open up again, and I think Cairns is in a prime position for this, there's not

going to be a lot of international tourism, but domestically people are going to be looking

for different experiences and they are going to want to travel, they're going to want to travel

by car, they're going to want to travel on plane, they're going to want to travel by train.

They are going to want to look for those family experiences and if we want to have a strong

domestic aviation sector and a strong international aviation sector, we're going to need the

workforce for that. I think Qantas's decision is part of a broader failure of the Government

where we've seen them just not have a strong plan for aviation overall or how we're going

to actually help aviation out of this. It's not just our airlines, it's airports as well and all of

those companies that rely on the airports and airlines for their jobs, we've seen all of that

across the board. And I think the one thing the Government needs to absolutely focus on in

this upcoming Budget in October is what is its plan for jobs. What is it actually planning to

do to save the aviation sector and make sure that we've actually got those jobs going into

the future?



JONES: And certainly one thing that we've done here in the Tropical North in an effort to

try and widen our economic base, has been to get involved a little bit more in aviation

training, and quite a few facilities here in Cairns, including at the Cairns Airport. But

obviously, you know, with respect to the need for pilots worldwide, there's going to be very,

very few jobs for quite a few years to come. So that's been another impact as well. And I

guess just coming back to what you said with respect to outsourcing as well, one of my

biggest concerns is that once these things start to happen, Australia and particularly

Qantas and Jetstar has got an amazing safety records, there is the potential impact on

safety in our skies as well, Catherine?



KING: Absolutely, I think we've seen it in sector after sector when things get outsourced,

subcontracted down lower and lower and lower, the lines of control and command do

become more and more difficult, and those lines of accountability. So whilst Qantas is

making its decision today because of the cost pressures it's got, I think it is a very short

sighted decision both for them, but also for the country overall. I know the fabulous Senator

Nita Green that you've got up there, she will be fighting pretty hard to try and push the

Government to do better when it comes to terms to those jobs and the jobs of people up in

Cairns. But I do think it's incredibly disappointing that we've just not seen any plan for

aviation from the Government at all, despite the fact that we've had calls from across the

aviation sector, from the union movement, from people working in that sector for months

now.



JONES: I was actually talking to your leader, the Leader of the Opposition Anthony

Albanese just a few days ago. And look, you know, we are in a position here in Australia

because of what's happened is that some fundamental change is needed as to the way

that we operate. So many things with respect to our society need to change and we really

need to, I guess, grab the bull by the horns because significant systemic change is

needed. And this is something I did put to the Opposition Leader, is Labor in a position to

be able to get Australia progressing and make some of the changes that we inevitably

need to make, which are likely to include quite a bit of change, Catherine, and pain along

the way?



KING: Yeah, well, when we were last in Government we had quite a bit of experience with

this, obviously with the Global Financial Crisis and what that meant for jobs and what we

needed to do right the way across the economy. What we knew is that every single

community, every town, needed stimulus, we needed to be building things. Now you've got

a great project in your port up there, and I hope very much this defence announcement

we're seeing today the Government makes even further announcements for Cairns today,

crossing our fingers that it does. But what we knew is that, whilst the Liberal Party mocked

us at the time, we knew that improving school classrooms across the country, building new

hospitals and improving hospitals' infrastructure, every single town had projects like that.

And what we saw in communities across the country, you had small building companies

that suddenly grew to medium sized building companies, employing more people because

they had lots of work on, and we've been calling on them to look at that sort of stimulus.

They're the sorts of projects that could be got up really quickly, but also things like social

housing, why are we not building more housing that is affordable for people in

communities, and using that again as a stimulus in the economy? The smaller size road

projects in communities across the country, the Government's not really been looking at

that so that every single town in every community across the country has some form of

stimulus and money coming into their economy. That's the sort of thing they really should

be doing, and as I said that was our experience in the Global Financial Crisis, it kept us

from recession and it kept people employed, and they are not thinking in that way. And

that's what we've been saying, what is your plan? Why would we not be right at the

moment, saying while tourism, you know, is really incredibly flat, why would we not do

something like we did when we were last in government with the thing called T-QUAL

Grants, providing grants for tourism infrastructure to improve the quality of infrastructure so

that then when people do start traveling again, we've got better products out there to



attract people into areas. I reckon your council could name and your business group could

just name a list of projects immediately where they would like just a bit of an injection of

money to do exactly that, to improve the quality of your tourism product and improve the

offering. I think Cairns is in such a fantastic position once the domestic stuff opens up

again, if you really focus particularly on those family groups, given that fantastic boardwalk,

the pool, that beautiful treehouse that you've got. We loved it coming up with our little boy

and I reckon lots of families would as well. So that's the market you're going to have to

target given we're not going to get international people, but improving that product, we

should be spending money on that now.



JONES: Okay, and I guess getting that balance between the economic reality nationwide,

and I guess the real needs of our community seems to be the real challenge. We're going

to get to news but look, it's been great to talk to you this morning. It is a concerning matter

moving forward, particularly for tourism-focused cities such as Cairns and the tropical

north. Catherine King live from Ballarat and keeping warm this morning, Shadow Minister

for Transport, thank you so much for your time today.



KING: Lovely to talk to you Murray.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: NICK BEAVER 0419 709 266





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











