



SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women

THE HON ALEX HAWKE MP  Minister for International Development and the Pacific

MEDIA RELEASE

CORONAVIRUS ASSISTANCE TO PACIFIC AND TIMOR-LESTE

Coronavirus [COVID-19] is now affecting 75 countries, with the total number of cases over  90,000 and the global death toll at more than 3000.

To date, there are no confirmed cases in the Pacific islands or Timor-Leste. However, Australia  remains vigilant, especially as the possibility of a global pandemic is now widely acknowledged.

Australia is working in partnership with neighbouring countries to keep our region safe from  coronavirus.

We have responded quickly to a range of early requests for assistance from our Pacific  partners for laboratory diagnosis, personal protective equipment for healthcare workers,  risk communication strategies, and national response planning and budgeting.



We are providing personal protective equipment and medical supplies for healthcare workers in  Papua New Guinea, Timor-Leste and Fiji.

We are also helping Solomon Islands, Kiribati, Palau, Tonga, the Federated States of  Micronesia and Fiji with planning, surveillance, risk communication and case management.

Australia’s Indo-Pacific Centre for Health Security in the Department of Foreign Affairs and  Trade has deployed specialist advisers to work with the World Health Organisation and the  Pacific Community in Suva. They are also working with the health ministries of Kiribati, Papua  New Guinea, Samoa and Tuvalu, and are undertaking contingency planning to provide a surge  clinical response capacity in the event of an outbreak.

Australia and New Zealand are jointly funding the WHO’s Pacific regional coronavirus response  plan. Australia’s contribution is helping Pacific island countries to access medical supplies from

the WHO’s global and regional stockpiles and technical advice in areas such as infection  prevention and control, and clinical management.

We are supporting some of Australia’s premier health and medical research institutions to work  with regional partners on infectious disease prevention, detection and control. The Doherty  Institute, the Menzies School of Health Research, the University of Newcastle and the  Australian National University will lead assistance in laboratory strengthening, disease  surveillance, field epidemiology and infection prevention and control.



Media Contacts  David Wroe (Minister Payne): 0429 531 143  Melanie Ruiz (Minister Payne): 0427 888 392  Wade Laube (Minister Hawke): 0409 193 057

