

BILL SHORTEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT SERVICES  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE  SCHEME    MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS   THURSDAY, 12 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus distancing measures; Centrelink wait times;

KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: Let’s go live now to the Shadow Minister for  Government Services Minister and former Labor Leader Bill Shorten, Mr  Shorten thanks so much for your time, I’m interested in your comments to  Laura Jayes this morning, I want to look at those in a moment, but first up I’m  interested in your reaction to the stimulus, what did you think of it and can it be  delivered by appropriate Centrelink payments in your view?

BILL SHORTEN, MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG:Well I think it’s good the  government has said that it is going to do something to protect the economy  with Coronavirus, and I know that our Leader Anthony Albanese and our  economic team have been out there saying we will be constructive, we want to  study the detail. But I notice in my own patch in term of Centrelink and  government services, that the government, whilst it is looking after people who  get sick and it’s saying they can access some sickness allowance, what they  don’t tell people is that it takes 35 days for 70% of people to get their sickness  payment and the other 30% don’t get it. So, I’m concerned that without more  resources to Centrelink when people are sick, they think they will get  reimbursed, they will be waiting a month and half to two months. The other  thing of course is the government package, on my first study, and I could be  correctedupon further detail, is that it does nothing for the casuals, for part-employed who are sick and have toself-isolate anyway. So, in other words, are  they going to be eligible so sickness payment or are they just meant to sit at  home for two weeks and starve. We can’t ask small business to pickup the tab  there, so for the 3.3 million casuals, I still can’t see what the answer is. I  mean it’s good that we’re looking after the pensioners,tick, good the people on  Newstart, tick, but the 3.3 million people who go to work who may not be sick

but have to self-isolate, what happens to them? What we don’t want to do is  push people into a situation where they’ll either starve at home or they have  to go to work sick, so I think there is still plenty of questions to be answered.

GILBERT: Well the other question, and this really was quite stark, your warning  with Laura this morning seemed to go well beyond any other figure in the major  political parties, your concern, you want some more drastic social distancing  measures now, are you worried if we don’t move now we will be regretting it in  a few days, maybe a week away from now?

SHORTEN: Well I appreciate your commentary, but I thought I was stating the  obvious, a lot of parts of the rest of the world are now putting in  place measureswhich were perhaps unthinkable a few weeks ago. So,you  know Labor has been working with the government, there has been  bipartisanship, I think the chief medical officer of the commonwealth and the  states have been doing an excellent, excellent job. I know Chis Bowen has  been talking to them publicly and privately about what to do, but it just seems to  me that any cursorystudy of what’s happening around the world, that we’re  going to have to contemplate things in coming days that would have been  unthinkable weeks ago, and my concern is that if leave it too long to  contemplate it then this infection will spread. See I love going to events, I think  events are great, but part of my challenge is that I don’t want to be accidently  infected, and then more important than me, you know, I’ll get through  any Coronavirus like most people. But there is a proportionof Australians who  are vulnerable, you know I was talking to a teacher who has a  disabled child and she was in tears worrying about what will happen if she got  an infection at school. I know another gentlemen I was speaking to on the way  to the studio, 79 year old parents with respiratory diseases, it’s not that the  people in Australia are worried for themselves, but surely if we see that in  Japan, Singapore and other parts of the world, social distancing measures are  introduced to stop Coronavirus, then it’s really all about protecting the  vulnerable. See what happens if you know there is a bit of attitude that says ‘oh  I’ll be alright, I’ll be comfortable, well we’ll get through it’ well that’s true for most  people, but what happens if all of a sudden our hospital systems are clogged  up because we don’t take more draconian measures earlier, or that more  people will be in intensive care. What happens to the cancer patient who need  those intensive care beds? I think it’s not a problem of government or  authorities, or businesses planning for it, we just have to start thinking about at  least inconveniencing ourselves for the greater good.

GILBERT: The Prime Minister said, he was asked about this by Michelle  Grattan today at a news conference here at Parliament House, he said ‘I’m  going to the footy this weekend, I’m looking forward to it, I’m sure many  Australian would,  I would encourage you to go unless you are ill or there is a  reason like you are in self isolation’. He said, ‘if the advice changes then he

will change his position at that point’, but what is your view, about the fact that  he is still saying the he will go to the footy and encouraging others too in this  environment?

SHORTEN: Maybe he feels he is the Prime Minister and doesn’t want to be  seen to be taking a backward step, and that’s fair enough, that’s his opinion  and that’s what he will do. But for myself, and this is a personal view, well I  might just watch it on TV, not because I’m worried about getting a virus, but  because I’m accelerating the transmission to a vulnerable section of the  community. This is not an easy question, I mean we’ve sort of all a  bit conflicted; no one wants to see events cancelled, and no one wants to be  seen to be deterred by some invisible virus that we can’t see. But I saw a  really dramatic graph from the American Centre for Disease Control, it’s the  world expert body, they are just the best, and they, there’s two humps, and one  hump is if we, one part of the graph is if we just keep going business as usual a  lot more people will get infected, and that will overwhelm our health, it won’t  overwhelm it but it will put a great strain on our health system, where as if we  take measures which now seem unpalatable, it just gets me wondering that if in  a couple of months we look back and say should we have perhaps, you  know, taken these measures and inconvenienced ourselves? But nothing that  I’m saying should be construed as any critique of the response of the chief  medical officer or the medicos, I think we’ve got the worlds best, and  bipartisanship, you know we’re all working together. But I just for the Australian  people think there is a bit of a challenge, there this, we haven’t seen situations  like this, we’ll get through it, the stock market will rebound, I just don’t want  more people to be gravely ill or worse because we just sought of, just wanted to  delay making decisions which some countries are already grappling with right  now as we speak, but I’m sure we will get there.

GILBERT: Yeah indeed, but as you say that the point is, even though the vast  majority will have some mild experience with this there is a cohort that will die,  you are saying to shut down the stadiums, shut down the events now.

SHORTEN: Oh, I’m not going to say shut down this event on that day or say  shut down this event, I’m not, because that then becomes the debate rather  than what we are trying to resolve. What I’m really stating when I look from the  payment systems at Centrelink to the individual stories I hear in my electorate,  people are worried about their parents and their grandparents, their worried  about the vulnerable. I’m worried about disabled people who might not be able  to get carers to go see them, and to make sure that we can get thought this  pandemic in the best possible shape. I think that’s going to involve not just the  effort of business, or education authorities or politicians, it’s all of us. And I think  we need to make the message that it’s going to be uncomfortable for a period  of time, but if we are all in it together that is the best way to get through this, all  of us making a bit of sacrifice, I’m saying to my own staff at different times, if



they can work from home work from home. I mean none of what I’m saying is  rocket science, we’ve already had schools close, we’ve already had  Dark Mofo cancelled, but I do think, and this is the point I was making  today, that what’s happening in the rest of the world, even with the fact that  we’re a large island and that we’ve got excellent medical resources, we are not  immune, and I just think we need to be prepared sooner rather then later for the  more draconian decisions which maybe if we take too long to get to people will  regret that we didn’t get there quicker.

GILLBERT: Mr Shorten I appreciate your time, I think many viewers will  relate to what you are saying right now, thanks for that

SHORTEN: Thankyou Kieran, cheers.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM HOULIHAN 0438 366 400









