

HON GREG HUNT MP  Minister for Health

HON MARK COULTON MP

Minister for Regional Health, Regional Communications and Local Government

Media contact:  Douglas Rodgers 0411 658 056



MEDIA RELEASE

4 December 2020

GOVERNMENT SUPPORTS HEAR FOR YOU  Young deaf and hearing-impaired Australians will benefit from a $300,000 investment to support their  mental health and well-being announced today.

The Australian Government will fund Hear For You to deliver online mentoring, collaborate with  mainstream youth mental health services providers, and produce a campaign to reduce stigma and  encourage deaf and hearing impaired young people to seek help for mental health issues.

Announcing the funding during a visit to Hear For You’s headquarters at the Australian Hearing Hub in  Sydney, Regional Health Minister - whose responsibilities include hearing services - Mark Coulton said  Government is committed to ensuring Australians who are hard of hearing get the services they need.

“The Government is committed to improving the health of all Australians, particularly the most vulnerable  among us,” Minister Coulton said.

“We understand that for Australians who are hard of hearing, their health needs are not defined purely by  their hearing challenges and can - just like the rest of us - benefit from support for their mental wellbeing.

“Life’s not easy when you’re a teenager and if you’re deaf or hard of hearing, it can be even trickier.

“Hear For You delivers a modern service, tailored to support improved mental wellbeing for young  Australians with hearing challenges, and I am pleased to announce our support for the work they do.”

Minister for Health, Greg Hunt said the Australian Government recognises the cumulative impact that  COVID-19, bushfires, floods, and droughts had created for many Australians.

“This funding will address the additional mental health and communications challenges that deaf and  hearing-impaired young people face, such as increased levels of social isolation, loneliness, anxiety, and  depression,” Minister Hunt said.

“The Government is committed to supporting all young Australians with, or at risk of, poor mental health  by improving access to early intervention services and preventative mental health support.”

This announcement follows $21.2 million invested in the recent Budget to deliver key initiatives from the  Roadmap for Hearing Health and an additional $485 million for mental health services and supports.

For more information about Hear For You and their work, visit hearforyou.com.au.

ENDS

