



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

Pat Conaghan MP  Federal Member for Cowper



The Hon Paul Toole MP  NSW Minister for Regional Transport and Roads  Deputy Leader of the NSW Nationals  State Member for Bathurst



The Hon Melinda Pavey MP   Minister for Water, Property and Housing  State Member for Oxley

Mayor Liz Campbell   Kempsey Shire Council



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au



18 November 2020

MAJOR SOUTH WEST ROCKS ROAD UPGRADE UNDER WAY

A major $4 million upgrade of the South West Rocks Road between Jerseyville and Kinchela is  underway, with preparatory works to stabilise the Macleay Riverbank almost complete.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack visited the road today to see how the project was progressing with Federal Member for  Cowper Pat Conaghan and Kempsey Shire Mayor Liz Campbell.

Mr Conaghan said it was great to get out on the ground and see the benefits of the Federal and State  Government’s record investment in fixing local roads starting to flow.

“It’s been some time since South West Rocks Road received a major upgrade and it’s being delivered  now due to our Government’s record investment in infrastructure,” he said.

“Locals use this road every day to travel between South West Rocks and Kempsey. It’s a key local  road for the Macleay community.

“The rehabilitation and resurfacing which will start soon will make it much safer and smoother for  motorists to drive along in the future.”

Deputy Prime Minister Michael McCormack said this project was an excellent example of the  thousands of local road upgrades occurring right across Australia.

“Right here in Kempsey Shire, we are providing significant support to the region for infrastructure  and road works to support local contractors, local suppliers and local businesses as we recovery from  the COVID-19 pandemic, bushfires and the drought,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“Only our committed Federal and State Liberal Nationals Governments fight and deliver for regional  communities to get their fair share of infrastructure investment and it is great see this strong and  resilient regional community benefiting and bouncing back.”

State Minister for Regional Transport and Roads Paul Toole said the project was being delivered  through the NSW Government’s $500 million Fixing Local Roads program, turbocharged by the  Australian Government’s additional $191 million commitment, to see even more bush communities  benefit from road upgrades, faster.

“We know how much better roads mean in the bush - and projects like this will be key to helping  regional communities recover from the impact of bushfires, drought and the COVID-19 pandemic,” Mr  Toole said.

“Big infrastructure projects might create a lot of headlines but these are small projects that make a big  difference in people’s everyday lives.”

State Member for Oxley Melinda Pavey said the upgrade would be a game changer for locals who use  the road every day.

“I know how important this upgrade is to local communities - it’s a road that families use to get to  school, to get to the supermarket or get to work and home again, so I’m excited we’re now seeing  work under way,” Mrs Pavey said.

“The upgrade will involve sealing a 7.3-kilometre section to deliver safer, smoother journeys for all  motorists.”

Kempsey Shire Mayor Liz Campbell said the upgrade of South West Rocks Road was identified as a  priority in Council’s 2020-2021 Operating Plan and will be carried out over the next two financial  years due to the scale of the project.

“We are aware of the South West Rocks community’s concerns over the driving conditions on this  stretch of road and it is a great result to be able to announce this much-needed upgrade,” said Cr  Campbell.

“After securing this crucial funding we are ecstatic to have broken ground on a project that will  significantly improve the drive for the community and tourists alike.”

“We thank the community for the patience regarding any minor delays experienced as a result of the  roadworks, and we look forward to many more wonderful journeys on this vital road.”

This project is an example of many local road projects that is being funded in the region through  various programs, including the new Local Roads and Community Infrastructure Program which is  providing more than $2.7 million for the Kempsey Shire Council.

ENDS.

Media Contacts:  Mr McCormack - Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Mr Conaghan - Liz Spry 0418 928 744  Minister Toole - Ella Smith 0428 745 348  Ms Campbell - Giles Hardie 0411 221 016

