







THE HON MELISSA PRICE MP  Minister for Defence Industry  Member for Durack



MEDIA RELEASE

DEFENCE EXPORT ADVOCATE GOES VIRTUAL  PROMOTING SMALL BUSINESS TO THE WORLD



20 August 2020



Efforts to boost Australia’s defence exports are going online with plans for a series of webinars  and one-on-one virtual discussions with small businesses across the country.

The virtual sessions will be led by Australia’s Defence Export Advocate, David Johnston, who  has been tasked to help small businesses overcome export challenges arising from COVID-19.

The Australian Defence Export Office (ADEO) will implement a range of online support activities  to assist companies in maximising export opportunities.

Minister for Defence Industry, Melissa Price, said one of the innovative measures will see ‘pitch  training’ to help small businesses better promote and market their products and services online.

“This will help Australian companies put their best foot forward when engaging with overseas  military services and international businesses,” Minister Price said.

“The pitch training will be delivered as an online, five-week course, and includes coursework,  webinars and one-on-one support.

“It is free to members of defence industry who are participating in Team Defence Australia-supported online or physical trade events.”

Minister Price also announced that Mr Johnston’s tenure as Defence Export Advocate had been

extended by 12 months, in a move aimed at providing continuing support and continuity for the  sector, especially during this COVID period.

Mr Johnston has held the position since 2018, providing high-level advocacy on behalf of  Australia’s defence industry, including targeted support and advice.

"Mr Johnston’s re-appointment ensures Australia’s defence products will continue to be  promoted and supported around the world and his experience will also help companies form  positive linkages with Defence,” Minister Price said.

“His substantial experience with ministerial and international engagements enables him to  support Australian industry to access a wide range of export opportunities and build  relationships in key markets.

“Mr Johnston’s advice and assistance to small business is a key element of the support offered  by the Defence Export Strategy, the ADEO and its initiatives.

“Industry frequently acknowledges the value and influence that Mr Johnston’s advocacy work  brings, which is particularly important during the COVID-19 pandemic and the significant impact  it is having on small business right across Australia.”

For more information on the support available from the Australian Defence Export Office, go  to: www.defence.gov.au/Export/Office/

Media Contact  Ben Spencer (Minister Price’s office): 0412 754 310  Charlotte Butler (Minister Price’s office): 0406 338 521  Defence Media: media@defence.gov.au



Authorised by the Hon Melissa Price MP, Minister for Defence Industry, WA, Australia

