







THE HON KEITH PITT MP

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia  Member for Hinkler

THE HON ANGUS TAYLOR MP  Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction  Member for Hume

THE HON MICHELLE LANDRY MP  Assistant Minister for Northern Australia  Member for Capricornia

Dr SAM McMAHON  CLP Senator for the Northern Territory

MEDIA RELEASE

September 2 2020



NAIF supporting energy security and new jobs in NT

The Australian Government is continuing to support economic growth and development in the  Northern Territory through funding for two new electricity projects which will improve energy  security for Darwin and the Top End.

The Government’s Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility (NAIF) has approved a $37 million loan  to Merricks Capital Ltd for a new 12 megawatt gas-fired power plant in Darwin and a 10 megawatt  solar and battery farm near Batchelor, 100 kilometres south of Darwin.

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt said the loan took NAIF’s total  approved or conditional approvals for projects in the Northern Territory to more than $830 million,  underlining the Government’s strong support for northern Australia.

“These new energy projects will help modernise Darwin’s energy networks and reduce reliance on  older and less-efficient gas and diesel generators,” Minister Pitt said.

“They will link with existing transmission infrastructure between Darwin and  Katherine, and will  supply up to 90 per cent of future electricity generation needs for the Territory’s largest energy  retailer Rimfire.”





The Hudson Creek power station and the Batchelor Solar and Battery Farm would  create around 160  new jobs during the construction phase.

Under the funding agreement, the project proponents will also work with the Larrakia National  Aboriginal Corporation to deliver a range of intitiatives including cross-cultural awareness training to  employees and contractors.

Assistant Minister for Northern Australia Michelle Landry said NAIF projects across the Northern  Territory will support more than 2,900 jobs and generate more than $2 billion in forecast net  economic benefit.

“Today’s announcement follows the Government’s decision in July to extend the NAIF and continue  to fund vital infrastructure projects for a further five years until 2026,” Assistant Minister Landry  said.

“NAIF continues to play a crucial role in the Government’s agenda to help northern Australia develop  and grow, and to help unlock the north’s economic potential.”

Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction Angus Taylor said these new projects will improve  energy security, reliability and affordability in the Territory.

“The Government is focused on supporting new energy generation projects that create new jobs and  that deliver affordable, reliable power.

“These projects will help to lower power prices for Territorians, helping to back local businesses and  strengthen the economy,” Minister Taylor said.

CLP Senator for the Northern Territory Dr Sam McMahon said it’s good to see the NAIF continue  supporting local jobs in the Territory.



“In July, we had Minister Pitt in Darwin to confirm a $151 million NAIF loan to support the expansion  of Charles Darwin University and now we’re seeing it support jobs in the energy sector.



“Power generation and transmission infrastructure have been badly neglected leading to  widespread blackouts and a lack of reliability. This investment will see a much needed reserve  capacity added for Top End consumers and stability for the network, ” Senator McMahon said.



“Our Government is strongly committed to the north and announcements like this show how  important the NAIF can be to our post-COVID economic recovery in the Territory.”

ENDS

Media contacts:

Pitt - Matt Dunstan 0411 535 072  Landry - Tom Birkbeck 0418 908 159  Taylor - John Hulin 0466 443 917  McMahon - Kris Civitarese 0418 220 411

