

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER

JASON CLARE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR REGIONAL SERVICES, LOCAL GOVERNMENT  AND TERRITORIES  MEMBER FOR BLAXLAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  SYDNEY  FRIDAY, 3 APRIL 2020

SUBJECTS: Landlord and tenant issues arising from coronavirus; coronavirus;  health and economic implications of coronavirus; cruise ships; freezing of MPs  wages; airline industry impacted by coronavirus; housing issues; free childcare  announcement; Parliament sitting to pass wage subsidy package.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Thanks very  much for joining us. And I am here with Labor’s housing spokesperson, Jason Clare, for a  discussion about housing, the impact that the COVID crisis is having on people now that  we know that the way to minimise the impact and spread of this disease is by people  staying at home. Well, you can’t stay at home unless you have the security of that home.  That applies whether it be homeowners or whether it be people renting. And today there is  an opportunity for the Commonwealth and state governments when they have their COAG  phone hook-up today, to come up with specific policies about how they will take up the  policy that Labor championed to stop evictions and also to speak more about how they  protect people who are renters.

We need clarity on those issues. And we need also for real estate agents to reduce the  pressure, not add to it. And we are somewhat concerned about the reports which are  there, reports whereby most real estate agents are doing the right thing, reports of one  where a woman was asked to go for a walk. A woman who was supposed to be self-isolating, so that someone could view the rental property in which she lived. Entirely  inappropriate behaviour by that real estate agent. Also, Stephen Jones, our Shadow  Assistant Treasurer, wrote to ASIC about the behaviour of some real estate agent telling  renters that if they had a difficulty paying their rent they should access their  superannuation. ASIC have put up a letter to real estate agents on the front page of their  website in response to that, indicating that it could well be a legal because this is  inappropriate financial advice, for which real estate agents are simply not licensed to do.  Not only is it inappropriate financial advice, it will be bad financial advice. Because Labor

has pointed out our concern with the super arrangements.

When you have the bottom of the market as we are seeing at the moment, it is not in  individual superannuation's interest to take their super out because it will lead to much  lower retirement incomes. And our concern is also there for the superannuation industry  which may well be forced to sell assets at the bottom of the market, which is not in  Australia's national interest nor in the interest of the members of those funds. So, we take  this issue very seriously indeed. The truth is that the more people who stay-at-home, the  better the health outcome. And therefore the better the economic outcome as well. We  know that most real estate agents are doing the right thing. But we are all in this together.  And that is why requires government, private sector, people who are dealing with these  difficulties, to negotiate out sensible outcomes that are in the common interest. I would ask  Jason to make some comments about some of the individual examples as well that we  have seen.

JASON CLARE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS: Thank  you very much, Albo. I think that most people get it now. They understand that housing is  the frontline of healthcare in Australia. More and more people are being told to stay at  home. And the more people who stay-at-home, the fewer people that will die in Australia.  You can’t stay-at-home if you don't have one, if you have been evicted from your home.  And that's why we have been urging over the last few weeks for the Government to put a  freeze on evictions for tenants who have lost their job and can't pay the rent and would  otherwise risk being thrown out in the middle of this global pandemic.

The good news is the prime minister has listened. And last weekend he announced that  they would put in place a freeze on evictions. And what we need today is the detail. We  need to see the meat on the bones about how all of this will work. We have asked for two  things. First, we need to look after tenants. We need to make sure that tenants who have  lost their job and can't pay the rent don't get thrown out onto the street. Second, we have  got to look after landlords, the homeowners that rely on that rent to pay the bills, to pay the  mortgage, to put food on the table for their own family. The banks have already helped  here, so have the building societies with mortgage deferrals. But governments can help as  well. Government can help with a bit of land tax relief or land tax deferrals, and they can  also help by doing with the ACT government did yesterday. They have said that they will  provide tax cuts for landlords that provide rent cuts for renters. That seems to me to be a  smart idea. And provides an incentive for landlords and tenants to come together and help  work this out. And I would encourage other states to look at that example as a way through  to help both landlords and tenants.

What has become clear though over the last few days is that a lot of tenants and landlords  are worried and anxious. They want to know the rules, they want to know all of the detail  about how this moratorium on evictions is going to work. And real estate agents need to  know these details as well. They are the ones in the middle that are working between  tenant and landlord. And as Albo said, most real estate agents are doing the right thing.  They are professionals and doing a great job. But over the course of the last few days we  have seen a few bad examples of real estate agents doing the wrong thing. One example  is the woman from Queensland that contacted us, told us that she had been sick in bed  with flu-like symptoms for the last two weeks. She had been tested for COVID-19 and got a  phone call while she was waiting for the results from her real estate agent telling her to get  out and go for a walk because he needed to take a prospective buyer in to look at the  property, and he didn't want someone in there that was sick at the time. The good news,  Albo, is she doesn't have COVID-19 but that is not really the point here. The real estate

doing that is reckless and irresponsible and really needs to pull his head in. I would ask  them to think, how would you feel if this was you? Your mum or your dad or your child,  they are at home in bed, think they might have the virus and they get a phone call from the  real estate agent saying, go out and go for a walk because they want to show someone the  property? Think about the prospective buyer who was wandering through that property not  knowing that there might have been touch points around the house and the risk of getting  the virus as well.

We need a bit of common sense here from real estate agents at this critical time. The other  example is superannuation, and we have seen numerous examples over the course of the  week, of real estate agents urging or advising or recommending to tenants that they raid  their superannuation to pay the rent. Now, this is not on. Real estate agents are not  licensed financial advisers, they shouldn't be providing this advice. Stephen Jones, our  Shadow Minister for Financial Services, wrote to ASIC this week urging them to act and tell  real estate agents not to do this. He was right. And ASIC has proved that today by writing  to the Real Estate Institute saying that they should not be doing this, and they might be  breaking the Corporations Act if they do this and if they keep doing it, ASIC will throw the  book at them and I am glad that they have said that today. Real estate agents risk a fine of  more than $1 million if they do this. As Albo said, the pressure is on everybody at the  moment. There is a lot of pressure on tenants and landlords. We need to do everything we  can to reduce that pressure. A bit of detail from Government today about how this will work  out. But we also need real estate agents to show a bit of common sense as well to help  reduce the pressure on tenants and landlords, not add to it.

ALBANESE: Thanks, Jason. Happy to take questions. Firstly, from in the room.

JOURNALIST: Just on the lady from Queensland, in that circumstance should we be  freezing house inspections altogether to take that decision out of their hands?

ALBANESE: I think what it requires is just a little bit of common sense. The real estate  market will continue to operate. But it needs to operate with common sense parameters.  Here you have, it was not in the interest of the person who was a tenant of that house to  be asked to go for a walk, in contravention to the health advice, not just for herself but for  anyone she might come into contact with on that walk. And also, was not in the interest of  the person doing the inspection, because they would be visiting a house where there was  someone who had been tested for COVID-19, waiting for the results. Common sense tells  you that is not a sensible thing to do. So, it just requires a little bit of common sense at this  point in time. And if there is any doubt whatsoever, we need to have the precautionary  principle kick in here, which is that if there is a risk, don't take it.

JOURNALIST: I am interested in Labor's reaction to Michael McCormack’s comments  yesterday, pushing back on the idea of a bail-out for Virgin. Is that something that Labor  disagrees with or will you support that?

ALBANESE: What we're talking about here, we need to take a of steps back. The first  principle is, is it a good thing that Australia has an effect of lead a two-airline system, with  full-service airlines, Qantas and Virgin with their respective budget partners, Jetstar and  Tiger. My answer to that is yes, the aviation white paper suggested that was the way to go.  And we know we have a very competitive industry that supports the jobs of literally  hundreds of thousands of Australians, in the aviation and tourism sector, that rely upon  this. In particular, also, I would say to Michael McCormack as the National Party Leader, it  is so important for regional Australia. If there is one airline, there will be higher prices. If

there is one airline, there will be less route. There will be an impact on our economy  particularly in the form of regional Australia. So, in terms of any requests, my view is that  what should be considered isn't giving anyone money, isn't even loaning anyone money, I  have raised with the Government directly, my view which is consistent with the view that I  held and that we examined when I was the Transport Minister, which is that any support  should be in return for equity. The truth is that if Virgin disappears, it won't be replaced in  the near term. That is just the fact of the matter. Airlines throughout the world, if there is  one industry that is suffering, and there are many industries that are suffering, by definition  it is the airline sector. Throughout the world, most of the world's airlines rely upon  government support either direct or indirect. The chapter provisions in the US mean that  their government backs essentially, the US airlines, and most of the others are connected  with government. Whether it be Singapore, Malaysia, many of the European airlines, the  Middle Eastern carriers are all connected with governments. Because governments  recognise that aviation is an important national interest industry, and that nation states rely  upon them. We are very well-served by Qantas as the iconic Australian company, and our  international airline. But domestically, we are well served by two airlines. I want to see that  survive and believe that any sensible proposition should be considered by the  Government. But the Government should also be prepared to look at its own version of  support, which is one that guarantees a return by either a sell-down of any stake that is  taken on an airline down the track, or if it is not successful of course, then it will ensure that  asset is bought. And the advantage of an equity injection as well is that it is obviously off  the books, because I am sure it would produce a return over a period of time.

JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister has made some comments today about MP wages  being frozen. He doesn’t think that we need to go to cuts.

ALBANESE: MPs wages have been frozen by the tribunal. The Rem tribunal acts  independently of MPs. And I think that is a good thing. It should be done independently.  And we should not be the arbiters of any of those entitlement issues.

JOURNALIST: Just on childcare and the announcement yesterday, the Government has  flagged that that will not continue beyond the current crisis. Is it something Labor is looking  at extending?

ALBANESE: We do not want to try to predict too far into the future. If you predicted that a  Government that described our childcare policy at the last election as communism would  be implementing free childcare, you would have been buying some lottery ticket because  you could have predicted the outcome of the lottery. Truth is that this Government has  acted in ways in which they have contradicted not just their recent history, but for many of  them, years of their rhetorical position. And we will wait and see how the Government,  many of the Government speakers now reassess their view, for example, of Labor's  actions in the Global Financial Crisis and some of their rhetoric there, I think, they will have  great difficulty continuing in the future. We support the action to support the childcare  industry. We called for it. It was in danger of collapse. It is important that coming out of this  crisis that we keep structures in place so that we can emerge stronger from the crisis than  would be the case. If those structures disappear, whether it be the childcare industry, the  aviation industry, the arts and entertainment industry, all these industries require sectoral  support because unless we do that then you are starting from scratch and it ends up  costing you a lot more. One of the things about many of these measures is that they are  investments in the future. And I would say to the Government it is relevant for other  measures as well. The cost of action has to be balanced up with what is the cost of  inaction. And I say that applies to the great challenge of climate change as well. And

maybe the Government like to think about that as well because that is absolutely critical.

JOURNALIST: We have seen some of the cruise ships finally move on from Sydney  shores. Labor has been critical of Peter Dutton 's role in this issue. Do you think those  cruise ships being moved on is a sign that they are dealing with this issue now and that we  have moved pass this issue?

ALBANESE: We are seeing now the figures are up around 600 figure for people directly  linked to the Ruby Princess and people being allowed, 2700, being allowed off that ship.  That is a diabolical circumstance. The Government’s handling of this, I think, people just  shake their head when we see Federal Coalition Government criticising the state coalition  government and vice-versa. What they want is for this to have not happened. The Federal  Government has control of our borders. They are responsible. They are responsible for  these issues. And, yet, the Federal Government has refused to take responsibility for it.  This will all be examined in time. But what we do need to make sure is that the Federal  Government works with state governments to make sure that we get this right and that we  do not see any repeat of this debacle which has had tragic consequences, make no  mistake. Lives have been lost as a result of this the buckle. Can I take some questions  from those people online? Can you identify yourself? Who is this?

JOURNALIST: Catalina from SBS News.

ALBANESE: You are on.

JOURNALIST: I just wanted to ask a related question to the housing and specifically  related to international students. We know that many of the welfare measures being  announced don't cover them at all and they are struggling to pay bills, rent and sometimes  school fees. What you think should happen in that case?

CLARE: Thanks, Catalina. It is Jason here. The virus does not identify nationality. It can  affect anybody. And the freeze on evictions needs to apply to everybody here in Australia.  We need some common sense here. Take the pressure down and get people to get  together and try and work this out. The story we saw online yesterday telling people to go  home or to get a job is not the way back. We do not have people sitting at home at the  moment watching Tiger King on Netflix because they are bludgers. They are at home  because they have lost their job or have been told to stay at home. We need common  sense here. Tenants and landlords working together. And real estate agents helping not  hurting.

JOURNALIST: A quick follow-up, what about financial assistance other than housing?

ALBANESE: We have raised the issue with the Government that we cannot have  individuals left destitute in this country in the current circumstances. So, we need to look at  any of the gaps which are there. Two reasons. One, obviously, for the individual, people  cannot just return home. But, secondly as well, this virus means that any individual,  regardless of their circumstance, who is mixing with people represents a danger. That is  the whole principle of social distancing here. And you cannot self-isolate if you do not have  any income, you do not have any food, you do not have anywhere to live. So, we do need,  here, to just as the Government has recognised in a range of areas, that they have  responded in ways which they would not have seen themselves as doing some months  ago, we need a bit of common sense here. We need to recognise that everyone,  regardless of their circumstance, needs an appropriate level of support. Because it is in all



of our interests. One of the things that, I guess, is a positive about this is that while it is a  wonderful thing that while Australians are forced to stay 1.5m apart, in some ways we have  never been closer together than we are today. We are all interconnected and we need to  recognise that, and the Government policy needs to reflect that. Any more questions from  the phone?

JOURNALIST: Eryk here from the Sydney Morning Herald. You had a briefing overnight  with Scott Morrison. Can you tell us what was discussed there? And, secondly,  consequences of the childcare package are that centres who have been able to continue  operating throughout the crisis are now finding that they can’t charge fees because  childcare has been made free and therefore they are unviable themselves.

ALBANESE: On the latter question, I would take advice on that, that would be of some  concern if there are unintended consequences of Government policy. And I would take  advice on that. With regard to the meeting yesterday afternoon, late yesterday afternoon,  between respective leaders of both Government and Opposition, it was a constructive  discussion. We talked about Parliament next week. We raised, in terms of our concern that  with wage subsidies there were six issues which we raised. Many of those, I hope, will be  worked through by Tony Burke and Christian Porter, the respective Minister and Shadow.  We are concerned about people potentially missing out. We are concerned about casuals  and the nature of permanent workers. We are concerned about any potential changes to  the Fair Work Act and whether they are necessary. It was us working through the detail in  advance of us receiving the legislation which we expect to receive, the majority of which by  the end of the weekend and some of which, potentially, on Monday. It was a constructive  discussion for us to indicate the areas of concern that we have and to try to work those  through and come to an agreement by Wednesday. We talked about the parliamentary  sittings and the number of pairs. It is expected that there will be 47 pairs on next  Wednesday between the Government and the Opposition. That will enable quorum to be  there and will enable people to participate. I indicated that we wanted Parliament to not sit  until 10am because we want to have our proper caucus processes. One of the things we  have done, we had a caucus meeting this week on Tuesday. And we will have one next  week and one the week after. We want to make sure that all of our people are able to  participate, and they want to participate in this process. And as elected members of  Parliament they have a right to participate in the processes. So, we discussed that. I raised  the aviation issues with the Prime Minister. And we also received a briefing from the  Deputy Chief Medical Officer, Kelly, about the health issues and where they are up to. So, I  can say it was a constructive meeting. I will not go into all the details of what was said but  they were the headline issues. It is important, given the Parliament, we do not want the  Parliament to sit for longer than it has to. If we can work through some of these issues in  advance and some other issues raised as well by both sides, I know that the Managers of  Opposition Business and Government Business are working through some of the  processes in the lead up to next Wednesday. And I think that is working constructively, as  well, with the Speaker and the President of the Senate. But it was a constructive meeting.  We welcome the fact that those meetings will be held regularly, and it was attended by all  of the senior members of both the Government and the Opposition. Any further questions?  We are done. Thank you very much. Thank you for coming and thank you for coming  online as well.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053







