

THE HON JOSH FRYDENBERG MP  Treasurer

SENATOR THE HON ZED SESELJA  Assistant Minister for Finance, Charities and Electoral Matters

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

Media contact: Annabel Clunies-Ross — Office of the Hon Josh Frydenberg MP — 02 6277 7340  Media contact: Cassandra Choake— Office of the Hon Zed Seselja — 02 6247 6444

15 December 2020

EASING THE REGULATORY BURDEN ON CHARITIES

Australian charities hit hard by the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic will receive relief from burdensome  financial reporting requirements under an agreement signed by all Federal, state and territory treasurers.

Inconsistent and outdated regulations across jurisdictions create an estimated regulatory burden of $13.3 million  a year for the charitable fundraising sector. The recent Royal Commission into National Natural Disaster  Arrangements highlighted the crucial role charities play in disaster recovery efforts, but noted the complexities  of operating across jurisdictions with distinct regulatory schemes.

Charity financial reporting

The Council on Federal Financial Relations (CFFR) agreed to develop a framework by mid-2021 to lift the  financial reporting thresholds to benefit over 5,000 small and medium charities, allowing those charities to  redirect resources to help vulnerable Australians.

Over 3,000 charities will no longer need to produce reviewed financial statements, saving each charity around  $2,400 in accounting expenses annually. In addition, approximately 2,000 charities will no longer be required to  produce audited financial statements saving around $3,000 annually.

These changes were recommended by an independent review of the ACNC Legislation, Strengthening for Purpose:  Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission Legislation Review 2018, to reduce the regulatory burden whilst  retaining the transparency required to maintain public trust and confidence. At a minimum all charities  registered with the ACNC must produce an annual information statement which contains financial information  as well as information covering their governance and activities.

The reforms will simplify financial reporting requirements and maintain transparency to ensure charities can  dedicate more of their time and resources to assist vulnerable communities.

Charity cross-border recognition model

CFFR also agreed to establish a cross-border recognition model to harmonise charitable fundraising laws. The  model will provide a single registration point for national operators, which will reduce the costs and  administrative burdens for charitable fundraisers that operate across multiple jurisdictions.

The Morrison Government will continue to work with the States and Territories to reduce the administrative  and financial burdens on charities ensuring they can dedicate their time and resources to assisting vulnerable  communities and giving Australians confidence that their donations are directly contributing to assisting those in  need.

Ends

