

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AFTERNOON AGENDA  WEDNESDAY, 4 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Scott Morrison’s lies; Liberal Party’s bushfire advertisement; Defence  Force imagery used in political party ads; Government’s dismissal of bushfire crisis;  sports rorts saga; Prime Minister’s role in sports grants; coronavirus;

KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: Mr Albanese, thanks for your time.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Good  afternoon, Kieran.

GILBERT: What is your concern around this particular matter? As the Prime Minister has  made it clear, it was authorised by him. Criticism there was made by the General. What is  your concern about it?

ALBANESE: My concern is the same that I expressed at the time. That what we had was  in the midst of the bushfire crisis, the Prime Minister using the imagery of the Defence  Force in order to try to shore up what was flailing political support due to his lack of action  during the bushfire crisis. And the fact that the head of the CDF has made this statement  before Senate Estimates today, making clear that he was discomforted by the abuse that  occurred here. Remember this ad had in it the Defence Force imagery, it had Muzak as a  soundtrack as if it was some Hollywood movie at a time whereby people were defending  their houses, at a time where communities were under siege from the bushfires. And the  Prime Minister had, of course, on it an authorisation by the Liberal Party with a Liberal  Party donate button attached to this advertisement. So, he could do that. But he couldn't  ring the head of the New South Wales Rural Fire Service to tell him that the circumstances  had changed and that now there was going to be the national response.

GILBERT: Yes, but as you pointed out just now, it was funded by the Liberal Party. It  wasn't taxpayer funded. So, the Liberals and as the Prime Minister says, in that Parliament  answer today, Mr Albanese, he says that this was essentially a public service message  because there had been calls for the Defence Force to be rolled out. He's saying, well, this  is what's happened.

ALBANESE: Well, the Prime Minister today, once again, committed in Parliament the  same error that he has committed over and over again. It doesn't matter whether it's the  invitation of Pastor Houston to the White House, it doesn't matter about who the acting

Prime Minister was and the circumstances around the Prime Minister's leave where people  weren't allowed to talk about who the acting Prime Minister was during the bushfire crisis,  during the Prime Minister's absence, whether it's about the sport rorts saga and the  involvement of his office. The pattern is that this Prime Minister says there's nothing to see  here. And he doesn't give a straight answer to what is a very straight question. Today, he  wouldn't confirm that he had received the phone call from the Head of the Defence Force  to make it clear that it was inappropriate, the Defence Force imagery that was in this ad.

GILBERT: The Government has made it clear to us this afternoon, sending us the  information that, and I want to get your thoughts on this, because it's basically a Labor  advertisement when Tony Abbott was Prime Minister using troops. And they are saying,  well, their argument is both sides have done it. What do you say to that?

ALBANESE: Look, it's just absurd. This Government when confronted with errors of  judgment, which quite clearly was at the minimum, forget about the fact that quite clearly  the Prime Minister's office was involved, and resources were involved in the ad by  definition. Where did the Defence Force imagery come from? They didn't dress up Liberal  Party members and create Liberal Party military hardware for this ad. It was Defence  Force, it was Government. And if the Government was truly not being partisan at this point  in time, then it wouldn't have had to have been authorised by the Liberal Party. And this  was a Government ad. And bear this in mind too, Kieran. That this came after many  months of Labor and others, experts, former fire chiefs, all saying that there needed to be a  national response. All saying that there needed to be an increase in our aerial firefighting  capacity. And the Government, including particularly the Prime Minister, had dismissed it  up to that point. They were continuing to say that this was a state's issue. But they  prepared this ad for the very minute that the announcement was made. Clearly didn't  consult with the head of the Defence Force. We know they didn't consult with the head of  the Rural Fire Service. And this was an attempt to use the Defence Force in a way that  wasn't appropriate. And what's really important isn't that I or you think that. It's that the  head of the Defence Force thinks that.

GILBERT: Okay. On to the sports grants issue. Now, you obviously believe there are more  questions to be asked here. But does it get to a point where you think, look, there are  bigger fish to fry in terms of issues right now. We've got an international health crisis that  we're grappling with as a nation, the Government's dealing with in terms of its economic  response. Is it time to move on from that as an issue because people are more worried  about other matters?

ALBANESE: Well, Kieran, you make a reasonable point. But the Prime Minister's office  last night was meeting with the Sports Minister, two advisors, about the fact that Sport  Australia had given evidence before the Senate Estimates that wasn't correct, that was  inaccurate, and they had misled the Senate. The Prime Minister's office was there last  night being involved again. They've been involved the whole way through here. And if this  Government was ever straight about anything, and just said what was actually occurring  with this sports rorts saga, then this wouldn't be dragging on. If they'd have released the  136 emails, for example, between the Prime Minister's office and Minister McKenzie, if  they'd released the lists, the colour-coded list of all the applications that were in, if they had  released the Sport Australia ranking, which was supposed to determine where the funding  would go. But at every stage, this Government obfuscates. They sometimes simply don't  tell the truth. Sometimes it's the exact opposite. And we've only learned, for example,  through Senate Estimates, that there were these changes to emails. The first one on the  11th of April, where they changed funding as a direct result, the Audit Office have said, of



the intervention of the Prime Minister's office. And then that afternoon an additional nine  projects were added, and one removed. We only found that out this week, Kieran. I agree  with you that what there should have been is transparency in this. But there hasn't been.

GILBERT: We're seeing panic around the country. Shops have been cleared of goods like  toilet paper and so on. Is it time for our political leaders to call for calm? Some calm amid  what is widespread panic in this nation right now?

ALBANESE: Well, we should keep calm and wash our hands. That is the slogan that I'd  be using. Because that is what is appropriate. We have a very good medical system here.  We are listening to the Chief Medical Officer and his advice is being followed. There are no  politics around the following of that advice. Both the major political parties have said that is  what should occur. And people should be going about their business, you know, in terms of  making sure that they obviously take some sensible precautions such as washing hands  more often than what would normally perhaps be the case. But I agree with you that  people certainly should be keeping calm. Because that is the advice of the Chief Medical  Officer. I have been briefed by him again this week.

GILBERT: Mr Albanese, I appreciate your time. Thanks very much for that.

ALBANESE: Thanks very much, Kieran.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053













