

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP

Prime Minister



TRANSCRIPT

PRESS CONFERENCE

AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT HOUSE, ACT

WEDNESDAY 11 MARCH 2020

EO&E…

PRIME MINISTER: Good morning, everyone.

I said yesterday, in 2020 is one focus: the health and wellbeing of Australians, their livelihoods, their jobs  and ensuring that Australia bounces back better on the other side. That's our focus. That's what the  Government is intently been working on. From the outset, back in January we moved to get ahead. We've  been working hard to stay ahead, and it's important that we keep our heads as well when it comes to how  we're addressing these issues. Every Australian has a role to play, whether you’re in a government,  federal, state, local, whether you're an employer, whether you're an employee, wherever you happen to  be. We all have a role to play. To stay together, work together, to work through this very challenging time.  And importantly, on the other side, because there is another side, that we bounce back stronger than  ever. The health response has always been our first response to the COVID-10 crisis that has been  enveloping the world. It's a health crisis. It's a health contagion. It's a virus. And that's the first thing that  around the world countries are working hard to address and to ensure that the health responses are in  place to support our people. There are many other implications of this and the economic consequences  of this are very serious, as I've already outlined on numerous occasions. And tomorrow the Treasurer and  I will be making announcements in relation to that response. But today it is to outline the first response,  which is always on the issue of our health preparedness and what we're putting in place to protect  people's health. Today, $2.4 billion is being committed in substantively demand-driven programs to  support the health and wellbeing of Australians. Just under $1.2 billion of that will actually, we anticipate,  be spent this financial year, particularly as the virus and its impacts ramp up in the months ahead. That  health response covers the areas of primary care, support in aged care, support in the hospital system,  which I announced last week with the Health Minister, that $500 million in shared support with the states  and territories matched 50/50, which the Premiers and I and Chief Ministers will be discussing again on  Friday. And investing in research, everything from telehealth to testing, to clinics, hotlines, ensuring  people can get access to the medicines, ensuring importantly that the most vulnerable parts of our  community are very much in our attention and that not just means those who are elderly or frail and in

care facilities, but those who are in remote parts of the country, particularly those in Indigenous  communities. And there are specific measures that we're announcing today that go to those issues.

We have a world-class health system. That is one of our great advantages. We have an economy and we  have a balance sheet that enables us to address this crisis, both in terms of providing for the health  response as well as the many other responses, in particular the response that is needed to address the  challenges in our economy. Of course, this system will come under stress and it will come under strain.  That is to be expected. These will not be usual times and usual demands on our health system. And so I  anticipate there will be times where that will come under great stress. That is not a reason for alarm or  concern, because a plan and the resource and the preparedness and the professionalism of our health  system will attend to those needs. And so it's important that as we go through the months that are ahead,  that we all have confidence in that plan. I have great confidence in those, particularly, obviously, Dr.  Murphy, and the tremendous advice that he’s provided, together with all of his state and territory  colleagues over these many weeks now. The state governments are also very focussed on this, the  Premiers, the Health Ministers, of course our Cabinet led in the health area by Greg Hunt is doing exactly  the same thing. It doesn't mean there won't be stresses and strains. It won't mean there won't be difficult  times or days, and waiting from time to time. But the surging of these resources into our health system,  some 2.4 billion. And as I said, the majority of this is demand-driven. And that means if the demand is  greater than the resource will be provided.

One other point I'd make today is we received advice from the AHPPC today regarding Iran and sorry,  regarding Italy. And that advice is that the situation in Italy is now commensurate with the other countries  where we've previously had travel bans put in place. And so we'll be extending that travel ban to Italy  now. That ban will come into effect at 6PM this evening. That's what Border Force has advised me. And  effectively though, I think it's important not to overstate this, I mean, Italy itself has effectively put itself  into lockdown with travel now, and this largely closes that loop. We already had the enhanced screening  measures that are in place. This of course will mean that any Australians, residents or others who are  obviously exempt from those travel bans, would be subject to the same 14-day isolation period that  applies to the other countries for which there are travel bans. So health first. That's always been our focus.  This is a health crisis. We have to address the health issues and that's what this package of measures is  designed to do today. I’ll hand you over to Greg and then to Brendan.

THE HON. GREG HUNT MP, MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks very much, Prime Minister and Brendan.  Today's package is the next step in supporting and protecting the health of Australians. It flows from the  medical advice and it's designed to cover the four pillars of the Australian health system: primary care,  the aged care system, the hospital system and research; as well as providing national support underneath  all of those. In terms of the primary care system, it's a $615 million package, but as the Prime Minister  said, uncapped in its elements. And that is focussed on expanding the capacity of people to have  treatment, diagnosis and testing. And at present, people ordinarily have access to their General Practice  or to the Emergency Department at a hospital for those in more serious circumstances. This is adding to  that existing capacity. And so in particular, we will be creating a Medicare telehealth item. What that  means is that you will be able to get telehealth for coronavirus patients up through, from the home. And  by being able to get telehealth from the home, it both deals with the situation of patients who are isolated,  but it also protects the health system. There will in fact be two groups who can qualify for this. Those that  are in isolation, but also on the medical advice, those that do not have coronavirus, but are vulnerable  patients. And I think this was a very important piece of advice that came out of the primary care  roundtable last week by working with the medical community. They were able to give us that additional  advice, and Brendan, I want to thank you and everybody involved in that, and that means for our elderly,

for Indigenous Australians over the age of 50, elderly over the age of 70, for people with chronic  conditions, and either pregnant mums or parents with young children who are isolated at home, they can  also receive advice over the phone. That means that they don't necessarily have to go into a General  Practice or hospital environment if they are immune-compromised.

The next thing is, of course, we'll be expanding the respiratory clinics, so these are what are sometimes  called pop-up clinics. They will be there in addition to the General Practice, the Emergency Department  and the telehealth. Just over $200 million will be provided, but if more is needed, more will be provided,  and that is to develop 100 clinics across the country. And in addition to that, there will be many General  Practices that simply seek to have a drive through or another entrance and we'll be able to assist them as  well. So we're expanding the ways in which people can seek assistance to make it easy for people and to  support our magnificent, magnificent doctors and nurses.

We're also creating a new Medicare pathology test, that's a specific test for coronavirus. It will be  delivered in conjunction with the flu tests. So it will add approximately $170 million of support, again  that's uncapped, and that will include both the capacity for individuals to be given those tests on the  advice of medical professionals and we will be testing in aged care homes. And so these two things come  together to provide that maximum support. We've spoken with the pathology companies overnight and  that's been very well received. Upgrading of the national hotline up provision of home medicine services,  which is an important system, I mean we're expanding that capacity and that will assist people who are  isolated. And then also remote community preparedness and retrieval, where you might have an  Indigenous community, for example, where if the virus were to break out, we have the capacity to treat,  and to transport, and then to assist. And so those are extremely important things. In aged care, we'll be  providing additional workforce support of just over $100 million. That's to ensure if there are temporary  shortages or additional costs over and above those which they would ordinarily have. The hospitals, the  Prime Minister announced last Thursday, of a 50/50 share with the states on their in-hospital coronavirus-related health activities and their public health and related activities in the community.

In terms of research, we will invest $30 million in research into vaccines, antivirals and immunotherapy or  respiratory treatments - that's a very important step, and we'll be working with the research community  on that. And then finally, we'll be investing over a billion dollars in national support across the country,  and that funding goes to the national medical stockpile, to the incident room, to modelling, in particular  to workforce and communications, so all of those things go together. The last thing is, today's goal is very  simple. It's to support our magnificent doctors and nurses and to allow the public to have multiple avenues  in, to receive the advice and the care that they need, they deserve and they will get.

PRIME MINISTER: Thank you, Greg. Dr. Murphy.

DR. BRENDAN MURPHY, CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER: Thanks, Prime Minister and Minister. So these  packages are really important. And as Minister Hunt has said, they were designed in partnership with the  sector. We've had very good engagement with this, this is what the sector has been asking for. So they're  very important to respond to the current demand. But even more important to be prepared for future  demand. And I do want to briefly talk about demand. We have seen over recent days a number of people  seeking testing who don't need it. We are, it's clear that there is some anxiety in the community with over  100 cases. But I say, as I've said on many occasions, a couple of things. Most of these cases are related to  imports from overseas. There is only one element of significant community transmission and that's small  and controlled in Sydney.

There is no point being tested at the moment if you have not travelled or if you've not been in contact,  even if you have flu-like illnesses, we are not saying to people who get acute respiratory symptoms, a cold  or flu, to go and get tested for COVID-19. We are saying that if you've come back from a return traveller  or you've been in contact with someone, who has been a confirmed case, then you should be tested. But  other Australians do not need testing, and all they are doing is putting an unnecessary burden on the  testing. But the testing is being expanded and the new package will substantially increase our capacity to  test with the clinics and the new pathology service. The only other people we are looking at now is  whether health care workers who have significant febrile illnesses might also be tested simply because of  the impact of a sick health care worker, but we're seeking further advice from AHPPC on that. So the  number of Australians who should be tested at the moment is well within the capacity of current testing,  but we are expanding and getting ready, and I'm just trying to tell people to stay reasonably calm about  this. We've got small numbers of cases at the moment. We do expect more, and I've also said on many  occasions, for most people who get this virus, it is a very mild illness. Certainly we are worried about the  elderly. Certainly we are worried if we have a large outbreak, that that would put pressure on our  hospitals, as the Prime Minister and Minister have said. But at the moment, there is no reason for  community panic in Australia.

JOURNALIST: When will these pop-up clinics appear and who will be responsible for building them?

MINISTER HUNT: Already we've seen the states establish clinics. We have, for example, four out of  Melbourne hospitals up, which the Victorian Government has established. South Australia has pioneered  a very innovative drive through model, I think featured on the front of one of the papers today. We have  the Royal Adelaide Hospital, and New South Wales, Queensland, and other states are already doing that.  So we'll be building on those. And we're now working through what are called the primary health networks  on identifying those practices that wish to be part of this. And so we'll continue to roll them out as soon  as a practice is ready. We're in a position to support.

JOURNALIST: [inaudible] going to be based in existing GP clinics, or they’ll -

MINISTER HUNT: So there’s a number of options here. So we're, what we're doing is entering into a  flexible situation. Some General Practices may choose to become dedicated respiratory clinics, and in that  situation, there'll be very significant funding. Some, such as the example of the great innovative Dr  Mukesh Haikerwal, have established a drive through clinic, and we’ll provide funds for that. He'll continue  the ordinary practice work in his practice, but where funds are needed to assist with that supplementary  work. So we're creating flexible models. And that's why the primary health networks will work with GPs  across the country.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, a few weeks ago, I think it might have been a fortnight ago, we were being  told that the expectation was it was going to peak in about April, coronavirus. What's the latest? What  are the latest modelling on how many people might be infected at its peak in Australia, given that states  like Victoria are preparing for tens of thousands?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, Andrew, I’m not sure what that April figure is you’re referring to because the  Government has not been providing that type of information.

JOURNALIST: It was being discussed at an international level.

PRIME MINISTER: Okay, fine. But in terms of what the Australian government has been saying, we have  not indicated those types of horizons. The government is continuing to do modelling on these issues and

working closely with the states and territories, because the profiling of how the virus extends in the weeks  and months ahead obviously has implications for ensuring that you can deal with any sort of peak capacity  requirements. And that is the, that is the very planning phase that we're currently engaged in. One of the  challenges to date has been that the data that has been available and these models depend on the data  that goes into them, and so it's important that when you're making those sorts of decisions, you're getting  a quality of data. And more recently, I'm sure Dr Murphy would agree, the sort of information was seen  coming out of Korea where you've got a very wide scale testing program where you have a much better  handle on what the level of, number of people who actually have the virus, and that relates also to the  mortality rates. I mean, the mortality rates we're now seeing in Korea are much less than what we've seen  based on other data. And I think that's as a result of the better read that you're getting on this. So at this  stage, we're looking for the best data to make those assessments. But the government is not making any  public statements on that at this point. I think that would be speculative at this point. But the government  is working on the various scenarios that would ensure that we can work with the states to meet the  demands that we would anticipate. But Dr. Murphy, did you want to add to that?

DR. MURPHY: Yeah so modelling is a very tricky science. And one of the things that we've had in Australia  is that we have, by very early and quite aggressive containment methods, we’re behind the curve of many  other countries and we are still in containment mode. How long we stay in that mode depends on the  success of our public health interventions over the next few weeks. If we develop sustained community  transmission, then the models can predict how long it might take to develop a peak. And again, those  models depend on how well you contain during the development of the sustained community  transmission. So there are a variety of potential models, but a pandemic or an epidemic in Australia could  last as short as 8 weeks, or as long as 14 to 16 weeks. But we don't actually know when we are going to  enter that stage if we do have sustained community transmission. So it's really hard to predict and  certainly it's very unlikely that we will peak in April.

JOURNALIST: Dr Murphy, how far away are we from a vaccine? Are there any encouraging signs that  you've seen?

DR. MURPHY: A lot of research scientists are very positive about getting candidate molecules. The  challenge is taking a candidate molecule through animal testing into human testing and the best estimates  that that would take a year or more. Some researchers are much more optimistic. Researchers, I used to  be one, we're always optimistic. And you never know what might happen. But I think it would be very  unrealistic to expect a vaccine is going to be here to do anything to impact on the current phase of an  international outbreak.

PRIME MINISTER: There’s also a lot of work that’s being done on anti-virals as well which support the  treatment, so there's the issue of the vaccine, which deals with the virus. But then there's also the issue  of the treatment that can be available, which can moderate, obviously, the severity of the impact. And  that's important, particularly when you're talking about older patients as well. So, and the private sector  equally is investing quite a lot on that front as well.

JOURNALIST: Minister Hunt, the spike in general, members of the general public getting tested  unnecessarily was somewhat sparked by a misinterpreted comment of your own on Sunday. The line, ‘If  in doubt, get tested’, which was obviously specifically in the context of if you were one of the at risk groups  or a medical professional, does that in your mind highlight the importance of very clear public messaging  and as a result of that, when can we expect the public health campaign to launch?

MINISTER HUNT: Look I think that's a very important question on two fronts. One as you've noticed, a  particular news agency, not yours, had to issue a clarification that they had excluded the very conditions  which Professor Murphy set out, that if you've been in a high risk area or if you've been in contact and  you have symptoms, then that's appropriate and that's the time to to seek the advice and the testing.  Unfortunately, that organisation excluded that. It took a while but we got the clarification. And I, and so  this is a message to all of us. And it wasn't intentional, by the way. It's a message to all of us to make sure  that we're reporting carefully and fully, but equally for us, we've already begun our communications in  terms of what we're providing online and the advice, but that will roll out progressively over the coming  period in terms of further online, radio and electronic and other means of communicating with  Australians. So that's that's an ongoing process.

PRIME MINISTER: Mark?

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can pensioners and other welfare recipients expect to get some form of cash  payment or other benefit from your stimulus?

PRIME MINISTER: I’ll have more to say about that tomorrow with the Treasurer, and that's when we'll  announce those measures. We're still finalising some of those measures after what was a very lengthy  meeting yesterday. The Treasury, together with other departments, have been working very solidly on  pulling together what is a very well balanced package. Obviously, stimulus will form part of that. I've been  very clear about that. And those who've been around this place for a long time will know that the Coalition  actually supported stimulus back in the first round, in response to the global financial crisis. And that's  exactly what we did. There were two tranches to that stimulus at that time, the first one acted and worked  through the existing payment mechanisms, and that was able to be able to put through fairly quickly. The  Coalition supported those measures at that time.

So, you know, these are measures that the government has been looking closely at. I have said from this  platform and others that we need to address the demand side and supply side. But what the package is  all about, is keeping Australians in jobs, keeping business in business and ensuring that the Australian  economy and the businesses that form that economy bounce back stronger on the other side of this. It's  important to understand the economic impacts of this are highly connected to the health crisis and the  life of the virus. These viruses have a trajectory. They have a life cycle. And that is not indefinite. How long  that is is still not clear. But it is clear that these have finite lives and it will have a finite impact on the  economy. And that's why the principles that I set out yesterday, that there is a clear fiscal exit strategy,  that the measures are timely but targeted, that they're proportionate. This is what has been carefully  weighed up by the government as we prepare to put that in place. And what will happen is we'll announce  those measures tomorrow. I'll have the opportunity then to take specifically the Premiers and Chief  Ministers through that on Friday. State governments then will make their own decisions, as some already  have, about what role they want to play and what role they can play. I mean, they have payroll taxes, they  have a range of other things and levers that they can pull. They have local governments, they have  roadworks, maintenance programs. They have a range of things that they have available to them. And I'm  sure they will consider those in the same way. But I think it's important that they can do that after they've  seen the totality of what the government's response has been.

The legislation that will support all of those measures, that will be developed over the course of the next  week and when parliament returns, we’ll be able to move quickly to take that through the parliament.  We might go over here? Sorry Michelle.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, or I don’t if this is for you Dr. Murphy, but do you think it's likely that America  will become the next big problem country with this disease?

DR. MURPHY: I think America has significant, has more more cases than we have. And I think they were,  by their own admission, a bit slow in getting testing. But they have a very good, robust centre for disease  control and public health systems. And they're working very, very actively now at trying to contain the  outbreaks in America. So it's a little hard to predict at this stage, but obviously we're watching that closely.

MINISTER HUNT: I will just add one thing there, Dr. Murphy referred to testing. The latest advice we have  from the National Incident Centre this morning is that we have now had approximately 20,000 tests in  Australia, which puts us very much at the global forefront.

PRIME MINISTER: That's right. Michelle?

JOURNALIST: Senator Rex Patrick has suggested that the parliamentary timetable should be changed. Can  you envisage any circumstances in which you think that should be done?

PRIME MINISTER: We have no plans to change the parliamentary sitting schedule based on the  information that we have. Andrew, you’ve had one go, I’m happy to come back to you but there’s lots of  people here.

JOURNALIST: Just on your aged care package, there are some reports of insufficient personal protective  gear in aged care centres. Is there specific funding for that, or will they be prioritized in terms of the  national stockpile?

MINISTER HUNT: So I can answer that, so we have capacity to assist through the national stockpile and  where there any organisations that do have issues, there's the capacity to work through the primary  health networks. And if they do have shortfalls, we'll be assisting them.

PRIME MINISTER: Andrew? He’ll burst if he doesn't get it out.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what do you say to employers who believe that a declaration of isolation,  self isolation, perhaps a declaration by Brendan Murphy himself, lifts the obligation of them paying a wage  to their employees?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, look everyone's cases will be different depending on what their health situation  is. I think that's fair to say. I'm just going to repeat what I said yesterday, when I spoke to the business  group in Sydney, all of us have a role to play. And large businesses in particular have an important role to  play. Large businesses have much stronger balance sheets, they're in a position to take actions to support  their employees. I've highlighted I think the example of Qantas is a very positive one, and one that is  seeking to make use of the flexibility it has, when that's whether people are taking leave or things of that  nature, where people are in a position where they have to isolate, either have an obligation to or  otherwise, I'd be encouraging employees to take a flexible and forward leaning approach in supporting  their employees during this process. They'll need their people on the other side. And businesses,  particularly large businesses, they will be watched closely I think through the months ahead. You know  businesses spend a lot of time talking about the value and integrity of their brands, well their brands will  be defined in these months ahead.

The government will be leaning heavily on its balance sheet that we've taken great care to put in good  order in bringing the Budget back to balance to be able to to respond to this. Equally, large businesses are  in a similar position. And that's why, again, I give credit where it's due in terms of the banks passing on  the 25 basis point rate cut, the first time all four of them have done that in five years. And I think that is a  demonstration of, I think, their willingness to do that. So I look, I would urge people to be practical about  these things, to be sensible about these things, to act with a sense of good faith to both towards  employees and towards employers, about how you manage these issues.

Getting through this is all of our responsibility, acting with a sense of common sense. I think, with a sense  of patience, with calmness and having, I think an assurance about the arrangements that are being put in  place, whether at the government level or otherwise.

JOURNALIST: Dr. Murphy, what is Australia's testing capacity? How many tests can we get through in a  day or a week? And can you explain a little more about the plans to extend testing, please, to aged care  and doctors?

DR. MURPHY: So at the moment, most of the testing has to be done in our public health labs. But with  these measures announced today by increased Medicare funding, all of the private laboratories, many of  whom have already started doing testing, they are all scaling up rapidly to do testing. And they will do as  many tests as we require. They have huge capacity, these can be automated assays and they can scale up  enormously as needed. So we haven't set a number on that, they'll do as many as needed. What we want  to have is the capacity for people to get a test with essentially a same day turnaround. And that's going  to be our aim throughout this. In terms of aged care we will be specifically looking, because we don't want  to have difficulties in aged care getting testing, we will be looking at pathology companies, possibly going  into aged care facilities, taking the tests and coming out to make it easier for the facility and for the  residents. But we're working through those measures.

JOURNALIST: What about symptoms in aged care?

DR MURPHY: No we're not testing people without symptoms at the moment. There is no value in testing  people without symptoms. Currently our approach is testing - and that's the international approach - is  testing people who have respiratory symptoms and who have been a return traveller or who are a contact.

JOURNALIST: So just to clarify, your efforts to limit the number of tests is not about sort of a limitation on  the number we have available? It's about the same day turnaround, is that correct?

DR. MURPHY: So same day turnaround is important. But what I'm saying, we're not testing asymptomatic  people is because there's no value. If you if you think you've been in contact with someone and you have  a test that’s negative, it doesn't mean at all that you're not incubating the virus because you may not shed  the virus until you're symptomatic. So that's why we're not favouring doing tests on asymptomatic people  so that the challenge- we want to test the people for whom it's appropriate to test and to get quick results.

JOURNALIST: Just on Indigenous Australians, just on Indigenous Australians, can you explain why those  specific measures are being taken to target those at risk groups?

PRIME MINISTER: I’ll just ask Greg,

MINISTER HUNT: So one of the things which is is very clear, is that we know that in many indigenous  communities in particular, you can have health challenges and also in a close community, transmission

can occur easily. The primary health systems have emphasized the importance of that. The chief medical  officer and the deputy chief medical officer and also working with the states and territories, so we've all  recognised that. That's why we're providing two additional forms of support. One is the telehealth  capacity for the over 50 indigenous Australians based on the relative health position, and then secondly,  the preparedness and retrieval and treatment support for remote communities.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will the government in the stimulus package -

PRIME MINISTER: Sorry couldn’t quite hear you Katherine?

JOURNALIST: Sorry, just referencing your answer before about business, and stepping up and doing the  right thing. Will the government provide any support to businesses in the stimulus package to cover  entitlements for work, for casual workers, for people who are not not, you know, don't qualify for sick  pay?

PRIME MINISTER: Tomorrow the Treasurer and I will -

JOURNALIST: I'm sorry Prime Minister, I have another one.

PRIME MINISTER: Sorry, yep?

JOURNALIST: Another one, sorry. Bridget McKenzie says she made in her statement on Thursday night,  says she made no changes to either the ministerial brief or the spreadsheets in relation to the sports  grants after April 4, the audit office told Senate estimates that changes were made to the spreadsheets  on April 10 and April 11, one at the request of your office. So who made these changes after April 4 and  on what legal authority, given that my understanding is ministerial advisers cannot cannot make decisions  in the way Ministers can make decisions?

PRIME MINISTER: Ministerial authority for the program was with the Minister for Sport, that is the  position. On the other issue that you raised, tomorrow I'll be back here with the Treasurer we’ll be  outlining what I believe will be a well-targeted, proportionate, appropriate response to address the very  real economic challenges that are being presented by the coronavirus here in Australia. Importantly, it  will be a response that is focused on the challenges we have here in Australia. We're not trying to solve  problems that are occurring in other countries or in the dimension of the economic challenge there in  other countries, we’re tailoring this to deal with the challenges that we face here in Australia. And that  program is comprehensive. It addresses both supply and demand side issues, it deals with investment  issues. It ensures that we can put Australia in the best possible position to bounce back, to bounce back  strongly economically, to support people's jobs, to keep business in business, and to ensure that we are  even stronger on the other side. Thank you very much.

[END]



Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney



