MR JASON FALINSKI MP

Federal Member for Mackellar



TRANSCRIPT

Sky News, First Edition with Peter Stefanovic



E&OE…

Topics: Economic accounts, border closures, Tony Abbott speech





Peter Stefanovic: Joining us live is Liberal MP Jason Falinski. Jason good to see you,  thanks so much for joining us. So, for the folks at home, what does this mean for them?

Jason Falinski: Well at the moment it probably doesn’t mean very much but what it will  mean in the very near future is a lot of businesses that we rely on for goods, services  and employment are going to be finding it very tough. So, the government is focused on  making sure that we have as smooth and wide a pathway out of this recession created  by external forces.

Peter Stefanovic: Is this as bad as it gets?

Jason Falinski: This is about as bad as it gets, Pete. Essentially, when you have all  major economies down turning at the same time, in a very short period of time, it’s as  bad as it gets in terms of economic events.

Peter Stefanovic: Ok. We saw Mathias Cormann trying to get on the front foot this  morning before that grim news comes out saying, “well we’re not doing as bad as other  countries.” I guess he’s got a point there but still it’s of little comfort to so many people  who have lost their jobs.

Jason Falinski: It will be of little comfort to them, that’s quite true. But when you  compare Australia’s economy, which most economists are saying that we should see a  downturn of around five to six percent, in the UK they’ve had a twenty percent decline,  in the US it’s around ten percent and the declines just go on and on around the world,  Australia’s contraction in economic activity looks pretty mild by comparison. But that’s  really history, the thing that we need to focus on is the future and how we get back to  growth and sustainable growth as quickly as possible.

Peter Stefanovic: Well a few points on that. First of all, the RBA is sending in another  hundred billion dollars worth in cheap loans for businesses at the moment, what sort of  an impact can that have?



Jason Falinski: Well that’s going to be critical because where things get really bad in  your economy is when your payment system and your lending system start drying up.  So, the RBA’s emergency loan facility encourages financial institutions or allows  financial institutions to continue the flow of credit into the economy and that’s what we  are trying to do, or that’s what they’re trying to do. So, that’s a critical element to making  sure that the decline isn’t any worse and, once again, that we get out of this as quickly  as possible.

Peter Stefanovic: Yeah, and how much does this, if at all, affect the debate at the  moment for open borders? I mean, the Prime Minister is trying to persuade the Victorian  Premier, the New South Wales Premier to get things going by Christmas, he’s not  having much luck in Queensland and elsewhere but does this kind of energise that  debate at the moment?

Jason Falinski: Look, I think that debate has never been more critical. I mean, at a time  where we need to be pulling on every single level we possibly can because as you  correctly pointed out these are just figures. There are real people behind those figures  whose jobs are in jeopardy, whose houses, whose families who rely on their income are  being put at risk, so we can’t afford to be playing politics with borders. The Premiers  need to be obviously listening to health advice but not playing popular politics at the  moment and opening those borders for the good of everyone.

Peter Stefanovic: Just a couple of quick issues before you go Jason. Tony Abbot he’s  kicked up a hornet nest this morning when it comes to his thoughts on borders, it kind of  is a part of that argument anyway, just wondering if you’ve managed to catch them and  if you agree with them or not?

Jason Falinski: Look, I haven’t read his speech to be honest, but I don’t think that any  Australian would like to feel that their lives are worth less than someone else’s, I  certainly know that I don’t want to be in that particular category. So, look I think the  broader point about whether the measures we’re taking for example, closing borders  instead of looking at individual hotspots is an overreaction and is costing more than it’s  doing good in terms of health terms. They’re reasonable questions to ask.

Peter Stefanovic: Well I mean, one of the quotes he said to, and there’s quite a few of  them, he said, “We’ve all had six months surely it’s time to relax the rules so that  individuals can take personal responsibility and make more of their own decisions about  the risks.” Does he have a point in that regard?

Jason Falinski: Yeah, I think he does actually. I think that there is a point about where  governments are just basically just telling people, ‘for your own good you need to stay at  home’ even when they’re in very low risk categories, even when they’re in parts of  Australia that haven’t had a COVID case or have no active COVID cases. I think that  that’s pretty heavy handed to be honest.

Peter Stefanovic: Yeah and just finally, John Barilaro he reckons that Sydney’s New  Year’s Eve fireworks spectacular, well it can’t go ahead this year. The Tamworth  Country Music Festival is off in the country regions so why should Sydney have its own  fireworks? Do you agree with him?

Jason Falinski: Well John’s pretty spectacular I’ve got to say but look I think the  fireworks might be more spectacular.

Peter Stefanovic: Spectacular? Spectacular in what regard?

Jason Falinski: I think he’s been on your program Pete. You know he’s a pretty good  performer. But look, I think the fireworks are such a major even for Australia both here,  but more importantly overseas in terms of being an attraction for other people. Everyone  will say ‘well no one can come to Australia at the moment anyway’ but you never take  your foot off the gas in terms of making sure that you’re prominent in peoples thinkings  about where they are going to go for their next holiday. And look, as I say you know at a  time when we can’t be not pulling every lever we can in terms of sustainable growth I  think that this is something that we should do, and whether we need to manage the  crowds differently that’s a separate question.

Peter Stefanovic: Yeah that is a big question too. Jason Falinski, good to get your  thoughts. Thanks for joining us.







