PATRICK GORMAN MP

MEMBER FOR PERTH





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW   ABC CAPITAL HILL WITH GREG JENNETT  MONDAY, 31 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Aged Care Crisis; Victorian Restrictions; Emissions Data.

GREG JENNETT, HOST: Now we want to step through some of the discussions and matters of the  day now with Liberal MP James Stevens from the South Australian seat of Sturt. He's in our  Parliament House studio and Labor's Patrick Gorman the Member for Perth is joining us from the  Mural Hall. Apologies to both of you at the outset. We're really operating in a tight time restrictions  now because of the earlier media conference. James Stevens, why don't we just pick up on the line  of questioning that journos threw at Greg Hunt, Richard Colbeck and that is adequacy of aged care  funding. Because the crisis is here and now, are you impatient for a bigger fix to this system to come  sooner rather than just the extension of funding we got today?

JAMES STEVENS, LIBERAL MP: No. Look Greg, I think it is important that we wait for the outcome  of the Royal Commission process which will report in February we've obviously made a significant  announcement just adjacent to this interview with the Health Minister and the Aged Care Minister  making it clear that we're extending and expanding the corona-related financing to the sector. We  commissioned a royal commission which will be reporting back in February and I think that's the time  to undertake consideration of necessary reform to the sector.

JENNETT: So sound process. Patrick Gorman Would you agree with that hasten slowly on the big  fixes and just put down what you need to deal with the present circumstances?

PATRICK GORMAN, MEMBER FOR PERTH: Well we already know that there's a lack of home  care places. We know that there's a need for guaranteed staffing numbers. We know that there's a  lot of things that could be done without the Royal Commission report and I was very concerned to  hear the minister, that is the Aged Care Minister, although it seems increasingly like Greg Hunt is the  Acting Minister for Aged Care, say they're going to wait till May next year. People can't wait till May  next year. Most people only spend three years in aged care. That's just too long and the  Government knows there are things they could do right now to fix it.

JENNETT: All right well let's take it back to I guess where a lot of these questions emanate from and  that is the situation on the ground in the state of Victoria. James Stephens, border restrictions  economic shut down in Victoria, your Treasurer is very keen that a timeline be laid out by the  Victorian Premier. Why is he so agitated I know he is a Victorian but why is he so bent out of shape  over this, he's calling it the biggest crisis almost ever in public policy making.

STEVENS: Well I think he's speaking on behalf of the people of Victoria who are desperate to know  what the plan is to reopen that economy when it's safe to do so, get some of the jobs back that have  been lost and give Victorians hope for their future. And clearly the ambiguity that is in place about

the current restrictions in Victoria and when they will be eased and what the roadmap is, is making it  impossible for businesses to make decisions for the short term let alone the medium and long term.  And I think the Treasurer who's obviously a Victorian and also interested in the economic  devastation that's unfolding in Victoria quite rightly is saying to the Premier of Victoria tell us what  your plan is to rebuild the Victorian economy and give people some hope for the future.

JENNETT: Sure but shouldn’t he maybe follow the epidemiology here, the medical numbers  because that more than anything else will dictate the timeline that Josh Frydenberg is so eager to  hear.

STEVENS: Certainly. I don't think anyone's suggesting we shouldn't be taking the health situation  into account but that doesn't mean you have no plan. And what we need to know is what will be the  pathway out to reopen the Victorian economy when it is safe to do so. And the Premier should be in  a position to make that very clear to the people of Victoria and the people of Australia.

JENNETT: Alright. Patrick Gorman, Josh Frydenberg is he within his rights as James suggests there  to get some markers put down by Dan Andrews not just for Josh Frydenberg but indeed for all  Victorians?

GORMAN: Look I thought in the middle of a pandemic the behaviour from the Treasurer today was  immature. He needs to remember he is the Treasurer of the Commonwealth. He has immense  power to get these things moving but just having a whinge in the halls of Parliament House isn't how  you fix things. My advice to him is treat the premiers with some respect. Also work with them don't  work against them. Put people first. We can get through these things together but these sort of  whinges and sort of blow ups don't help anyone, and they don't help people. So I just don't  understand why he did it, other than I assume it's some sort of political game.

JENNETT: Alright. Well look we've only got about a couple of minutes left for both of you to stay with  us before you scurry off to Question Time. Just one on emissions, James Stevens. So we've had  some figures come forth from the government today to say that naturally because of the economic  slowdown the emissions are dropping to perhaps to record levels of slow growth. Does this replace a  policy or should we still be seeking some substantive emissions control policy from this government?

STEVENS: Look, I'm happy to see emissions down for the fact of it but not for the reason of it and  obviously it's because of the dramatic curtailing of our economic activity in this country that the  reduction has occurred. So I don't want that to set in I'd rather us follow our very clear policy position  of achieving our Paris commitments which is technology based and we will be doing that and  continuing to implement the policies which we've already outlined to the people of Australia well  before the coronavirus challenges about how we will meet our Paris reduction commitments.

JENNETT: Alright. So there is something coming. Patrick Gorman, good enough?

GORMAN: Well, like James, it is good to see emissions down. But this isn't because of any action  the government has taken. It's not because of a long term plan from this government. And it's not  because their current plans are working so I don't think it means anything other than it's just some  data. It's factual, but it doesn't help our planet for the long term.

JENNETT: Alright. Well that's where we will farewell both James Stevens and Patrick Gorman and  thank them for their time. They've really pushed the outer limits of what they can afford today with

Question Time now approaching.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DYLAN CAPORN 0437 055 472

