CATHERINE KING MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT AND

REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR BALLARAT





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS AM AGENDA WITH TOM CONNELL

TUESDAY, 22 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Western Sydney Airport; Airport Rorts; JobSeeker; Victorian

COVID Crisis.



TOM CONNELL, HOST: The Shadow Infrastructure Minister, Catherine King.

Thanks very much for your time. So we've seen what's been spelled out by the

Auditor General's office, the government says there'll be an inquiry. Fair

enough?



CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE,

TRANSPORT AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT: It's not fair enough. I think

the government's got some questions that it needs to answer when it comes to

this. You know, at the end of the day, we've got a Westminster system of

parliamentary responsibility and ministerial responsibility. I want to know very

clearly, you know, what were ministers doing to allow such a blatant waste of

taxpayers money? How on earth could this have occurred? At the very

least ministers should have been asking questions about how much is this

property costing us? Is it the, you know, the best value for taxpayers money?

And clearly, the ministers either didn't do that, couldn't be bothered to do that,

or decided not to do that.



CONNELL: But don't you find out those very things in an inquiry, what's the

alternative?

KING: Well, this is the government inquiring into itself. I think that really there

needs to be much more scrutiny from the parliament in relation to this matter.

And obviously, we've now had the Audit Office report come out. The Audit

Office report, you know, says some pretty damning things about the way in

which this process was handled. But frankly, I find it extraordinary if you've got

a $30 million land acquisition, that no ministers knew anything about it or knew

anything about how this process was undertaken, and I think the government

needs to answer some questions in relation to that. The government's trying to

run a million miles from this, they're saying it is all an administrative process, all

well away from us, all hands off, and it's really the department, we're inquiring

into the department. Frankly, that's not good enough. Ministers are responsible

for the decisions that they make. They're responsible for the proper use of

taxpayers money. And I think they've got some really serious questions to

answer in relation to this acquisition.



CONNELL: So will was set to seek something out in the Senate to probe this.



KING: We'll certainly use the avenues we've got available to us in the

parliament to do so. But, obviously, we're not going to disclose what they are

here. But we'll certainly use the parliament to put some scrutiny on this

acquisition. But I think it would be much better if the government actually just

came clean about what actually happened. How did they get this so absolutely

and comprehensively wrong? At the best it's incompetence at the worst, you

know, is it something else?



CONNELL: Right, but again, how else do I do that? I mean, are you asking for

a long news conference complete with mea culpa? There is going to be an

inquiry, what are you saying should happen instead, specifically?



KING: Well, at this stage, we don't know if there's an inquiry, the government

has said that the department is undertaking some inquiries about internally its

processes and what happened there. Ministers do need to front press

conferences, they do need to be upfront and be out saying, you know, this is

what happened, this is what I knew. Obviously we'd rather not have to go

through freedom of information processes, but if that's what the government's

going to force us to do, we'll certainly do that.  I find it extraordinary that you

could have, you know, Scott Morrison, as Treasurer, Paul Fletcher, both

members from Sydney, that they didn't have some knowledge about what was

happening with the acquisition of this land and the fact that they didn't seem to

be making any inquiries into how this process was actually undertaken, and

what the basic value of this land is. I think, it's really quite extraordinary.



CONNELL: Swimming on to another topic, you've been pretty outspoken about

support, including JobSeeker not being taken away. We had the minister

announcing yesterday, the government's monitoring the economy re JobSeeker

payments to make sure it doesn't drop off too quickly, and it will stay higher if

it's needed. That seems like a sensible approach. Would you back that?



KING: Certainly back it, but I'd rather see the actions. I'd rather actually see

something happened to assist people rather than talk. You know, it's crunch

time, really, for many, many people who are in desperate circumstances. We've

got JobKeeper dropping off  on the 29th of September, and I think we're

already starting to see evidence of employers laying people off as a result of

that and I think that the same is with JobSeeker. If you're gonna do something,

why wait? Tell people. People are just so incredible anxious about this.



CONNELL: Well they did do that, they did announce different cohorts that

would be eligible to still get a higher amount of JobSeeker, so that is

happening, isn't it?



KING: Well, that bit is good, but don't hint that you're going to do something.

Don't try and say, oh, yeah, we'll keep it high if we need to. If you need to, get

on with it and do it. I don't think people should...



CONNELL: In terms of these though it's beyond December. We don't know

what will be like in January and February do we?



KING: I think we've got a pretty fair picture about what the economy is like at

the moment and I think we've got a pretty fair picture about what the trajectory

out of this is and it's slow. Certainly in my home state of Victoria it's going to be

much slower than it is in other states. It's going to be different in the regions in

Victoria and some industries, in particular, the aviation industry where we've

seen Dnata workers who were denied JobKeeper in the first place, many who

couldn't get a JobSeeker, now 1000 of them have been laid off. We know the

aviation industry, and certainly international aviation,  something magic isn't

suddenly going to happen in December and it suddenly spark up and we're all

flying internationally again. We know where the sectors are where there's going

to be significant problems. If the government is planning to do something, it

should just say this is what we're going to do.



CONNELL: You spoke about accountability and proper inquiries earlier, Daniel

Andrews will front the inquiry to hotel quarantine on Friday. At the end of that

evidence we need to, do we not, have the question well and truly

answered, whose idea was it around security guards being in charge of hotel

quarantine?



KING: Look, I think absolutely, it is important that we know what went wrong so

that we can make sure it doesn't happen again. We know that we're

increasingly going to have to rely on quarantine as we start to get more and

more Australians hopefully back from overseas. That's going to take a long

time. And of course, you know, ministers and premiers need to be accountable

for those decisions and I'm sure Daniel Andrews hasn't instigated this inquiry

into the quarantine because he doesn't want to know, and doesn't want to be

accountable for what's happening. He absolutely wants to be accountable for

what's happening. And I think the fact that he's fronted, every single day of this

health crisis in Victorian shows an extraordinary level of leadership, you know,

something that I haven't seen for a very long, very long time, certainly at the

national level. I think he's willing to be accountable, he's willing to turn up, he's

willing to talk, he's willing to answer questions. I only wish we'd say the same

level of leadership from the national parliament.



CONNELL: Right. But just to drill down on that. This decision has absolutely

smashed your state Victoria. At the end of the evidence tomorrow, the

ministers, three ministers, and Daniel Andrews, we can't have the "I'm not sure"

answer around whose idea it was on hotel quarantine to have security guards

in charge, can we? You know, having an inquiry is one thing, having a

particular person stand up and say this was my call, you mentioned the

Westminster system, this is vital, isn't it?



KING: Well, at the end of the day, the results of the inquiry will be up to the

inquiry. It's not up for me or for ministers to say this is what it's going to find.

You know, I hope its findings are clear. I hope its findings show that there are

things that we need to learn. And it is very apparent that you know, there are

lessons not just in Victoria, but about how quarantine has operated and failed to

operate nationally. I think it is important that we hear those things, but that's

going to be a matter of inquiry and I'm not going to preempt what it's going to

say or what it's not going to say. It's got to do its job. But I think the fact that



you've got ministers and you've got a premier of the state willing to be so

accountable to be before the inquiry in the first place is in pretty stark contrast,

frankly, to what we see from the Morison Government.



CONNELL: Catherine King, thanks for your time today.



KING: It's really good to be with you. Thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: NICK BEAVER 0419 709 266



