







The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology  Federal Member for McPherson

MEDIA RELEASE

NEW FACE MASK TESTING FACILITY OPENS IN MELBOURNE

06 August 2020

A new Australian-first testing facility will enable local manufacturers of surgical face  masks to fast-track the supply for frontline health workers.

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said the new CSIRO  facility in Melbourne will boost Australia’s sovereign capability to produce essential  medical supplies more efficiently and at a lower cost.

“The COVID-19 pandemic has seen many Australian businesses shift quickly to  meet unprecedented demands for personal protective equipment,” Minister Andrews  said.

“This new facility gives companies access to accredited testing here at home so they  can demonstrate their products meet rigorous Australian standards.

“Test evidence from the facility will give confidence to manufacturers who supply vital  equipment to frontline medical staff, and make an important contribution to the global  response effort.

“This is great news for local manufacturers, who will no longer be required to send  their masks and mask materials overseas for testing and it’s further proof of how  science is playing a critical role in Australia’s pandemic response.

“The facility will also be able to test masks from other countries, enabling Australia to  assist our regional neighbours in their fight against COVID-19.”

CSIRO Chief Executive Dr Larry Marshall has welcomed the announcement.

“It’s inspiring to see Australian science enabling Australian businesses to supply life-saving surgical face masks to protect our frontline health care workers,” Dr Marshall  said. “This is another example of how science can support our efforts to tackle the  COVID-19 pandemic.





“Science is guiding us through COVID-19, and science will help us grow on the other  side. There’s not much Aussie innovation can’t solve, whether it’s finding the right  vaccine or creating Australia’s only NATA-accredited face mask testing facility.”

The National Association of Testing Authorities accredited facility is now open and is  testing masks and mask materials for breathability, blood penetration and bacterial  filtration efficiency.

Media Contact: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

