

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

TODAY SHOW

FRIDAY, 31 JULY 2020



SUBJECTS: Aged care in Victoria; Number of Victorian coronavirus

cases; people dodging quarantine; restrictions in Victoria.



ALLISON LANGDON, HOST: Home Affairs Minister Peter Dutton and Deputy

Opposition Leader Richard Marles join us now. Good morning to both of you.

Richard, to see your city, your state, where it is right now must really hurt?



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR

PARTY: It does hurt, Ally. It's a very difficult moment to be living through. I think

we're all sort of bracing every morning for about 10 o’clock to get what the

numbers are and, you know, we are all told not to ride the emotional

rollercoaster of the daily numbers, that it is the trends that matter, but that is a

very hard thing not to do, and it sets the tone for the rest of the day. The day

before yesterday actually, you know, we were all feeling a bit brighter with a

number that had two in front of it. But yesterday was just very demoralising. But

I think the point of needing to get back to work and keep going is absolutely

right. And the lesson from all of this is; you know, people just need to abide by

the rules, by what we're being told, to brace themselves for whatever

restrictions are necessary, and to do the right thing by our fellow citizens

because so much is at stake. You know, people's lives are being lost. People

are getting sick, but people's businesses are going up in smoke. I mean, this is

a very, very desperate time.



LANGDON: And the centre of this, Peter, is aged care. We heard this morning

bodies being left in their beds for up to six hours. There's nearly 900 infections.

Too many mistakes are being made, aren't they?



PETER DUTTON, MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: I think that's right, Ally.

The face of it, I think you've been very powerful in showing this morning, not

just the loved ones, the families, the aged care workers, the healthcare

workers, and, you know, from somebody who had coronavirus, I can tell you

one of the big burdens is the worry about who you may have contracted or

spread the disease to- whether it is a loved one. So when you see some of the

selfish acts where people are lying to the police or going across borders or

ignoring all of the very clear medical advice, it's what makes all of us more

angry at their actions, and the selfishness of it is unbelievable and the

consequences are well known. So those people need to consider, you know, if

they don't have any regard for the healthcare workers or for people in aged

care facilities, surely they have some decency left that sees them have regard

for loved ones in their own family circles or their own friends that could contract

the coronavirus and end up with thetragic outcome that we have just seen very

powerfully on the Today Show this morning.



LANGDON: Your state has now been dragged into it, Peter, with these two

quarantine dodgers. Can you sum up the sentiment and the feeling towards

these women in your state right now?



DUTTON: Well, I think Richard really summed it up well before, that there is a

real anxiousness around these numbers, the announcement of the numbers,

and there was some, you know, glimmer of hope that a number with a two in

front of it was perhaps a turning point. But that's not the advice. It continues to

be a big concern. So, when you see these two cases, I think the view up here in

Queensland is just that people are angry and they're rightly angry. I see this

morning reports of those women being under police guard because there will

have been threats made against them and there will be family members who at

the moment are having, you know, really terrible conversations with doctors in

emergency departments or in ICU departments about loved ones that may not

see the day out, and yet they see the behaviour and activities of these young

women. It's unacceptable.



LANGDON: And it's not just these two women. We are seeing too many people

do the wrong thing. Richard, in your state we hear the defence force are going

around to homes to check on people to find even though they have tested

positive to COVID, they've gone to work. What is the solution here? We know

that the Premier Daniel Andrews had a crisis meeting with the Prime Minister

last night. Do you think tougher restrictions, like a New Zealand-style lockdown,

is the only solution here?



MARLES: Well, I think everything needs to be on the table, but certainly there

is an enormous sense of frustration about people not following the rules. I

mean, you know, if you're a small business and your life's work has gone up in

smoke, then, you know, I mean, how does that person feel when they look at

somebody who's actually going to work knowing that they are positive? You

know, for those of us who have loved ones in aged care, I mean, this is the

most terrifying moment in the pandemic. The idea that people are not following

the rules is genuinely unbelievable. And I do think we need to brace ourselves

for, you know, tougher measures if that's what's required. I mean, ultimately the

one thing that we can't allow to keep happening is for this number to be going

in the wrong direction and, you know, to state the obvious, we need to do

whatever it takes. We need to rely on the science, of course, in all of that, but,

you know, people need to wear masks. Okay, there is a bit of a psychological

hurdle, but it is not that big a deal-



LANGDON: Why is it only being introduced now? It feels we're just a little bit

behind. It feels like this pandemic is just ahead of us every step of the way.



MARLES: Well, I think that's an important observation that we do need to be

ahead of this and we do need - you know, there is an imperative to get your

head around this quicker rather than slower so that we're getting the measures

in place. And I think that's been the story in a sense actually throughout the

world, but here in Australia from the very start. I do actually think, you know, the

Victorian Government from day one was a government which was advocating

or leaning more forward in terms of doing tighter restrictions rather than the

opposite. But if masks is what is required, and there's a lot of evidence that

masks make a big difference, then people need to wear them. They're going to

be mandatory not just in Melbourne, but throughout the state by the weekend.

People just have to follow what is being put out there because ultimately, as

your previous guest pointed out; you know, we've never needed each other

more. I think that is exactly right. And it's following the rules which is the way

we can help each other the most. And we just have to get through this.



LANGDON: And as we're seeing, the budget is blowing out, the bills are piling

up, and that is on all of us. Very quickly, Peter, a very final message to the

people of Australia?





DUTTON: We want to make sure that the first priority is to fight the virus, to

defeat the virus. We want to make sure that we can help people deal with

what's the worst year of their life, whether it is because they've lost a loved one

or because they've lost their business. I think the Prime Minister has

demonstrated his compassion, his leadership and our absolute resolve to make

sure that we can get Australia through what is a very difficult period.



LANGDON: Yep, I think everyone's tired, everyone's emotional and we've got

our fingers crossed that the numbers are better when they come out later this

morning. Gentleman, thanks for joining me this morning, appreciate it.



MARLES: Thanks Ally.



DUTTON: Thanks Ally.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













