

JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

PRESS CONFERENCE

CANBERRA

SUNDAY, 22 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Impact of Coronavirus on the economy; Additional economic

stimulus measures; Support for small and medium sized business;

Concerns about workers; Timing for stimulus legislation.



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER:Thanks for being here at short

notice. We are about to meet with the Prime Minister to talk about some of the

issues before us this week in the Parliament. It's likely you'll get an opportunity

to speak with Anthony Albanese after that meeting this afternoon.



Australians are anxious about their job security, their health, their personal

finances, and their superannuation. We take our responsibility in the Labor

Party to be constructive and responsible very, very seriously. This is not

business as usual in our economy, it's not business as usual in our society and

nor should it be business as usual in our politics. We will be responsible,

constructive and supportive where we can be and as we have been for some

time now. We won't be standing in the way of the measures that the

Government has proposed today to get support into the economy which

desperately needs that assistance right now. Being a constructive Opposition

also means injecting a sense of urgency when that is lacking or absent. It

means pointing out where there are groups of Australians who need assistance

who haven't been receiving it. It means pointing out where the Government can

do a better job getting this stimulus into the hands of more Australians and

more businesses sooner.



What the Government is proposing today includes some welcome steps. We

believe that it's important to get that assistance out into the economy and out

into the community. Our concern is that there is insufficient sense of urgency

here. Some of these payments will not be received by pensioners until July.

The business assistance won't be received by businesses until the end of April.

There is a serious lack of urgency here and the Government needs to work out

ways to get this assistance into the hands of workers and businesses sooner.



When it comes to the business assistance measures in this package, there are

absolutely no guarantees that the money that the Government is providing to

small and medium sized businesses will find their way into the pockets of

Australian workers. It concerns us that there is no mechanism and no

guarantee that this assistance for business will be dedicated towards keeping

workers in their jobs so that we can protect the livelihoods of millions of

Australian workers. There is insufficient urgency and there has been insufficient

thought put into how we ensure that workers benefit from these billions of

dollars in payments for Australian businesses. Obviously we welcome support

for Australian business. We have for some time now. We continue to welcome

the support that is being proposed in this package but we need to find ways to

ensure that it benefits the workers in those businesses as well. There are no

guarantees in this package that it will do so. So, urgency and the design of the

business assistance.



The Government is already saying that this package won't be enough to meet

the tests that they set for themselves to prevent job losses and to prevent

business closures. If the Government thinks that there will already be the need

for a third stage of stimulus, then what's the delay for? This is not the time for

half measures. It's not the time for more dithering and delay. The Government

was already too slow out of the blocks here. They are playing catch-up and part

of our role as the Opposition is to inject that sense of urgency which has been

largely lacking or absent. Unfortunately we're seeing that again today.



We will take the time to go through the detail in the legislation and we will make

sure that we come to a considered view. We will not be standing in the way of

this important support going out into the community and we'll be pointing out

where the Government can do more, sooner and better.



JOURNALIST: You talk about the design of the business assistance. I guess

part of the reason why it's not coming in until the end of April is they're trying to

make it so that businesses don't have to fill in any forms, they just lodge their

regular BAS and [inaudible]. So how would you propose doing it so that it's

easy for business, but can happen sooner?



CHALMERS: The idea that business, which has already been doing it really

tough, and particularly small business, can wait until the end of April for some

assistance just doesn't pass the pub test. Businesses are doing it tough right

now. Pensioners, workers and the unemployed are doing it tough right now.

They shouldn't have to wait until the end of April or until July in some cases to

get the assistance that they need and deserve. The Government should have

explored other ways to get this money into the community sooner, whether it is

through single-touch payroll or other options available to them. When you

speak to small and medium sized businesses, as I have been doing, their

biggest concern is that they won't get this assistance fast enough to make a

genuine difference. People are already getting laid off and businesses are

already closing. The idea that not a cent of this assistance has flowed yet and

that some of it won't flow until the end of April or even July in some

circumstances is clearly not good enough.



JOURNALIST: With the July payment, though, that's a second round of

funding. There's the first round due to go out at the end of this month. Are you

suggesting pensioners should all just get $1,500 now, immediately? What

would be the difference if they know they're getting it in the future and can plan

towards it?



CHALMERS: If the Government thinks that there is a need for these payments,

then there's a need for these payments to be out the door urgently. If the

Government thinks that pensioners are doing it tough, and we think so too, then

they need to find ways to get that assistance into people's hands sooner. The

idea that people can wait months in some cases for assistance just doesn't

stack up. We welcome what the Government is proposing but we think there's a

lack of urgency in how they're looking to deliver it. Unfortunately for too long

now, the Government sat on its hands. We haven't seen enough action quickly

enough and this is just one example of that.



JOURNALIST: Just two things, though, on that. You said that you wanted to

take the time to consider this legislation. The Government is hoping -



CHALMERS: I meant overnight.



JOURNALIST: I was going to say, there's not that much time, so my question

is, is there really any capacity at all for any kind of due diligence or is that

something we just have to let go by the wayside so that you get the speed that



you're looking for? And then as a result of that, are these concerns that you

have kind of redundant because you're obviously going to support the

measures anyway?



CHALMERS: There are a few parts to your question. We should be putting a

premium on urgency and we need to get these bills passed through the

Parliament this week for obvious reasons. We offered to sit the Parliament last

week and the Government said that they weren't prepared to do that. Our

highest priority is getting these payments out the door urgently. When I say that

we will go through the details of legislation, that's the task that we're

undertaking right now and we'll be doing that overnight as well. We've been

indicating for some time now that we don't want to stand in the way of getting

welcome assistance and support out the door. Our role as a responsible

Opposition is to point out where we think the Government can be doing things

better. The business assistance is not designed in a way that guarantees

workers will receive some of that assistance. There are issues with timing and

the design of the payments going out the door. We reserve the right to make

those points outside Parliament and inside the Parliament as well.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949



