

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AFTERNOON AGENDA WITH KIERAN GILBERT  TUESDAY, 31 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; Coronavirus JobKeeper wage subsidy package; Labor  working constructively during the coronavirus crisis.

KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: Anthony Albanese, thanks so much for your time. You have  been calling for a worker income guarantee. It has been delivered to the tune of $130  billion. Are you satisfied with the scope of this plan?

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Look, it is a  good plan. It is a positive plan. And what we have been saying since the Parliament sat,  and indeed beforehand, was that without a wage subsidy, we would see hundreds of  thousands of Australians join the Centrelink queue. And that is what we needed to avoid.  We need to keep the relationship between workers and employers. I am very hopeful that  this scheme will do this. It is a positive scheme. I think it has been well-targeted. We will  look at the detail, of course, to make sure that no one has missed out. But we are  supportive of this principle. And we are glad that the Government changed its mind and  adopted the principle.

GILBERT: We’ve seen a massive amount of interest from businesses registering already  their ABNs with the tax office for this package. So, that really says it all in terms of how well  it has been designed because the demand is very much there, isn’t it?

ALBANESE: Well, business was telling us that this is what they wanted and indeed what  they needed. This is what unions have been telling us. And I pay tribute to the fact that  unions and employers, last week there was a joint release from the Shop Distributive  Association, one of Australia’s largest unions, and the retailers, all on the same page. That  is a good thing. And it is good that the Government has been prepared to listen to Labor, to  unions, to employers, to the community, and take this action. I think it will make a  fundamental difference to the strength of our economy as we go out of this downturn. We  need to make sure that those relationships are in place. And it is a very positive thing. And  I certainly hope that it is taken up as widely as possible.

GILBERT: Well, the Government has been flexible in this in working on it. They've said  they've done an Australian-suited program as opposed to something like the UK. It's got its  own approach. Do you think that they've got that approach right in terms of using existing  mechanisms through the tax office and so on?



ALBANESE: Look, I think they've got many of the principles right. I think the flat rate  ensures basically that it's a progressive system. We know that a lot of the areas of high  unemployment that's occurred over the last couple of weeks is in the low-paid industries.  And they are precisely people who will benefit. This will pay up to in some cases 90 plus  per cent of the income, in some cases just about all of it. That's a good thing. And what it  will do, employers have been telling me for the last period that we had got it right. They  were telling us to stick with it. I think it's a vindication, also, of Labor's constructive  approach here. We are determined to make a real positive difference. We are determined  to be constructive. We are determined to be positive and be supportive of the Government  wherever possible. But to make suggestions that improve the lives of Australians. Because  at the end of the day, whether it's health or the economy, this is about people. And what  these changes will do is make sure that more Australian households stay in work. It'll make  sure that employers benefit by keeping that relationship with their workforce. And it'll make  sure that the entire economy can emerge from this crisis much stronger.

GILBERT: Your approach has been welcomed from within the Government. I know this  morning, having spoken to a number of people who've said to me that the fact that Labor is  on board with it means the tax office can start working on this already before the legislation  is approved and passed by Parliament. When would you expect that parliamentary sitting  to happen and in what form?

ALBANESE: Well, I spoke to the Prime Minister yesterday morning. I kept that confidential  until he announced it. It was a private discussion. But it was very constructive. By then, it  was clear the direction that the Government was going in. And I welcomed it. And indicated  that just as we did when Parliament last sat, we would facilitate passage of legislation. It  may well be that we have amendments. Last time around when Parliament sat, we  proposed amendments that have allowed for the changes to income support to be much  broader for two-income families where someone has lost their job. That is increasing, of  course, from $48,000 up to $79,000. That will make an enormous difference to people in  our suburbs. We also ensured that 230,000 additional people got support, whether they be  Abstudy, Austudy or Youth Allowance recipients. And we proposed increasing the amount  to which the Finance Minister had discretion but with the approval of the Shadow Finance  Minister as well, up to $40 billion. So, we made a practical difference. We'll look at this  legislation but we're sure that it can pass hopefully within one or two days. It's not finalised  yet when that parliamentary sitting will be. It'll be in the usual fashion in Canberra. There  will be lower numbers. We facilitated changes to the standings orders, which means that  there won't need to be 76 members between the Government and the Opposition there on  the floor of the House of Representatives. So, there can be a lower number. So, I'd expect  there would be somewhere in the order of 40 to 50 Members of the House of Reps. And it  will most likely be either towards the middle of next week or perhaps even the week after.  But the outcome in terms of the fact that there will be a scheme, it's important that we give  that certainty. And that's one of the things that I've been determined to do, and I've asked  for, is clarity and certainty are the key.

GILBERT: When it comes to a few other things, I want to get your thoughts on the banks.  They're deferring loans for six months for businesses, but not deferring the interest. Would  you like them to do that as well? To defer the interest so that doesn't accrue for businesses  who need that deferral?

ALBANESE: Well, look, I would like them to consider that. And at the very least, I think  they could consider that on a case by case basis. We know that the cash rate is minimal. It

is 0.25 per cent. So, essentially, the cost of purchasing money is just about free. So, I think  the banks need to bear that in mind. The banks have played a constructive role. That's got  to be said. And I hope that they do everything possible, because it's in the banks' interests  for businesses to survive. Because then they remain their customers. If businesses  disappear, then that's a customer disappearing for the banks as well. And they need to  bear that in mind.

GILBERT: Virgin is requesting a $1.4 billion Government loan. If it's not repaid,  Government would take equity in the airline. What's your take on this? And do you think  that Australia must have two airlines at the end of all of this crisis?

ALBANESE: Look, I think that two major airlines is an important principle. It arose out of,  essentially, the white paper that was done when I was the Aviation Minister in 2009. We  have one of the world's best aviation systems, with essentially two airlines with a full  service in Qantas and Virgin and their respective budget arms in the form of Jetstar and  Tiger. And then we have good regional airlines like Rex as well. It is very important that we  continue to have a competitive and dynamic aviation sector in this country. I think one of  the things that the Government could consider, if it does give any support, financial  support, it can consider that in the form of equity. And then it could, of course, sell that  down at some future date. There will be, across the world, a whole lot more state  interventions in terms of aviation. Why does that occur in particular? Because aviation has  a great role in terms of foreign policy and in the national interest of nation states that's  recognised around the world. Indeed, just about most airlines have some form of  government involvement in them.

GILBERT: So, just basically, you want the Government to be positive about that? To  support Virgin through a difficult time?

ALBANESE: Well, look, I'm not in a position given that I haven't seen the specific  proposals to say precisely what should happen. But I do think that the Government should  consider any proposal from a sympathetic point of view and should consider it in the form  of the long-term. There's a lot of capital has gone into building up our aviation system here  in Australia. And I want to see that continue as it has done in recent years to serve the  nation well.

GILBERT: Just finally, you've said, a number of times, words to the effect that if we're  going to do something next week, that we know we're going to do, we're better off doing it  today. That's been read in many ways as you and Labor wanting the Government to go  harder and faster in terms of shutting down, social distancing and that sort of thing. Do you  think they've got the balance right now in terms of their social distancing measures? And  are you encouraged by some of the health numbers that we've seen over the last 24 to 48  hours?

ALBANESE: Well, that comment, of course, Kieran, goes to a range of issues. It goes to  testing, which is now being stepped up. That's a very good thing. And the fact that there is  new technology enabled, essentially, for it to be a bit like a pinprick, and to be able to get  some immediate response within a short period of time, is very good indeed. The wage  subsidy issue, Kieran, we argued that should have been put in place the last time  Parliament met. That should have been a key component of the package. If that have had  occurred, many people who were laid-off in the ensuing period wouldn't have been laid-off.  That's what employers are saying. So, I think we've been right in saying that if we know  something is necessary to do in a week or two, there's got to be a good reason why you



don't do it, or at least give an indication that's occurring. There has been a considerable  strengthening of the social distancing rules and that's a good thing that has occurred.  There is a far greater consensus now, amongst the medical experts, that it's getting close  to where the more stringent advocates say it should be. But Kieran, the fact that people  were able to walk through the airport without even a temperature check is something that I  was raising. I remain concerned that occurred. I think that was a wrong decision. And it's  the job of the Opposition to be constructive and to be bipartisan. But bipartisanship doesn't  equal silence. And the fact is on a range of measures, be it the no evictions, the wages,  the stepping up of the testing, the mental health plans, the Telehealth plans, all of these  are measures that we have called for, that have subsequently down the track been  adopted. And I see that as a vindication of the position that Labor has taken. We will  continue to be constructive. We will continue to put forward our ideas. No one has a  monopoly on knowledge, whether the Government or Opposition. And the fact is in a range  of areas, we've worked constructively. The Parliament worked very effectively when we  last sat. And I am very confident that we will work effectively in the national interest in  either next week or the week after when we come together. Because that is what this crisis  requires. It requires us to put aside partisan issues to work together in the national interest.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053











