SENATOR THE HON LINDA REYNOLDS CSC  Minister for Defence  Senator for Western Australia

MEDIA RELEASE

ROYAL AUSTRALIAN NAVY JOINS REGIONAL PARTNERS FOR  EXERCISE PACIFIC VANGUARD

The Royal Australian Navy has joined an eight-ship fleet with more than 1,500  personnel aboard from Japan, the Republic of Korea and the United States for Exercise  Pacific Vanguard, in waters off Guam.

Minister for Defence, Senator the Hon Linda Reynolds CSC said the exercise brings  together four key likeminded regional partners, working in support of a shared vision for  a secure, open, prosperous and inclusive region.

“The increasing complexity of our security environment highlights the importance of  maintaining and growing our regional partnerships,” Minister Reynolds said.

“Ours is a strong community built on shared interests, and activities like Exercise Pacific  Vanguard increase our ability to contribute to the peace and stability of the Indo-Pacific.”

HMA Ships Stuart and Arunta will participate from the Royal Australian Navy, in this  third iteration of Pacific Vanguard.

During the exercise, naval forces will practice a range of activities, including combined  manoeuvers, surface warfare, live-fire exercises, anti-submarine warfare and  replenishment at sea.

Commander of the Australian Maritime Task Group, Captain Phillipa Hay, CSC, RAN  said the Royal Australian Navy welcomed the opportunity to work with key regional  partners on complex warfighting skills within a task group.

“It’s more important than ever to increase practical cooperation with regional partners,”  Captain Hay said.

“Pacific Vanguard is an invaluable opportunity to increase the Royal Australian Navy’s  understanding and experience working with the Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force,

No publication date: received by Parl Library on 12/09/2020

Republic of Korea Navy and United States Navy.”

Japanese Ships Ashigara and Ise, Republic of Korea Ships Chungmugong Yi Sun-sin  and Seoae Ryu Seong-ryong, and USS Barry, a submarine and USNS John Erickson  from the United States will also take part.

The exercise is part of the Royal Australian Navy’s Regional Presence Deployment  through Southeast Asia and the Pacific, which demonstrates Australia’s enduring  commitment to the Indo-Pacific region.

Exercise Pacific Vanguard was conducted in accordance with COVID-19 safety  measures.

Imagery will be available at: http://images.defence.gov.au/S20202919



Media Contacts  Ben Martin (Minister Reynold’s office): +61 447 219 902  Nicky Hamer (Minister Reynolds’ Office): +61 437 989 927  Defence Media: media@defence.gov.au

