



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

The Hon David Littleproud MP  Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management  Deputy Leader of The Nationals  Federal Member for Maranoa

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au



Friday 21 August 2020



MORE FUNDING FOR COMMUNITIES TACKLING DROUGHT

The Australian Government is continuing to support drought-affected communities, with 30 projects  sharing in more than $1.1 million in Federal funding.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the latest tranche of funding, under the Foundation for Rural & Regional Renewal’s  Tackling Tough Times Together program came at a significant time for regional Australia.

“While COVID-19 has been front of mind, we know drought continues to be a key concern for many  of our regional communities,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“Our $15 million funding assistance to the Tackling Tough Times Together program has already  supported hundreds of projects run by local groups in drought-affected regional communities.

“These projects build social cohesion, reduce social isolation, develop local capacity and leadership  skills, address disadvantage, stimulate economic activity and can increase educational participation.

“2020 has been Australia’s toughest year in a long time and the resilience that rural and regional  Australians continue to demonstrate is remarkable.

“Through drought, bushfire and now COVID-19, The Nationals continue to stand shoulder-to-shoulder with our regional communities to ensure they bounce back stronger than ever.”

Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management David Littleproud said projects  supported through the program help families and businesses in regional communities cope with the  stress of the drought while stimulating economy activity and renewing local infrastructure.

“Many projects funded this round will help reduce volunteer fatigue, enhance social participation  and upgrade community infrastructure and shared spaces, which are all crucial to drought-affected  regional communities,” Minister Littleproud said.

“Projects funded through the program this round include a new skatepark for kids in Condingup, silo  art in Paringa, an outdoor pavilion in Moonie and a playground and outdoor space at the Jerilderie  Long Day Care to bolster access to locally based childcare services.

“Most of the community organisations recieveing funding this round rely on the generous time and  effort of volunteers, but have faced significantly reduced volunteering capacities thanks to the  unprecedented challenges of COVID-19.

“That is why we are proud to continue supporting the Foundation’s important work at such a critical  time, backing these local groups and their projects that will stimulate regional economies and  strengthen social connections in drought-affected communities.

“With money already flowing through rolling grants as part of our more than $8 billion drought  support package, we are doing what it takes to help regional communities through these extremely  difficult and stressful times.

“I encourage all eligible community groups to apply for the ongoing funding available under the  Tackling Tough Times Together program to make their much-needed initiatives a reality.”

More information on the Tackling Tough Times Together program and the latest round of recipients  can be found on the Foundation’s website at www.frrr.org.au/grants/TTTT.

Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Minister Littleproud - Douglas Ferguson 0455 448 985



