

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER

JIM CHALMERS MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  BRISBANE  THURSDAY, 12 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Government’s economic measures for COVID-19;  coronavirus; impact of coronavirus on casual employees; The McKell  Institute’s ‘Wage-cutting Strategies in the Mining Industry’ report.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR  PARTY: Thanks very much for joining us. The Prime Minister has made  statements this morning about a $17 billion economic stimulus package. Labor  has said that we will be constructive, and where possible we will be supportive.  That's the approach we've taken to our role in the Parliament. For some time  we have been pointing out that this economy is failing, that debt under this  Government has increased from $175 billion to $430 billion. Consumer demand  is flat, productivity going backwards, wages stagnant. And that what we have is  a circumstance whereby before the impact of the bushfires and the coronavirus,  we saw the Reserve Bank reduce interest rates three times. And we saw the  Reserve Bank Governor and economists call for economic stimulus, call for  support for our economy. That was rejected, time and time again by the Prime  Minister and the Treasurer. And they continued to say, for example, that cash  payments were not appropriate.

Today, it’s a good thing that increased money will be going into the pockets of  pensioners and the unemployed through Newstart. It is a good thing that there  are wage subsidies for apprentices to make sure that they are maintained in  employment. Our priority will be to ensure that jobs can be maintained, that the  economy be kept going. But we do think that the Government has been  complacent for a long period of time. It is reminiscent of their attitudes towards  the bushfire crisis, where for so long they said it was a state issue, said there

was no need for economic compensation for people who were volunteer  firefighters. They said there was no need for an increase in our aerial  firefighting capacity and then eventually we saw Defence assets finally  deployed. We saw a more appropriate response. On this issue, of course, we  need to bear in mind that this is first and foremost a health issue which is then  having an impact on the economy. So we need to make sure that we get the  health impacts of this coronavirus crisis right as well. We need to stop the  mixed messages. We need to make sure that those people who do need  testing do get tested in an orderly way. And we need to make sure that we  minimise the impact that it has on individuals, most importantly in terms of their  health but also in terms of the economy.

Now we’ll examine the details of the statement today that has been made.  There was no attempt to reach out to the Opposition by the Government in  order to secure in advance support for their announcements. But we do note  that many of the things that they've put forward are the sort of measures that  were put in place by the Rudd Government during the Global Financial Crisis.  Measures which were criticised and voted against by the Coalition at that time.  Labor is far more responsible, and we’ll be acting responsibly. We’ll be  examining the details. And we’ll be responding to the details once we’ve had a  chance to look at what it is precisely that the Government has announced it  intends to do today. I’ll ask Jim to make some comments.

JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: Thanks very much, Anthony.  Labor has been calling for some time for there to be support for workers,  employers and communities, and the Government has at last come to the table  with a package. We will be as supportive as we can of what the Government is  proposing today. We understand that Australians are anxious. Workers are  anxious about their job security. People with superannuation are anxious about  what's happening on the stock market. Businesses are anxious about whether  or not they can keep their doors open. We will be constructive, responsible and  supportive where we can be. Our highest priority all along has been those  workers, those employers and those communities and getting them through  what is a very difficult time for them and for the broader economy. There are  some welcome measures in this package that the Prime Minister and the  Treasurer are announcing today. We won’t stand in the way of those. We'll do  what we can to be supportive of them. We'll do what we can when legislation is  necessary to support them through the Parliament as quickly as possible. We  need to see this support into the hands of Australians and Australian  businesses and circulating in shops, businesses and the broader economy as  soon as possible.

It remains to be seen whether this package is big enough or will be deployed  fast enough to prevent job losses, to prevent businesses failing, and to prevent  a deeper downturn in the economy. This is a Government which has made big

announcements before but unfortunately they have had trouble getting the  promised support out the door. We’ve seen that with bushfires, we've seen that  with drought relief, and we've seen that with infrastructure funds as well. Our  job is to be supportive but also to put pressure on the Government to get this  support at the door as soon as possible and implemented properly so that it can  do the good in the economy that it needs to do if we are to prevent those job  losses, to prevent those business failures and support communities and the  broader economy as well.

We will work our way through any concerns that we have with the  package. We'll want to make sure that enough is being done for casual workers  in particular. We want our workers to do the right thing by their co-workers and  that means Government and business doing the right thing by them. We don't  want Australians to have to choose between doing the right thing by their  colleagues or going to work so they can afford to live and to eat. We want to  make sure that what's been announced today is sufficient. We’ll work through  our concerns around some of the business payments to make sure that that  money supports workers as well and not just businesses. We want to make  sure that that money is effective. We will work our way through our concerns. It  is our responsibility as an Opposition to be supportive, responsible and  constructive, but also to point out when the Government can do better and put  pressure on the Government to get the money out the door.

We call on the Government to implement these measures as quickly as  possible. They need to guarantee that if this does turn out to be insufficient that  there will be additional steps taken in the coming days and weeks to make sure  that we can support the economy. We will have more to say about all of this in  the coming days. We will work through the detail but we will be supportive,  responsible and constructive because our highest priority is people in jobs,  businesses in business, and communities prospering. It will be a difficult period  and we’ll play our part in helping Australians get through this difficult period.



ALBANESE: Thanks very much, happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: Isn’t it a good thing now that they’ve held onto this money and  not gone earlier with it that they’ve got $17 billion to pump in on what is really a  rainy day?

ALBANESE: Well it’s the Government that said they were back in black last  year. That’s not true. It wasn’t true at the time, and it’s not true now. And it’s the  Government that went out there with all the hubris on display. It is also the case  that the economy has been much flatter than it should’ve been. The economic  growth has been downgraded on a number of occasions. And the truth is, that  had there been more action earlier, the economy would now be stronger. We’ve

had underemployment rise to something like two million people. We’ve had  consumer demand flatlining. We’ve had productivity growth going backwards in  two quarters in a row. We’ve had, if you measure economic growth in terms of  population, we have had per capita of going backwards.

So there has been these concerns for a long period of time. The Reserve Bank  Governor has made comments about that, as has other economists. And the  concern we have is that the Government has, for example the drought fund,  announced with much fanfare, legislated last year. The fact is not a single dollar  has been spent on the drought fund. The bushfire recovery fund, a notional  fund of $2 billion that doesn’t exist anywhere, has allocated just $500 million in  the financial year that we’re currently seeing. The only explanation for why you  would allocate just a quarter of the spending you intend to make in the financial  year in which the bushfires occurred is that you are so obsessed about the  surplus and about the claims that you made that weren’t true. And we know  indeed just 10 per cent of that money has been paid. So for those communities  on the South Coast of New South Wales, in the Adelaide Hills, Kangaroo  Island, the North Coast, the Gippsland region, they’re getting the double  whammy now, because the economic downturn that we’re seeing as a result of  Coronavirus is of course already building on the slowdown that had occurred  because of the bushfire crisis.

So the fact is that the Government, if you look at its rhetoric and what it said  about, for example, that cash payment. The cash payments that they are  making and they have announced today, they have previous rejected this  approach and they have had a lot of harsh words to say. I don’t think it’s  unreasonable for the Government to be held to account for the gap that’s there  between what they’ve said in the past and what they’re saying today.

JOURNALIST: [inaudible] this was unforeseen.

ALBANESE: Well the bushfires weren’t unforeseen. Of course Coronavirus  was unforeseen and that’s just a fact. But the bushfire crisis for example, was  seen that it was coming, was predicted that it was coming, and the Government  was complacent about it. The fact is, when we dealt with the measures, when  Parliament was returning in June, there had already been interest rate  decreases when Parliament sat as a result of the weakening in the economy.  So Labor has been, I think, very consistent in the approach that we’ve had to  these measures. Unlike, it must be said, unlike the Coalition, which voted for  example against the economic stimulus plan when the Parliament sat back  during the Global Financial Crisis.

JOURNALIST: But they supported your first round of it. So are you saying that  you would block measures in the Parliament here?

ALBANESE: I haven’t said that. I’ve said precisely the opposite. And you know  I've said precisely the opposite. Even your colleagues are laughing, having a  chuckle at it.

JOURNALIST: So you would support it?

ALBANESE: Well we haven’t seen the legislation yet.

JOURNALIST: Then you haven’t said that you’ll support it.

ALBANESE: Because we haven’t seen it. We’ve said we will be as supportive  as possible, we will be constructive, we will support any measure that supports  people being in jobs. We’ll wait and see what the detail is. As I said, the  Government have chosen not to have the courtesy of any consultation with the  Opposition. That’s a decision for them. But given that the Prime Minister is  probably still speaking on the announcement, it would be premature for us to  just give a kick through. But we’ll be as supportive as we can be. We’ll be  constructive. That’s the approach that I’ve taken as Labor Leader. I’ve said I  want to be the Labor Leader, not the Opposition Leader. One mob acting like  an opposition is one too many. It’s a pity that that mob happens to be sitting on  the government benches.

JOURNALIST: But you’re reserving your right to block things if you want.

ALBANESE: No. You’re playing word games now. We’ve said we will be  supportive of any measures, any measures, which are reasonable.

JOURNALIST: Putting aside the mass isolation, cancellation of events due to  Coronavirus, are you on the same page as Bill Shorten?

ALBANESE: Look, we will take the advice from the health experts. That is what  we’ve said the whole way along. We continue to receive briefings from the  Chief Medical Officer. I think on matters like that, it’s important that we take the  advice of the health experts and that's the approach that we have taken.

JOURNALIST: [inaudible]

ALBANESE: Well, we’ll wait and see. We’ll wait and see what the impact is on  business, on jobs. Our priority is keeping people in work and keeping  businesses functioning.

JOURNALIST: Are these measures going to stimulate the economy?

ALBANESE: Quite clearly, a $17 billion stimulus will have an impact on the  economy. We’ve said for some period of time, for example, that Newstart

recipients who will receive a one off payment. My understanding through this is  that if you give additional money to Newstart recipients they’ll spend every  single dollar of it. If you provide the sort of support that’s required for  pensioners, of course will also spend that money. So that’s a good thing. What  that does is create retail activity at a time since right through the second half of  last year we’ve seen very poor retail spending figures.

JOURNALIST: What about casual workers? I know Labor has been calling for  casual workers to be paid if they need to self-isolate.

ALBANESE: Look, we’ll examine the detail of what the Prime Minister has  announced. We’re very concerned that people shouldn’t be in a position of  having to choose whether to go to work or to be able to pay for food to put on  the table for their families. That’s a significant issue which is there. And I was  very disappointed, I've got to say, by the comments yesterday by Christian  Porter, who suggested that casual workers put money away for a rainy day  because they receive higher rates. If only that were true. The truth is that  casualisation of the workforce that we’re seeing has been used essentially to  drive down wages and conditions. And today in the mining industry I’ll be  releasing a report in Mackay, in a couple of hours, that points out just that. You  can have workers doing the same job, standing next to each other. The casual  employee, contracted out, being paid some 40 per cent less than the person for  the same job. So we’re concerned about these issues and we’ll examine the  detail. I note that the Prime Minister in his statement made some comments  about sickness benefits being available, and waiving the waiting period. That’s  a good thing if that occurs, but we’ll look at the detail. We need to prioritise, the  first issue is health. And we need to prioritise that and make sure that anyone  who needs to be in isolation is able to do that without being able to worry about  whether they’ll literally be able to afford to live, to eat, to pay their rent etc.

JOURNALIST: Are you satisfied [inaudible] the health aspect?

ALBANESE: I think there have been some mixed messages out there and  everyone knows that that’s the case. And I think the Government needs to be  much clearer. Why is it that the Government only this week is talking about a  future information campaign? When they did the announcement with the  infamous Defence Force video in December or January, they had a video and  public information campaign authorised by the Liberal Party ready to go at the  same time. They couldn’t wait to get that out the door, because that was about  politics. This is about the national interest. And it’s important that people get  clear messages, and that they’re able for example to put in place measures in  which people can get the support that they need, get tested if it’s appropriate  that they be tested, and make sure they then get a health response if need be.

JOURNALIST: NRL season starts tonight. Will you be staying away from



games? Should the PM stay away from games?

ALBANESE: Well I’ll be going to Souths/Cronulla on Saturday. Whether the  PM wishes to go and watch his new team play is a matter for him.

JOURNALIST: Without a mask?

ALBANESE: I’ll be there with my fellow burrow members. Thanks.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053







