

MICHELLE ROWLAND MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS

MEMBER FOR GREENWAY





COMMUNICATIONS MINISTER ENDORSES HARMFUL MISINFORMATION



Communications Minister Paul Fletcher today voted against Labor’s motion to counter the

harmful health misinformation being peddled by Coalition MP Craig Kelly during the

COVID-19 pandemic.



Minister Fletcher currently has his Portfolio agency the ACMA working with digital

platforms to develop a code on misinformation and news quality, yet today he voted

against a motion affirming science and the independence of the TGA, as well as the

responsibility of public office holders to counter misinformation and conspiracy theories.



It begs the question: how serious is Minister Fletcher when it comes to combatting

misinformation?



As recently as 26 June 2020, Minister Fletcher issued a media release stating:



“During COVID-19, we’ve seen firsthand the harm misinformation can cause as it spreads

rapidly online. It can create public confusion, raise anxieties and erode trust in institutions,

and this is particularly harmful to those most vulnerable in our community”.



Exhibit A is Craig Kelly’s harmful speech in Parliament this week in support of

hydroxychloroquine, a drug identified as potentially harmful in treating COVID-19 by

leading health authorities and strongly discouraged as a COVID-19 treatment by the TGA,

the video of which is now circulating widely on social media.





The ACMA’s position paper classifies misinformation about health and safety as an “acute

harm” stating that “misinformation about medical matters may directly threaten the health

of anyone who acts on the information, and in the case of infectious disease, the health of

others and public health systems”.



It is clear the Morrison Government isn’t serious about countering misinformation during

COVID-19, or combatting what the UN Secretary-General and the WHO Director-General

refer to as an “infodemic” that has included everything from dangerous health remedies to

the nonsense that COVID-19 is somehow caused by 5G technology.



Not only does the Morrison Government shut down Parliamentary debate, they haven’t

even bothered empowering the ACMA with a clear statutory role for dealing with

misinformation and the voluntary misinformation code is still months away.



What’s more the Morrison Government is cutting funding to the public institution of the

ABC which has a key role in promulgating trusted information, including through ABC

RMIT Fact Check.



Minister Fletcher says that the development of a voluntary code is an important step in

combatting misinformation on digital platforms. It would be refreshing to have a Morrison

Government Minister whose actions matched their words.



THURSDAY, 27 AUGUST 2020



MEDIA CONTACT: ADAM BOIDIN 0406 009 019





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.









