

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister



TRANSCRIPT

INTERVIEW WITH JOHN MACKENZIE, 4CA  THURSDAY 15 OCTOBER 2020

EO&E…

JOHN MACKENZIE: Good morning.

PRIME MINISTER: Good morning, John.

MACKENZIE: Oh, clear as a bell. You're in town, obviously?

PRIME MINISTER: Oh on my way, I’m in Townsville at the moment, so we won't be, there too long.

MACKENZIE: Okay. I'm pleased to hear that, you've got an excellent day's weather up here. Obviously,  lots of people wanting to speak to you. Scott Morrison, let's go straight to the pandemic. It's had this  crippling impact on tourism. No surprises to you, your early days of course, your working career was in  tourism. So I'm pleased to be here to talk to you today about a crisis on our doorstep up here. In fact,  perhaps nowhere else in the country when it comes to, with the impact on our tourism industry is suffering  like we are up here, the thousands of people basically living one day at a time, some of them wondering  if they'll ever work again. You're getting daily updates, I presume, from the people who would know best  about how this is going to play out over the next few months. What are you hearing about, for example,  the possibility of getting these international borders open, whether it be bubbles or otherwise, about the  sort of response we might expect in international visitors when these borders are open to ultimately bring  us some relief from this nightmare up here?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I'd love to see Kiwi holidaymakers coming to Queensland from Friday, but they  won't be, they'll be going to New South Wales. They'll be going to the Northern Territory and they'll be  going to the ACT. The Queensland Government is still insisting on two weeks quarantine for visitors  coming from New Zealand, but New South Wales is not. And they'll be arriving from Friday. So we're,  we're opening up to New Zealand visitors to Australia, and that's the only thing that stands in the way.  And as you know, New Zealand has a very good COVID record. And as we move through the back end of  this year and into next year, of course, we're working to get a vaccine. And I was down at University of  Queensland the other day. To see the great work that's being done there. But we've got a plan with or  without a vaccine, and that means we've got to start looking at ways to, to be able to have people come  to Australia, safely and that's possible. And so we've already had discussions at an early, very early stage  I stress, I wouldn’t want to raise expectations, but with countries like Japan and South Korea in particular,

and we'll continue to progress that and ways that we can get, start getting some of the international  education business back as well.

MACKENZIE: Yes.

PRIME MINISTER: We've got to proceed cautiously for that. But the big part of it, though, John, is domestic  tourism, now you know, everyone knows that about seventy or eighty per cent, depending on where you  are in the country, of our tourism industry is domestic. And the Queensland tourism industry, which has  had a claw back of jobs since the fall off of 44 per cent, in New South Wales they have had 70, in South  Australia that had 70 per cent. And I think that goes to the point you’re making, that the tourism and  hospitality industry in Queensland has been the most affected. And that's why we've put the measures in  to support through JobKeeper and JobSeeker and all of these things. And that has supported a large  number of businesses and people up in \North Queensland, as you know. And that support will continue.  It's saved, you know, thousands and thousands, tens of thousands of jobs, almost 17,000 people, it  received the coronavirus supplement up there, 7,000 businesses are being supported by JobKeeper. Our  cash flow boost has helped 6,200 small and medium businesses stay afloat. And then there's the additional  payments to pensioners. So, but, you know, the domestic tourism industry can have an enormous help to  Queensland. And that's why I mean, health borders should only be there for health reasons and only so  long as it is absolutely necessary. And, I understand why the Queensland government made the decision  to have a border. But, you know, it should only be there as long as possible as needed, I should say.

MACKENZIE: Let me just ask you about the point you've made about JobKeeper. What is it? March isn’t  it, I just had a lengthy discussion with one of the operators going out to the reef this morning who said  their wage bill is, is very, very high indeed. I won't go into the details of how much, but he has said, this  deadline coming up in March is terrifying for him and of course, for his employees. The point he was  making was, our low season is fundamentally February through to June. And with that support drying up  in March, he is really, really fearful about the fate of those people that won't be able to have the income  that they've got at the moment, even though it's only a relatively small amount. The point he's making is,  please take on board how difficult it's going to be up here at the end of March and consider some sort of  drip feed situation, at least through to June and possibly a bit beyond.

PRIME MINISTER: What we've demonstrated, John, is a willingness to deal with the situation as we find  it, and in COVID-19 right from the start, we've dealt with the information as it's presented now we've  extended it out to the end of March. That's still six months away at the moment. And a lot can happen  we've learnt in six months. I mean, in the last six months across the country, in fact, just the last three  months or thereabouts, we've seen 760,000 jobs come back into the Australian economy. And now, you  know, this is why things like getting the domestic terrorism market open again, getting New Zealanders  coming and holidaying in Australia, you know how many Kiwis come on holiday in North Queensland, they  haven't got a North Queensland in New Zealand. So they come there and there will still be, for the  foreseeable future, restrictions on Australians leaving the country. So there are still great opportunities  for Queensland so long as it can receive visitors from all around the country. I mean, there is a net import  of tourism to Australia. What that means is the amount spent by Australians overseas is very significant.  And so there will be a period of time while those external - you know those borders for people going out  of the country except for business and compassionate grounds, then Queensland, and particularly North  Queensland, having the opportunity to capture that market. So I think a lot can happen between now and  the end of March. We'll watch it closely. But I can tell you, particularly in the aviation sector, the tourism  sector, travel agents, all of them we know are feeling the full force of this and so we're working with that  sector very closely.



MACKENZIE: Scott Morrison, I’d get you to hark back to your early days in tourism. Back in the mid 90s,  you would remember very well what was happening up here. We were enjoying the visitation of up to a  quarter of a million Japanese visitors per year. You just intimated a few minutes ago that Japan's in the, if  you like, the early hitlist. When you're thinking about when I mean, even if you talk about early next year  to mid next year or whatever, when might we be able to open the borders again to Japan?

PRIME MINISTER: I can't give you an honest answer to that at the moment, John and when I can I will and  because I don't want to falsely raise expectations. What I can tell you is we're working on it. And I know,  I mean, I've spoken to both the current and former Japanese Prime Ministers about this and we're in a lot  of discussions with the Japanese about a range of issues at the moment. The Foreign Minister was just in  Japan the other day. So look, that is, I mean, Japan has done very well through the COVID-19 crisis. So has  South Korea as well,

MACKENZIE: Yes.

PRIME MINISTER: and that is also an important market, but parts of obviously of China have also done  very well. So, and Singapore is another one that I've mentioned that I think we can work with. And then  there's the issues within the Pacific. But that's a separate I think, set of issues to the ones that we're talking  about here. So what I can say is it is very high on my agenda. The other one is I mean, we're still trying to  get a lot of Australians home. And it's a decision of the Queensland Government whether the quarantine  arrangements are done. But I do know there's been quite a few empty rooms in Cairns which could have  been doing that. But the Queensland Government decided that that was all to be done down south, not  up north.

MACKENZIE: Let me ask you.

PRIME MINISTER: That was that was a shame.

MACKENZIE: It is certainly a shame, according to some of the operators up here and the people desperate  for work. I'm sure Warren Entsch would have taken this up with you. I think it's a really creative idea.  We've got these freight flights exiting Cairns four times a week. They're going into South-East Asia. The  point he's making is they're coming back to Australia empty. All those seats at the top level are empty.  He's saying why can't we look at bringing those students back to finish their studies perhaps, or even start  studies here in Far North Queensland, and they can do their 14 day quarantine when they get here et  cetera. And we'll be giving ourselves a little early mark. Given the sort of misery being endured up here, I  thought it was a great idea.

PRIME MINISTER: These are the sort of things we already are working on and we've got a trial running  now in the Northern Territory and South Australia because those governments are working with us on  those issues.

MACKENZIE: Yes.

PRIME MINISTER: and with the trial, bringing students back into both of those states. I would like to see  how we can get to the start of next year’s university year and seek to restore as much of what we had  safely for next year. And that can be done through proper quarantine arrangements. As you know, the

health orders, they are decided by the states. The Commonwealth Government doesn't decide who has  to quarantine and who doesn’t. That's the subject of state health orders and those quarantine  arrangements require people currently to quarantine in those officially designated state health facilities,  which are the hotels down south. So the hotels down south are getting quite a lot of that but up north,  there hasn't been the opportunity to do that because of those decisions in Brisbane by the Labor  Government. So, that's one of the roadblocks in the way of it and I hope we might be able to work through  that with the Queensland Government. And I am pretty sure I know which way Deb Fecklington will be  going on that. So it is important because I know it's so tough up in North Queensland. I know how  important the tourism industry is to North Queensland. And, you know, you've seen these tough times  before. I remember when, you know, when the Japanese market collapsed and those short haul flights  out of Japan were going to Guam and other places, the closer flights to Japan and we lost out there and,  of course, the pilots strike of many, many, many years ago. You know, Cairns understands these things  and they push through, but, you know, we're trying to give as much help as we can. And Warren has been,  you know, a lion on this. He has really been great trying to connect as much and those freight flights you  talking were about, they’re a god send too to your fishing industry and we've been supporting, subsidising  those flights from the get go.

MACKENZIE: I want to take this one up because I know you know a hell of a hurry. I was listening to your  Health Minister yesterday, Greg Hunt. I thought this was fascinating, this national definition of a hotspot.  This has got to be addressed because this is aiding in this, I think, ridiculously over extended period of  having our border closed between Queensland and New South Wales. Can you explain to the listeners the  importance of this national definition of a hotspot?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, our Chief Medical Officer, so you know it wasn't dreamed up by, you know a  couple of Treasury officials, it was by Professor Paul Kelly, who's an epidemiologist, was able to define our  hotspot as one where there was a three day average of 10 cases. Now, you know, the Chief Health Officer  here in Queensland has a different view to that and they have a more stringent definition. And what that  means is they won't allow people to come from anywhere else in the country, I think it's 28 days, with  zero cases. I mean, that's very different as you can see and the likelihood of that being achieved out of  New South Wales and indeed  Victoria. I mean, Victoria's done amazingly well to get back to where they  are now. But you've got to have realistic goals. I mean, you've got to do with the health issues. I totally  agree with that. So I understand why the borders were put there. But a national hotspot definition, which  I think balances the economic and the health interests is, I think, wisely is what is needed. So, I mean, New  South Wales, I mean, put a border in with Victoria. I was part of that process and it was needed. But I can  assure you, the New South Wales Premier does not want that border there a day longer than it has to be.  She’ll get rid of it the second it's safe to do so and we're working towards that at the moment and Victoria's  doing so much better now. But when New South Wales and Victorians can travel to Queensland again  safely, then that's going to be great for North Queensland.

MACKENZIE: Scott Morrison…

PRIME MINISTER: Actually probably more important, John, in many respects than some of the  international business. Particularly because when you had that big drop off Japanese tourism all those  years ago, you still have the domestic business. I mean, this is a double whammy.

MACKENZIE: I know what you're saying, but I've just had a discussion this morning with one of the top  operators and he said there's an aspect to this that most people don't understand. Australians coming to  Far North Queensland at the moment, they're largely from the southern part of our state. They're coming

up here, they're getting their hotel accommodation or whatever, but they don't do the activities. They  don't go on a raft, they don't go sky diving. They don't even go out to the Reef very often. So as much as,  yes, we're pleased to see our accommodation houses getting some help, the operators of those  experiences up here have been left disappointed.

PRIME MINISTER: You know, that is true. Domestic travellers behave differently in a place like North  Queensland or for that matter, you know, other parts of the country, Tasmania or wherever they're going,  differently from international experiences.

MACKENZIE: Exactly.

PRIME MINISTER: Let's not forget that once these borders open up again, Australians aren't going to be  travelling to, you know, Mexico for those experiences or South America or India or places like this. People  who are looking for those sorts of experiences will be travelling within Australia.

MACKENZIE: Yes.

PRIME MINISTER: And so I think there is an opportunity to connect with them as operators and so much  of the tourism, I mean, I think sometimes people think the tourism industry is just hotels. Of course it's  not. It's all of these, those operators and the investment, the capital investment that's made in, you know,  in marine infrastructure and all these sorts of things, it's significant. And so we're going to continue to  stand by the tourism industry there and the hospitality industry and, look, it is an area of passion for me  and I'm looking forward to coming up and sitting down with business leaders up there today and hearing  more from them. Warren's got a lot of them together today, and I'll sit down with them and Entschy and  we’ll work through some of those issues.

MACKENZIE: Well, that early career of yours is coming in very handy, your career all those years in tourism  so that insight is going to be very, very handy indeed in handling this crisis up here. As is your past in job  creation. You'll certainly be needing to be on your toes in that regard as well.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, that's true. And we've got the job hiring credit, which has come in as a result of  the Budget. This will be important for tourism businesses, too, and I know we're focusing a lot on tourism  this morning, John, but that's very relevant. The loss carryback, now, it's not an easy thing to explain, but  what it basically means is, is if you make a loss this year and there'll be many tourism and hospitality  business, restaurants, others, tour operators, reef operators, all of them, aviation and so on, they'll make  a loss this year at no fault of theirs. And what we're saying is you can take that loss for your business this  year and you can set that against the tax you paid in the years going into this recession. So that means  you'll be able to get a rebate on your tax return, you'll be able to get that from this year's tax year.  Normally, what would happen, you'd get hit with that loss. You'd have to wait several years while you  trade yourself out of the situation, and then you can use those losses against future. Well, we're saying  we're shareholders for you guys now. You've got those losses now, through no fault of your own, we'll  give you tax back from what you paid before in your good years to get you through this period. Now,  obviously you can't use your losses twice down the road, but we're going to take the risk with you.

MACKENZIE: Ok. This is really interesting, but I'm getting an urgent flashing message from Townsville, let  the Prime Minister go. Good to talk to you, Scott Morrison.

PRIME MINISTER: It's always good to talk to you, John, it’s always good to talk to you and I look forward  to coming up there today. All the best

MACKENZIE: Excellent. Prime Minister Scott Morrison actually is in Townsville at the moment and  probably boarding a plane in the next hour or so to come to Cairns.

[END]

Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney



