

TONY BURKE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ARTS

MANAGER OF OPPOSITION BUSINESS

MEMBER FOR WATSON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS WITH KIERAN GILBERT

WEDNESDAY, 9 DECEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Scott Morrison’s pay cut, IR changes.



KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: Is Labor basically trying to reheat the WorkChoices

campaign of a bit more than a decade ago?



BURKE: I think the government's trying to bring back elements of that legislation.

Effectively when, you had the question today from Ged Kearney, about an aged

care worker who would stand to lose $11,000. Because of the changes that were

introduced today. I think that says at all, about what the government has lobbed up

in front of people, you know, the Better Off Overall Test is what they're wanting to

suspend for two years. And the Prime Minister wouldn't even defend it. He wouldn't

even argue the reasons to justify the pay cut that they've brought in today. But be

in no doubt. It'll be frontline workers, the heroes of the pandemic, the people who

work the late nights and weekends, are the people who are under direct attack by

what was introduced today.



GILBERT: The Fair Work Act already has provision for employers to be able to, in

exceptional circumstances, to not have, you know, honor the Better Off Overall

Test, the BOOT as it's known. So already, there are measures in place this, and it

was put in by Labor, under exceptional circumstances. So what's different between

that and what Christian Porter is saying here, essentially circumstances under

which a business has been affected by COVID-19?



BURKE: What's already there is unbelievably tight and unbelievably rare. I think

Christian Porter made the comment today, something like four cases under the

previous government or something like that. What was drafted was very tight. What

they have brought in today, it's difficult to think of a business in Australia that would

not be covered by it. Like in his media conference, he made all these comments

about turnover and cuts and all of that - none of that in the bill. All that's in the bill is

the business has to have been affected by the pandemic. Now, some businesses

have done well out of the pandemic, they've been affected, they're covered too. It's

hard to think of a business in Australia, that is not covered by what was introduced

today. And the impact of what was introduced today allows agreements where not

just some workers on a new agreement are worse off - where every single worker

who is covered by an agreement is worse off. That would become legal.



GILBERT: The Minister does say and quite rightly point out that it's the Fair Work

Commission who would have to make a judgement as to whether or not an

enterprise bargaining agreement was reasonable under this legislation. So you do

have the independent arbiter who would be looking and monitoring and guarding

against ripoffs, would it not?



BURKE: Two things on that. First of all, the Fair Work Commission, we can't talk

about it without acknowledging the stacking of the commission. It used to be that

you'd have equal numbers of people who traditionally had represented the

employee side of the bargaining table on the employer side of the bargaining table.

Out of the 46 positions on the Fair Work Commission, because of the stacking by

this government, we're now down to 12 out of the 46, who have a history on the

employee side of the bargaining table. The last 20 appointments, not one of them

has been -



GILBERT: So you don’t trust them?



BURKE: Well I think you need to say in the first place, the government has been

stacking the commission. But the second thing, which goes to the question that

you just raised Kieran:  why give the Fair Work Commission permission and new

laws to cut pay, unless you want them to do it? Because if the government doesn't

want workers to have their pay cut, then don't bring in new laws saying to the Fair

Work Commission, now you can cut the pay for the frontline workers, the heroes of

the pandemic, the people that just carried us through.



GILBERT: The answer to that question would be, the Minister would say, the

reason they're doing that is so that businesses don't cut jobs. So they might cut

pay, but in the interest of keeping people on the books. The example he gave was

tourism industry in Far North Queensland with the Great Barrier Reef and

obviously, international tourists, it’s not happening in the foreseeable future. So his

argument it would be, that's why they're doing it.



BURKE: Let's think of the mixed messages coming out. So Christian Porter at the

moment is running that argument - to say that the economy, everything so tough

out there, we need to cut wages. At the same time that Josh Frydenberg is out

there saying the economy's doing so well it's time to cut JobKeeper and cut

JobSeeker. Both can't be true. But both are being run as arguments by the

Australian Government except with one exception, which is today the Prime

Minister's denying that the wage cuts are happening at all on the same day they

introduced the law.



GILBERT: You also said that in terms of moving from casual workers on to part-time or full-time that the provisions within these amendments are too broad that

you think in your words, you could drive a truck through them. But isn't the risk

here of not having measures? They are changes in that direction, they do afford at

least some opportunity, some pathway of certainty from casual to part-time or full-time work. If you make it too onerous though doesn't that risk a scenario where,

say, a casual worker gets to 10-11 months, and then is about hit this threshold

where the employer has to move them to part- or full-time work? And they'll just

say, okay, I'll get my next casual worker, they'll move them on to the person who

loses their job. That's the risk.



BURKE: Yeah, and I hear what you say there. And you do want to make sure you

get that particular balance right. But no matter where you draw the line on that laws

only matter to the extent they're enforceable. And what was introduced today has

no remedy for the casual where the boss says you can't become part-time, for the

very simple reason that arbitration is only if the employer agrees to it. So the

employer if they want to be difficult, just says, well, I'm not agreeing to arbitration.

And what's a vulnerable casual worker meant to do? Are they then meant to say

that well, I'm now going to take you to the Federal Court of Australia? There'll be

some people with the backing of a trade union who will be in a position to take it

further. But most vulnerable casual workers will simply be in a situation where they

have to take it or leave it.



GILBERT: Do you think this is an ambit claim, basically, from the government, and

that they will compromise through the Senate inquiry process?



BURKE: Can I say it's a ridiculous bill to use as an ambit claim. They spent

months saying that Scott Morrison thought he had something to do with Bob

Hawke, and they're going to achieve this new consensus and have unions and

employers sit down together and work things through. The issue that we've come

out today objecting to, wasn't even raised at any of those meetings, at any of those

groups. So what the government's done, is spend months telling us they want a

consensus, they want people to work together, and then they wait till today and

they say, by the way, we're declaring war on people's wages.



GILBERT: The Minister is adamant, though. It's only going to be a handful of

scenarios where these laws will be applicable. What do you say that?



BURKE: That's not what the law he introduced says. Like the Minister is saying it'll

be a handful of scenarios, the Prime Minister’s saying it'll never happen. Well,

what's the law for? The law that they've introduced really specifically gets rid of, for

two years, the Better Off Overall Test for any business that's been affected by the

pandemic. Now, when you do that, you do it with your eyes wide open, that every

shift penalty, every weekend penalty rate, every other allowance is now up for

grabs. And what happens to the good employer? The good responsible employer,

who doesn't want to let down their workforce, tries to keep wages at the current

level as people are coming out of the pandemic, but they have a competitor then

becomes part of the race to the bottom. What is being announced today isn't good

for the responsible employer. And I'll tell you what, it's a complete slap in the face

for the workers have carried us through.



GILBERT: So, finally, let's be frank, the Opposition Leader has struggled to make

ground against the government. It's been a pandemic, I can see that. And I know

that those strong supporters of Anthony Albanese say you've got to give him a

chance outside of this current context with COVID-19 and all that sort of thing. But

do you think this gives him a political lease, a new lease on life, essentially,

because he's got something to grab a hold of?





BURKE: First thing, even over the last 12 months in the middle with the pandemic

having run our position has improved. Secondly, you look at the Oppositions

across the country, you're hard pressed to find an Opposition that's doing better

than the federal Opposition here in Canberra. But the final thing on what you said -

I don’t think anyone from the Labor Party looks at this legislation and sees it as an

opportunity. We’re offended on behalf of the people who we’re here to stand for,

that the government, after people have been through the toughest year of their

lives, gives them a Christmas present of a pay cut.



ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ADAM GARTRELL 0427 008 525



