

SENATOR JENNY MCALLISTER

SHADOW CABINET SECRETARY

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER TO THE LABOR LEADER IN THE

SENATE

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR COMMUNITIES AND THE

PREVENTION OF FAMILY VIOLENCE

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC NEWS AFTERNOON LIVE

MONDAY, 17 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Ban on Australians leaving the country without an

exemption; Ruby Princess; Super Guarantee.



PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST:  Time for my afternoon political panel. Shadow

Cabinet Secretary Jenny McAllister is one of my guests, so is Liberal MP Katie

Allen. Welcome to both of you.



JENNY MCALLISTER:  Thank you PK.



KARVELAS: The Health Minister Greg hunt has defended the ongoing ban on

Australians leaving the country unless they are granted an exemption. Katie,

some of your colleagues are really concerned about this. Your colleague, for

instance, Dr. Sharma described the measure as a pretty extraordinary

restriction on people's liberty. Do you agree and should it be re-looked at?



ALLEN:  Look, I think it is very important that we do look at this carefully.

Australia has a special situation that we are an island continent, and I have had

a lot of my constituents locally over the last few weeks and months, with very

good reason to need to leave and it is heartbreaking with these rigid restrictions

that are in place. I think going forward, we're going to have to have a very

careful look at it. It has a complexity to it, because when people leave, then we

put a burden on quarantining coming back and the questions are who does the

quarantining? How is it done effectively? And who pays for it? And of course,

people need to understand that if they leave, it does put pressure on our

system coming back. Having had the difficulty with quarantining here in

Victoria, we can say that perhaps it was overwhelmed. And we now have a cap

system, it does make the whole system more complicated. So, I am a big

advocate for having a look at this. I think it is a very important issue for all

Australians, we've been containing the COVID pandemic at this point in time.

And so therefore those steps have been necessary. But going forward, I think

people need to see hope that they can get on with their lives, which for some

people means their business or going back to university overseas.



KARVELAS: Just to get some clarity here. You're saying you're getting

complaints essentially, from constituents saying they can't get the exemption to

leave the country?



ALLEN: They've been asking for a request for assistance for exemptions, and

that's been going on going throughout the pandemic…



KARVELAS: And is that a big issue? Would you identify that as a big issue in

your electorate?



ALLEN: Higgins has a large and a number of businessmen and also people

going to university overseas. So, I suspect my constituency is larger than

perhaps other constituencies with regards to that requirement. Yes.



KARVELAS: And so you think the rules, just to nail you down on this, should

be loosened in terms of being able to go overseas if you're an Australian?



ALLEN:  I do think we need to think about this very carefully provided that we

sorted out the return aspect of it. When I speak to people about leaving, I need

to explain to them that you also, if you're going to expect to come back that that

has an impact on the safety of our country. Now, I believe that we need to have

quarantining sorted out because that is our best form of defence, and we need

to make sure that that is done properly, to keep Australians safe. So, we need

engagement of the community that when they leave, and then they're going to

wish to come back who's going to pay for it? Are they going to bear the cost?

How's it going to be done? Is it going to be effective? So we don't have ongoing

issues about COVID outbreaks in Australia because that's where it's coming

from.



KARVELAS: Jenny McAllister, what do you think on this? I mean, I've spoken

to lots of Australians too, who can't get an exemption or want one and are really

frustrated. Do you think there should be a loosening of the requirements around

this?



MCALLISTER:  I think that Australians are shown themselves to be incredibly

public spirited. If there is health advice that we ought to behave in a certain

way, Australians have been willing to take that health advice; accepted in the

interests of protecting ourselves and all the people around us. This falls into

that same category. We've been told repeatedly that there is health advice that

makes these restrictions necessary. I think it really is up to the government to

explain it properly to the public. There's a sense out there that people don't

understand what the reason for the restriction is. And they also feel it's being

applied in a particularly heavy handed way. I think there would be greater

acceptance if more effort was put into explaining what the restrictions are, how

it relates to the health advice that government’s apparently received on this,

and what it means in really practical terms for people who are seeking these

exemptions.



KARVELAS: Okay, well, you're just saying that people should have the

rejection better explained to them right? You don't think there should be a

change?



MCALLISTER: I'm not really in a position to question the health advice. Like

most other Australians out there, I don't know what it is, I don't understand the

underlying rationale that's been provided to government. I think my point is in

this, and lots of other matters, government would do better if they explained

properly what it is that they're asking of people, and then people could be in a

better position to assess whether or not that request is reasonable.



KARVELAS: Look, there is obviously this evidence that we're hearing coming

out of this inquiry in Victoria on hotel quarantining. Lots of different elements

coming out, but I want to put to you, Katie Allen, that PPE wasn't necessary.

That's what the guards were told. What do you make of this revelation?



ALLEN: Look, I think there is a lot of questions to answer about quarantining

because that has been the biggest breakdown in our defences. And so, getting

quarantining right has been absolutely essential. We've known from the very

get go, whether it's the Ruby princess that we've been hearing about or the

Diamond Princess before that or closing down hotspots overseas, that the

international travel is the most important aspect, whether it's Australians or non-Australians who are coming back overseas. So, everything about quarantining,

we knew from the very start, we had to have that exactly right. And I heard

about many people who are in quarantine who were having mental health

issues, and the guards were having difficulty explaining those situations to

them. So quarantining and to be fair, was rolled out very quickly, and with

speed and in large numbers. And so to be fair, I think that's what's caught

things unaware. But the quality of the quarantining, I think is a very serious

issue, and we've got to learn from those so that we don't make those mistakes

going forward. I think there's no doubt now, now that with the benefit of

hindsight, that mandatory masks and quarantining, training and mandatory PPE

training is incredibly important because infection control is at the heart of the

quarantine issue. So hopefully we learn from these inquiries. We don't make

those mistakes, because we're going to be quarantining for a long time to

come. And we've got to learn from those mistakes right here, right now



KARVELAS: I want to put to you, Jenny McAllister, what we heard from your

Premier, your New South Wales Senator in relation to the Ruby Princess. So,

changing the topic, but the first outbreak we saw, are you satisfied by the

response? Or do you think heads should roll?



MCALLISTER: Look, I think that the most important thing is to understand

problems rather than to allocate blame. And whether it's the Ruby Princess or

the aged care sector, or the contact tracing app, we actually need to

understand whether things are working, where the mistakes lie, and how to fix

them. In the case of the Ruby Princess plainly things did go wrong. I see in this

and many other questions State Premiers standing up and actually accepting

that and engaging with those propositions. I don't see the Commonwealth

taking the same approach to accountability, and I think that's a shame.



KARVELAS: What's the difference? The Prime Minister apologised on aged

care. Gladys Berejiklian apologised today on Ruby Princess. The Premier

Daniel Andrews has this inquiry we’ll hear more at the end of it.  Aren't they all

doing something similar?



MCALLISTER: I think it is incredibly important that people take responsibility

for the issues that lie within,  the Prime Minister actually on the case of

Ruby Princess promised the public that the Commonwealth, that Border Force

would put in place bespoke arrangements to deal with cruise ships. The report

reveals that that didn't happen. I'm yet to hear a really full accounting for that

from the Commonwealth. And as I say, I think that's disappointing. I think

Australians expect more.



KARVELAS: Katie, just don't another issue I just want to get it in and that's

compulsory superannuation. We talked about it with Sally McManus a little

earlier that rise that is meant to happen 9.5% to 10% next year, and then it

keeps increasing. It's been legislated. Katie Allen, do you think it should be

reconsidered?



ALLEN: I am actually arguing that should be reconsidered. And that's just

because whether it's experts like the Reserve Bank of Australia, Grattan, even

ISA are arguing that the legislated increase in the super guarantee rise will

come at a trade off in wages. And we also know with COVID that there's huge

pressures on our economy, and there are huge pressures on our jobs. The best

support you can have going forward and into retirement is having a job now. So

I'm a big proponent of looking at this legislated rise, it is legislated....



KARVELAS:  … so that means you need legislation for it not to rise. Is that

what you're advocating for?



ALLEN: We're going to have to look at that, for it to be argued and for the

Australian people to understand what are the trade-offs with regards to a

legislated rise in…



KARVELAS: … but it is your view that you should change the legislation to

remove this legislative grants?



ALLEN: Well, I think the issue is, I don't know the mechanics of how to change

it, but I think I would argue for a stay on the rise and consideration of a pushing

it down with regards to its timetable.



KARVELAS: I'll get you to reply to that Jenny McAllister because Labor’s been

quite outspoken on this, although we've got other groups like the ACOSS group

saying that it should also being reconsidered.



MCALLISTER: It's hard to take the government seriously and to believe that

this is a debate that they want to have in good faith. They have, for a year,

been rolling out back benches to attack the super system. And now the Minister

responsible for this issue has done a radio interview this morning saying she is

ambivalent about the rise. The truth is that they are sitting on a very detailed

report -by the minister's account a 600 page report - into the retirement income

system. If they want to have a serious debate about retirement incomes, they

should release the report and allow a proper debate to unfold. As it is, you’ve

just got all this coat trailing; backbencher after backbencher sent out to attack

the system. If the government wants to break its promise to Australian workers

not proceed with a super increase they should be a little bit more upfront about

it and enable debate.



KARVELAS: Now just finally, I know Katie Allen, you're isolating in Melbourne.

Is that right before you go to Canberra? How's that going?





ALLEN: Yes, so I'm isolating with my family, they took the decision that instead

of me isolating for a month in Canberra or being LSI, in Canberra, we would

isolate at home. And but that being said, stage four lockdown. I think everyone

in some ways is isolating and they can go out for one hours exercise and one

person to the shop. So, we've had to give up on that. But there as a result,

there's a lot of Nike apps being used and bounced around inside a house trying

to keep active for that one hour that others might have. But I'm feeling it for the

whole electorate. I think the whole electorate is really finding this difficult thing

to do. And I'm very grateful for all that everyone's doing, you know, to keep all

of us safe.



KARVELAS: I can suggest Katy Perry songs for a dance off in your home. I'm

just here to help. Thanks so much to both of you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LEILA STENNETT: 0436 632 388





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













