Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg







THE HON KEITH PITT MP

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia  Member for Hinkler

MEDIA RELEASE

27 August 2020

Industry expert appointed Chair of NOPSEMA Advisory Board

Experienced oil and gas industry executive Ken Fitzpatrick has been appointed Chair of the  Advisory Board of the National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management  Authority (NOPSEMA), for a three year term from 5 September 2020.

Resources, Water and Northern Australia Minister Keith Pitt announced the appointment  today and said Mr Fitzpatrick has extensive experience in the oil and gas industry in  Australia and overseas.

“Mr Fitzpatrick is ideally skilled to lead the NOPSEMA Board, possessing strong stakeholder  engagement skills and a detailed knowledge of maritime and safety matters relating to the  offshore petroleum industry,” Minister Pitt said.

“The NOPSEMA Advisory Board has an important role to play in providing high-level policy  and strategic advice on the safety and environmental management of offshore oil and gas  activities.”

Over the past 30 years, Mr Fitzpatrick has held several senior industry roles, including Chief  Executive Officer of PTTEP Australasia and senior roles at Ampolex, Mobil, Nexen and  Woodside. He has also served as Western Australia’s state chairman of APPEA, the peak  body for Australia’s oil and gas industries.

He is the current chair of the Oil, Gas and Energy Resources Growth Centre Board.

Mr Fitzpatrick’s appointment comes at an important time, with the offshore oil and gas  industry facing challenging times due to the operating constraints presented by the COVID-19 pandemic.

Minister Pitt thanked former Chair Dr Erica Smyth for her significant contribution to the  Board since 2016, and as Chair since March 2017.

“Dr Smyth’s experience in the minerals and petroleum industries, and with government  regulation, enabled her to provide a considered and in-depth perspective on complex  issues,” Minister Pitt said.

“I thank Dr Smyth for her leadership and the substantial contribution she made to the  NOPSEMA Board.”



Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg



ENDS



Media contact: Marnie Hobson 0407 090 230





















