

PETA MURPHY MP  MEMBER FOR DUNKLEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA  WEDNESDAY, 16 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Returning Australians; Gas announcement; Labor policy  platform.

TOM CONNELL, HOST: Joining me live now to discuss this and other issues,  my pollie panel, Liberal MP Andrew Wallace and from the Labor party Peta  Murphy. Thanks both for your time. This plan put forward, Peta, by the Labor  party, does it really address the issue? The issue is quarantine spots, I mean  there’s countless reports of people being bumped off near empty flights  because it’s quarantine. So, planes don’t really fix the issue, do they?

PETA MURPHY, MEMBER FOR DUNKLEY: They do in part because we also  are hearing, of course, that people can’t pay for a business class or a first class  ticket, they’re just not getting onto the flight. But also, there may be an issue  with quarantine but this government is in control of Australia’s borders, it’s in  control of the quarantine situation and we really do need it to act. I’ve got  countless constituents who are stuck overseas and one of them is a 26 year old  who went to Dubai to work at the world expo which got cancelled. She has no  job, no income, no savings, is really suffering from anxiety, no family and she’s  in Dubai. It’s a fundamental job of a government to help its citizens who are  abroad.

CONNELL: But let’s just clarify the issue, you say people can’t afford the  business class fares, that’s because economy fares are being bumped, its  because the planes are empty because there are no quarantine spots. It’s the  quarantine that needs sorting.

ANDREW WALLACE, MEMBER FOR FISHER: Correct.

MURPHY: Well, if quarantine needs sorting, then the federal government  should sort it. And the federal government send flights to get people home as

quickly as possible and it should sort the issue. Its clearly and squarely a  federal government responsibility and there are tens of thousands of Australian  citizens, many of whom are in really dire straits overseas who need to come  home.

CONNELL: Well just on the quarantine issues, Andrew Wallace, yes its up to  the states at the moment but it could be up to the federal government,  Christmas Island was used early in the pandemic, there’s talk of detention  centres, the Northern Territory government is up for this. Should the  government address this as an urgent issue?

WALLACE: Well look, no one would quibble with the fact that we want to get  as many Australians as we can, back to Australia. We’ve got around 20,000  Australians currently overseas. The National Cabinet agreed some months ago  that the state would be responsible for quarantining returning Australians and  international visitors. That was the agreed point. Now at the moment, we’ve got  states like Queensland that are only permitting 500 people per week, New  South Wales government is doing the vast bulk of the heavily lifting in allowing  2,450 people a week, Victoria is zero and I suppose that’s understandable to  some extent. But where you have states like Queensland that are totally  underutilising the resources that they have. We’ve got the Cairns international  airport, we’ve got Brisbane international airport, Gold Coast, all of these places  have the ability to be able to take in far more international returned Australians  or visitors. We’ve got hotel rooms,

CONNELL: It’s the ability to quarantine and not just the room, so again, we  understand what you say about the states, we know where the states are at  right now. Is it time that for the federal government say let’s look at Christmas  Island, let’s look at detention centres, army bases?

WALLACE: Look, that is a matter that will no doubt be discussed at national  cabinet on Friday. But up until now, the agreement with the federal and state  governments and territory governments has been that the states would be  shouldering this responsibility. So it’s a bit rich for the leader of the opposition  to be talking about, you know, this thought bubble of his, of sending RAAF  aircraft. The issue is not how we get people here, the issue is how we deal with  them in quarantine in Australia. And up until now, that’s been the agreed  responsibility of the states.

CONNELL: Agreed responsibility of the states, we saw Christmas Island used  at the start of the pandemic, we’ll see what else can be done. I do want to move  on.

MURPHY: We can’t have the national



CONNELL: Sorry Peta, we want to whip through a bit.

MURPHY: Sure.

CONNELL: I understand that sorry, I’m going to move on, I want to get some  more opinions. The plan outlined by the Prime Minister yesterday, big focus on  gas, Peta Murphy, Labor did have its own plan for more gas extraction at the  last election, what do you make of this?

MURPHY: Well, let’s see where it goes, we know Scott Morrison is incredibly  good at making announcements, we’d like to see some follow through on some  of his announcements and, you know, how many energy policies has this  government now announced? (Inaudible) It’s interesting that they are actually  talking about manufacturing, I haven’t heard them talk about manufacturing for  a very long time apart from maybe saying goodbye to industries like the car  industry. So let’s see whether or not they’ve actually got a plan that they’ll put  into practice.

CONNELL: But what do you make of it? Yes, you say we’ll see what the actual  plan is clearly they’re sketching out where they’re going, a huge focus on gas,  this would lock in gas as a big part of Australia’s landscape for a long time to  come. Does Labor agree with that?

MURPHY: We know that there is a role for gas and we’re waiting to see in  some respects before we say what the government’s policy, whether it will work  or not, what the details are. Again, you know, very good at high level  announcements from the Prime Minister but not so good at implementation. We  also know that renewables are the future and we have to have an economy that  looks to invest in renewables because it’s not just good for the environment, it’s  good for the economy and its good for jobs.

CONNELL: All right

MURPHY: And that’s what we need, we need jobs and we need them now not  off into the future.

CONNELL: So, when we talk about gas as transition, the end goal is  renewables, Andrew Wallace, do we hear enough about renewables? Helping  them get into the system more, yes gas can firm them up but so can batteries  too. Was that a part missing from this announcement?

WALLACE: Well I think batteries can only do so much based on the energy  produced by renewables. The reality is that we need dispatchable, we need

reliable and we need economical power generation and with AGL’s  announcement several years ago about sending Liddell offline, the market has  had an opportunity to provide, or at least put in place the planning for, that  dispatchable power. But that hasn’t developed so, the Prime Minister was  absolutely right to say that in circumstances where that dispatchable power will  not be online then if the energy providers wont step in, then the federal  government will. We are absolutely driven to ensure that our manufacturing  sector, that employs 850,000 Australians, that we keep those people in work. I  mean, we are looking at an environment now, as a result of the covid pandemic  that a lot of people have lost their jobs and those people who have kept their  jobs, we want to make sure that that remains the case.

CONNELL: Let me ask you this though, there’s a seven month deadline now to  get this dispatchable power into the grid, it appears though it has to be gas for  some reason, If someone can come along with a solution that firm renewables  and that is dispatchable power, should the government be true to its word that  it’s agnostic on power sources?

WALLACE: Well Tom, provide me with an example of dispatchable power that  doesn’t matter what’s happening out there, whether its night time or no wind,  that will be able to provide our steel smelters with the sort of constant power  that they need. Irrespective of whether the sun’s shining, irrespective of  whether the wind is blowing.

CONNELL: Well that all depends on the size of your battery network. That’s  what makes things firm. That’s pretty straight forward isn’t it?

WALLACE: Well, how big do you want your batteries? So, the question is gas  provides

CONNELL: Isn’t it up to a bid. So, if that’s not economical, fine, but why not  open it up?

WALLACE: Well, we have some of the largest resources of gas on the eastern  seaboard of Australia. What we need is for the states to end their moratoriums,  to give Queensland their credit they have managed their gas resources well.

CONNELL: We have a huge amount of coal, does that mean we have to use  that for power sources as well?

WALLACE: Well, I mean, gas provides energy, dispatchable energy, at a  fraction of the CO2 emissions of coal and we can do it now.

CONNELL: No, I get that, but you’re saying well we’ve got gas there we should



use it essentially seems to be the argument.

WALLACE: Because we have large resources of it, it’s a low emitter of CO2  and its an excellent transition fuel. It is right for the government to say to the  energy market that unless you provide that dispatchable power, then we will  step in and provide it.

CONNELL: And just finally, Peta Murphy, your thoughts on the Labor policy  platform which suggests no target 2030, 2035, no short-term climate target, is  this argument just too hard to win now with voters for Labor?

MURPHY: We’ve got a clear policy of net zero emissions by 2050 and what  you’re talking about is a draft policy platform.

CONNELL: That’s 30 years away

MURPHY: That’s gone out for consultation. It’s pretty difficult when we’re  governed by a government that isn’t doing what needs to be done to reduce  emissions at a fast enough pace. We should be setting a target right now. I’m  sure you will hear more from Labor as we head towards the next federal  election.

CONNELL: You can’t set a target in 15 years time because of what the  government’s now, that’s what you’re saying?

WALLACE: Correct.

MURPHY: Well, the government is in charge and it’s not doing a good enough  job, its not an election today, you’ll be hearing a lot more from Labor about the  detail of our policies as we head into an election campaign. We’ll be very happy  to debate them (Inaudible) but there needs to be a bit of focus at the moment  on the fact that this government is presiding over a climate disaster and needs  to do more now.

CONNELL: Alright, we’ll have to leave it there, Peta Murphy, Andrew Wallace,  thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DYLAN STEED 0400 615 862







