





THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP  MINISTER FOR POPULATION, CITIES AND URBAN  INFRASTRUCTURE



STEVE IRONS MP  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR SWAN





THE HON RITA SAFFIOTI MLA  WA MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT

THE HON BEN WYATT MLA  STATE MEMBER FOR VICTORIA PARK







MEDIA RELEASE



Monday, 31 August 2020

Armadale Line to be transformed with removal of level crossings

Up to six level crossings will be removed on the Armadale Line under a business case  submitted to Infrastructure Australia.

Under the jointly funded $415 million Federal-State plan, the Inner Armadale Line Level  Crossing Removal project will remove three level crossings at Oats Street, Mint Street and  Welshpool Road.

The project business case also examines and assesses the removal of a further three level  crossings, at William Street, Wharf Street and Hamilton Street.

Federal Minister for Population Cities and Urban Infrastructure Alan Tudge said it was another  targeted infrastructure project designed to deliver tangible benefits for the people of Perth.

“We are prioritising projects in Perth that will bust congestion but that are also going to drive  the WA economy and deliver local jobs,” Mr Tudge said.

“We’re pumping billions of dollars into WA as we come out of COVID and you can see the  construction activity right across the metropolitan area.”

WA Transport Minister Rita Saffioti said the McGowan Government is cutting waiting time for  drivers and removing six level crossings along the Armadale line.

“Commuters can finally say bye, bye boom gates - we’ve all felt the pain sitting at a level  crossing waiting for one, two, sometimes three trains to pass by,” she said.

“Submitting the business case to Infrastructure Australia is the next step forward to removing  these boom gates - we plan to start procurement on this METRONET project later this year.”

Federal Member for Swan Steve Irons said the project would improve safety, promote better  connections and movements along the Armadale Line for commuters and community  members.

“I’ve advocated for the removal of level crossings along the Armadale Line for years - I’m  pleased to see this project finally getting off the ground.”

State Member for Victoria Park Ben Wyatt said removing the Oats Street and Mint Street level  crossings was one of his key election commitments.



“I’m pleased to see we are one step closer to removing these boom gates,” he said.

“METRONET is all about connecting the community and for the first time in a century this will  remove parts of the rail barrier that have separated the communities of Carlisle and East  Victoria Park.”

Removing these at-grade level crossings and replacing them with elevated rail provides a cost-effective solution to safety issues along the Armadale Line, while maintaining thoroughfares for  motorists and serving as a catalyst for better design, placemaking and development  opportunities around the train line.

Up to 2.8 kilometres of elevated rail could be laid along the inner Armadale Line, providing  more opportunities for pedestrians, cyclists and motorists to safely cross the rail corridor while  also creating safer roads, quieter neighbourhoods and new connections between communities.

It will also remove the dreaded boom gates, reducing the amount of minutes spent by  commuters sitting at level crossings. Currently Oats Street boom gates are closed 233 times a  day for up to 1 minute 33 seconds per closure meaning it is down for up to six hours daily.

The business case for this METRONET project will now be reviewed by Infrastructure Australia  with procurement for the project expected to begin later this year.

[ENDS]

Media Contact:  Mr Tudge - Michael Bennett 0434 782 923  Ms Saffioti - Caitlin Goddard 0437 234 249



