

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT  INTERVIEW ON TODAY  WEDNESDAY 5 FEBRUARY 2020



EO&E...

ALLISON LANGDON: Good morning to you Prime Minister.

PRIME MINISTER: Good morning Ally.

LANGDON: Now the independent commissioner will have the powers of a rolling royal commissioner. But  as we know, every day counts here. When can we be moving on this?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, we've got to get the laws set up and get that through the parliament. But we'll be  setting up an interim Commissioner, which will be working out of my department straight away. And the  first task of this Commissioner will be to look at a whole series of cases in the past to ensure we're getting  the lessons from those, and that's very important. I spoke to Julie-Ann Finney last night, who's been an  advocate with this for many times. And she couldn't be more pleased that we're taking this step. It's bigger  and better than a royal commission, beyond what she had hoped for, because this is an ongoing problem.  We can't just look back. We've got to look forward.  And the other thing we've established is a Veterans’ Families Advocate that sits within the Department of  Veteran Affairs. The other thing I learned from talking to these families, that they need help and support  as well to go through this, our veterans policies and programs rightly focus on veterans. But we must think  of the families as well and ensure that we're working closely with them.

KARL STEFANOVIC: PM I was on 2GB at the end of last year and this was running hot. News Limited have  also done a terrific job in trying to get this up. I think it's a timely and important inquiry. Some veterans  told me though, they feared, and let me put this delicately, what an inquiry like this would do to their own  mental health in raising post-traumatic issues, deep issues in many cases, private issues. This inquiry will  need to be mindful of that delicate- and considerate to certain personnel.

PRIME MINISTER: I agree. And that's why we've gone down this path rather than the traditional approach  of a royal commission, because it does have those risks. I spoke to many of those veterans myself, also  Karl, and I spoke to the President of the RSL who had not been supportive of a royal commission in that  sense. And that's why I think we've come up with a much better way that brings everybody together.  Veterans like Phil Thompson, who serves in our parliament but served in uniform and served with so many  Australians, and he's been to too many of these funerals. I remember on one day we were walking into a

press conference and Phil got the news as we were walking to the microphones that another one of his  mates had taken his life. So we've got to be very sensitive to that. And that's what this Commissioner will  do. And I think also having the Families Advocate will be helpful in supporting families through this as well.  But you’re dead right. That's what you have to do.

LANGDON: Well, Prime Minister, yesterday was the first day back in parliament. We should have been  solely focussed on the bushfire crisis, instead it was marred by the Bridget McKenzie sports grant saga  and the Nationals leadership spill. Were you happy to see Barnaby Joyce fail?

PRIME MINISTER: I was happy to see the Nationals deal with these matters as quickly as possible as they  did so we could get the focus very quickly back on to the importance of yesterday, which was to honour  certainly and firstly, those who lost their lives in these terrible fires and many of the families of those  who'd fallen in Australia's name were able to be there and get that comfort and support, but also to  honour all of those who certainly continue to serve to this day, that Michael McCormack has made it clear  this morning that he, you know, he's apologised, that there was that event yesterday morning, but they  dealt with it quickly. And we've got back straight on the job as we never departed from as, in the  government.

LANGDON: I mean, it was an ugly distraction yesterday. Prime Minister, you know, he'll be back.

PRIME MINISTER: No, he said he's not challenging again. So I think that issues-

STEFANOVIC: Because that never happens in politics.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, look, the media might want to talk about it, but I think Barnaby ruled a line under  that pretty clearly yesterday. So we just get on with the job, which is what Australians expect us to do.

STEFANOVIC:  Alright, you may not have Michael McCormack for long I reckon, will you work with Barnaby  because he ran for leadership yesterday on an anti-environment platform. He vowed to promote coal,  and build coal fired power stations, enable land clearing and said the government should not be  succumbed on climate change by greenies. That sounds like a good partner in crime for you, don't you  think?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I'm going to put in place the policies I took to the last election, that's what I'm  doing. We're going to keep rolling those out, we’re going to keep the economy strong. And on issues like  hazard reduction, I announced yesterday that we're recommending Mark Binskin to lead this royal  commission. One of the issues he's going to be looking at closely, not just the federal powers, which you  know I've talked about before, Karl, about how and when I can send in the defence forces without request  but on our own initiative, but also because when we're thinking about the bushfire season the next one,  then hazard reduction is as important, if not more than I would argue, to keep people safe- than emissions  reduction. The royal commission assumes that our climate has changed and there is climate change. The  issue is what you do about it, the practical actions that keep people safe, and emissions reductions, land  clearing. All of these things are critical to that.

STEFANOVIC: But of course our- the perception is, the perception out there is and I know you and I have  argued about that perception before, but the perception is we need to do more. But the Nationals want  you to do less. How on earth do you sleep together?



PRIME MINISTER: We’ve been a Coalition always in government, and the great beneficiary of that has  been the Australian people. Stronger economy, stronger national security, sensible balanced policies,  particularly on things like climate change. And you know we listen to all Australians and we listen to  Australians right across the country, not just those in the inner city. And we listen to those out in the far  flung parts of our remote territories. Our bush, our regional communities. And it's important to listen to  everybody but take people forward on practical, balanced action that doesn't go and write people's jobs  off, or industries off. That doesn't go and put taxes on people. I mean, action on climate change does not  mean taxing people. It's about technology, not taxation. So we won't be bullied into higher taxes or higher  electricity prices. What we'll do is take practical action that deals with these challenges. And that challenge  is living in a hotter, drier and longer summer where these risk of these bushfires we need to be more  resilient to. So I'm going to focus on the stuff that works. The stuff that actually reduces risk and the stuff  that ensures that people can be safer in summer.

LANGDON: Ok and Prime Minister, just very quickly what can you tell us about the second evacuation  flight to get stranded Aussies in Wuhan home?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, it's on its way to Auckland, there’s around about 35 Australians on that flight and  they’ll be ultimately transferred back to Christmas Island when they arrive in Auckland. Our focus on  Coronavirus is to keep Australians protected here in Australia first. And we've been one of the first movers,  if not the first mover, on important issues like travel bans and things of that nature. We'll have another  flight going into Wuhan. We're working on that now. And the transfer arrangements to Christmas Island  are working very well. And we've had no presented cases there on Christmas Island at this point. But what  I want to tell people is that they can't count on a further flight beyond that or one into mainland China at  some point. So there are flights coming out of mainland China now and people should avail themselves of  that if they wish to. But my focus, the National Security Committee met yesterday again, our focus is on  keeping people safe here in Australia. And the arrangements we’ve put in place have been very effective.  We've had three people already discharged who had contracted the virus. And they're fine and they've  gone back about their lives and there are 10 active cases at the moment. But in so many other countries,  we're seeing a different scenario play out. Our containment measures are working well.

STEFANOVIC: PM, thank you for your time and congratulations on the independent Commissioner that  you appointed into veterans affairs and what's happening with our veterans that needs to be  acknowledged today. Appreciate your time.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks, Karl. Just one other thing- can I thank the Chinese Australian community for  the way that they’ve been respecting and honouring these, these quarantine arrangements and these  self-isolation. They've been so fantastic. And I just want to thank them very much for their cooperation.

STEFANOVIC: OK. Thank you PM.

[END]

Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

Press Office of the Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Prime Minister, Canberra



