JOSH BURNS MP

MEMBER FOR MACNAMARA





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

MONDAY, 9 NOVEMBER



SUBJECTS: Victoria defeating the Coronavirus second wave; Prime Minister politicising

the fight against the second wave; US election of Joe Biden and Kamala Harris; action

on climate change.



JOSH BURNS, MEMBER FOR MACNAMARA: All right, all good? Well, it's really, really good

to be back in Canberra and the only reason why I'm back in Canberra is because of the

sacrifices of Victorians. It's been a pretty difficult few months where Victorians have made

huge sacrifices for themselves, for their families and for their fellow Victorians. And we're back

here today because Victorians have done something remarkable. And that's turned the fate of

the Coronavirus around in Victoria. Yesterday, we had nine days in a row of zero cases. And

hopefully today, we have exactly the same. So I just wanted to say thank you to Victorians for

all of their efforts and all of their sacrifices. And they did this despite some really loud voices

from the top down, undermining the health response and making really difficult days in Victoria

even harder. The Prime Minister, the Treasurer, and the Health Minister, issuing press

statements on the side during Victoria's darkest hours. It was politics at its worst, but

thankfully, Victorians ignored the loud voices and did what they had to. The other thing to say

today is that obviously it is a historic day with Joe Biden and Kamala Harris winning the US

election. And I think anyone watching their speeches yesterday felt really inspired and uplifted

about what Americans have chosen for their future. And obviously, Australia as a proud and

long-standing friend of the United States looks forward to everything that a Biden presidency

and Kamala Harris comes to offer. But that means that one of the first things that Joe Biden

has announced is the United States will rejoin the Paris Climate Agreement, the first thing that

Joe Biden will do is bring the United States back to the leadership position on climate, and

Australia must join the United States in that leadership position. We can be a leader in

renewable energy, we can be a leader in all the things that we need to do in order to make

sure we have a future for our planet. And it is exciting that we'll have a partner in the United

States as well.



JOURNALIST: Joel Fitzgibbon said that Labor risks electoral doom, by pushing for too much

of an ambitious target, does there need to be a balance here?



BURNS: I think what the weekend has shown and what the US election has shown is that a

party can come to an election with ambitious climate policy and they can win. And that is what

the Labor Party will do at the next election, we will come with ambitious climate policy and we

will win the next election.



JOURNALIST: Are you happy to see Mr Biden, for example, on trade, where there's going to

be, it's going to be a bit easier to deal with perhaps, less erratic than Mr Trump? Are you happy

about that?



BURNS: I think that the world needs stability, and the world needs leadership. And that's

exactly what Joe Biden will provide, as the President and Australia as a long standing friend of

the United States, one where we share values and where we share so much in common. And

we'll be working with a Biden presidency, as we do with all presidencies, but especially, we

have a lot of work to do in the coming years and months.



JOURNALIST: Were you relieved to see the back of Mr Trump, has this been four painful

years, four good years? What was your opinion on his administration?



BURNS: Look, I'm not going to comment on the previous four years. I think that anyone

watching Joe Biden's speech and Kamala Harris' speech yesterday felt uplifted and felt

inspired because Americans have made a really important choice for them to lead the country

and Australians look forward to working with him in the future.



JOURNALIST: Some Labor Governments like the Queensland Labor Government have

approved new coal mines and, you know, is Labor's record on climate really that good here?

You know that Adani coal mine's gonna ship out a huge amount of coal?



BURNS: Labor Governments are the only thing in this country that have and that bring

meaningful action on climate change and the Labor Party right now, we are building our policy



for the next election, just as Joe Biden did and just as Kamala Harris did to take ambitious

climate policy to the next election, and just as they won, the Australian Labor Party will win the

next election as well. All good? Thanks very much.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DEAN SHERR 0423 394 949

