

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES  MEMBER FOR HUNTER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2GB WITH DEBORAH KNIGHT  FRIDAY, 21 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Border closures; National Cabinet; Labor internal  differences; China trade dispute.

DEBORAH KNIGHT, HOST: Order, order. Angus Taylor and Joel Fitzgibbon  are in the house. Fellas, thanks for joining us for Friday Question Time.

ANGUS TAYLOR, MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND EMISSIONS REDUCTION:  Thanks Deb and Joel.

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: G'day Deb - Angus.

KNIGHT: Good to have you both on. Look, I want to dive into some of the  issues with you, specifically Joel, but just big issues in National Cabinet today -  aged care and the borders. Now the Prime Minister, Angus, is calling for state  and territory leaders to have a more common sense approach here, which they  need to have. They need to have more flexibility particularly in these border  towns. But it looks as though politics is taking precedence over health.

TAYLOR: Well, politics shouldn't take precedence over common sense, Deb,  that's the point. We've got agricultural workers, we've got people with medical  conditions and there needs to be real common sense applied to those  situations. And this is obviously a human welfare and health issue. A very  significant one when you get to the borders for really critical treatment for  cancer and other things. And of course, for our farmers being able to get across  the borders. We're seeing a shortage of shearers in many areas now and that  becomes a big animal welfare issue. It's just common sense, Deb. Everyone's  got to apply common sense in a situation like this. It is not a time for politics.

KNIGHT: What are the chances of it being resolved, though? We live in a

federation, the states can make their own rules, they can set their own rules,  and that's what we're seeing apply here. And Joel, we've got the Queensland  election 10 weeks away on October 31. The Northern Territory has got its  election tomorrow. I mean, we can hope and ask for a resolution but they're not  going to deliver, are they?

FITZGIBBON: I agree with Angus, Deb. It's a serious problem. And it's looking  more and more chaotic as each day goes on. I mean, in New South Wales,  you've got the Deputy Premier attacking his own government for the  mismanagement on the border issue. David Littleproud, the Federal Agriculture  Minister is attacking what's going on on the border between Victoria and New  South Wales yet his mob are in power. Now this goes back, for those of your  listeners who are tragic enough to listen to me and Angus every week, you  might recall that last week, I said that, you know, Scott Morrison put big store in  this National Cabinet. He's trying to run the whole show himself and override  the states. And of course, how often does he have a National Cabinet meeting?  He's telling people well, we'll sort that out on Friday, you know, five days away  when farmers and others need help right now.

KNIGHT: So, Angus, should he be doing more here? I mean, the system as it  works means he can't though.

TAYLOR: Joel says that. We live in a federation. That is what we live in. Now,  we have had some real successes on exactly this issue. We got a national  freight protocol in place last week, which is crucially important for getting trucks  through borders and freight through borders. We now need to make sure that  for people with medical conditions and agricultural workers - sort it out. So,  these things can be sorted out. Our appeal is to common sense and get beyond  the politics. We have got a couple of state elections coming up - territory  election coming up. You know, we see that but it is time to focus on people's  interests. It's a simple call. We've had some success. And I'm sure common  sense will prevail here too.

FITZGIBBON: The Prime Minister can't have it both ways. He boasted about  the role of the National Cabinet. He can't claim credit for everything that goes  right, and then...

KNIGHT: ...But what can he do, Joel? It's a federation. I mean, he can't  overrule the states. That's the system we're stuck with.

FITZGIBBON: Well Deb, he abolished the COAG process - the normal way in  which states and the Commonwealth talk to one another through a range of  committees. He's folded it into his own committee - one committee... And  people expect timely decisions. I mean, of course you're not going to get timely

decisions because one committee is trying to do too much…

TAYLOR: Look the idea that COAG was going to solve all these issues is, I  mean, it's a lumbering bureaucracy and it was and that's why we've got rid of it.  But, we are having some real success but this is an area where we need to get  common sense.

KNIGHT: Yeah, well no argument there. We've got to get it sorted, that is for  sure. Too many ridiculous stories of the rules just not making any sense  whatsoever. Now Joel, Chief troublemaker for the Labor Party, are you  prepared to split the ALP if the party can't unite on climate and energy policies?  Do you think that Labor is going to end up, the latte-sipping lefties on the one  side and the blue-collar working class on the other? Is it going to be that  extreme?

FITZGIBBON: Here is a tip, Deb, for you and your listeners - Blenheim  Partners, B-L-E-N-H-E-I-M. Listen to my hour-long podcast and exactly what I  had to say - that a whole range of issues from foreign affairs and my passions  in Australian politics.

KNIGHT: Okay, but you raised the issue of Labor really struggling to unite  those two very disparate groups.

FITZGIBBON: I made the point that the Labor Party is the biggest party in the  country, therefore, it's the most diverse. We don't have this neat little trick  where we've got The National Party telling people one thing, the Libs telling  them another. And then after they, after the election, they combine to take the  most number of seats in the House of Representatives. We don't do that. We  don't play that tricky game. We speak to all people and what I've been saying is  that we need to make sure that our policies and our utterings and our language,  are such that we can take sufficient people with us to secure an election victory  because I think right now, the country could do with a Labor Government.

KNIGHT: Well, you've copped some heat from some within your own. Tanya  Plibersek jumped on Twitter, saying that it's an insult to suggest working people  don't care about preserving our beautiful country. And we've had Albo  dismissing your view that the party can't appease both progressives and the  middle class as well. I mean, do you support your leader? Do you support  Albo?

FITZGIBBON: I do support Albo and I think he'll be the next Prime Minister. He  will lead us to the next election. But Deb, your listeners don’t want their local  members being shrinking violets. And I will be out there every day, on every  occasion doing everything I can, which is good for the country, good for the

Labor Party, and makes Anthony Albanese most likely to become our next  Prime Minister.

KNIGHT: You're making his life bloody hard though aren't you, Joel?

FITZGIBBON: A contestability of ideas in the marketplace, I think makes for a  vibrant party, Deb.

KNIGHT: You'd be sitting back, Angus and having some popcorn, wouldn't  you?

TAYLOR: Well, look, the Labor Party doesn't know if it's Arthur or Martha.  Open fighting under weak leadership. It's forgotten what's important to  Australian families and businesses. It's good to see Joel taking on the latte-sippers and backing in hard working Australians - as I do every day and the  Liberal Party and National Party do every day...

FITZGIBBON: ...you should not talk about Matt Kean like that.

TAYLOR: They are divided, they're under weak leadership and it's showing,  Deb.

KNIGHT: What about your claims though, Joel, on China because you're  blaming the PM for China's anti-dumping investigation into the wine industry. I  mean, that's a bit of a stretch, isn't it?

FITZGIBBON: Absolutely not, Deb. look I represent barley growers, beef  produces, vignerons. And of course, those involved in the coal mining industry  who have all been either affected, or could soon be affected, by retaliation from  the Government of China.

KNIGHT: So, do we just bend over backwards and take it?

FITZGIBBON: No. No, we have to be most robust in the defence of our  national interest when it's under challenge.

KNIGHT: And that's what the Prime Minister is doing, isn't it?

FITZGIBBON: No. What? He ran out, Deb. He ran out and called for an inquiry,  the shape of which he had no idea about, before the rest of the world. Now,  there are correct ways of doing things, Deb. But, you don't need to just believe  me. When, Deb, can you ever remember an Australian Government in which its  ministers have no dialogue, no cooperation with ministers, their counterparts in  China? That is a terrible place to find ourselves with our major trading partner,

Deb.

KNIGHT: And it is, and you're right, that is a big concern. That absolutely has  to be rectified. But Angus, how concerned are you that the latest threat to trade  relations from China is going to really hit us hard?

TAYLOR: Well, I think it's a completely inappropriate accusation that they've  made. But the point I'd make, Deb, is that we're just not going to trade away our  sovereignty on any issue. We'll be consistent. We will be clear, we'll be  respectful and we'll get on with the business. We're open to talking with China  on this and any issue, at any time. That's our approach. And we'll stay  consistent with it. And we'll stay clear at all times on this.

KNIGHT: now quickly, Joel. I know you toured the Orica stockpile of  ammonium nitrate at Newcastle, and you said you're comfortable with it, are  you?

FITZGIBBON: Deb, if Xi Jingping in China said he was going to send weapons  inspectors into Australia, knocking down doors and stealing laptops and you  know, laboratory equipment, we wouldn't be very happy. So, we're not being  respectful. But on Orica, I did visit the site yesterday. I'm not an expert. I  challenged the company, I raised community concerns. It’s not my place to tell  people whether it's safe or not safe. But I did say that from a personal  perspective, my Mum lives within a kilometer of the plant and I walked out of  that plant yesterday with no concern about my mother's safety.

KNIGHT: All right, but it's good to get that perspective. Just quickly before I let  you go, old wives tales. We've got some callers and I'm gonna get to those in  just a moment, on old wives tales that listeners swear by. Angus, have you got  one?

TAYLOR: Well, look, I've always lived by the five second rule which with four  kids, you've pretty much got to. The five second rule, which gives you five  seconds to pick food up. I've got to say I've had to put that one on hold during  COVID.

KNIGHT: Yep, I was going to, I was wondering about that.

TAYLOR: I've had to do that, Deb. Unfortunately. I'm sure it will return with a  vengeance.

KNIGHT: The five second rule, alright, Joel, what about you?

FITZGIBBON: Deb, mine has been scientifically trialed and tested.





KNIGHT: Oh, yeah.

FITZGIBBON: A quick, gentle and unexpected surprise punch in someone  else's chest will cure hiccups.

KNIGHT: Oh!

FITZGIBBON: It worked with my kids on almost every occasion. I swear by it.

KNIGHT: Child abuse from Joel Fitzgibbon. Goodness me! Not just chief  troublemaker in the Labor Party, but also. Alright fellas, good on you. Great to  talk, thanks so much for joining us

FITZGIBBON: thanks Deb.

TAYLOR: Thanks Deb.  .

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641









