

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS AFTERNOON AGENDA WITH KIERAN GILBERT

TUESDAY, 3 MARCH 2020



SUBJECT: Collinsville proposal; Liberals’ economic mismanagement; Reserve Bank

interest rate cut; COVID-19, climate action.



KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: Welcome back to the program live from Townsville today.

Joining me now is the Shadow Education Minister, Tanya Plibersek. Tanya Plibersek,

thanks for your time. Being in North Queensland today, I've been speaking to various

individuals in the business community. Just before the break caught up with Ashley Dodd,

the CEO of Shine Energy behind that Collinsville proposal. What did you make of his

criticism of Labor leader Anthony Albanese and Federal Labor for not giving them a fair

hearing.



TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION: I don't think it's a fair

criticism at all. Of course, we are always interested in making sure regional communities

have jobs for the people who live there and you're in Townsville, you know how important

that is. They've got unemployment of close to eight per cent. You've got youth

unemployment of eighteen per cent and that's why we went to the last election with really

strong infrastructure investments for the Townsville Port and road projects and others

around Townsville. What worries me about Collinsville is that it's another scam from the

Federal government. It's a press release designed to cover up their lack of an energy

policy. We've found out through Senate Estimates that the $4 million that they've promised

Shine hasn't been delivered yet. I mean they've put the press release out saying that it has

been delivered but there's no actual money being delivered. So again, it's sort of a fraud on

the people of Townsville who are expecting real action from this government on high rates

of unemployment in Townsville, and on continuing energy policy uncertainty in this country

and they're not getting either, a response to either of those problems. And this is a

government that's now on its nineteenth energy policy. It's just a joke. Sorry go on.



GILBERT: We are now expecting a stimulus - measured, targeted, scalable stimulus, as

the Prime Minister puts it. What do you want to see from that, and specifically in the sector

of higher education, which has been copping it so badly?



PLIBERSEK: Well higher education has been facing significant problems due to the

COVID-19 or Coronavirus. So far the universities aren't calling for a specific intervention

from the Government, but we do need to keep watching this. It's a week-by-week

proposition. But when it comes to stimulus for the economy, we've been saying for months

what this government ought to be doing - it could bring forward tax cuts. It could bring

forward more infrastructure spending, it could increase Newstart, it could offer an incentive

to businesses to invest. We've got very low rates of business confidence and very low

rates of business investment at the moment. That's just an example of a few things that

we've recommended. We've also said, of course, particularly in the bushfire affected areas

that instead of allowing businesses to lay off people we could be stepping in and paying

the equivalent of Newstart for those people so that we can keep them working, keep

money circulating in the economy. The fact that we have seen the fourth interest rate cut in

10 months shows just how badly this government is doing when it comes to managing the

economy. They've more than doubled our national debt. They've set themselves the target

of getting back into surplus by next year. It seems increasingly unlikely that that's going to

happen.



GILBERT: OK.



PLIBERSEK: They, in fact, said six years ago that they were going to get into surplus in

their first year in government. They have missed six for six and it looks like they might miss

this next one too.



GILBERT: Yep. Do you think the higher education sector, as some within the Liberal Party

of suggested, that they’re are feeling the effects now of the fact that they haven't diversified

sufficiently outside of the China market?



PLIBERSEK: The higher education sector, the international student part of that, is really a

terrific success story. It's good for our nation economically. It's about a $33 billion-a-year

export earner. It employs about 130,000 people, but it's also good for us diplomatically. I've

met leaders from around our region in particular who look back very fondly on their time

studying in Australia. But there are a few things that we need to ensure. We need to make

sure students are getting a good quality education when they come here, our reputation

depends on it. We're looking after student welfare. We're making sure that they've got the

English language skills they need to have when they're embarking on a course of study

here. And of course we need to also diversify the countries from which students are

coming. I think the sector is pretty well aware of this. Certainly my conversations with the

universities show that they know that the broader the range of countries from which we

draw students the better. It's a better student experience. And also of course it reduces the

risks of incidents like we've got with this health emergency at the moment.



GILBERT: Do you welcome the rate cut from the RBA today? Is that the right call?



PLIBERSEK: Oh look, I think it's a sign that the economy is in trouble in. We’ve never had

rates this slow. I think a lot of economists and business leaders are saying that the

Reserve Bank has, sort of, reached the limit of what it can do to support the economy, that

actually what you need is the Government to take action and we are sadly lacking a

government with a plan that would grow our economy. I was talking a moment ago about

energy and this is a terrific example of where the Government completely lacks a plan, and

the cost of that is certainty and the cost of that is jobs. If we don't have a decent energy

policy, that is the biggest jobs killer. We've seen investment, for example, the most recent

figures on renewable investment plunge off a cliff because of the lack of certainty and that

hits people's hip pockets. Power prices are going up because of this lack of certainty and

food prices, insurance prices - all of these are increasing because of the impact of climate

change on farming, on natural disasters.



GILBERT: Shouldn't Labor, in terms of certainty though, when it comes to climate change,

and that issue, why didn't Labor have a bit more meat on the bone when it announced that

2050  target?





PLIBERSEK: We're two years away from the next election so there's plenty of time to put

meat on the bone, as you say, but think about the opportunities here, Kieran. Every state

and territory has a target of zero net emissions by 2050 - all the Liberal states do, all the

Labor states do. Businesses do - BHP, Wesfarmers, Qantas, Commonwealth Bank,

they've all got a target to get to zero net emissions by 2050. The National Farmers

Federation, the Meat and Livestock Corporation - they want to get there sooner than 2050.

We are saying that as a Federal Government, if we were elected, we would help the states

and territories meet their targets. We would help the farmers meet their targets. We would

help businesses meet their targets and by doing that we're providing certainty. We are

driving investment and when you provide certainty and you drive investment, you are

driving jobs growth, you are driving economic success. This government's doing the exact

opposite. Malcolm Turnbull called it for what it was. He said they're so busy fighting each

other that the chaos and uncertainty inside the Liberal and National Parties, the lack of

energy policy is pushing up power prices and it's pushing up pollution. That's what you see

on display day after day from Scott Morrison and The Muppet Show as he calls them.



GILBERT: Tanya Plibersek, I appreciate your time. We'll talk to you soon. Thanks.



PLIBERSEK: Thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350







