

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

Media contact: Douglas Ferguson, 0455 448 985

Thursday 2nd April 2020

Interview with Leon Byner 5AA

LEON BYNER: But let's talk to the minister- the Federal Emergency Management Minister  because there's a bit of good news. David Littleproud, thanks for joining us today. It is very  clear that there are between - according to what media is being told - anything from 100 to  200,000 people - they're daigou's - these are personal shoppers for essential items who go  out, raid the supermarkets or chemists, bring the product back, put it in a garage and then  export it to China. Is this still lawful?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No, it's not. Anyone that's trying to profiteer using critical medical  supplies or even those types of essential we got a legislation in place where there's a $63,000  fine and up to five years jail. Those that are trying to smuggle it out of the country - there is  work being down now to ensure that we can penalise them and the Home Affairs Minister,  Peter Dutton, is working on that to ensure that we protect Australians, not just with some of  this produce but also, but also with critical medical supplies. And there is a surge of Australian  Border Force personnel to our ports to protect Australia supplies.

Those that are lawfully want to export can, they can - get an export permit and do the right  thing, go through the proper channels. But those that want to do it through these organised  crime gangs, the Australian Border Force, the Australian Federal Police and state agencies  are working together to bust them open. And we're going to go after them and make sure we  square up with them - and we're going to make them isolated from society, we're going to  isolate them in- away from society to let them reflect on what they're doing to their fellow  Australians.

LEON BYNER: There are quite a number of international students who, in order to make some  extra money - and sometimes it can be substantial - have gone out and done this. So, if an  individual student or somebody else doing this was to apply for an export licence, would they  then be able to do it lawfully?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No. Well an international student would be under- would be in  Australia on an education visa and that would not fit with that visa conditions, and in fact it was  found to be undertaking this unlawful act would in fact risk their visa being cancelled. In fact,  they have every opportunity to be sent home. So that is the clear way in which the law would  look at this after we've obviously dealt with them with any fines or imprisonment.

LEON BYNER: We've already seen - in fact a current affair had a bit of footage a couple of  nights ago, and it's not the only one - there's been quite a number of large warehouses and  garages raided with massive amounts of essentials - baby formula, wipes, sanitisers. These  are all, presumably, going to be prosecuted?

Transcript



Transcript

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Definitely. And that's why there's been a surge in Border Force  personnel and there's been real coordination between the federal police and state agencies -  understanding there are people trying to profiteer out of this state of emergency that we are in  under COVID-19. They are taking advantage of the circumstances and those that are trying to  do it are going to get found out.

And that's why we're putting more resources into it, we want to protect our community - not just  for things like baby formula but also for critical health supplies. That's the lowest of the low,  taking away from Australian's those critical health supplies that are there to protect us is  something that we need to bust open and get hold of. And that's why we're moving quickly with  personnel, intelligence and then with prosecution.

LEON BYNER: So, what's your reaction to the fact that our Border Force experts have  intercepted a lot of products that have come mainly out of China, that are actually faulty and  dangerous? I mean, that's extraordinary.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, it is. And that's why I'm proud of the fact that our borders- the  Border Force and also our biosecurity officers there are working hand-in-hand with one  another; are collaborating and making sure that we're checking more and more of, not only of  goods that are going out, but goods that are coming here to protect us. And that is where  vigilance is so imperative and that we have the coordination of intelligence of agencies  working together to bust these people open and make sure that those that are perpetrating this  spend some time in isolation.

LEON BYNER: So, if somebody is seen in a supermarket or chemist putting large amounts of  particular products into a supermarket trolley or container and then going to pay for it, are we  going to be suspicious?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, you should be and you should let law enforcement officers know  so that they can undertake the appropriate investigations. That is what we we've asked every  Australian - it's every Australian's responsibility - you can help the police, you can help  agencies, by giving them the intelligence, the information they need to bust these rings open.  And that's everyone's responsibility in our society to do their bit to live up to our responsibilities  and help those brave men and women on the frontline there to protect us.

LEON BYNER: So you want people if they notice anything unusual - for example, they're in a  street and they happen to notice that there - if the garage door is open - is containers of all  sorts of products, report it?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah. That's the responsibility of every Australian - that if they if they  suspect a crime has taken place, then they should be reporting it to the law enforcement  agencies for them to make proper investigation and allow them to do that in a professional  way. And that's one of the tools that our law enforcement agencies rely on, is the vigilance of  our community in working hand-in-hand with law enforcement agencies to be able to get the  intelligence, to get the evidence, to get prosecutions.

LEON BYNER: Minister, thank you for joining us.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks for having me Leon.

LEON BYNER: That's the Federal Emergency Services Minister, David Littleproud.

