

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS AM AGENDA

FRIDAY, 6 NOVEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: US Election; China Trade; High Court rejects Clive Palmer’s challenge

to WA border.



TOM CONNELL, HOST: And of course, with the US election, joining me live Deputy Labor

Leader, Richard Marles. Thanks very much for your time. As we've seen, Joe Biden gain in

several key states. A tweet from Donald Trump amongst many ‘stop the count.’ It's just

anti-democracy, isn't it?



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Well,

look, I mean, Donald Trump, if we've learned anything over the last four years, is going to

say what he's going to say. And he's always been unpredictable and that's his form. But I

think if you put that to one side, and you look at the way in which the American system is

playing out, it's playing out as it should. The count is occurring, it's a close election, some

elections in America, some elections in Australia take a number of days to conclude. So

there's nothing particularly unusual about that and our job really is to just give the US the

space it needs to ultimately land this result and I’m sure they will.



CONNELL: I mean you say put it to one side, would we be putting it to one side if other

world leaders had said that? Why does Donald Trump get a pass mark from something he

said, you know, he's unpredictable. This was predictable, wasn't it, this reaction?



MARLES: Well, I'm not sure it’s a leave pass, its just to make the observation that what

we're seeing from Donald Trump in the last few days is what we've seen over the last four

years. It is what it is, and we've learned to live with Donald Trump's comment by tweet.

And often those tweets have been pretty unpredictable, but it is what it is. I think what's

important here is that the American system is playing out as it's meant to. And indeed,

what is playing out was absolutely predicted in the lead up to the election in the sense that

because of COVID-19, there have been a large number of people who have voted by mail,

who voted early. And so there were predictions before the election, that it was going to

take some time to count this and it might be a few days before we get the result. That's

now what's playing out. We've just got to let it play out.



CONNELL: But again, if we look at the action and Donald Trump and his team, this is a

concerted effort, ‘keep counting in Arizona’, ‘stop counting elsewhere’. Again, that's not a

democratic urging, is it?



MARLES: Well, I mean, what is important in any democracy is that every vote is counted.

The act of voting is a sacred act, it's, you can read right back to the earliest writings of the

American democracy and that's what it says there and indeed, that's informed our own

democracy over more than a century. And part of the act of voting is that at the end of the

day, the vote that is cast is counted and recorded. But that is what's happening in the US

and we should let that play out. But I'm absolutely certain that it's going to, and at the end

of the day, we're going to get a result. Donald Trump is going to tweet what he's going to

tweet, we've come to learn that over the last four years, it is what it is and I'm not sure that

it helps to kind of make any more observation on it than that. What matters is that we have

a sense of confidence in the way this election is playing out. And we absolutely do.

America is a great democracy and it's fulfilling this election in the way that we expected it

would and that's a great thing.



CONNELL We'll see how those institutions hold up. If Joe Biden -



MARLES: Institutions will hold up. I think that's important; institutions will hold up. You

know there's been a lot of kind of commentary in various places over the last few months

about whether they will hold up. I think that's essentially the point I want to make.



Inaudible



CONNELL: Given the makeup of it, whether it takes a sort of ‘Team Red’ approach to

some legal questions right now that some people think are not really valid.



MARLES: I think the American judicial system will apply the rule of law. I’ve got complete

confidence that the American institutions are going to manage this election and land it and

our job, as a friend and an ally is to give the US the space for that to happen.



CONNELL: Let's move on to what's happening with Australia and China and the

relationship there. It seems a bit unclear, Chinese media is reporting there is this

widespread ban; seafood, including lobster, wine, coal, barley, timber, sugar, copper ore.

The Ministry won't confirm it, though. What sort of government can’t even communicate-

that is China communicating to Australia- what it's doing with a major trading partner and

supposedly a strategic partner?



MARLES: Well, it's obviously a deeply concerning situation and we actually need to hear

from our own government about what's the plan. When the government signed the China

Free Trade Agreement, it touted itself as being the great trade government in our history, it

was all about the actions of the Australian Government at that moment in time. Now, it is

essentially saying this is beyond its control. I don't actually think that is good enough. I

think all of those in Australia, hundreds of thousands of jobs who are dependent upon this

trade, those people want to hear from our government about what's actually going on-



CONNELL: Let me jump in there. These are two separate issues, surely. You sign a Free

Trade Deal. In that negotiation, you try to get as many tariffs dropped by as much as

possible. That's the aim there, there's nothing else. It's just about trade. What's happened

since has all kicked off since Australia was a big part of the push for an independent

inquiry into COVID-19. They are separate issues, surely. The Australian Government's

allowed to say what a great trade deal, and things can go wrong for a different reason.



MARLES: Well, my only point is, that trade is a function, ultimately, of the relationship

between the two countries. The deals that we sign are a function of that as well. And the

Australian Government is part of that relationship and the Australian Government can’t, as

it's trying to do at the moment,  sit on the sidelines and throw its hands in the air and say

there's nothing we can do, this is beyond our power. They are part of this relationship. Now

I do make the observation Tom, we are seven years into this government and there is not

a single personal relationship of substance between any member of this government and

any member of the Chinese government, which can give some ballast to this moment.-



CONNELL: Do you give any blame?



Inaudible



MARLES:  I find that astounding. I find it completely astounding.



CONNELL: The decision that upset China was the inquiry. It was 5G. Our Ministers are

seeking just to pick up the phone with China. Their Ministers won't return phone calls. Why

aren’t you more critical of China for that?



MARLES: We’ve made criticism of China all along. And we can make observations about

the way in which China is behaving, for sure. But as much and all as we do all of that, it

doesn't change the reality of the situation; that the side of the relationship that Australia

gets to control is the Australian side. And I'm just making observations about where that is

at. And I do find it astonishing that seven years down the track, they can't point to a single

relationship of substance. I mean, during the Cold War, there were relationships of

substance between the United States and the Soviet Union which provided ballast in that

one-



Inaudible



CONNELL: The big decisions again on 5G, on the Inquiry, would Labor have made the

same decisions?



MARLES: Labor supports those decisions. But the assertion that you're now making is that

it's all about that. I think there is more to the relationship than simply those decisions. I

think it is possible-



CONNELL: You don't think that’s the big reason though, for why things have soured.

Because if the Chinese Communist Party watches reaction from yourself, that's saying,

what about the Australian side? They can say yeah, great, it's not our fault. It's the

Australian Government.



MARLES: I'm not saying China is without blame- that is absolutely not my point. We can,

we can absolutely make criticisms about what's happening here. So let's be clear; China

should be held to account in terms of its obligations in relation to the China Free Trade

Agreement, no question at all. The Australian Government has to accept responsibility for

its part in this relationship as well. And even to the extent of holding China to account, in

the context of the Trade Agreements that we have in place. But what we’ve got at the

moment Tom-



Inaudible



CONNELL: If things are right-



MARLES: That's not right, because what we've got to remember-



CONNELL: If things arrive at the Chinese port, and they're not allowed entry into the

country, what can the Australian Government do?



MARLES: Okay, if the assertion of the Australian Government is that in relation to our

largest trading partner, the partner with which it has sought to engage in enormous amount

of trade, that we've got to a point now where they are powerless in respect of it, I think that

is a profoundly unsatisfactory answer. For the thousands, the hundreds of thousands of

people in this country whose employment is dependent upon that trade, I think they would

have hoped that as this government pursued this trading course, that they were doing so

with greater agency and with greater power.



CONNELL: So just in terms of -



MARLES: Let me make this point, Tom. Because there is this kind of proposition that is

put out there that if we want to stand up for our values, and if we want to stand up for our

national interest, then this is the inevitable consequence. We can do all of that, and we

must do all of that. We must stand up for our national interest. But we also must do our

diplomacy right. And to find ourselves seven years down the track, and this government,

unique against any other Australian Governments since Australia recognised the People's

Republic of China back in the early 1970s, is in a situation where there is not a single

relationship of substance that exists between anyone within this government and anyone

within the Chinese Government, that is inept. And to suggest that has nothing to do with

this situation is just wrong. Personal relationships matter, and they don't have one in place.

And so that's what I point to at the moment in terms of this government's behaviour. Yes-



CONNELL: Okay.



MARLES: We can criticise China, we should. But to say that the Australian Government

has no say in this, isn't right.



CONNELL: I guess the question is, what the government can do. They’re picking up the

phone. I think there's been three trips from the Minister to China. Anyway, I want to get you

very quickly-



MARLES: Yeah, but we’re seven years down the track, Tom. And picking up the phone

and not getting an answer just says they actually haven’t managed to achieve what they

should have at the start.



CONNELL: We've got news coming in, the High Court has rejected Clive Palmer's

challenge against WA’s border ban. All laws are valid. Clive Palmer to pay costs. Quick

reaction on that one?



MARLES: Well, I think, you know, that is not a surprise. But I do think the internal borders

of our nation have something to do with our federal government. And I find it amazing that

from the very outset of this, our Prime Minister sought to have nothing to do with the

decisions that were made in relation to our internal borders. I can tell you, John Howard

would not have absolved his responsibility in relation to internal borders in the way that

Scott Morrison has and I think the Commonwealth has something to do with this.



CONNELL: Richard Marles, appreciate your time. We'll have to leave it there. Thank you.



MARLES: Thanks Tom.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













