





SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Deputy Leader of the Government in the  Senate Senator for South Australia



TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Interview on ABC Radio Adelaide, Breakfast, Ali Clarke and David Bevan  Topics: Sam Duluk suspension; Holden closure; Jetstar TWU dispute  18/02/20  08:42AM

Ali Clarke:  Right now we are going to introduce you to Senator Simon Birmingham. We do have a lot to  talk to him about, especially as Minister for Trade. Good morning.

Simon Birmingham:  Good Morning, Ali.

David Bevan: Simon Birmingham, before we get onto the Holden announcement…

Simon Birmingham: Which is what you asked me on air to talk about, but yes.

David Bevan: Do you have a message for the people in Waite? You’re the most senior Liberal in the state.

Simon Birmingham: Well, for the electors in Waite or the party members in Waite?

David Bevan: The party members who got together last night and decided to defy the Premier.

Simon Birmingham: That they erred in their judgment and that I doubt they had all the facts before them.

David Bevan: In what way do you think they've erred in their judgment?

Simon Birmingham: I don't think this motion was a helpful thing to do. Now, in the end the state executive  was meeting last night and unanimously accepted the suspension of Sam Duluk’s membership.

David Bevan: You saying they don't- they don't know Sam Duluk like you know Sam Duluk?

Simon Birmingham: No well, we all know Sam, I'm sure they know Sam. And look, it's not unusual that  local party members who have selected their local Liberal candidate - it’s the right of local members to make  that selection - will have an affinity and affection for that member and that candidate. So, I can understand  there would certainly be mixed emotions in terms of that branch.

David Bevan: Was Wayne Matthew right to warn them against doing this?

Simon Birmingham: Yes.

David Bevan: And he was right because it looks like conflict, because it is conflict?

Simon Birmingham: Well obviously they're expressing a point of view, that's not unusual across the many  thousands of members of the Liberal Party that sometimes those members express a point of view that is not  the one shared by the leadership. But the Premier's made it clear he doesn't tolerate, doesn’t accept and will  not accept the behaviour that's been alleged, and the state executive has unanimously backed in the Premier.

David Bevan: Okay. But by their actions the Waite sub-branch are saying: well- well, what are they saying?



Simon Birmingham: Well, I haven't seen the full text of the motion, I've only heard your- your playing it on  air this morning, David.

David Bevan: Well I can read it to you if you like. What it says is: the Waite State Electoral Committee notes  the apology statement to Parliament and subsequent actions in relation to the events of 13 December 2019  and Branch wishes to inform State Executive its support- of its support for Sam Duluk’s ongoing  representation as the Member for Waite.

Simon Birmingham: Well then that's obviously what it says, David.

David Bevan: And what do you think about it?

Simon Birmingham: … what are they saying, that’s- you've just read it out.

David Bevan: Yeah. And you think they were wrong to do that?

Simon Birmingham: Well David, I do and now I think even more appalling was the individual who chose to  take a recording and leak it because obviously that individual has undermined the right of all party members to  feel that they can speak freely and with some confidence at local branch meetings and that's a terrible act  that's occurred.

But in the end, the party has taken strong action in this regard. The Premier is taking a clear and strong  stance that the behaviour is unacceptable, the State Executive unanimously backing in the Premier I guess.  The local branch who had pre-selected Sam originally has obviously expressed some views and sentiments  there and we’ll all have to work through those with those branch members. But it doesn't change the position  of the State Executive or the Premier.

Ali Clarke: Senator Simon Birmingham forgive me, but what does it actually mean to be suspended from  the Liberal Party? If he can have this meeting in his office, which I understand apparently the sub-branch  always met at, but then stand up and address and then have motions put in his name.

Simon Birmingham: Well Ali, I understand this meeting had been scheduled before the suspension took  effect and so this was the routine and regular meeting which obviously they determined could go ahead still at  this time and that place. But once the meeting heard from him about him departing himself from the Liberal  Party, suspending himself from the Liberal Party, that he then left and that they proceeded without him.

David Bevan: In the meantime, hundreds of jobs lost across the country with the announcement from  Holden that it's removing its brand, it’s removing its business here in this country. The government had just 15  minutes notice. What does that say about Holden's respect for your government?

Simon Birmingham: It says they're showing a fairly contemptuous attitude I think, not only for the  government but really for their workforce, and to their dealerships, and to the people of Australia. And now  they're choosing to shut up shop and exit, they're doing so because they've been woeful in the business of  selling cars.

Their- last monthly sales were at the lowest level in 72 years and so if you- if your sales plummet to a seven-decade low then you’re going to go out of business and that is obviously what they've done and it's tragically  terrible for the dealership and for the workers, and that's where all the efforts need to be. But General Motors  have hardly covered themselves in glory in the way they've handled this.

David Bevan: Some people would say this is the end game of your government's decision not to support  General Motors Holden years ago.

Simon Birmingham: But David, I’d say quite the opposite. That more than $2 billion of Australian  taxpayer’s money was provided to General Motors to prop them up over the years and to try to make a  success of the business. Now, we could have thrown even more money at that over the last few years in  terms of manufacturing operations, yet what we're seeing is that they can't even sustain a retail business in  Australia. Now, if you can't sustain a retail business selling enough cars to Australians, you’re certainly not  going to sustain a manufacturing business. So any further money that had been thrown at Holden or General  Motors, really would have been a case of putting good money after bad.

Now, this is tragic. Australian consumers ultimately voted with their feet and their wallets and chose to buy  other cars. You've got Ford, as AM was reporting this morning, quite clearly saying that they're doing well, that  they are looking at employing more Australians. That in part is, I think, a result of the fact they've been very



successful with the Ford Ranger, an Australian designed vehicle, that they've designed to meet the demands  of the Australian marketplace, and as a result their sales are holding up while Holden's sales have crashed to  the 72 year low. Now, that doesn’t help if you’re a Holden employee of if you’re a Holden dealer and you’re  struggling with now the consequences of this. But we do have to accept that government can’t make people  choose to buy certain types of car, and Australians had decided to stop buying Holdens.

Ali Clarke: Simon Birmingham, all the money that we gave to General Motors, by us -the taxpayer, did  they fulfill every caveat that was on them getting that money?

Simon Birmingham: Look, I believe they met the conditions over the years. These were grants by  successive Governments of all political stripes that were awarded to maintain those manufacturing operations  here. And there were glimmers of hope that occurred along the way - I think we’d all remember some of the  export deals that were struck in terms of sending cars to Saudi Arabia or making police cars for parts of the  US. It's a shame that that success wasn’t able to be sustained in a long enough period of time. But certainly  those options weren't on the table when they were last asking for more taxpayer money and at that stage I  guess it was already apparent that their sales were in decline and they've declined continuously since then.

Ali Clarke: Tom Koutsantonis is the former state treasurer, he is also with us, also Shadow Minister for  Transport. You took to Twitter yesterday to delay(*) part of the blame for the Holden decision - the Abbott’s  government treatment of Holden, particularly the tender for the VIP car fleet. Do you really think that tipped  this over the edge?

Tom Koutsantonis: Yes. I remember when the incoming Abbott government decided to choose for the  VIP fleet a BMW over a Holden. The then CEO of GM contacted myself and the premier Jay Weatherill, really  concerned about what this meant symbolically that the Australian Government was prepared to carry the  Australian Prime Minister and the Governor-General in a foreign made car. We did our very best to reassure  them about, that that was just a probably a security decision based on the armament of a vehicle. But we  subsequently found out that the Australian made option was cheaper, better and there was a deliberate  political decision to choose another foreign made vehicle. We then- subsequently we saw the determined  efforts by the Abbott government to not offer subsidies, to not offer support. Holden were actually increasing  sales, Australians do like their rear-wheel drive V8s - they were doing quite well, despite what Simon's saying  now. There were a lot of Holden dealerships, we made this case to the Australian Government at the time.  Both Joe Hockey and Abbott were adamant there'd be no more subsidies. And we reminded them that every  car manufacturer in the world, including the BMW that the Prime minister was driving had government subsidy  in it. I mean there's not a motor vehicle made anywhere in the world that is not subsidised at the point of  manufacture - that is the nature of automotive manufacturing. If you want to be a country with advanced  manufacturing and make your own motor vehicles, that’s the price you pay. Everything-

David Bevan: Tom Koutsantonis, we're going to quickly run out of time. Your party wanted to kick Sam  Duluk out of the Parliament. He has the support of his Waite sub-branch. What? Do you want to kick them out  too? I mean, what- you want to see them close down?

Tom Koutsantonis: No, I don't want to close democracy; I want democracy to flourish. What shocks me is  the act of open defiance and the old wounds and the old enemies surfacing again to fight out battles in the  Liberal Party. I mean this is in open defiance of the Premier. I mean, you had Wayne Matthew getting up and  arguing against moving that motion and where was Stan Evans? The old arguments, they’re back again. And  for the Premier to be so upfront in that needing to be warned about what this- how this will look for the Premier  and then for all of them- I think you said 45 of them to seven voted to support their local MP. I think it goes to  show that the divisions run very, very deep at a local grassroots level in South Australia in the Liberal Party.  And I make this very common point that people make all the time about political parties - if you can't govern  your own party, how can you possibly govern a state? If the Premier has no authority; how can he have  authority anywhere else?

Ali Clarke: Tom Koutsantonis, thank you. Let's go back to Senator Simon Birmingham. Simon  Birmingham, another major company we're talking about now in Jetstar. Looks like there’s some bad news for  airline commuters tomorrow - possibly one of our busiest days, or in the lead into our busiest days into here,  into South Australia. As Tourism Minister, can you give us an update on this because we understand that  they've cancelled around a quarter of domestic flights around the country?

Simon Birmingham: Look, thanks Ali. Look, just firstly, I just want to point out that it’s a bald-faced lie  Tom’s telling in relation to the government fleet. You know, when you're talking about the Prime Minister's  armor plated car, you're talking about around six or eight vehicles for the Prime Minister or the Governor-General across the country. Holden haven't shut down their retail presence in Australia over six or eight armor  plated cars and it's just a preposterous lie that he’s telling there.





Now in relation to Jetstar, this is terribly disappointing - really, frankly, appalling action we're seeing from the  Transport Workers’ Union, one of the more militant unions around the country. And they’re shutting down  Jetstar flights across the country at the same time where I'm talking daily to tourism business around Australia  who are trying to keep their small businesses afloat, trying to keep their employees in jobs as they face the  impact of coronavirus and the downturn of visitation. And I would urge the TWU to reconsider its actions, to  think about the fact that it is just piling more pain on top of a tourism sector that is already suffering  enormously as a result of circumstances beyond anybody's control and that they really ought to keep these  planes flying so that people can book and travel with confidence when the government is spending $20 million  on an additional domestic tourism marketing campaign at present to try to get people travelling across  Australia. And the trade union movement is working in exactly the opposite direction, undermining that  campaign, undermining those small businesses and harming the jobs and threatening the jobs of people in  tourism across the country.

Ali Clarke: Alright. Well we certainly will keep everybody up to date as these flights are canceled. As we  said, lots of people need to travel in and out in this coming week so thank you very much Senator Simon  Birmingham, Minister for Trade and Tourism. Tom Koutsantonis, also part of that conversation.





Media Contacts  Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.

