

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  SYDNEY, NSW  THURSDAY 20 FEBRUARY 2020



EO&E…

PRIME MINISTER: Good afternoon, everyone. There is no more important job for an Australian Prime  Minister, and indeed Premiers and Chief Ministers of states and territories, than to keep Australians safe.  After the devastating Black Summer bushfires, we are still in that summer as we speak. I said some weeks  ago now that it would be necessary for us to move forward with a national Royal Commission. At the same  time, states and territories are proceeding as we anticipated and as they said they would, as is  appropriate, with a series of inquiries that they're running at the state and territory level, as is appropriate.  Today, the Governor-General issued letters patent to establish a national Royal Commission into the Black  Summer fires. That Royal Commission is about three things: improving natural disaster management  coordination across all levels of government; improving Australia's resilience and adaptation to a changing  climate, living in hotter, longer, drier summers in this country; and, importantly, a legal framework as is  necessary for the Commonwealth's involvement in responding to national emergencies. One of the great  challenges of the Black Summer fires has been how they impacted on so many different states and  territories, often at the same time. We all remember the day that a state of natural disaster was declared  in Victoria. It was on the Thursday, I recall. We'd had the terrible fires that have been raging also through  New South Wales to such devastating effect. By that Saturday, two days after we had the first compulsory  call-out of the reservists, which saw our numbers increase from 890 to 6,500 in a matter of weeks. As the  Commonwealth, we decided to take leadership and to put more boots on the ground. And I am sure  everyone all over the country that is affected by those fires was so grateful to see those boots on the  ground. And I want to thank General Ellwood and everyone who has been involved in that operation,  which continues to this day, Operation Bushfire Assist, for the way they've been conducting that  operation, providing tremendous support to communities and great relief across the country.

The Royal Commission will be led by the former Chief of Defence Force, Air Chief Marshal Mark Binskin,  and he will be supported by two other commissioners, a former Federal Court judge, the Honourable Dr  Annabelle Bennett , and by Professor Andrew Macintosh, who is a specialist researcher in climate change  mitigation and adaptation. This Royal Commission accepts, it acknowledges, it understands the impact of  climate change more broadly on the climatic conditions that Australia is living in. What this Royal  Commission is looking at are the practical things that must be done to keep Australians safer and safe in  longer, hotter, dry summers in the conditions in which Australians will live into the future. So that's dealing  with the practical things that need to happen, on everything from preparation to response and

importantly recovery. In framing these terms of reference, we circulated and sought comment from the  states and territories and I thank all the Premiers and Chief Ministers for their feedback and input into  that process and we listened carefully to those responses and we've made adaptations as necessary to  ensure that the Royal Commission will enable the commissioners to look at this issue very much from the  position of the national perspective. And that national perspective, as I said, will look at what is the  arrangements when you could have a national state of emergency or disaster declared? There is no such  power. There is no such declaration that currently exists and therefore no consequent powers, authorities  or actions that would flow from such a declaration.  And so it's important to discuss through, particularly  when you have natural disasters that are occurring across multiple states, how that would be put in place,  what would be the conditions? What would it then do and how would that integrate and work with the  state and territory effort?

It’s also important, I think, as Australians have said very clearly that they want a greater national  perspective on these issues. And so it is important to ensure that when we're talking about issues like  hazard management, hazard reduction, when we're talking about vegetation, native vegetation  management, when we're talking about building standards and controls and planning land-use laws, that  we have a greater national consistency in our understanding of what the best practice is and what the  standards are and what the plans are and what the accountabilities are using common methodologies so  Australians can get a national picture of how we're tracking. These are clearly and absolutely and should  forever be the responsibility of states and territories. This isn't about changing who does what. This is  about how we work together even more effectively and we build on the disaster recovery arrangements  that have been put in place by previous governments that have been tested on this occasion because of  the multiple-jurisdiction nature of this disaster. We've also seen, across these latest fires some  inconsistency in how the application of the various category A, B and C assistance has been declared in  different states and territories. When you're only operating in one state or there's only one jurisdiction  that's been affected, well, those inconsistencies don't present because they’re declared by the states. But  when you have it happening at Kangaroo Island and you have it happening up in Canungra, you have it  happening in Batemans Bay or East Gippsland at the same time, then obviously it's important that  Australians should have the same expectations of the level of support that they might receive in those  circumstances.

Now, we've worked together to do our best to ensure that they’ve been as consistent as possible, and I  make no criticisms at all of the state and territory governments and, in particular, those who led the first  line of defence, the first response in combating the fires themselves. The volunteer fire brigades, the  emergency services departments and all these organisations. This is an opportunity to have a national  Royal Commission which looks at the ways that the national coordination, the national consistency, the  national standards of the national measure and the national powers and authorities that need to be put  in place and that those questions can be considered and they can be assessed. Now, it is important that  this be done in a very rapid fashion, as the states are also doing. So six months have been set aside for  this inquiry, that needs to report back by the 31st of August of this year. That will also give them, based  on the reporting timetables for the state and territory arrangements, a month to consider the  recommendations and the inquiries that have been undertaken at that level.

This isn't an inquiry as to whether the truck should have gone down that road, or gone down some other  road. The states are looking at those operational issues and that's why it's important that there be close  collaboration between this national Royal Commission with the State-based inquiries, particularly that are  occurring in New South Wales, South Australia and in Victoria. And I would hope that that would be the  case, because the more they work together, the quicker they can get the job done, the quicker the

Premiers, Chief Ministers and I and the relevant Emergency Services and Management Ministers around  the country can get on with the recommendations that they would bring forward.

Now, I want to go to one other item on corona before we go to general questions, if it's not inconvenient.  I can confirm that 170 people did depart Japan and they've arrived back in Australia at Darwin and they  have been transferred to Howard Springs. I can confirm the Australian Embassy in Tokyo continues to  provide consular support to 47 passengers in Japan who have tested positive to the coronavirus, the  Covid-19 virus, as well as those who chose to remain behind in Japan and those who have opted to finish  their quarantine on the Diamond Princess. So those arrangements have been put in place. I can confirm  that there are still only 15 cases in Australia. But I can also say that 10 of those cases have now recovered.  So we have five who are in an active part of the virus and the containment arrangements that we put in  place as a government continue to be very effective.

Now, as you know, we are reviewing the travel ban on a weekly basis. We'll be doing that again today and  over the course of the next 24 hours, when we have concluded that consideration a statement will be  issued about the next steps. I can say that not a lot has changed between this time when we considered  this issue last week and today. But one of the other things that we're also looking very carefully at is the  mitigations and the things we can do to try and minimise the impact on particular sectors, particularly in  the education sector. There's been a lot of discussions going on between the university and school sector  and Minister Tehan and Minister Hunt, and we'll be considering some of those arrangements over the  course of the next 24 hours as well.

So it continues to present a significant challenge. The good news is, if you can call it that, is that we're  getting better data now because of the number of cases that exist outside mainland China and that is  another set of data that can be used by the researchers and by the medical experts who are advising the  government. That's giving us a clearer insight on the severity of the virus and issues like mortality rates  and how that compares into intensified zones like Wuhan where the mortality rate outside of Wuhan,  particularly outside of China, are far less than what we're seeing in those places. And particularly when  you remove the impact of the Diamond Princess, which was a particularly significant cohort group, which  was skewing the broader international numbers, we can get a better sense of what the threat and impact  of this virus is going forward, because we have- first priority, whether it's bushfires or coronavirus or  anything else, health and welfare of Australians is the first priority. We're also very mindful though of the  significant economic impacts of this virus, but that's not restricted to Australian that is happening globally.  Happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, isn't this Royal Commission about justifying your argument in the dispute  with New South Wales in early January, about sending in the reservists and also about showing the states  haven't done enough on hazard reduction, isn't it about saying the states aren’t up to it and in particular,  New South Wales? Justifying your position?

PRIME MINISTER: No, it's not Andrew. It’s got nothing to do with that. That's a pretty cynical view. What  it is about is ensuring that the Commonwealth and the States have clear, clear understandings of the legal  arrangements that enable the Commonwealth to act, for the states and territories to act, for us to work  together. I'm not making any criticisms of the states and territories. I was pretty clear about that in my  opening statement. We're working together with the states and territories. When you have a devastating  impact of the Black Summer fires that we've had. You've got to learn the lessons and you've got to look  at the ways you can do things better. And when we moved to put 6,500 Defence Force personnel in boots  on the ground, we did that in a constitutional grey zone but with the great permission also of the states

and territories so those issues didn't arise. So I'd expect Mark Binskin as a former CDF to know what the  sensitivities and the legal issues are here and what the practical issues are, this is about assisting us all,  Andrew, to ensure that we can make Australians more safe in longer, hotter, drier summers in the future.  It's not about conflict. It's about action and it's about making people safe.

JOURNALIST: But you believe that New South Wales were recalcitrant, they did the wrong thing, don’t  you, that's your personal view?

PRIME MINISTER: No.

JOURNALIST: So it was okay for them not to request that? Those reservists at that time?

PRIME MINISTER: Andrew, I'm not going to have you put words in my mouth. What I'm saying is we need  to know the answers to these questions. Australians, their safety, needs the answers to these questions  so we can better protect them. It’s not about politics. I know the media likes to focus on politics, obsessed  by it, but Australians are interested in their safety. And this national Royal Commission is about their  safety.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how would state of national emergency laws have changed the Defence  Force's involvement in New South Wales during the recent bushfires?

PRIME MINISTER: What we are seeking to understand is how our defence forces can be in a more  proactive position to provide support, not to fight the fires. There is no suggestion here that defence  forces would be trained in fighting fires. The people who fight fires in this country are overwhelmingly our  volunteer fire brigades, supported by state governments, resourced by them, trained by them, run by  them, under their command and control, and they do an amazing job. I think one of the clear lessons from  the recent disaster has been that  where we've been able to get those Defence Force personnel in more  quickly and more promptly, then that has provided great relief and comfort to those communities. And I  don't think the states and territories have any issues with that at all. And so this just enables, I think, a  more effective partnership.

JOURNALIST: Would these laws have seen then come into New South Wales, though, into fighting that or  being involved in that effort sooner?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, look, I think that's a retrospective analysis that the commission will certainly look  at, as they should. But what's more important-

JOURNALIST: What's your view?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, this is why I've commissioned a national Royal Commission. I'm interested in them  doing the work and providing that advice. I'm doing this because I want them to inform the answers to  those questions, appropriately. And I've asked a former judge, a former Chief of the Defence Forces and  a scientist, a professor who has experience in dealing with climate change adaptation. So these are experts  who can give us all, shed a lot of light on this. Working with what the states and territories are doing, I  think it’ll help us, give us a lot of answers to help make people safer in the future.

JOURNALIST: But you were frustrated with New South Wales weren’t you?



PRIME MINISTER: No, I’m going to let you be frustrated for one second Andrew and let PVO get a question  in.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, would you like to see the Royal Commission hear evidence from the former  Fire Chiefs who tried to warn you about the impending catastrophe before it happened but couldn't get  access?

PRIME MINISTER: It's up to them who they call, and how they call and when they run their meetings and  how they run their hearings, they have the powers to conduct those open hearings. And that'll be a matter  for the royal commission.

JOURNALIST: But do you think they should hear from them?

PRIME MINISTER: I don't give the Royal Commission a running guidance on how to, they run their  commission. That's for them to do. It's an independent Royal Commission. The idea that the Prime  Minister would somehow be seeking to direct them in any way like that I think would be highly  inappropriate. It's up to them.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister is 6 months enough for this inquiry, given the devastation of this summer's  bushfires?

PRIME MINISTER: Well it’s the same length of time that has been done for the state inquiries. And they'll  be looking at a lot of operational matters in particular. It's important that we get this done quick, because  we need to ensure that we have advice coming back to us, particularly as we go into next season. There's  already been an enormous amount of work that has been done here by previous Royal Commissions. And  one of the things they've been tasked to do under this terms of reference is to effectively audit the  implementation of those recommendations. And I am aware that there's been a lot of good work already  done in the research community and scientific community on those issues. So I think they'll be able to  draw on that quite readily and to be able to move forward into the other areas of the inquiry.

JOURNALIST: Would you give evidence yourself if you've called upon? Do you anticipate that occurring?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, actually, it's, it's not that usual, but the royal commissioner has those powers.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I know you're damned if you do and damned if you don't in some respects  but-

PRIME MINISTER: No surely not.

JOURNALIST: But did you think, did you, did you think really hard about whether to go down the royal  commission path or not? You know, this idea of having so many royal commissions, a lot of people wanted  it. Some people didn't.

PRIME MINISTER: I did. I thought very deeply about this as we were actually working through the recovery  arrangements. And let's not forget, as I said, a state of disaster declared on the Thursday in Victoria,  reservists called out compulsorily for the first time ever on the Saturday. On Monday, the National

Bushfire Recovery Agency had been stood up, it had a head and it had a budget of $2 billion dollars. More  than half of that had already been committed in a matter of weeks soon after that. At the same time, I  was also considering how we needed to move to the next stage of learning from what had been a  devastating bushfire crisis that had resulted in the loss of many, many lives. And those lives lost, whether  there were those who were fighting the fires or those who were the victims of them, deserve these  answers and their families, they deserve these answers and they deserve it at that level. And so I believed  it was important to establish something at that level, at the right time. I didn't want it to begin while  particularly the agencies were very involved in the direct bushfire fighting response. And I think both the  states, particularly New South Wales and Victoria, and ourselves, we didn't rush to putting this together,  but we knew it would be necessary. And so coming to the view it was then about, well, what should it be  focussed on? It doesn't need to overlap. I don't believe does, with this terms of reference with what is  being done at the state level. What it's doing is trying to understand from the national perspective - what  are the things that nationally the federal government should be focussed on, in how it responds? And  they fall into three areas, as I said one is whether there should be a national state of emergency at a  statutory level that engages particular powers for responses, and certain responsibilities, and there need  to be clear safeguards about how they can be used. That will have implications for our defence forces and  how they prepare and their command structure on these issues as well. And I flagged that when I spoke  at the Press Club.

The second one is, how can we ensure as a federal government that nationally Australians can have a  greater sense of confidence that things like hazard reduction targets are being met and are being  measured on the same basis, as well as the many other practices that are managed at a state level that  they are meeting standards and they are reporting against them and Australians can have that confidence,  that sunlight is a very good way of doing that.   And the third area, is to acknowledge that we are living in hotter, drier, longer summers. And that means  building our climate resilience both in responsiveness and preparedness, as well as the longer term  arrangements we need to do with adaptation. So that's what we have to focus on, and this Royal  Commission will assist me greatly and the rest of the Cabinet, in responding to those issues, as I believe it  will support COAG and the leaders of the states and territories.

JOURNALIST: What's the cost, what's the cost of the royal commission?

PRIME MINISTER: That's still being finalized. But to give you a guide, the 12 month cost of the Banking  Royal Commission was just over $50 million, this is going for about half that time.

JOURNALIST: Just on the issue of coronavirus,

PRIME MINISTER: Sure.

JOURNALIST: The Australians remaining in Wuhan are desperate to get out, why isn't it possible to arrange  another evacuation flight just as you have for the Aussies in Japan?

PRIME MINISTER: Well as I said at the time on the first flight, I said we wouldn't be in a position to  guarantee a second one. We were able to achieve that. We've just finished a third flight this time from  Japan, and that has been quite an undertaking, and to the AUSMAT team and anyone else who's been  involved with that, again Qantas, the amazing job they've done, to Australian Border Force in standing up  Howard Springs and how that's being managed, I mean, this has been an extraordinary Australian effort  here. But as as seamlessly as that has has been able to be undertaken make no mistake about its

complexity, make no mistake about the complexity of getting into these areas and the various  arrangements you need to put in place with those authorities. So at this point, we don't have a plan to do  a third flight. We don't have that plan currently. But as I say, the National Security Committee is meeting  every couple of days. We'll meet again today, on this matter in particular and consider particularly the  issue of the ongoing travel ban. But that may not result in a firm conclusion today. There may be further  that is needed before a statement is issued on that matter.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you believe security agencies such as the AFP need the help of the  Australian Signals Directorate to hunt down paedophile and serious criminals online?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I'll tell you, I've always said that what happens in the real world, should happen  in the digital world. Now, if I thought someone was abusing a child somewhere, I’d kick the door down,  I'd go and try and rescue that child. And so those who want to abuse children shouldn't get to be able to  hide in the internet. And if they're doing it, I'm going to use every tool at my disposal to try and protect  that child.

JOURNALIST: So do you, what tools do security agencies currently lack when it comes to finding those  criminals?

PRIME MINISTER: They'll get what they need to protect the kids. Thank you very much.

[END]

Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

Press Office of the Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Prime Minister, Canberra





