ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

PODCAST INTERVIEW

THE GUARDIAN PODCAST WITH KATHARINE MURPHY

FRIDAY, 14 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Opposition during the coronavirus pandemic; holding the Government

to account; gaps between what the Government says and what they deliver; Labor’s

values; Labor’s platform; the need for manufacturing to occur in Australia; energy

policy; Eden-Monaro by-election; national cabinet process; economic recovery from

coronavirus pandemic; climate change; Labor’s constructive role during the

coronavirus pandemic; next federal election.



KATHARINE MURPHY, HOST: Hello, lovely people of the podcast and welcome to the

show. You are with Katharine Murphy and the show is Australian Politics Live. And with me

in the pod cave is someone who has missed their cue.



ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Oh, that was

a cue?



MURPHY: Yes. That was a cue.



ALBANESE: Anthony Albanese.



MURPHY: Welcome. Thank you for coming on.



ALBANESE: Thanks for having us, Katharine.



MURPHY: There is a load of stuff to talk about, but I want to start with something that is

slightly left-field, but I suspect might be a common experience of both of us in the strange

times of a pandemic. I have been very conscious, because, obviously, the journalists need

to keep governments accountable, that is very important, hence the name ‘journalist’. Also,

opposition, hence in the name, need to keep governments accountable. But I've just

noticed there's a real difference among readers at the moment. There are readers who

want accountability 24/7, all the questions asked, all the time. And then there are other

readers who express some discomfort with this. I had a note from a guy this week, lovely

bloke, said to me, ‘Why don't you write something positive and affirming?’ And it was hard

to know how to respond to that because, how do you write something positive and

affirming from my vantage point? Anyway, long preamble. Opposition in the time of

COVID, how do you find it?



ALBANESE: Well, it is not business as usual. And today is, of course, the 75th

anniversary of the end of World War Two. That was a time whereby the country came

together and united. And everyone was focused in one direction. And to some extent, I

think there's an analogy with how people feel now. People are anxious, they're concerned,

they want governments to succeed. Because they know that it will have a direct impact on

their health and on their standard of living if they don't. So, it isn't the normal political

environment.



MURPHY: And that's the point. So, people want governments to succeed, right? So, then

where does that put you in the firmament?



ALBANESE: I think what that does is mean that we have to be constructive. So, we have

to be prepared to hold the Government to account, even if that is sometimes

uncomfortable, even if sometimes we say, ‘No, you should be all singing from the same

song sheet’. And so, we have done that. Put forward constructive ideas. Some of which

have been taken up, some of which haven't. But I think that's the key of what people are

looking for. But it is difficult. There are some people, including some of our base, who just

want us to criticise everything, every day. But others will say to me, ‘Good on you for

working together’. The slogan in terms of. ‘We're all in this together’ is more than a slogan.

It is actually something that we need to do. And to my mind, one of the things that we've

tried to do is to point out that where the Morrison Government has got things right, it's

because they have, in some areas, done things which are deeply uncomfortable for them.

They have recognised that there is such a thing as society. The whole spirit of collective,

basically, recognising that we are all interrelated. There is such a thing as society. We do

have to look after each other. We do have to look after the vulnerable as an end in itself.

But also, if we don't, there are consequences for everyone. So, for example, putting

homeless people up in hotels, not something that would be at the top of the Liberal Party

agenda as a matter of course. It has also meant that in the way that the Parliament has

dealt with the economic packages, we have said very clearly upfront that we will support

the packages whilst reserving our right to be critical of a range of measures, as we have, in

some cases being successful in terms of wage subsidies being adopted, in other cases,

like superannuation, not being successful. But not being in a position to block all of the

changes is something that I think most people have understood. The idea that we would,

for example, when the wage subsidies and JobSeeker both had in them end time dates of

the end of September and Scott Morrison was talking about snap-back, we clearly

indicated that we were concerned about that. But to vote against it would have meant that

none of it happened. There were no wage subsidies, there would have been many more

people on the unemployment queue. And after all, wage subsidies were something that

Labor argued for, and indeed, the Coalition opposed at the very beginning of this

pandemic.



MURPHY: You mentioned some feedback, right? That people want the Government to

succeed and others want different things. Obviously, during this pandemic, the whole

structure of governance that Scott Morrison set up, the national cabinet with the premiers,

was designed from the get go to exclude opposition leaders. That was the price of entry for

the premiers in the middle of March when they had that frenzied conversation in the

football stadium back then? Yes, we will create this sort of unity government, for want of a

better term, but no opposition leaders. So, the whole structure is designed to exclude you.

When you get out and about in the community, are people listening to your messages? Are

they conscious that you're participating in the debate? Because I'm very conscious that the

structure of the governance excludes you. So, what's the feedback?



ALBANESE: Look, honest assessment is that it is more difficult for us to cut through in the

current climate. That's just a fact. And that can be a source of frustration when people say

things like, ‘Why haven't you raised the issues with aged care?’, an issue that I've been

raising each and every day. When people say, ‘Well, what have you contributed?’, it can

be frustrating if you look at the measures that we said should happen that Scott Morrison

resisted. Everything from travel issues, we shut down China, but people were streaming in

from the US and other places, then spreading out to the respective regional cities, or other

capital cities, through the major capital city airports without even temperature testing. We

were raising that issue. We were raising the need to test more people. We were raising the

issue of lockdowns and the need to lock things down when he was opposing it. Scott

Morrison was opposing school closures. He was opposing the border closures and was

particularly critical only of Labor premiers in particular in WA and Queensland. And then

when Gladys Berejiklian close down the borders, no problem. We raised the issue, of

course, of wage subsidies, paid pandemic leave, the issue of snap-back we were critical

of, Parliament as well where originally, of course, Scott Morrison cancelled Parliament for

six months. On all of those issues, we have pursued our agenda and changed the

Government's view. Now, we haven't got a lot of credit for that. Well, so be it. Our job is to

make a practical difference to people's lives. And we said that you have to look after

health, and then you have to look after the economic consequence of looking after the

former. Because it was inevitable that there would be an economic cost to making sure

that health concerns were front and centre.



MURPHY: Again, you say it's frustrating at times, and you haven't got a lot of credit, but so

what? Because this is a crisis and Labor is showing up to be as constructive as it's

possible to be while raising issues that you think are legitimate in terms of flaws in the

Government’s strategy, right? But when you’re in the pub, well not that you are, but you

know what I mean. When you are wandering about, what do people say to you? Have they

heard your messages, or have they not heard your messages? I'm genuinely curious about

this.



ALBANESE: It's mixed so that people who are less engaged in politics are very positive. I

think they recognise that we are trying to be constructive, consistent with what I've said

about being the Labor Leader, not the Opposition Leader. They recognise that we've been

out there raising issues of concern. And the feedback is quite positive. The truth is that

some of the base who want us to oppose everything, ‘Why don't you just vote against

everything?’ or, ‘It's the job of the Opposition to oppose’ is a view out there. And I

understand it, I get it. And in part, people are frustrated as well. They can see that, your

reference to the national cabinet, they can see that the national leader meets with the state

leaders. It doesn't actually have the authority of a cabinet process, of course, as we all

know. Then Scott Morrison does a press conference and says what the state leaders have

all agreed to. It is Gladys Berejiklian and Daniel Andrews, who were arguing for

restrictions, like on schools, for example, is a big source of disagreement with the Federal

Government early. The Federal Government, I was contacting Scott Morrison directly

about my experience of going to Sydney Airport and being shocked, frankly, that people

were waiting in the Rex lounge to go to various regional centres throughout New South

Wales who had just got off planes from the US, from the Philippines, from wherever,

without so much as a temperature check.



MURPHY: And how did he respond?



ALBANESE: Well, he said that it was all okay. That was what they were saying at the time

in terms of the medical advice. It didn't pass the common-sense test for me that those

international borders were so porous. And of course, we know what happened with Ruby

Princess as well. So, this is a Federal Government whereby I think over a period of time,

there are a range of characteristics that were there before the pandemic, that the

pandemic isn't hiding. One of those is the gap between what it promises and what it

actually delivers. Another is its capacity to play the blame game. Since 1901, the

Commonwealth are responsible for our borders. How the Ruby Princess circumstance,

they think they can get away with saying, 'It's nothing to do with us', even though there

were federal officials on there. Scott Morrison blocking federal officials from giving

evidence to the inquiry that's been set up by the New South Wales Liberal Government is

quite extraordinary. I gave a vision statement in the Parliament before what was supposed

to be Budget Day in May. And I really thought when we were putting that together, that this

would be our statement before Josh Frydenberg stood up the next day and outlined a plan

going forward. So, we had in that, the talk about the need to have industry policy and

energy policy. We spoke about public housing and social housing investment. We spoke

about secure work and how the casualisation of the workforce had exposed some of the

weaknesses in the economy. The decline of manufacturing had been exposed by the fact

that we didn't have PPE, personal protective equipment, and other basic things here. That

we had to change what we were manufacturing as the pandemic was happening. And yet

from the Government we’ve had nothing. Essentially, it's back to 'leave it to the market'.

Even industrial relations changes, emergency measures, which unions cooperated with,

Scott Morrison said he would set up a dialogue and he was going to consult. Remember

when Sally McManus was besties with Christian Porter and they were going to sit down?

And now what we see is them trying to impose, essentially, some of the more emergency

level IR changes at the expense of the unions, including the companies that are posting

record profits, which some of them are at the moment.



MURPHY: You've outlined a list of problems there. Problems in the response. Problems in

the way things have been implemented. The gap, as you put it, between what the

Government says and what it delivers. You know, these things are reasonably obvious at

close range. But yet, the Prime Minister maintains a personal approval rating in the order

of 65 per cent, which any leader would kill for, really, in any circumstances.



ALBANESE: But which most leaders have got.



MURPHY: Well, that's absolutely right. Although, both Daniel Andrews and Gladys

Berejiklian have come off their peaks during the pandemic. Funnily enough, Andrews is

holding up relatively well given what's happening in Victoria. But I'm just making a point,

right? Morrison has an approval rating in that order. And you guys are, as we've been

exploring in this conversation, not through want of effort, but structurally locked out of a

normal political condition. I mean, that's a stupid word. But you know what I mean? It's like,

it's not political as usual, Parliament's not meeting, all of that sort of stuff. So, then the

question becomes for the Opposition Leader, how do you respond? Do you just chip away

on issues and just assume the cycle corrects itself? Do you muscle-up because, obviously,

Labor has been much more, I agree, I think you've been chipping away the whole time. But

there has been an acceleration, particularly over the last couple of weeks, on aged care,

which I think most people are not seeing. Because you are kind of locked out for reasons

we've been discussing, right? You must run these ideas through your head all the time,

Anthony, in terms of how you position yourself with all of these complexities, right? Some

people want us to oppose everything. Some people want us to be a government of national

unity. We keep saying these things, we don't get credit for them. How do you put this all

together? What is the approach?



ALBANESE: Sure, look, if it was easy, then I wouldn't be the Opposition Leader. The truth

is, though, that I think that the values which are seeing us through the pandemic, where

things are going right, are Labor values. And they're the values that will see us through the

recovery as well. Recognising the power of government to make a difference to people's

lives. Recognising that no one should be left behind in the pandemic, but no one held back

during the recovery as well. So, I think a massive mistake a few weeks ago, I think that

exposed the real thinking, was when Josh Frydenberg said that his inspiration for the

recovery were Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan.



MURPHY: The Prime Minister got a bit cranky with him for saying that.



ALBANESE: Because someone actually said something. Most of what Scott Morrison has

been doing is not saying much. But the prejudices of the Coalition are all there. Why is it

that the art sector has been left behind? Why is it that the university sector has been left

behind? And even when the Prime Minister speaks about art, it's straight off of a focus

group. I mean, everything is market-tested. And we had the polling company that works for

the Liberal Party in Tasmania actually doing a poll about whether Teddy Sheean should be

given a VC, even though there'd been a recommendation by the independent tribunal who

clearly found that should have happened. Everything's market-tested, even the names of

JobKeeper, JobSeeker, HomeBuilder, etc. When you look at the actual delivery, in terms of

HomeBuilder, for example, most states can't even apply for it. The idea that there'll be all

this additional investment is, I think, just plain wrong. Because people don't have $150,000

in a bottom drawer to suddenly renovate their home. So, I think it's a matter of just staying

the course, being clear about what Labor values are. And one of Labor's values is, as well,

to be constructive. And sometimes that is more difficult. Some people say that the model of

an Opposition Leader is Tony Abbott. No. That's the model of a destructive, reactionary

Opposition Leader who doesn't care about institutions, who doesn't care about the impact

that it has on going forward. And what's more, if you behave like that in opposition, you will

behave like that when you come into government. I think that's one of the problems with

this Government is that they came into office in 2013, knowing what they were against,

which was Labor and everything we stood for, but they didn't have a plan to actually

govern. I think I'm someone who listens to people, engages with people, but also acts on

gut instinct. It's the right thing to do to be constructive at this point in time. Now, there is a

bit of a political cost to doing that. But we're about saving lives too. We are about

minimising the impact. Because one of the things about the economic consequences of

this pandemic is that it's uneven. The people who get hurt are the people who are the most

vulnerable, they are the people in the most marginalised employment sectors. We cannot

dismiss that. It's the people who were queuing in those long queues outside Centrelink

who we have a responsibility to represent.



MURPHY: Okay, you've sort of semi-crystallised the question here, really, with that last

description. You say you're not going to be Tony Abbott. I mean, you didn't say that it puts

a cancer in the system, but that it creates consequences beyond the election cycle in

which you want to dominate, right? But then we're going to get to a point in the election

cycle, aren't we, where you've talked about Scott Morrison's capacity to market test, to put

pleasing sounding ideas out into the marketplace, and in fact, reflecting back the country to

itself. That's what Morrison is very good at. He's a mirror. It's hard to get a glove on him,

my set up is different, but I'm talking about opposition-ism at this point. It's hard to get a

glove on him because he reflects the country back at itself. So, at a certain point in the

cycle, Labor has basically said, 'I've been constructive as an Opposition Leader, because

I'm a Labor Leader and because the country needs it'. But at a certain point, between now

and the next election, there's going to be pressure in your own show to crash through and

cut through. So, are you saying to me that when that pressure starts to build up in the

system, just because the closer that people get to elections, the more worried people get,

the Government people will be worried, your people will be worried. Pressure will build up

in the system. So, you're saying, as that pressure starts to build up, you will always err on

the side of what the country needs, rather than crashing through to some sort of victory?



ALBANESE: Well, to use your term back, that I think is, in part, I don't fundamentally

disagree with, but to think that through, the idea that the Prime Minister of the country is

just a mirror means that he's just a mirror at a particular point in time. That is something

that explains the Scott Morrison who said no to border closures, school closures, the wage

subsidies, paid pandemic leave, Parliament sitting, and then changing his view. Over a

period of time, it becomes obvious, I think, that what the country needs, and what

leadership is, isn't just reflecting what a focus group says at a particular point in time. It's

about giving the country what it needs. And what it needs is a vision of a future that's more

than just returning to what was there or more than what people have at a particular point in

time. It's actually pointing towards how we build a better Australia. How we take people

forward. And how we create, whether it's the economy, whether it's about social policy,

whether it's about environmental policy, a framework that is about a better Australia. We

need to examine the weaknesses that have been exposed by this pandemic, including the

nature of work. The first vision statement I gave was about jobs and the future of work.

How do we envisage where the economy is going in 10 years’ time, what the opportunities

are there, how we maximise the number of people who will benefit from those

opportunities? If we just deal with the day-to-day 24-hour media cycle, which is the

Morrison model, and what some people would want us to do, then you'll never actually be

able to create that picture or that vision and then set about doing it for how we create an

Australia that is fairer and an Australia that provides opportunity for someone like me, who

is a son of a single mum, grew up in a council house, gets to lead the Labor Party. That's

the sort of opportunity that I want to see for the country. That's what we're doing in the

vision statements. And that's what the platform work and other work that Shadow Ministers

have been doing is as well, laying that groundwork. At the moment, I think a majority of

people out there don't want to hear, 'Okay, what's your vision for 2030?' They want to hear

how we get through the next month.



MURPHY: That was what I was going to ask you. A couple of things on that point.

Basically, you're saying that Labor strongest suit for the next election is presenting a set of

propositions to win the future, for want of a better term, right? That's what you're saying.



ALBANESE: Deal with the present, but in the way that we deal with the present

anticipates the future.



MURPHY: Yes, absolutely. But you've got to have the bandwidth. One, you've got to be

heard. And two, people have got to have the bandwidth to take it on board. Now, I had

Chris Bowen in the studio relatively recently. He said one of his lessons after the election

was Labor's platform was way too big. Heading for the next election, he said, 'I think we

should just have a handful of propositions that we nail, and we explicate rather than being

the government in exile, we should identify some priorities and go for them'. Is that your

view?



ALBANESE: Well, that's what the review found that was adopted unanimously by the ALP

National Executive, undertaken by Jay Weatherill and Craig Emerson. We had 284 fully-costed policies. Now, The Guardian might have run stories.



MURPHY: I think we probably didn't most of them, actually.



ALBANESE: I don't think you did.



MURPHY: No, probably not.



ALBANESE: A whole range of them, people didn't know anything about. And the idea that

when your door-knocking, you say, 'Hi, Katharine. I'm running for Grayndler. Let me run

through this list for you of why you should vote for us', is quite frankly not on.



MURPHY: So, Labor will narrow its focus?



ALBANESE: We will narrow our focus, but it will be a clear vision with a clear outline of

alternatives. One of the things I said was that Labor's policies don't carry over from election

to election. And one of the problems we had was that because in 2013, we got to 2016, we

won some seats. So, we just kept going and added. We didn't actually take a step back.

So, that created an issue for us. But I've said that our values are enduring. What does

Labor stand for? We stand for jobs. Not an economy as the end in itself, but one that works

for people, not the other way around. We stand for opportunity and aspiration, not in a

sense of, 'We're worried about whether a billionaire is paying more or less tax'. The

aspiration that allows kids of working-class people to either get a trade or go to university

or have a better life. People are pretty simple in what they want. Like what my mum

wanted for me and what I want for my son. I want him to have a better quality of life. And

he certainly has had than I had it at his age. And they want healthcare and services to be

available on the basis of need, not on the basis of wealth. We unashamedly are people

who recognise that it's not a bad thing to care for others. There is such a thing as society.

And on the environment, that we need to have action on climate change and that it's an

intergenerational issue.



MURPHY: Let's hit pause there because there is a public conversation that is happening

now with frequency between your Resources spokesman, Joel Fitzgibbon, and the Energy

and Climate Change spokesman, Mark Butler. Fitzgibbon opened the batting by saying

you needed to sue for peace on emissions reduction targets, you needed the short-term

emission or the medium-term emissions reduction target to be the same as the Coalition.

Then, at every opportunity, Fitzgibbon been out making the case for the continuation of

fossil fuels in various forms. That's what he's been saying. Butler has been saying that

we're not going to sue for peace on the medium-term emissions reduction target, and that

you are going to maintain ambition in climate policy. So, who do we believe?



ALBANESE: What we believe is Labor platform. And it has been Labor's vision ever since

we participated, way back in Rio and previous forums that led to the UN Framework

Convention on Climate Change, that it is an existential threat, that we do need to take it

seriously. And that the position that I've outlined is very clear, which is that action on

climate change will actually create jobs and lower energy prices. That we need to take

climate change seriously. I was the Environment and Climate Change spokesperson who

wrote with Kim Beazley, the Climate Change Blueprint in 2006. That is what led to, for

example, the 20 per cent by 2020 renewable energy target. People would agree that has

been the most successful measure.



MURPHY: No, all that's fine. And I'm not asking you about your own record. Because your

own record is clear. You're the Leader of the Labor Party at the moment, and you've got

hammer and tongs happening between two people in shadow portfolios.



ALBANESE: The Labor Party, from time to time, will have people who are out there that

are passionate about policy and about making a difference.



MURPHY: That's fine. I think that there's too much straightjacket in politics. I think there

should be more open discussion about things. But at the end of the day, someone wins,

and someone loses. So, who's going to win and who's going to lose?



ALBANESE: Labor will always take climate change seriously. I've announced the net zero

emissions by 2050. All of the policies that a Labor Government that I lead would implement

would be consistent with that.



MURPHY: So, how about Fitzgibbon saying this week, as he did, that Nev Power, the

chairman of the National COVID Commission, he's produced a report on gas that we

haven't seen, that he is on board with it. Is the Labor Party totally on board with it?



ALBANESE: Well, we haven't even seen the report. It hasn't been released. And it is quite

outrageous that Scott Morrison is the expert at this contracting out. He's contracted out

things to the states through the national cabinet process, he has contracted out industrial

relations reform to a series of committees which the ACTU are participating in. And here

he has contracted out to the NCCC, this body that are being paid by the Commonwealth.

They're not public servants. They all come into their positions with all of their history and all

of their background. So, it's not surprising that a committee chaired by Nev Power would

come up with predictable response. But the Australian people aren't allowed to see it.

Because somehow, this is cabinet in confidence. Bear in mind, I do think that Scott

Morrison has, we were talking before about frustration, I think that Scott Morrison getting

away with having a cabinet committee of one, which is him, so that anything to do with him

is somehow cabinet in confidence is just unbelievable. But here, the fact is that AEMO, the

Australian Energy Market Operator, the people who run the grid, have come up with a 20-year plan, the integrated system plan. Now, under all of the scenarios, what they say is

that by 2040, gas will be about 1 per cent of the total electricity market. The total. That's

what they say. And all of their scenarios suggest that it's renewables with storage that will

make the real difference. That's where the expansion will be, that's where the market will

be. And that, indeed, there's other prospects for green hydrogen and other potentials which

are there. So, gas is an important part of the market. But if you look at where the growth is

going to be, the people who actually run the energy sector, and this is a body established

under COAG, that has continued to operate, hasn't been destroyed by this Government.

And you had, one of the leaks of this report, is the idea of a gas pipeline from the west

coast to the east coast. Now, that is not new. There's nothing new about that. I quite liked

the plans that have been done by, I think, it's The Chaser at one stage had a plan to tilt

Australia, either west-east or north-south, that we can solve the water problem by just

running everything down. We're a big continent. A study was done 18 months ago that

found that it would require billions of dollars of subsidy. So, you'd spend billions of dollars

building this pipeline from the west to the east. It would then require a massive subsidy.

Which is why the market will determine these issues, or should, and then you will end up

with common sense solutions.



MURPHY: Then why is Fitzgibbon out saying, 'We'll accept a report we haven't seen.'?



ALBANESE: Well, the Labor Party's position, I speak for the Labor Party. And the Labor

Party's position is that we examine things based upon the detail. And if the rumours are

right, as well, that this report suggests that gas would be viable at $4 a gigajoule, that's

below the production costs. So, you're looking at, again, an ongoing subsidy.



MURPHY: Tax payers are massively on the hook for keeping gas prices.



ALBANESE: We'll have a look at the detail. But it's very clear that what we actually need

in this country is an energy policy framework. Now, I wrote to Scott Morrison,

constructively. It was a four-page letter. It outlined, I think, a series of principles. What we

would do, what we wouldn't do as well. So, I ruled out nuclear energy for Australia and

made it clear. But what it would do is allow for different targets at particular times to be

implemented based upon, from our perspective, based upon the science and what the

experts told us was required to reach that net zero emissions. Scott Morrison hasn't even

bothered to respond to that. Josh Frydenberg went on radio and TV the next morning at

8am and dismissed it.



MURPHY: I mean, we could keep going. We definitely could, but we shouldn't. Because

we're way over time. You put Kim Beazley in my head, let's end here. I've spoken about

that dynamic within Labor, whether or not everybody can keep their heads ahead of an

election, whether everybody can remain on the same page. A cynical person would say,

we've seen a bit of a beauty parade along the right in your show of people just positioning

themselves for future opportunities. It is all visible, interesting. Kim Beazley, a Labor man,

Labor values, viewed universally as a decent and nice man, was nonetheless run down by

Kevin Rudd in the lead-up to an election. Do you think you will lead Labor to the next

election?



ALBANESE: I know I will. I know that I will. And I know that we will win the next election. I

actually think, in terms of where Labor finds ourselves, in terms of the positioning of where

the debate is, think about the Coalition and what they normally run on. They run on debt

and deficit scare campaigns and how they can run the economy. Well, where's their

surplus? Where is their management of the economy? We've got a million unemployed.

We've got people being left behind. We have no plan from this Government in terms of

energy policy is a good example whereby what business is crying out for, look at the zero

net emissions targets, it is supported by the BCA, by Australian Industry Group.



MURPHY: I think even the Minerals Council support it.



ALBANESE: Everyone except for this this Government where they allow people like Craig

Kelly out there with these cuckoo plans and the Prime Minister won't even dissociated

himself from that. Now, we've already had a test at the peak of what should have been the

Government's powers during a pandemic. We had a by-election. The Government spent

double what we spent on that by-election. They spent pretty close to one and a half million

dollars. You live in Canberra and you could not turn on a TV without getting saturation ads

in the Canberra market, Illawarra, Wagga Wagga, and all in the Eden-Monaro. We had the

retirement of a popular local member in Mike Kelly. We had a new candidate. They were

running the same candidate that they ran just a year ago. So, they could continue on with

the name recognition advantages that come with someone running for the second time.

We had a great candidate in Kristy McBain. But we also had circumstance whereby

because it wasn't near the next federal election, we couldn't say, 'Vote for us and we'll do

this next month'. And we won. We won under circumstances whereby, make no mistake

about the timing of some of the Government's national security announcements that they

made as well, designed to feed in to that campaign, and they couldn't get elected to a seat

which, by the way, on the current boundaries, at no stage, except for when Mike Kelly's

been the candidate, including throughout the Hawke and Keating Governments, does

Labor win Eden-Monaro on the current boundaries. This is a seat where every state seat

within the boundaries is a safe Liberal and National Party seat. Now, if they couldn't

convince people at that time, what that shows is that when people are actually confronted

with thinking through who is best to represent them, as well as the weaknesses, and one of

the issues in that by-election was Scott Morrison's lack of empathy and, frankly, his

contempt for people when he visited places like Cobargo and others and forced them to

shake his hand in circumstances which people may well be reminded of. We certainly did

remind them of them during the by-election. People voted Labor.



And during the next election campaign, it will be about two things. One, it will be about the

pandemic, yes. And in that we will be able to say that we played a constructive role. Yes,

wage subsidies helped minimise the economic damage, but we were the ones who

advocated it. Yes, in terms of healthcare. We were the ones who were arguing for stricter

controls. We are the ones raising aged care and saying there was a need to have a plan

for aged care. We were the ones who argued for an Aged Care Royal Commission for

some time before it was actually announced. All of those issues. So, it will be about the

pandemic. But I think on that, we will be in a position to put forward our case that we made

a positive difference to people's lives. But people vote about the future. And in the future, it

is Labor that will have a plan for jobs. We'll have a plan for secure work. We'll have a plan

for climate change. We'll have a plan for regional economic development. For social policy

that doesn't just leave people behind. For advancing social issues like what is happening

with recognition of First Nations people, of those issues as well. And so, we will be able to

put forward a positive agenda. And this Government that will lose Mathias Cormann in

December, that will have, I think, one or two other ministers running for the hills between

now and the next election. At the next election, they will have been there for three terms

and almost nine years, or maybe nine years, depending upon the timing of when it is. What

was the point of this Government? Where is their economic reform, social reform,

environmental reform? They still won't have an energy policy. They'll still be blundering



around trying to just run scare campaigns. And I think that the Australian people will vote

for a positive alternative. And I intend to present that alternative whenever the election is

called.



MURPHY: Well, you can't get clearer than that. Thank you very much for coming on the

show. Thank you to Miles Martignoni, the executive producer, and to Hannah and others

who always helped with cutting the show. We'll be back next week.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053



