

TONY BURKE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ARTS  MANAGER OF OPPOSITION BUSINESS  MEMBER FOR WATSON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT   RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RADIO NATIONAL WITH FRAN KELLY  MONDAY, 30 MARCH 2019

SUBJECTS: Wage subsidy; recalling Parliament.

FRAN KELLY, HOST: The Opposition is urging the Federal Government to get on with it,  to give desperate employers a final chance to stay in business and to stop the sweeping  layoffs which have seen hundreds of thousands of people join the unemployment queues.  Tony Burke is the Shadow Minister for Industrial Relations. Tony Burke welcome back to  breakfast.

TONY BURKE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS: Hi Fran.

KELLY: Well you said yesterday the government has got to get on with it. It seems like  they heard you. The Treasurer will announce his wage subsidy scheme today. Do you  welcome that?

BURKE: Oh absolutely. I mean we want to see the details but the concept of people being  able to keep their relationship with their workplace is really important. It's important for  them now. And it's really important when we get on the other side of the outbreak months  down the track. I do take issue with the argument that the Treasurer just put on your  program, where he claimed they'd been working on this for some time. It was only Friday  when Mathias Cormann was in the news, ruling it out and the government spent weeks  ridiculing this. I'm glad they seem to have got closer now, because we might have been  able to avoid some of the scenes that we saw over the last few weeks. There are some  challenges I've got with the design. But the fact that they are now acknowledging that we  need to keep people in touch with their workplace, that's a really good step forward.

KELLY: We don't know the elements of the design yet and the Treasurer has you know  had said stay tuned to the press conference later today. But the main point is to keep  workers, employers and employees linked. Effectively, does it need to ensure that all those  people who have been laid off from their employers, all those retail workers, all sorts of  casuals, hospitality workers - that they remain effectively employed on the books of their  company or their restaurant or their cafe or whatever it is. Is that is that how it should work

or it must work in order for this to be effective?

BURKE: There's three elements you need to have. The first is exactly what you've said - it  needs to be conditional on keeping people on. The first sort of business support scheme  the government had was one where the employer that sacked all their staff got the exact  same benefit as the person who kept them on. So it needs to be conditional and it sounds  like it will be. The second question is who gets it? And the third will be for business, is it  enough? On who gets it, I am concerned at the moment that they're only talking about full  timers. You know, more than a third of the workforce now is part-time. Of the part time, and  that covers casuals as well, of that part of the workforce more than two thirds of them are  women. A significant number of those people work more than one part-time job. So they're  working full time hours but across a number of employers. Now from the sounds of what's  been leaked to the papers today those workers are going to get nothing. And if you think  about the industries that have done the big shutdowns - retail, hospitality and the like -  these are industries where you have a minority of people in full-time work. We want to  make sure that this reaches all workers and that has to include people in insecure work,  people in the gig economy, and we've got to find a way of helping sole traders as well.

KELLY: Okay we will wait and see how extensive the government’s plan is when the  Treasurer announces it. But reportedly, The Australian reports today, that the amount  being considered or to be announced is around $1500 a fortnight. That's more than the  current payment, the coronavirus supplements payment that the government announced,  and it comes in at around, pretty close to 70 per cent of the net median wage. But it's a lot  less than unions and employees were pushing for. Would $1500 a fortnight be enough to  stop workers being stood down do you think?

BURKE: Well you need to put it in the context of an employer who's lost all their revenue.  And an employer who's lost all their revenue, when it's an 80 per cent or above subsidy  you can imagine a large number of employers saying “I don't want to lose contact with my  workforce, I'm going to find a way to make this work”. When you get a number that comes  in at less than half of average weekly earnings then you've got to say, in the context that  employers are facing, there'll be some where this makes a difference in being able to keep  the workforce on. And that's to be welcomed and that's really good. But there will be a  large number of employers that look at the figure that's in the papers today and say well it's  nice to have the help but I still can't afford it. And you know that's before you get to the  ones that have a high percentage of people who are not employed full-time.

KELLY: You're talking about businesses that haven’t laid off their workforce yet, that this  kind of subsidy might not be enough to help them keep them on.

BURKE: That's right. That's right. And it will also, for some who have laid off … I mean we  still don't know the design. So there's are some issues here where we've just got to see  how the government designs it. But the test of what they do today will be the number of  employers who can now afford to keep people on, and the number of workers who are in  fact eligible. Because there are big holes in what's been described today. I welcome it to  the extent that it's there but I'm worried about how many people will be left behind.

KELLY: You're listening to RN Breakfast, our guest is Tony Burke, the Shadow Industrial  Relations Minister. The Treasurer did confirm, I mean this package is going to cost a lot,  it's going to have a huge price tag, and the Treasurer has confirmed it would have to be  legislated. Which will take some time. Because you're the Manager of Opposition Business



you would know that Parliament's not due to resume until August. Can Parliament be  recalled before that? Could this be sorted out between the leaders without recalling  Parliament?

BURKE: If it requires legislation then it requires Parliament. And the government always  has the power to recall Parliament and we've been encouraging them to do so. So when  we -

KELLY: But does recalling Parliament require calling everyone back, or can you recall  Parliament and just have four people from each side. Basically the leadership group?

BURKE: You can do it with as few as 31 now in terms of the House of Reps. The Senate’s  a different number, but all you need, so long as you've got the quorum, you can recall the  Parliament. We made some changes to standing orders last Monday, supported by both  sides. So you can now do it with very few people. Basically the number of people who are  within easy driving distance gets you to quorum, so this can be done. And as I say - if this  had been ready to go two weeks ago there may be a large number of people who found  themselves in Centrelink queues and had their lives turned upside down when this didn't  need to happen. And the whole period the government was ridiculing the idea and right  through to last Friday when they were still ruling it out, there’s lives turned upside down in  the interim. As soon as the legislation is ready to go they should be recalling Parliament  and we'll get it done.

KELLY: All right Tony Burke thank you very much for joining us.

BURKE: Great to be back on the program.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ADAM GARTRELL 0427 008 525



