





SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Deputy Leader of the Government in the  Senate Senator for South Australia



TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Interview on ABC Radio Adelaide with Ali Moore.        Topics: COVID-19, Trans-Tasman Bubble, New Zealand arrivals, Hotel quarantine.  20/10/2020  07:21AM

Ali Moore: Let’s dive into this Trans-Tasman bubble. The first New Zealanders were touching down on  Friday, but originally the bubble, well, it is only supposed to have been between New Zealand, New South  Wales, and Northern Territory, but what’s happened is some Kiwis have touched down and then hopped off to  somebody- somewhere else. So, in fact, we now have five people who travelled from New Zealand in hotel  quarantine at their own expense after travelling to Adelaide Airport in recent days. Simon Birmingham is the  Tourism Minister. Good morning.

Simon Birmingham: Good morning, Ali. Good morning to your listeners, and good luck to the Years 12’s.

Ali Moore: Yes. Look, has this just been an absolute mess and a complete lack of forward thinking about  what would actually happen, in all practicality, when people came from New Zealand?

Simon Birmingham: No, Ali, it hasn't. We've had New South Wales and the Northern Territory open up  freely to two arrivals from New Zealand, and they've done so on the basis that New Zealand now just has one  active case, and a three-day rolling average of new cases is zero. So, they've done so on good, sound health  grounds. Now, for other states, they are able to treat arrivals from New Zealand just the same as they're  treating arrivals from any other country of the world. And so, if people land in New South Wales, spend 14  days in New South Wales, and then come on to SA, well then, of course they'll be treated like an arrival from  New South Wales. But if they land in New South Wales and decide they're going to head straight to SA, well  then they’ll be treated like anybody who happened to arrive on any other international flight that arrives in SA.

Ali Moore: And are you sure that the five people who are waking up in hotel quarantine here today knew  all that?

Simon Birmingham: Yes, and I am sure, having caught a good number of domestic flights myself to and  from Canberra in recent times, that there are ample warnings for individuals as you are going through airports,  getting on planes, booking your ticket, logging in to get your boarding pass; at every step of the journey there  are basically warnings telling you that you travel between Australian states at your own peril at present, that  there are different border restrictions in place, and you need to check in advance the conditions that will apply  to you.

Ali Moore: But do you understand, say, the anger from- certainly, let's look at the Victorian Premier and  Daniel Andrews, you know, he's got 65 of these 100 Kiwis that have come over since this travel border  opened, and he specifically did not want to be involved in this and have these people come, considering what  he’s dealing with.

Simon Birmingham: Let’s step through this then. The AHPPC, the body that brings together the Nicola  Spurrier’s of the country, together with Brendan Murphy and the team right across the country, including the  Victorian Chief Public Health Officer, have discussed this and signed off on the plans before it all happened.  So, every single state and territory was aware; there were no excuses. In the case of Victoria, Dan Andrews’  anger is quite feigned and pathetic, because he actually has now indicated they're free to come with no  quarantine. So, unlike South Australia, where there is a quarantine being put in place - and people can argue



the merits of that, given the very low case numbers in New Zealand, as I say, one active case for the entirety  of New Zealand, and a rolling average at present of zero new cases a day. But Victoria is saying they can  come and move freely. So, Dan Andrews knew in advance, and actually clearly has no problem with them  arriving, despite the rhetoric.

Ali Moore: Okay. So then, just step me through this then. So, the New Zealand travel bubble that New  South Wales and the Northern Territory signed up to, that means that Kiwis could come here and land in New  South Wales and not have to quarantine - right?

Simon Birmingham: Yes, correct.

Ali Moore: Okay. We have an open border with New South Wales. Why, then, do these Kiwis have to  quarantine here in South Australia?

Simon Birmingham: Well, that's a matter for the South Australian Government, they're choosing to apply  the quarantine regime there. But as I say, Nicola Spurrier was part of the AHPPC deliberations, as were the  public health officers from each of the states and territories. So, in the end, everything about COVID is risk  management. And I assume that those in the other states who said, well, we're not going to sign up to receive  direct flights and have the Kiwis come and land. But they realised that the risk, in terms of if somebody  happens to drive across the border, having arrived from New Zealand where there are essentially no cases,  just the one active case in the entire country, the risk then if they land in New South Wales, are that  determined to get to South Australia that they drive across the border, is a very, very, very low risk. And I  assume that's why the health officers signed off on it.

Ali Moore: So, do you think the South Australian Government is doing the right thing by telling these New  Zealand tourists or visitors that they have to do the 14 days here?

Simon Birmingham: Well, look, the ones who arrived when the rules were in place saying that people  needed to quarantine, clearly shouldn't have arrived or should have known that they were going into  quarantine. And so, in that regard, the South Australian Government's upholding its laws and it's doing the  right thing. But I do hope that SA continuously reviews that. And we have a circumstance where New Zealand  has one case across the entire country, and has continuously been recording zero new cases a day. And so, I  think that is a very, very strong grounds for South Australia to think about joining New South Wales and the  Northern Territory in allowing New Zealanders free entry to SA. And I hope that we will see, pretty soon, New  Zealand to reciprocate for states like South Australia that have done just as well as New Zealand, in terms of  managing COVID.

Ali Moore: Well, we do know the South Australian Premier, Steven Marshall, has said that he's going to  look at this connection and what can happen. And we do know that there is a transition meeting today, so  there may be news on this front, and we'll bring it to you here on ABC Radio Adelaide. In the meantime,  Tourism Minister Simon Birmingham, thank you for your time.

Simon Birmingham: Thanks so much, Ali. My pleasure.





Media Contacts  Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.

