LINDA BURNEY MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND SOCIAL SERVICES

MEMBER FOR BARTON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT   RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RIVERINA BREAKFAST WITH SALLY BRYANT  WEDNESDAY, 9 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECT: There are 28 JobSeekers for every job vacancy in regional NSW.

SALLY BRYANT, HOST: Linda Burney is joining me this morning. She’s the opposition  spokesperson for Families and Social Services and also for Indigenous Australians.  She’s the federal member for Barton and she grew up in Whitton. Linda good morning.

LINDA BURNEY, SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND SOCIAL  SERVICES: Good morning Sally.

BRYANT: Linda, is the JobSeeker program too generous?

BURNEY: No, I really reject that idea that it’s too generous. And also reject the view  that it is - the amount of JobSeeker is stopping people from applying for jobs. There are  lots of reasons about why some vacancies do exist, but we do know - and these  numbers are very real - is that it is much more difficult to get a job in the regions than it  is in the cities. In the cities, the average is that there are about 13 positions - sorry, 13  JobSeekers for every position. But when you go to regional Australia, on average,  there's about 28 people on JobSeeker for every single position.

BRYANT: So the comment that was made to us yesterday from Teys was that they  were - had - they had positions vacant, they're unable to fill them. So what do you  believe we should be doing to ensure that positions like that can be filled while still  supporting people who are unable to get work?

BURNEY: Well, you're absolutely right in what you say, JobSeeker - the amount will be  reduced come the end of this month. I think it's going back to an additional $250 over  the base rate of the old Newstart. We do know that the danger - or what Labor is calling  for from the Government is a permanent increase to the rate of JobSeeker. And that  should be announced immediately so that people can actually plan for their future. We  know that the old amount of Newstart which was about $40 a day was an absolute  disincentive for people finding work. The point that you raise Sally about individual  areas like meat works and fruit picking there are - it is much more complex than saying

that JobSeeker is too generous. JobSeeker is not too generous, in fact, the government  needs to increase the base rate permanently.

BRYANT: But then Linda, what would your message be to people who are looking at  the approach of the fruit harvest? They know that they can't get people to come and  pick that fruit, because they're in regional areas. Whereas we say, the jobs are not as  you know, as plentiful, but they still can't get people to come and pick fruit. I mean,  there's got to be a way around this.

BURNEY: Well, I understand that a lot of the fruit picking - people who pick fruit are  people who come in for seasonal work from other countries and obviously that's very  difficult at the moment, and many people that are on particular visas also pick fruit. And  that’s also extremely difficult at the moment with COVID-19. So the idea that just  because you're on JobSeeker that you can uproot your family and yourself and go to a  regional area is not a practical one. And I do think that there is reasons that some  industries that can't find enough workers, they need to look at their industries, they need  to be talking to the government, which does not have, in my view, a jobs plan. There  has been so many cutbacks, particularly in regions, of universities; of infrastructure  projects; of things like TAFE courses. I mean, you would be seeing that in Wagga and  right across the Riverina.

BRYANT: Yeah, some farming groups, are saying people just won't work though.  They're saying that people will not go and seek those jobs. There had in the past been a  sort of a harvest type window where payments are stopped during the local harvest  period? I'm assuming you would not support that.

BURNEY: No, I wouldn't support that at all. I think that compelling people to pick fruit is  not a jobs plan. And the other thing, of course, is that I have a lot to do Sally with people  who are on various Social Security payments and I can tell you that I have not met  anyone that does not want to work because it brings with it purpose and pride and a  self-worth in giving back to the community and that those things are very real.

BRYANT: So then, what is the way forward from this because we're facing a harvest  where as you said, we can’t get people in from overseas. We're not - the backpackers  just aren't there. So what happens to food security?

BURNEY: That's a question that the Government needs to really address. I mean, it's a  very real issue that you're raising and, and raising very appropriately but the  government does - simply does not have a plan, particularly for regions. And that has  been borne out by the statistics.

BRYANT: So Linda, the way forward, how confident are you that we can get a  resolution to this because there would be people who, as you say, they're very nervous

about the prospect of that payment rate dropping back? What do you think the future is  going to hold?

BURNEY: Well, I hope the Government sees fit to announce their intentions whether  they do it in three weeks’ time in the budget speech or preferably sooner. Let people  know what their income is going to be. I mean that the sad fact is that a lot of people  that have become unemployed, and have gone on to JobSeeker as a result of COVID,  are younger youger people, and particularly between the ages of 24 and about 40. We  know that women in the older categories have been very affected by this as well. And  we also know that pre-pandemic, that there were many people who were losing their job  in their 50s and 60s who had very little prospect of getting another job. And that's just  become much harder.

BRYANT: And of course, this will have a knock-on impact on rural and regional  economies because there'll be less disposable income in the community.

BURNEY: Absolutely. Yeah, that's a that's a really important point to make is that with  the winding back or a snapback of - whether it's JobKeeper or JobSeeker, what you're  going to see - and it will  regional businesses and small businesses - is less available money and therefore the  economy will suffer.

BRYANT: Linda Burney, thank you so much for your time this morning.

BURNEY: Thanks Sally.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DARYL TAN 0422 028 222

