afp.gov.au/news-media/media-releases/trio-arrested-authorities-make-large-scale-drug-seizure-nsw-coast

Trio arrested as authorities make large-scale drug  seizure off NSW coast

Tuesday, 18 August 2020, Publish time: 9:04am   This is joint media release from the Australian Federal Police, New South  Wales Police Force and the Australian Border Force.

Editor's note: Update 19 August 2020 - Record Australian  cocaine seizure

A total of 1890 blocks, each weighing approximately one kilogram, have now been  unloaded from the vessel.

One tonne of cocaine has a potential estimated street value of up to $472.5 million.

This 1.8 tonne seizure is now the largest on-shore cocaine seizure in Australia to date,  and would have a potential street value of approximately up to $850.5 million.

Editior's note

• Initial vision - Images and footage are available via Hightail  • Additional vision - Images and footage of drug removal available via Hightail

Australian authorities have made three arrests and seized hundreds of kilograms of  border controlled drugs in a joint investigation involving the interception of a drug-filled vessel off the NSW coast near Newcastle.

The Australian Federal Police (AFP), New South Wales Police Force (NSWPF) and the  Australian Border Force (ABF) commenced the investigation after intelligence was  received regarding a suspicious foreign fishing vessel on 11 August 2020.

The ABF's Maritime Border Command (MBC) located the foreign vessel and tracked its  movements as it headed into Australian waters.

MBC, with the support of law enforcement partners and the Australian Defence Force  (ADF), observed an Australian commercial fishing vessel, the Coralynne, approaching  the foreign vessel and making an alleged at-sea transfer of illicit drugs bound for  Australia.

On 15 August 2020, NSWPF Marine Area Command vessel Nemesis intercepted the  Australian vessel off the Newcastle coast. The Coralynne's three crew members were  arrested and a large amount of border controlled drugs identified in its cargo.  Presumptive testing of the substance returned a positive reading for cocaine.

The Coralynne was towed to NSWPF Marine Area Command in Balmain on Sunday  evening (16 August 2020), where specialised forensic officers are continuing to  examine the vessel and its cargo. While the exact weight and purity of the seized  substance is to be confirmed, investigators will allege the illicit drugs were stored in  the engine room.

The three crew members - a Hong Kong man aged 40 and two Australian males aged  27 and 32 - were screened and COVID-tested by NSW Health before undergoing  decontamination by NSW Fire and Rescue Hazardous Material Response Unit. They

were charged with attempting to import a commercial quantity of border controlled  drugs and fail or refuse to disclose identity as required.

The men appeared before the Sydney Central Local Court yesterday (17 August 2020)  and were refused bail. They will next appear before the same court on 14 October  2020. They face the possibility of life in prison if convicted.

Yesterday (17 August 2020), investigators from the AFP, NSWPF and ABF executed  search warrants in the Sydney suburbs of Chatswood, Zetland and Glenbrook in  connection with the investigation.

AFP Assistant Commissioner Eastern Command Justine Gough said the investigation  shows that authorities continue to work collaboratively to dismantle organised crime  groups and prevent criminal opportunities.

"Our ability to work together using the resources and expertise of each of our agencies  has again prevented the importation of illicit drugs into our community," Assistant  Commissioner Gough said.

"We are committed in our efforts to identify and disrupt illicit drug supply chains and  cause maximum damage to organised crime business models."

NSW Police State Crime Commander, Assistant Commissioner Stuart Smith said that  NSW Police and its law enforcement partners would continue to use all available  resources to disrupt criminal activity.

"Organised criminal syndicates should see this weekend's arrests as a warning, that if  you wish to take advantage of the community through illegal activity in NSW, law  enforcement agencies in Australia will work together to dismantle your operation,"  Assistant Commissioner Smith said.

"The efforts of officers, including those from the Marine Area Command, to tackle 3.5  metre swells to ensure this illicit cargo didn't reach our shores and those we alleged  are responsible were put before the courts should be commended."

Australian Border Force Regional Commander for NSW Danielle Yannopoulos said even  during a pandemic, the ABF's priority is to protect Australia's borders and prevent  illicit drugs like cocaine being smuggled in.

"The ability of the ABF and its law enforcement partners to quickly mobilise and  intercept this vessel and ensure these drugs never made it into the Australian  community is to be commended," Commander Yannopoulos said.

"Australia's maritime border is vast and criminals think they can exploit that and  evade detection, but they are wrong. Criminals should always assume the ABF is  nearby and is watching."

Investigations are continuing both locally and internationally.

For free and confidential advice about alcohol and other drug treatment  services, call the National Alcohol and Other Drug Hotline on 1800 250 015.

Media enquiries:

AFP Media: (02) 5126 9297

ABF Media: (02) 6264 2244

NSWPF Media: (02) 8263 6100



















































































































