

CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS WITH KIERAN GILBERT

THURSDAY, 5 MARCH 2020



SUBJECT: Coronavirus, Scott Morrison’s character, Morrison Government’s lack of

a plan for the economy.



KIERAN GILBERT: Mr Bowen thanks very much for your time. Do you welcome the

Government's latest restrictions on the travel? The South Korea ban and also those other

restrictions as they pertain to visitors from Italy?



CHRIS BOWEN: SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: I do and of course they're based

on the latest advice from the combined Chief Medical Officers Commonwealth and State.

It's a big step as all the steps are here and really as the Government has said and I agree

with them: this is about slowing the spread of the virus in Australia. Nobody should pretend

that this can be stopped completely but it is appropriate to try and slow it, to give the health

system time to prepare. I understand it will be some disappointment to people in the

affected nations particularly Korea but we must ensure that all the necessary checks and

balances are put in place and I think this is a sensible balance.



GILBERT: Should some of those restrictions been done earlier given?



BOWEN: Look I think again I mean there are some things I'll criticize the Government

about on many matters including some criticisms I'll make of the handling of this but I'm

only going to make them where I think they're very valid and genuine and they're working

on the best advice available to them. The institution is working. I mean the joint committee

of the Commonwealth and State Chief Medical Officers, Chief Health Officers at the State

level is providing daily advice to the Government, regular briefings to me and the

Opposition and they are acting on their advice as any Government would and should as a

Labor Government would as I would as Health Minister. So I'm not critical of that. I think

these are big decisions and they're taken in the appropriate way.



GILBERT: And you've been receiving some of these briefings as well from the Chief

Medical Officer and others. Where does this end up. What's your expectation? We're

talking about hundreds of Australians? Thousands? Tens of thousands look to be

affected?



BOWEN: Well look it is a very very serious challenge. Now as we know the majority of

people who get this the vast majority of people who get it will get it very mildly. 80 percent

of people will get it so mild that they may not even know they have it. They certainly should

not go to work or school because it's still infectious. And that's one of the challenges unlike

say SARS where people get by and large knew they had it because it’s a very severe

condition. With this condition 80 per percent of people get it quite mildly and they might just

feel a little bit sniffling a little bit sore a little bit unwell and then they go about their business

but they're still quite infectious. Fifteen per cent of people will get it relatively bad and five

per cent will get it to such a degree that they need intensive care. They're very critical. So

that's not to say that this isn’t very serious and of course the challenge is it can spread very

very quickly. Look at Italy, there was a handful of cases a week ago now there's hundreds

and hundreds of cases. So it can spread very quickly and or people can have it and not

know about it so probably in Italy a couple of weeks ago the numbers were there but

people didn't realise they had it. It can spread very quickly. The modelling shows that a

substantial portion of the community can and will be affected but we do need to keep this

in context at all stages. Very serious but we have to act in the best medical advice.



GILBERT: Have you got any sense of where the research is at for a vaccine?



BOWEN: Yes yes the vaccine the research is coming along well but with the best will in

the world we are months and months away from a vaccine because as you'd imagine

Kieran obviously it has to be tested. Human trials, clinical trials. No health authorities in the

world is going to sign off a vaccine unless they're sure it's safe, that it works. And you know

Australia is playing a valuable role there, our world class medical researchers but people

shouldn't assume that if that vaccine is any sort of quick fix



GILBERT: A couple of concerns that have been raised. I know that there's largely

bipartisanship in this area but 2GB reported earlier in the day that a heavily pregnant

employee was exposed to patients at the Sydney nursing home. That she'd arrived was

exposed to the patients, saw emergency staff dressed accordingly and asked what was

going on but she wasn't told. This is a woman who's 36 weeks. That's quite a worry.



BOWEN: One of the concerns I expressed this morning is in relation to aged care and

what appears to be the argument the bickering between the New South Wales

Government the Federal Government and that's not good enough. I mean we are providing

bipartisan support but it's not a blank cheque. We're providing constructive engagement

with the Government and where you've got that that sort of concern being expressed by

the New South Wales Minister the Federal Government the Federal Minister for Ageing

needs to deal with it as a matter of extreme urgency. And now look I've had other reports

which I've dealt with constructively about various incidents around the country. I'm not

going to comment on a specific matter. I haven't received a full briefing from the CMO and

the Health authorities about the matter. You've referred to it has been reported. So it would

be irresponsible for me to comment one way or another. Obviously if that report is correct

it's deeply concerning but it would be appropriate to get a full briefing on it.



GILBERT: What about the WA issue around the Rockingham Hospital, in the south of

Perth. Apparently according to the West Australian people visiting the hospital with

concerns that they might have the virus were directed to a car park. Is that accurate?



BOWEN: Well I saw the report in The West Australian this morning. I saw the pictures. It's

not clear to me from the pictures of people in the car park as to how they got there. Again

it's appropriate-- I spoke to Madeleine King a Western Australian MP about this today. She

obviously is looking into the matter and talking to the Western Australian Government

about that. Again there'll be different measures put in place. One of the issues in Western

Australia has been a GP saying ‘don't come to our clinic’ Now I stress here Kieran I think

the most important thing for the Government to do is to interact very closely with the Royal

College of General Practice with the AMA to ensure that doctors are getting every support

they need in this issue. Now I've spoken to doctors who say “yes we are getting the

support”. I've spoken to others who say they aren't and I accept that this is a complex

arrangement will take time to give 100 per cent right. And when I do get that feedback I

pass it on to the Government for constructive work to fix it.



GILBERT: You've obviously been very measured in terms of the language around this

virus and putting the threat in context. Would you urge calm to Australians because you

see a lot of panic buying around the country.



BOWEN: Well I would urge appropriate precautions be put in place not panic buying. I

mean not panic buying. We have a shortage of mass around the world for example. So we

have to be careful about how we use our masks and they've got to go to those who are

most in need, need them the most to start with. It's a matter for people whether they buy

toilet paper or not. I mean you know it's a free world. But you know I don't think panic

buying is the right answer to the challenge facing us here.



GILBERT: Labor has been targeting the Prime Minister on various issues. You know,

trying to target his character but on sports rorts and those sorts of things. Do you think that

Australians want the Labor Party and politicians generally to move on and to be focusing

on issues like coronavirus given it is such a major concern?



BOWEN: This building is capable of doing many things. You know yes, we're engaging

constructively with the Government. That's our job. That's my job as the alternative

Minister, not a blank check doesn't mean you know everything the Government does gets

approval from me if I'm not convinced. But it does mean we engaged very constructively

with them. But we'll also not going to give the Government a free pass on things that are

going wrong. I mean sports rorts is a scandal. And you talk about the Prime Minister's

character. Just on coronavirus for a moment. You know we just had a very constructive

conversation. We've had them with the Government. The Prime Minister just lied about the

Leader of the Opposition on coronavirus. Just said the Leader of the Opposition refused a

briefing from the Chief Medical Officer in Parliament. It's a lie. The leader the Opposition

just ran through it all in Parliament. It was a mix up in the Chief Medical Officers diary. He

turned up for a briefing. I took the briefing instead. It was never intended the Leader the

Opposition be there. We've had two now briefings from the Chief Medical Officer direct to

the leader of the Opposition. I've had multiple which I appreciate. But for the Prime Minister

to try to politicize it and tell a lie about the leader of the Opposition goes to his character

just as it goes to his character that he's not telling the truth about the Chief of the Defence

Force. I mean yesterday we asked him did the Chief of the Defence Force complain about

the bushfire ad? He said I just talked to the Chief of the Defence Force all the time. Today

he said ‘I admitted that he had spoken to me’ which he didn't do, just tell the truth. I mean it

took him how many months to tell the truth about Brian Houston? Why doesn't this guy just

tell the truth as the first response? He gets dragged there all the time and it's not good

enough.



GILBERT: As someone who's watched the economy very closely over many years now is

this coronavirus the sort of threat to the economy that will see a recession?



BOWEN: It'll have a negative impact. But we went into this issue with a weakening

economy. That's the key point. The Government would say everything was rising until the

bushfires and the coronavirus, it's just not true. I mean the economy was tanking

beforehand. Of course nobody would argue. Jim Chalmers isn't arguing that the

coronavirus isn't a negative impact but it's not the main issue. The main issue is that the

economy was already tanking and this comes on top of it. This comes on top of it. So of

course it's negative but it comes on top of weakness and the Government's got no answer.

We keep being told there's something coming. I mean we went to the election promising an

investment guarantee, an upfront deduction for investment you know to encourage

businesses to invest. Businesses are crying out for that.



GILBERT: So it sounds like that's where the Government is going to land.



BOWEN: Well they poo poo’d it at the election didn't they. I mean you would have

interviewed Josh Frydenberg saying “no that's nonsense”. Well he may well do it now and

so he should do it. But we called for that. We went to the election promising it. This

Government's like a kangaroo in the headlights and doesn't know what to do in the face of

weakening investment. No plan for wages growth. I mean the Reserve Bank just this week

said wages growth isn’t going to be picking up any time soon. Scott Morrison's been

promising wages growth for years as Treasurer and then Prime Minister saying, it's about

to happen, it's about to happen, it's about to happen. Well it's not happening.



GILBERT: Mr Bowen I appreciate your time.





BOWEN: Great pleasure Kieran.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













