

CATHERINE KING MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT AND REGIONAL

DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR BALLARAT





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS FIRST EDITION WITH PETER STEFANOVIC

THURSDAY, 3 DECEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Qantas workers at Parliament House today; Aviation; Vaccine.



PETER STEFANOVIC, HOST: Catherine, good to see you. Thanks for joining us. So what are

you expecting Qantas to say today?



CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT AND

REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Well it's hard to say. We have seen this week that it is making

2,000 of its ground crew redundant. We have Qantas workers actually coming up here to

Canberra today, they're very keen for the Government and particularly Scott Morrison, many of

them live in his electorate, to hear how upset and worried they are about what their futures

hold. I think it does show that while we're seeing some green shoots of recovery, there are

some sectors that are under enormous pressure and aviation is one of those. I think that what

we'll hear from Qantas workers today is a last ditch attempt to try and get the government to

save their jobs but particularly to come up with a decent plan for aviation going forward

because these workers are well and truly being left behind.



STEFANOVIC: How many workers have you got there and in what sectors did they work?



KING: So, these are all ground crew, so baggage handlers, the people who are managing

planes on the ground, 2000 of them at all of our major airports, as well as the airports at Alice

Springs, Townsville and Cairns. All of their jobs are being made redundant and Qantas is

outsourcing those jobs. This of course comes on the back of 6,500 who were made redundant

at Qantas previously. We've had several thousand at Virgin lose their jobs, we've had Dnata

workers, also ground crew, 1000 of those made redundant. It's a substantial amount we've lost

out of the aviation industry overall and we're also seeing now these workers being told that if

you do get jobs with a new company, the potential that that work is going to be quite insecure

work and not pay the same terms and conditions that they previously had. What we're saying

and what we're seeing from the government is that while yesterday's national accounts were

welcome, coming off a very big dip in our economy, it is going to be a hard, long recovery and

one of those sectors in particular that is in trouble and whose workers are being left behind is

the aviation sector and the government's got to do something about it. So, they're coming up to

Canberra today to tell their message and hopefully with the Prime Minister coming out of

quarantine he will take the time to meet with them today.



STEFANOVIC: Okay, a few points on that. When it comes to the ground staff, and it's awful

that so many people have had to lose their jobs, but Qantas does say that it was forced into

that decision for financial reasons to be able to secure the future of the company. So, in that

sense, isn't that important as well? Isn't that perhaps even more important that Qantas does

survive?



KING: Well, I can't speak for Qantas and I do understand the financial circumstances they and

Virgin and other airlines across the country find themselves in because of the coronavirus

shutdown. But what we've been saying right from the start of this IS, you know, aviation got hit

hard very quickly. We had Virgin basically begging the government to try and assist it before it

went into voluntary administration, it's now slowly trying to make its way out of that but it's

going to be a very slow recovery and that recovery is highly dependent on JobKeeper,

potentially extending beyond March, which the government has refused to say whether it will

do, it's highly dependent on aviation support being extended beyond December, it runs out at

the end of this month, and the government's not saying anything about that. What my focus...



STEFANOVIC: Josh Frydenberg was on the show a little bit earlier and he said they're not

going to extend beyond March.



KING: Which I think is just incredibly frustrating for sectors like aviation and tourism and again

that is the patchiness of this recovery and the amount of people. No one should be left behind

in this recovery and aviation, it employs over 200,000 people directly and indirectly, it is a

massive sector, we need it for our economy, yet the Morrison Government has basically said,

we're just going to wash our hands with this sector and say just...



STEFANOVIC: I think that's a big call to make, $1.3 billion for the aviation sector plus

JobKeeper as well...



KING: Well have a bit of a look at what they have actually done. Most of that money has

actually been to go to things like Airservices Australia and CASA to pay the fees of other

government services that airlines are required to pay, that's where most of that money's gone.

Shifted from one government entity to another, that's basically what has happened with most of

the money. JobKeeper has been incredibly important, I absolutely acknowledge that, that was

something Labor called for and we're pleased the government followed through with that. But

what we haven't got from this government is a clear plan about do we want to have a two

airline full service industry that actually helps with the recovery and how do we make sure we

help Virgin recover and continue to be competitive. How do we make sure that we continue to

have good, secure, long term jobs in this sector, and that's not what this government's done.

You know, it hasn't focused on that.



STEFANOVIC: Well, we've still got airlines in play though. Virgin has a new owner, it's still in

play, Qantas still in play, and now you've got for Rex Airlines that's increasing its routes as

well. Shouldn't some credit be given in that sense? All of our airlines are still active?



KING: I think a lot of this has happened frankly, despite the government. If you look at Virgin

who was asking for assistance, there have been thousands of jobs lost at Virgin. It's not going

to emerge out of this crisis in the same way that it went into it. It's going to be a very different

airline that does come out. It's not going to be flying very much internationally, you're not going

to say many of the regional routes and the sort of offering it has will be quite different to what it

offered previously. Again, that goes to the heart of the government not having a very clear plan

about what does it want the aviation industry to look like and what does it want the jobs in the

industry to look like. It has a strong future, but it's going to take a long time for it to recover,

particularly internationally, and the government does need to be very clear about how it's

intending to support the aviation sector going forward. We've got a large amount of the money

for aviation running out in December and again, the government needs to make themselves

clear whether it's intending to extend that or whether it's going to withdraw all that support.

That's what we're saying about this recovery, it's going to be long, it's going to be bumpy and

it's going to be patchy, and aviation is one of those sectors where we have seen thousands

and thousands of job losses. These are people who have worked in this sector for 25 or 30

years, and the government needs to be really clear about what does it wants the aviation

industry to look like. It's so far said that we're just going to leave it up to the market. The

market has spoken and it's meant thousands and thousands of workers out of work, who

potentially won't ever work in this industry again.



STEFANOVIC: Just finally Catherine, just wondering if you can put your former health hat on.

I'm curious about your reaction to this Pfizer news that's come out of the UK overnight.



KING: Of course it's welcome news and welcome news in Britain. I do think it's important we

have one of the world class regulatory regimes here in Australia with the Therapeutic Goods

Administration. It's very important not only for the safety and efficacy of this vaccine but for

community confidence in this vaccine that we allow the Therapeutic Goods Administration to

undertake its processes and I'm reassured that we've had the Health Minister today saying that

will be the case. When this vaccine is found to be effective and found to be safe, we want it

rolled out as quickly and as far-reaching as possible and that is going to rely on people having

confidence in our regulatory authorities. We do have a world class system so let's make sure

that it's given the space to do its job.



STEFANOVIC: So, you don't believe that there should be extra pressure applied for a vaccine

to be sped up here in Australia?



KING: No, I don't. I think we need to allow the processes to take their place. It's really

important that consumers have absolute confidence that this vaccine is safe, that it is effective

and that it is the quality that it needs to be, and we have a great process to be able to do that.

I'm pleased to see that in the UK they've been able to do that under their regulatory regime, we

should allow the space for our regulatory regime to do exactly the same.



STEFANOVIC: Do you have concerns about the speed of things in the UK?



KING: I'm not across how their assessment process has worked, but it certainly happened a

lot quicker than everybody else, but their system over there is also world class so I certainly



have some reassurances. Also, with it being rolled out in the UK quickly there's more data then

available to Australia as well so that can only be a good thing across the world.



STEFANOVIC: Okay, Catherine King appreciate your time this morning. Thanks so much for

joining us.



KING: Really good to be with you Peter.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: NICK BEAVER 0419 709 266





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













