JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES

MEMBER FOR HUNTER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2SM

MONDAY, 3 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Farm labour shortage; Paid pandemic leave; Masks.



MARCUS PAUL, HOST: He’s fresh from his weekly spat, or blue. I don’t know I only saw it

out of the corner of my eye. Did you fight with Barnaby Joyce this morning Joel, or not?



JOEL FITZGIBBON, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES: No

Marcus, nothing particularly dramatic this morning. We were talking about COVID-19, of

course, mainly, but there was a disagreement between us on the need to take more action

on the pandemic leave front. I made the point that a lot of money has been wasted for

example paying employees three times more than they were receiving pre-COVID and

that's money that could be going to support people who should be staying at home but find

it very hard to stay at home because they have mouths to feed and work to do.



PAUL: Okay, Joel Fitzgibbon, of course, is the Shadow Agriculture Minister. I want - we'll

come back to the pandemic leave in a moment, Joel, but fruit pickers. I'm really worried

that we're not going to have enough people available - a labour shortage, if you like, of

people available to pick the crops and the fruit, as harvest draws nearer, mate. It's a

concern.



FITZGIBBON: Well you should be worried Marcus, as should we all. And workforce has

been a challenge for not just the horticulture sector but for the agricultural sector, for many

years now, certainly for the seven years I've been in this portfolio. And of course it's just

got a whole lot worse because we've now lost up to 50,000 backpackers we used to rely

on to help our growers get fruit off, out of their plantations. So, the government really

needs to start taking this more seriously. I think we've spoken before about food security.

This is another example, which indicates that we can't take it for granted. Now, 12 months

ago almost to the day, Scott Morrison did two things: he promised that finally after seven

years in office he’d create a strategic plan for the agriculture sector. He's not done so. And

a little while after that he promised that the Government would develop a workforce plan

for the agriculture sector. And we've not seen a sign of that either. So it's the government

being too complacent around this issue. Look, I know it's got a lot on its plate at the

moment, but this commitment to a workforce plan came before we even knew what

COVID-19 is, and it's somewhat disappointing for growers that the Government hasn't

provided the support it was promising.



PAUL: Well what can we do? I’ve got a note here from Neil. Neil says, ‘Marcus I wonder

whether you could ask Joel whether he thinks we could import, maybe, some labour from

places that aren't affected in the South Pacific by COVID-19, for instance, Vanuatu?

Maybe we can import agricultural workers from there? They haven't had any infections.

They've also’  - sorry, mate - ‘they’ve also lost their greatest earner, that is the tourists.’



FITZGIBBON: We've had an arrangement for many years now, Marcus, that does allow

workers to come from Vanuatu and the Pacific Island nations. It’s a great arrangement:

they come here and work and they repatriate the money back to their families, and it's

worked quite well. The problem now is not the question from us about whether they are

COVID-free. They are worried about the fact that we are not COVID-free. And therefore, as

you can understand, Pacific Islanders are reluctant to travel to Australia and risk

contracting COVID and taking it back to their own homeland. So look, there has to be a

suite of solutions here. The government's been talking about an agriculture visa on and off

for the last three years, at least. Scott Morrison promised one, then he took the promise

away. He promised again and took it away, again. So it's identified the problem but it’s yet

to come forward with some solutions. Now the interesting thing is that it's the structure of

our agricultural workforce that we, for decades really, relied upon outside labour to do the

job. And that's left us vulnerable. COVID-19 has highlighted that, just like the

Government's failure to secure, you know, chemical supplies - manufacturing here in

Australia - and it should cause us to have a bit of time to think and reflect and ask

ourselves about a more rapid take-up of technology, for example. You can't do everything

with technology in the horticulture sector, but if we don't have the human labour maybe

technology is part of the solution.



PAUL: Will you wear a mask at all when you’re out?



FITZGIBBON: Yeah I had to go to Sydney last week, so I did don the mask on a few

occasions, to keep me safe and to keep others safe, very happily. I'm in the beautiful

Hunter Valley, where we've had very, very little COVID spread. So I feel - I don’t feel a

need to do it here, but if I was asked to do it of course I’d do so.



PAUL: All right - paid pandemic leave? Labor are calling on the federal government to

help more vulnerable workers. Who are these vulnerable workers you're referring to, Joel?



FITZGIBBON: Well I'm a believer that we should have zero tolerance for those who do the

wrong thing and not stay at home, when they’ve contracted COVID, and therefore not

spread it. But it’s easy for you and I to talk about it. We're on a pretty good wicket - I

assume you are Marcus? I'm sure you're highly-paid there at the Super Network. But there

are other people, other Australians, who just can't afford to be at home and they have

mouths to feed and mortgages to pay. And they need to get out and earn a quid. Now

we've got to support those people and find ways of assisting them to stay at home and it’s

not as if we have been throwing money around, Marcus. And money spent now is money

saved in the long run. If - you know if COVID continues to spread, the unemployment

queue will grow longer, we'll be making more payments under JobSeeker. And of course

government revenues will continue to fall as businesses are struggling and people are not

paying income tax. So it can cost you more in the medium-to-long run by not spending

money now. So, you know, we need to invest, to help these people.



PAUL: All right. Another quick thing before I let you go. I don't know whether you know of a

bloke called John Watson. He says, on an earlier email I received - he's up there in the

Hunter. He says ‘say hello to Fitzy for me, he's an old Cessnock guy like myself, regards

John Watson.’ Name ring a bell?



FITZGIBBON: There’s a few Watsons around this part of the world, and some of them are

pretty good golfers, just quietly. The name certainly rings a bell, Marcus, yes.



PAUL: All right, and you mentioned you're in Sydney last week. Fitzy - she's the youngest

Fitzy, is she? She works on Channel Nine, of course. I always bring her up, I love to death,



you know I do. Gracie - she’s had another birthday?



FITZGIBBON: She had a birthday, growing old, making me feel even older, of course, but

you know she's going well. Very proud of her, but I do worry about her getting around

Sydney in this COVID environment, but she's aware of the risks of that and I say again,

she's obviously got her mother's ability.



PAUL: Follows in Mum's footsteps, eh? All right mate, good to talk to you as always, we'll

catch up again soon on the program. Thank you.



FITZGIBBON: A pleasure Marcus.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641



