MEDIA RELEASE

REX GOES INDEPENDENT  Senator Rex Patrick has announced that he will represent South Australia as an independent

senator.

"After careful consideration, I have decided that I will continue to represent SA in the Federal

Senate as an Independent," Senator Patrick said.

"It's more important than ever that SA keeps a strong and independent voice in the Senate to

ensure that our state isn't taken for granted by the major Federal political parties which are all

dominated by the political and economic interests of Australia's eastern coast. Strong

independent representation will be all the more important as SA works to recover from the

COVID-19 pandemic.·

"In October 2017 I was honoured to replace Nick Xenophon as a Senator for SA. In the thirty­

three months since then I have done my best to represent our great state, initially as a member

of the Nick Xenophon T earn and then as part of Centre Alliance."

"I've worked hard to hold the Federal Government to account for its performance and to use

the Senate balance of power to advance SA's interests."

"I've fought hard for SA jobs - whether in relation to submarine construction and maintenance

in Adelaide, or to support the Whyalla steel mill. I've fought hard for SA's water rights in the

operation of the Murray-Darling Basin Plan. I've campaigned strongly to protect the pristine

marine environment of the Great Australian Bight and I am absolutely convinced of the need

for action to combat climate change and to deal with the impacts it is already having on our

continent."

"I've campaigned for the Federal Government to put Australian firms first when they purchase

goods and services. I've used the Parliament as a forum to shame corporate executives whose

companies make huge profits but avoid paying any income tax. I've spoken up in defence of

whistle-blowers who have exposed government wrongdoing, policy failures, corrupt and

unethical behaviour."

"I've used the Senate's Committees, questions to Ministers, many Freedom of Information

cases to bring greater transparency to the often-secretive workings of government. I've

submitted 1027 Questions on Notice, pursued 180 FOi requests and moved 15 Senate Orders

for Production of Documents. I'm determined to use every opportunity to 'keep the bastards

honest' by pressing for more accountable, transparent and responsive government.·

"I want to see a Federal ICAC take a deep dive into our national political life and the workings

of many government agencies."

"I've worked hard to highlight the tendency of the Coalition and Labor to work together in their

own narrow interests and to exempt themselves from standards, rules and even laws that

apply to everyone else. It is a remarkable state of affairs that the Coalition and Labor enacted

laws to guard against foreign political interference and then exempted Federal MPs and their

staff from those laws."

"I have been pleased to work closely with my Centre Alliance colleagues Senator Stirling Griff

and the Federal Member for Mayo, Rebekha Sharkie and anticipate continuing to confer

closely with them moving forward."

"However I have concluded that in seeking to continue to represent SA, and to ensure that our

State's Senate representation includes a voice from the political centre, the best way forward

for me is to strike an independent path. Accordingly, I have tendered my resignation as a

member of Centre Alliance.·

"The Senate will be dealing with many challenging legislative issues through the rest of this

parliamentary term, many of which will be vitally important to South Australians. I will use the

freedom that comes with being an independent to press hard to win the best outcomes for SA.·

