

MATT THISTLETHWAITE MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR THE REPUBLIC  MEMBER FOR KINGSFORD SMITH

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS  WEDNESDAY, 26 FEBRUARY 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; Budget surplus; Liberals in climate denial.

CHRIS KENNY: We're gonna go back to Canberra now and catch up with Labor's Matt  Thistlethwaite who's been freed from the incursions of democracy down there in the  Chamber. Thanks for joining us Matt, just briefly I want to get you quickly your thoughts on  the Coronavirus. What this is doing to the economy and just how worried we should be  about all that?

MATT THISTLETHWAITE, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL  SERVICES:  Well, it is deeply disturbing, Chris, the disease is spreading. We know that  Australia's trade is intimately linked to China and we're facing the prospect of a downturn in  our economy. But I have to say, Chris, that the Australian economy has been struggling for  some time, now long before Coronavirus, long before the trade war between Trump and  China. Below trend growth and  very low wages growth, higher levels of household debt,  small businesses in particular struggling. So the government just hasn't had a plan to  reboot the economy, to get it on growth, trend growth again, and I think that unfortunately  the Coronavirus is going to make a bad situation worse.

KENNY: Yeah I don't think there's much doubt about that. You'd have to cut them some  slack though wouldn't you if they don't deliver their surplus because they've been hit by the  Coronavirus and the bushfires to some extent as well?

THISTLETHWAITE: Well that's up to them to explain to the Australian public, they were  out there with all the mugs saying ‘back in the black’ in the MYEFO, they said that they'd  be able to reach a surplus. Who knows, they may still do that but it's not looking good and  they're going to have to explain that to the Australian public on Budget Night in May.

KENNY: Yeah we'll see. Now, Matt Thistlethwaite, on climate policies do you believe that  Australian emission reductions policies can reduce the bushfire threat in Australia?

THISTLETHWAITE: Look, I believe that Australian emission reductions policies, Chris, can  contribute to reducing global emissions and that's what we need to do as a country.  Australia is one of many nations that signed up to the Paris Accord which is aimed at  limiting global warming to that one and a half to two degree scenario to avoid the  catastrophic consequences of climate change. And for our country the losses could be

rather dire indeed and we're talking about the Great Barrier Reef being wiped out and all of  the tourism that goes with that, we're talking about extended droughts and the effects that  that will have on agriculture and farming and indeed the CSIRO or other organisations  have said you'll get an extended bushfire season. So we think we need to do our bit  internationally to reduce global emissions and to avoid the catastrophic consequences of  climate change.

KENNY: Yep, you'd have to concede that what we've done so far and we have reduced  our emissions over the last decade or so what we've done so far has contributed nothing to  any environmental improvement because global emissions have increased dramatically?  You would be mad as a country to go much further wouldn't we until the rest of the world is  also acting?

THISTLETHWAITE: Well the rest of the world is acting, Chris, particularly European  nations…

KENNY: Hang on, global emissions are rising dramatically by more than our total  emissions annually, so you can't, it's just a nonsense to say the rest of the world is acting  while global emissions are increasing.

THISTLETHWAITE: Well, emissions in certain countries throughout the world are falling  particularly in those European countries where they've had a carbon price for many, many  years now. Unfortunately in Australia emissions have been increasing in in recent years,  we've had a very small increase in the last 12 months…

KENNY: I agree, yeah exactly but this is exactly my point, we shouldn't do any more than  our bit until the rest of the world is actually reducing emissions, surely because what we're  doing at the moment is not actually contributing to any resolution, China, India, Indonesia  all these countries are massively increasing their emissions.

THISTLETHWAITE: Yeah but for Australia to have any credibility in those international  forums, Chris, to argue that China and India and other nations should be doing a lot more  you need to be able to have credentials to say that well look we've been doing our bit here  in Australia and compared to other nations that can't be said of what's been going on with  this government. I mean they dismantled a price on carbon they tried to remove the Clean  Energy Finance Corporation, The Australian Renewable Energy Agency that have  undermined the take up of renewable energy and emissions have been going up. So we  don’t have that credibility internationally anymore.

KENNY: You're pretty down on Australia, you guys were in power for half of the last  decade, is there another country in the world that has paid a higher economic price to do  more on emissions reduction than Australia?

THISTLETHWAITE: Well you know when Labor was in government we certainly put in  place the mechanisms to reduce emissions and to try and grow our economy and  electricity prices were much cheaper. And now those policies were working, Chris, we saw  emissions under Labor were falling, the Clean Energy Finance Corporation was  established, that's billions of dollars’ worth of investment in renewable energy projects  throughout the country and those policies had been working.

KENNY: Yes, so win the next election and you can get back to that. But my question was  name a country that has paid a higher economic price doing more to reduce emissions



than Australia?

THISTLETHWAITE: Well it's about Australia playing its part internationally, there are  plenty…

KENNY: This is my point, I don't think you can come up with a country that has paid a  higher economic price to reduce emissions as substantially as Australia. I stand to be  corrected, just name the country.

THISTLETHWAITE: Well there are plenty of European countries that have done more than  we have in terms of emission reductions, but at the same time they’ve been able to grow  their economies and create new industries particularly countries like Germany, even the  UK…

KENNY: Germany's power are 50 percent higher than us, they're missing their emissions  reductions targets and they're facing supply security problems.

THISTLETHWAITE: The UK has been very successful in reducing their emissions and  creating jobs at the same time. The international community has come together, Chris, to  say that look if we're going to achieve this two degree warming scenario, limit warming to  two degrees, we all need to take action and that involves looking at net zero emissions by  2050. And that's why Labor's announced this policy to ensure that we're doing our bit  internationally and we work towards that.

KENNY: How old will you be in 2050?

THISTLETHWAITE: I'll be 70 odd years, Chris, hopefully I'm still around then. But you  know my kids will be a lot older and that's what this policy is about, ensuring that we're  handing on a cleaner environment and a safer environment and a better economy to our  kids and that's why I support policies that create stronger action on climate change

KENNY: Thanks for joining us, Matt, I appreciate it.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: BEN LEESON 0404 648 275









