





TRANSCRIPT

Senator James Paterson

Liberal Senator for Victoria

Wednesday 04 March 2020

Sky News: AM Agenda

Subjects: stimulus package, Coronavirus, Uighurs



Annelise Nielsen: Now it's time for our pollie panel with Senator James Paterson from Victoria and  Labor MP Tim Watts. Thank you for your time.



Tim Watts MP: Great to be with you.



Senator James Paterson: Good morning.



Nielsen: Now, big discussion today is about economic stimulus in the wake of longer term bushfires,  but also coronavirus is hitting our supply chains hard. James Paterson, we had the Prime Minister  today saying that there would be some kind of stimulus. What form should that take, though?



Paterson: Well, the prime minister said it will be targeted, it will be measured and it will be scalable.  I think that's three really important elements. We don't want to go overboard here. We have to be  proportionate to the problem that we face. What we have is a health crisis that is having some  economic effects. This is not a financial crisis. It is not the same as the GFC. It's quite different to  that. But the economy will need some support in this time. The first step has been the Reserve Bank  cutting interest rates and the banks passing that on in full, which I know a lot of Australians would  welcome. The second step, which will come in a few weeks time, will be a package from the federal  government.



Nielsen: Do you think the government's doing enough stimulus in the wake of coronavirus?







Watts: Well, in order for a stimulus to be effective, we need to properly diagnose the cause. And the  problems in the Australian economy pre-date the coronavirus and the bushfires. The interest rate  cut we saw this week was the fourth we've seen in the last 10 months. We've seen investment rates  in from the business sector at the lowest they've been since 1990 before the bushfires or the  coronavirus. We've seen two million Australians underemployed. We've seen weaknesses in  spending, weaknesses in wages. In fact, record low wage growth. So to correctly have a stimulus that  addresses the problems, we need to understand that these problems predate both the virus and the  bushfires. What we would like to see is some real stimulus in the economy, bringing forward  infrastructure spending, bringing forward the business investment tax allowance, looking at  increasing the rate of Newstart. There are a lot of things that the government could be doing to back  in what the RBA is trying to do to get the economy going.



Nielsen: So the government's line is that there was four and a half billion dollars of infrastructure  brought, brought forward in the last May statement and that there simply at capacity for projects  that they can fund. Is that a realistic proposition to be saying that we should be funding more  infrastructure?



Watts: Look, it's nonsense to say that the government is doing all that it can do on on that side of  the equation. And we know this because the RBA has been saying it repeatedly for months. This is  not a new thing. The RBA is at record low interest rates at the moment. There is no more room for it  to cut. You know, we're at the bottom of the barrel here and they've been begging the Morrison  government to come up with a plan to get involved, to get in on the act and start stimulating the  economy. I mean, Josh Frydenberg, it's all very well for him to call the banks and say back in the RBA,  pass on those rate cuts. Well when is Josh Frydenberg going to do his job and come up with a plan  for the economy?



Nielsen: Senator, Tim Watts does have a point in that we are almost at the bottom of where we can  go with interest rate cuts. What what is the government's plan?



Paterson: Well, right now, already the largest personal income tax since the time that Peter Costello  was treasurer are rolling out that is already starting to hit people's bank accounts and that will  continue to be rolled out over the next few financial years -



Nielsen: And they're paying down their savings. They're not putting it in the economy. Sorry, debt.



Paterson: Well, and consumers are entitled to, households are entitled to make those kind of  decisions. If they want to do that, then that's that's their right. I don't want to judge them here from  Canberra and say no you must go out and spend it. But, if we make more money available to them, if  we increase their take-home pay by cutting their taxes, then they can choose to spend it if they wish  and they can choose to save it or pay down debt if they wish as well.







Nielsen: But how does that stimulate the economy, though?



Paterson: Well, they're going to have more money in their pocket and inevitably at least some of  that is going to be spent. As you rightly recognised, we've already brought forward infrastructure  spending. We are running up against some capacity constraints, in Tim and my home state of  Victoria, the state government says they're running out of concrete and they literally can't do any  more major projects. Many of those projects are jointly funded by the federal government and  there's a lot more to come. For example, in Victoria, like the airport rail link, which are working very  cooperatively with the state government on. So there's an enormous amount of things happening in  infrastructure. There's tax cuts already happening. What the prime minister has indicated is likely to  come forward in the next few weeks is some targeted assistance to industries that have been  particularly affected by the Coronavirus. And, of course, there's been speculation in the media for  some months now about investment allowances and other measures that, if not in this upcoming  package, will certainly, I think, feature in the federal budget in May.



Nielsen: One of the interesting things that's been raised by the coronavirus is just how much we rely  on China with so many of our supply chains under pressure. There is this really interesting report  from the Strategic Policy Institute today about Chinese treatment of Uighur Muslims, about forced  labour camps. Is this the time when it really brings into focus the fact that we can't grandstand with  China because we rely on them economically? But at the same time, the serious concerns about  human rights abuses?



Paterson: I think there's a couple of really good points there Annelise. Yes, you're right, we cannot  be overly reliant on China. We have to diversify our interests, that's absolutely clear. What I was  disturbed by in this report from the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, as you say, is the major  global brands that have been caught up in what is effectively forced labour, if not slavery. We're  talking about brands like Volkswagen, BMW, Huawei, Nike, really major consumer brands that  should know better and should do better. And Australian consumers would be horrified to know that  their consumer goods might have been made by people forced into into that labour.



Nielsen: Tim Watts, do you think the government should be doing more on this?



Watts: Well, I mean, the ASPI report is deeply concerning and it frankly confirms reports that we've  been seeing in the media from leaked documents from Xinjiang about the treatment of the UIghur  minority and other Muslim minorities in China by the government there. We need to be clear with  the Chinese government that these kinds of human rights abuses are not acceptable. I mean, that  there are Australian values. We should be clear about that. We also need to understand that the  Australia China relationship is a broad, all encompassing one, and it crosses all spheres of Australian  life today. And that's why Penny Wong has been calling for a briefing of all parliamentarians about  the nature of this relationship so we can have a better informed, deeper debate about the way we  engage with China. I want to back in what James said about consumer boycotts here, or maybe not.  He didn't go that far, but about consumer responses to these issues. Often we focus on what's the





foreign policy? What's the policy of the Australian government, towards China. I really think that we  need to take a broader picture of this and say that as an Australian consumer, as a citizen, I can  exercise my values in my purchasing decisions. And if forced labour is being used to create the  products that I'm looking at on the shop shelf. I don't want to be buying that.



Nielsen: Were you actually calling for a boycott?



Paterson: We've actually passed anti-slavery laws in the parliament in a bipartisan way quite  recently, which attempts to crack down on this. It says to companies, you've got an obligation to do  your due diligence on your own supply chains and make sure that you are not taking products from  forced labour or slavery. Personally, as a consumer, I would be horrified to think anything that I  bought would have been made in that way. I've got an Apple phone that's one of the companies  allegedly caught up in this. I'll be thinking very carefully about future purchases from companies like  that if they're not able to come out and justify and explain that this is in fact didn't occur and that's  not the case.



Nielsen: If we can just jump back to the economic stimulus question and interest rates. Yesterday we  saw all four banks for the first time pass on full interest rate cuts since 2015. That's reportedly  because they were spooked about the bank levy being raised. The government's never really going  to raise the bank levy though is it?



Paterson: I'm not aware of any plans within the government to change the bank levy as it is. My  understanding is that that is settled policy. I think the banks have made commercial decisions to pass  on these rates, and I'm sure they're mindful of the important role they have in the Australian  economy. And at a time of vulnerability, I think they do have to take that responsibility seriously.



Nielsen: Would you support raising the bank levy?



Watts: I'd support the government actually having a plan about what to deal with the problems in  the economy at the moment. I mean, the real issue that we've got at the moment is we've got a  marketing based approach to this problem. We've got a salesman for a prime minister and we've got  a press secretary for a treasurer. And they're more concerned with the comms, they're more  concerned with the sales job than they are with the substance. I mean, is a bank levy on Josh  Frydenberg's agenda? I don't know, it doesn't seem like much in particular is on his agenda at all,  given the legislative calendar at the moment. What we need is a co-ordinated, consistent plan from  our economic leadership in this country, and we're just not seeing it from the Morrison government.



Nielsen: We are seeing a bit of a dearth of legislation here in parliament at the end of wait three of  the month and none of what's gone through.







Paterson: Annelise, I firmly believe that we should not measure the productivity of the parliament  by how many laws it passes. I think that will be a very, very bad idea. I'm much more interested in  the quality of the laws that we pass, and we should only pass them when the necessary, not just for  the sake of it.



Nielsen: Have you passed any good quality laws while we've been here?



Paterson: There's been quite a lot of legislation that passed through the Senate last week. It's  obviously not sitting this week because we've got Senate estimates, but we passed a number of  measures, for example, in the superannuation space to help reunite workers with lost  superannuation, to help make sure that low fee accounts, low balance accounts aren't being eroded  by fees. They're really important changes that will make people's retirement more secure.



Nielsen: What do you think the government's sitting on that they could be pushing through?



Watts: Just to put it in perspective, I mean, James just sort of glossed over things there. Last week in  the House of Reps, we passed a bill correcting punctuation errors in legislation.



Nielsen: Punctuation is very important in legislation.



Watts: Oxford commas, I'm sure, are very significant things.



Nielsen: These things can go to the high court if there's a typo.



Watts: Given the significance of the challenges to the Australian economy and the anxiety in the  Australian public from Australian workers, Australian families about the economic challenges that  the economy is facing. We need a bigger agenda. We'd love to see the government bringing forward  the business investment tax incentives that we've been talking about for many, many months now.  That'd be a very substantive legislative agenda, one that I'm sure James could even get get behind,  you know, lowering tax burdens. And it's something that Josh Frydenberg could have had ready to  go. It could have been on the front foot about this if they had an economic plan that could have  been acting already.



Nielsen: There's been some pretty serious overarching issues. We've had coronavirus. I mean, the  National Security Committee has been meeting just about every day on this. We've had the bushfire





response, again, really dominating spending approval and things like that. Surely that's going to  impact how much legislation is going through.



Watts: We've had seven years of economic policy drift under the Abbott, Morrison, Abbott,  Turnbull, Morrison government's. 10 months of the RBA begging this government to get in the  game, 10 months four interest rate cuts. They've been M.I.A. Nothing.



Paterson: Labor can choose to make this a partisan issue if they wish. But I suspect that most  Australians watching this would think that at a time of crisis, when we've got a very serious health  challenge, we should be working together to solve these problems. I think the leadership of the  federal government has provided has been world class. We moved ahead of the World Health  Organization. We put in some of the swiftest, strongest restrictions on travel in the world. And the  early evidence is that's helped delay the arrival of the coronavirus here on our shores, given us more  opportunity to prepare so that when and if it does come, we're able to respond effectively and  preserve the health and security of Australians as best we can. Labor's free to make partisan points if  they wish but I don't think that's what the Australian people expect from this time.



Nielsen: We'll have to leave it there. But Senator James Paterson, Tim Watts, thank you for your  time.



ENDS





