1





The Hon. Christian Porter MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Industrial Relations  Leader of the House



TRANSCRIPT

6PR Mornings with Gareth Parker  Wednesday, 2 December 2020



E&OE

Subjects: Four Corners, national accounts, IR reforms, Dean Nalder

GARETH PARKER:  One of those ministers at the centre of the program, as you know, is Christian Porter. He’s on  the line. The Federal Attorney-General and Industrial Relations Minister. Christian, good  morning.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Morning, Gareth. How are you?

GARETH PARKER:  Is there any substance to this report, from your point of view?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, I think if something extraordinary happened like an agency or body engaging a private  investigator to follow you around, the whole purpose of it is you wouldn’t know it, so I just  wouldn’t know. But, look, I understand some quite detailed questions have been asked in a  usual process of agency heads in the Senate. I think they were different from the questions  that were put to the ABC, from The Australian. I’d obviously be pretty interested to see what  the answers to those questions are in due course, but how would you know?

GARETH PARKER:  But, hang on. Does the Government believe that the ABC hired a private investigator to  follow you and Alan Tudge?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, as I understand it, a member of parliament has asked questions in the Senate, a range of  questions. Including, some around that issue of the Managing Director of the ABC…

2



GARETH PARKER:  …a member of parliament has asked those questions?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Yes, as occurs from time to time in the Senate, as part of their processes, they get answered in  due course. As I say, I’d be pretty interested to see what the answers are, but I wouldn’t have  any answers to those questions.

GARETH PARKER:  Which MP?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  It was Senator Henderson, I understand.

GARETH PARKER:  So, it’s Liberal Senator, Sarah Henderson, asking the ABC through estimates, whether you  and Alan Tudge were followed by private investigators?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  As I understand it, yes.

GARETH PARKER:  Okay. Do you have any reason to believe you were followed by private investigators?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Look, how would I know?

GARETH PARKER:  [Laughter] No, I understand that. I appreciate your point.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  You know? The whole point of these things, if someone did something extraordinary like  that, how would you know? But, you know, it’s not an unusual thing that during the estimates  process, questions get asked around HR and expenditure and the way budgets are used, like  these are part of a longer series of questions that are part of the estimates process, so thy just  get answered in due course.

GARETH PARKER:  Okay. But, I mean, if someone came up to you and said “hey Christian, you’re being  followed by a private investigator”, what would your reaction be?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  I would think that would be so extraordinary that I would find it difficult to believe. But, you  know, stranger things have happened in politics I would have to say, as well.

GARETH PARKER:  ABC have just flat out denied it, said it didn’t happen. Is that good enough for you?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:

3



Look, I don’t know what the precise types of questions that have been asked in the Senate are  but I think that they’re a little bit more detailed and different from the questions that have  been answered by the ABC. But, as I say, look I’d be interested to see what the managing  director of the ABC’s answer to these questions that have been put through the Senate  process will be in due course. I don’t have answers to them.

GARETH PARKER:  Okay. The ABC media unit were asked by The Australian whether they had employed private  investigators, the answer was a single word, no. Is that good enough for you?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Look, I understand I haven’t seen the questions that were put in the Senate, but I understand  that they’re a little bit more detailed than that question and answer process.

GARETH PARKER:  Okay. So, we’ll wait and see. I mean, it would be an extraordinary thing for them to do,  wouldn’t it? I mean, let’s say they didn’t do it. I don’t really know what we’re talking about  here, they say they didn’t do it, surely that’s the end of it?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, as I say, there’s a different set of questions that have been put that are slightly more  complicated and expansive than that in the Senate. So, they get answered like all questions do  in that process.

GARETH PARKER:  Were those questions answered by- asked by Senator Henderson at her own behest?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Yes, well, Sarah, as I understand it, asked a range of questions in the estimates hearing that  had the managing director in it before the show aired. So, she obviously takes an interest. She  was a former employee at the ABC, I understand.

GARETH PARKER:  Okay. On to things of perhaps more substance and importance…

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Indeed.

GARETH PARKER:  The national economy is roaring back. That’s good news.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  It is. And I mean, it’s been an extraordinary quarter of growth at 3.3 per cent. You’ve got to  go back to the 1960s to find anything similar, so that’s extremely positive. You know, there’s  no time for rest for the Government here, this is a kind of positive endorsement of the way in  which we’ve been dealing with the pandemic and the way in which we’re working policies  around coming out and coming back from the pandemic. But I’d also say that as positive as  these figures are, I mean, it’s very clear to all of us in the Morrison Government that there are  very substantial parts of the Australian economy that are doing it extremely tough and that  require particular attention and policy and reform to ensure that they can be part of this

4



broader recovery. But, it’s very positive, but it’s not even and it’s not across the entire  Australian economy and still in areas that have taken massive hits, like retail and hospitality,  things that rely on overseas students, parts of the economy that rely on overseas tourism. I  mean, there's an enormous amount of work still to be done, but it is very positive.

GARETH PARKER:  Okay. The reopening in substance, in large substance, apart from South Australia of the  national borders, we're pretty much open for business from next Tuesday nationally once WA  comes to the party. Will that assist?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Very much so. I think this is incredibly positive news for the entire country, particularly for  WA. But, you know, we want to come out of COVID and recover and have our economy  grow and be resurgent. And we want to do that making sure that we've got a healthy airline  industry, that our tourism industry remains healthy, that retail that relies on expenditure from  movements in between states, and in due course internationally, can recover. So, there's a lot  of moving parts to this. But getting your borders reopened is a very basic necessary condition  to having a functioning modern economy. I mean, everything in Australia, right, from our  families to the way in which we deliver healthcare, to our businesses has been structured for  120 years on the very fundamental basis that you can leave your state and come back in  without threat of sanction. And there have been reasons why that hasn't been able to happen  during the COVID pandemic, but having that basic condition not enlivened during the  pandemic has caused massive economic problems for us. And getting the borders down and  getting air travel moving again and getting people coming back in and out of the states is a  massive positive for the economy, for families, but also for people whose jobs rely on people  moving in between borders, of which there are a huge number of jobs that rely on that traffic.

GARETH PARKER:  In The Australian yesterday, it was reported that as part of your industrial reforms bills,  which I think you’re due to introduce sometime next week, and you spoke yesterday about  greenfields industrial agreements that would cover the life of a project, which might be five  or six years rather than the four years that an industrial agreement lasts for. But it was also  reported that employers might be able to pay a single higher rate of pay to retail and  hospitality workers. Can you confirm that that's on the agenda?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, just with the first one, very important for WA. And so, when we're talking about that  3.3 per cent growth that we’ve now had across the economy in this last quarter, that's off the  back of a 7 per cent decline in the quarter before that. And when there was that 7 per cent  decline in growth, the mining industry still managed to grow at 0.2 per cent. Now, not a lot,  but the stabilising effect that mining's performance had during the height of the COVID  pandemic was absolutely critical to our performance being better than virtually every other  place on Earth. So, having an ability to attract more mining investment isn't just a short-term  strategy for economic recovery. It's more importantly a massively important long-term  stabiliser and growth generator for the Australian economy, very largely from WA. So,  having longer periods of enterprise agreements for these greenfield projects, we think as a  government is very important. That other issue about loaded rates, I'm not going to confirm  or deny anything that's been reported or that might be occurring in the reform process that  we'll be speaking to next week. But just for your listeners, that issue is something that has  already been considered by the Fair Work Commission with respect to some awards. And

5



what it looks at is whether or not you can have a system whereby people get paid more at a  base level, and if you like, trade in weekend rates or penalty rates for a higher level of base  pay. Now, that is something that is an issue that has been considered previously by the Fair  Work Commission and considered in the context of certain awards. So, that's the issue that  you're talking about. I'm not going to pre-empt what we'll be speaking to next week when the  legislation comes out, but that's just a description for your listeners of the issue.

GARETH PARKER:  Alright, we'll wait and see. Just quickly, a word on Dean Nalder who’s leaving politics- well,  imminently.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Yeah, well, obviously wish Dean all the best. It's a shame to see him go. And I think that  obviously the Liberal Party at a state level is looking for renewal and refreshing of its  personnel and its members of parliament. I guess this provides that kind of opportunity. I’d  say that, you know, young Zak Kirkup’s made a bit of an impact over the first couple of  weeks. There's a lot of energy being shown, which I think you'd expect from a 33-year-old.  So, I think he's doing pretty well. And if this is an opportunity for Zak and for the Liberal  Party at a state level to recruit hopefully someone also with a great deal of energy, I think  that's a positive thing. But I just wish Dean all the best.

GARETH PARKER:  Christian, thank you for your time.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Okay, cheers Gareth.

GARETH PARKER:  The Attorney-General, Industrial Relations Minister, Christian Porter.

Authorised by Christian Porter, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

