



MEDIA RELEASE

Government must make Medicare and the MBS fit for the 21st Century



The Greens say that the Medicare Benefits Schedule task force final report is a

clear indication that lack of agility and innovation has meant that parts of our

Medicare system are no longer fit for purpose.



This report is a wakeup call that our medical system needs to adapt to meet the

needs of our population and ensure that it is accessible to everyone and that it

is not being exploited by private companies.



Australia prides itself on having a world leading healthcare system, but that

won’t be the case if we don't invest in the future.



Medicare costs should be efficient, but there’s also choice about what we

spend money on. Instead of giving private health insurance rebates and tax

breaks for super wealthy and big corporations we could be investing in our

Medicare system.



The Government’s proposed measures for transparency on out of pocket costs

do nothing practical to reduce those costs, it may just end up discouraging

people from accessing the services they need but can’t afford.



We should be reducing out of pocket costs by providing for an expanded public



health system rather than privatisation by stealth.



We need systemic reform so that medical professionals are incentivised to treat

the whole person and not just churn people through the system.



Primary care research including preventive health research is poorly valued,

and is essential to reshaping our health system for the future.



We also need to invest heavily in our aged care system. It is being reported that

the Government will announce an aged care funding commitment of over $1

billion as part of MYEFO tomorrow.



An additional 10,000 home care packages is a good start but much more is

needed if we are to meet the target of just a month wait for a package before

end of the next year.



The other parts of this leaked announcement were already announced as part

of the Government’s response to the Royal Commission’s Covid report

including $63.3m for allied health and mental health services, and $11.1m for

the serious incident response scheme.







Media Contact

Lucy Cowcher-Guthrie: 0418 401 180





