



Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra





THE HON DAN TEHAN MP  Minister for Education

MEDIA RELEASE



7 February 2020

Mental health support for international students

Mental health support is available to international students who are impacted by the  coronavirus and its effect on families, study plans and travel.

Minister for Education Dan Tehan said international students studying in Australia could  access the same health and medical services as any other Australian, including crisis  support services such as Lifeline Australia.

“We have established call centres that students can ring if they have any questions about  their health or education,” Mr Tehan said.

“These centres offer bilingual language support and can refer students to counselling  services in languages other than English.

“The safety of the public, and all students, is the Government’s number one priority. We  understand that extends to ensuring students have the mental health support they need.

“Our message to students is that you’re not alone and the Australian community is here to  support you.

“I also want to assure students that even if they choose to do a little more of their study  online, their highly-regarded, world-class Australian university degree also remains valid.

“The Government will continue to work closely with universities to make student transitions  back into Australia as smooth and seamless as possible when travel resumes.

“The visas of student visa holders who are in China and affected by the current travel  restrictions remain valid.

“It is only if students attempt to travel to Australia and it’s determined that they have been in  mainland China from 1 February 2020 that their visa will be cancelled.

“I am in regular contact with Universities Australia and vice chancellors as we continue to  co-ordinate our response to the coronavirus. We are dealing with the immediate issues of  supporting international students impacted by the changed travel arrangements and  exploring solutions to lessen the impact on their education.”





Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

A dedicated email international.students@dese.gov.au and hotline - 1300 981 621 (8am to  8pm AEDST Monday to Friday) - has also been established to assist international students  with questions or concerns relating to their study and novel coronavirus.

Further information is available online at www.dese.gov.au.

International students in Australia can access support through Lifeline Australia (13 11 14),  Youth Beyond Blue (1300 224 636), eheadspace (1800 650 890) and Kids Helpline (1800 55  1800), for those under 25 years of age.



ENDS

Media contact:  Tehan: Byron Vale 02 6277 7350 | minister.media@education.gov.au

