JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES

MEMBER FOR HUNTER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2CC

WEDNESDAY, 21 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Government can’t communicate with China; Government backbenchers

threaten China trade; Foreign investment; Amnesty for illegal workers.



STEPHEN CENATIEMPO, HOST: It’s just ridiculous that we shut the country down for a

sporting event but to shut it down on a day that the sporting event’s not actually on, in a

state where it's not actually happening, for a group of people that aren’t allowed to go to

work anyway. Give me a break. Joel Fitzgibbon, the Shadow Minister for Agriculture and

Resources, on the line with us. G’day Joel,



JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: Stephen, you're on fire this morning.



CENATIEMPO: Seriously though, when you have a public holiday for a bunch of people

that aren't allowed to go to work?



FITZGIBBON: Hmm. Interesting.



CENATIEMPO: Moving right along. The CFMEU is warning that Government

backbenchers are putting Australia's coal exports at risk by undermining our trading

relationship with China. Now you've been critical of Prime Ministers and leaders who have

done that, and you know, and we've had our disagreements about that. But it's a bit rich to

be blaming backbenchers isn't it?



FITZGIBBON: And you've understandably said to me, Stephen, that you know, we have to

stand up for our values and our own democracy, and our own interest. And certainly we

do. We should also - always do so, most robustly. But we've done some dumb things and

now you've got the boss of the mining union writing to a Minister in the Federal

Government out of desperation saying: look, if you don't fix this thing we are going to be

losing hundreds of jobs. In fact, he said, he accused the government of being the worst

government, in respect to the coal mining industry, in the history of our nation. And they're

pretty stern words, but I think that they are accurate. Not only has the Government caused

this problem - not only for coal miners but for wine producers, barley producers, cotton

producers, red meat processors - but it has no ability whatsoever to fix the problem,

because it has no relationship whatsoever with our largest trading partner. Keith Pitt, David

Littleproud - none of these Ministers, Simon Birmingham - none of them can pick up the

phone to their counterpart in China, and ask the important question: how do we fix this?



CENATIEMPO: Okay, so what, I don't necessarily acknowledge that that is the case

because they say that they can pick up the phone, but let's say the…



FITZGIBBON: Stephen, no, no, no, They do not say that. They have all admitted, including

David Littleproud, on stage with me at the National Press Club only a week or more ago,

that they do have - they do not have any ability to pick up the phone to their counterpart.

Their counterparts are not taking their calls.



CENATIEMPO: The Prime Minister says that lines of communication are still open.



FITZGIBBON: Well I rest my case.



CENATIEMPO: Okay.



FITZGIBBON: The Prime Minister says one thing but his Ministers are saying a different

thing. Get one of them on your program tomorrow morning, ask them a direct question: can

they get their counterpart on the phone? If they’re honest they’ll tell you the answer is no.



CENATIEMPO: Can we do that, Eddy? Can we make it - let's make that happen. Okay

then. My question to you is, if that is the case, then what do we do?



FITZGIBBON: Well, now how do we fix a problem created by a by this government? It's

pretty difficult for me from my position but I think I've been quite - I don’t really want to use

the word ‘courageous’, but it's not been easy speaking out from Opposition about this issue

because so many Australians have concerns about the rise and rise of China and our

dependence on it. But this is no way to go about dealing with that challenge. We need a

strong relationship - only strong relationships bring good outcomes. This is our biggest

export market. We need it. The people in my region, where we export 100 million tonnes of

thermal - mainly thermal coal every year, desperately need it and I don't want to be losing

hundreds of workers going into Christmas 2020. It’s been a tough enough year as it is.



CENATIEMPO: Yeah, that will that we can agree on but I'll get back to the original

question and let's say for argument's sake I accept your position that all these Ministers

are having this problem. What have the backbenchers got to do with it.



FITZGIBBON: Sorry, what was your reference to the backbenchers?



CENATIEMPO: The CFMEU apparently is warning the Government backbenchers are

putting Australia's coal exports at risk.



FITZGIBBON: Yeah, he was making reference to people like George Christensen who

constantly attempt to curry political favour in their electorates by being critical of China,

because they believe there's a majority view in their electorates that China is a challenge

and a problem for Australia. But sadly it doesn't just stop with backbenchers like George

Christensen. The current Prime Minister, and even worse the Prime Minister before him,

Malcolm Turnbull, have regularly used provocative language towards our major trading

partner, language that serves no purpose for us. It serves Scott Morrison, a very, very

important purpose in his mind, and in the mind of Malcolm Turnbull. But it means it wins

them votes here in Australia. But I'll tell you Stephen it won’t be winning them too many

votes when barley producers have no market, wine producers have no market, et cetera,

et cetera. And of course coal miners are losing their jobs in great number.



CENATIEMPO: Yeah. And I guess that's the double-edged sword of that kind of rhetoric.

In a related - sort of related issue, banks are warning that tough national security tests for

foreign investment could lead to higher borrowing costs. Surely we need to get fair dinkum

about foreign investment though and make sure that it's only of benefit to Australia rather

than benefit to the foreign entities only.



FITZGIBBON: Well of course and Australia has always been dependent on the inflow of

foreign capital. We wouldn’t have built the Harbour Bridge and the Opera House otherwise.

Snowy - the Snowy Scheme would not have been built without foreign capital. We’re a

country, still, of only 25 million people. Therefore, we have a limited number of savers so

we need other people's capital and governments need to give guidance to make sure that’s

well spent and appropriately spent. We've always had - since 1975 we've had a Foreign

Investment Review Board which screens these investments and make sure they're not

counter to Australia's interest. But what the Government is doing is, is not only ramping-up

the architecture but ramping-up the language. It’s the language that really causes the

problem and they’ve introduced screening processes in the FIRB which are discriminatory,

you know, one rule for one country, one rule for another. And what the banks are basically

saying now is that investors are going to potentially get caught up in this new tougher

regime, in that people were [inaudible] if they do they’re going to have to run the gauntlet of

the Foreign Investment Review Board. Now foreign investors have lots of options around

the world, and they’re starting to look at Australia, or there's a risk they will, and just

declare it all too hard. Now, in agriculture alone, it's been a sense that we could need up to

a trillion dollars of foreign investment to give us the infrastructure in that sector we need by

2050, to capitalise on opportunities. And a trillion dollars is a lot of money, Stephen. We

don't have it here in Australia, we’ll be dependent on foreign capital and yes the

government needs to protect our national interest, but it's also got the very important job of

facilitating the correct investment.



CENATIEMPO: The problem is perception, too, and this is where and, you know, you

blame government or oppositions or anybody else for this, but I blame the social media

society we live in these days. The number of times I see idiots suggesting that, you know,

where some huge amount of our farming land has been sold off to China. Or any other

country for that matter. But China is always the first country that comes under scrutiny,

when the reality is the amount of our farming land that is under foreign ownership is

particularly small. How do we go about changing that rhetoric and changing that perception

in particularly the Redneck vote’s mind.



FITZGIBBON: Well, a good start would be for the backbenchers you're referring to, to stop

capitalising on the sentiment created on social media instead of rejecting it and explaining

to people it's not true. Instead they pick up the ball and run with it and make it worse, and

you're right, China's investment is still modest. It is growing but it’s modest. Often they

simply buy a farm and of course sell it back. It's not all one-way traffic. They can’t pick up a

farm and take it with them, of course, and we do have control over what gets exported and

what doesn't. So, we should be welcoming of the investment. Yes, we need to be judicious

and careful to screen it, to make sure it's always in our national interest. But we

desperately need it and we should not be scared of it.



CENATIEMPO: Just quickly, some farming groups are disappointed that the Government

has ruled out an illegal worker amnesty. They see it as a possible solution to Australia's

farm worker shortage. Geez, that’s walking along a razor's edge isn’t it?



FITZGIBBON: Yeah, and I'm disappointed, of course, that the Government has been so

inactive in this critical area, that all we are left with is a debate about whether we should

give an amnesty to illegal workers. I mean, it's had years to address this problem and, you

know, obviously it's been made worse by COVID and it's not the Government's fault. But it

hasn't given new urgency to the problem since we were hit by COVID. So this is where it's

come - you know, this is what it comes to, Stephen, a debate about amnesty because

that's about all the Government's left us with.



CENATIEMPO: I remind you it wasn't all that long ago that you were the Agriculture

Minister, Joel.



FITZGIBBON: More than seven years ago, Stephen. More than seven years ago. And in

this day and age, that is an eternity. But look, I'm very happy to say that Governments of all

political persuasions over many decades have failed to recognise and think about the fact

that we have an industry in agriculture that is dependent on about 50,000 foreign workers

every year. And we've failed to, you know, have a long-term think about that and to come

up with some permanent solutions. We have a real problem here and it's about time we

gave it some deep thought and started thinking about some changes to that architecture.



CENATIEMPO: Joel, this is why I have you on. You’re the closest thing to somebody who

calls it down the line for a partisan politician. Talk to you next week.



FITZGIBBON: Thanks Stephen.



ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641



