



The Hon Alan Tudge MP

A/g Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs

Transcript

ABC Melbourne Radio, Mornings with Virginia Trioli

10 February 2020



VIRGINIA TRIOLI: We’re going to stay on a story connected with this though. You will  remember last week, on Friday, we spoke to a heartbroken Angus Yuan, who was a friend of  Xiao Li - a very young man, 22, who was involved in a road crash in late January hear in  Victoria and was declared brain dead last Monday in the Royal Melbourne Hospital. He had  been here on a working visa from China, and his Mother Xing Lan Ren had been trying since  then to get a fast track visa to come a see her only son here in Melbourne before the life  support machines were turned off. She had agreed for her son to be an organ donor and  had been caught up in the coronavirus ban. Well after that interview we heard from the  Acting Minister for Immigration Alan Tudge that a fast track visa had been granted and she  has now arrived in the country. Alan Tudge, good morning. Good to talk to you again.

ALAN TUDGE: G’day, Virginia.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: I understand you've met Xiao Li's mother, Xing Lan Ren.

ALAN TUDGE: I have not met her personally, no. But what I can confirm for you and your  listeners, Virginia, is that since the discussion that we had on Friday, the Australian Border  Force Commissioner did grant her a visa, taking into account obviously the health  considerations, but obviously it's a compassionate consideration here too. And from that  moment she did get on a plane on Saturday night and arrived in the country on Sunday  morning, just yesterday morning, and was able to see her son at the Royal Melbourne  Hospital.

She's still in the country, she's visited him, she’s exited the hospital and now is in a self-  quarantine arrangement. And from what I understand Xiao Li will be undergoing the surgery  today for the organ harvesting. So it's, in some respects it is obviously a tragic story, but I'm  pleased that we were able to support Ms Ren to be able to get out into Australia quickly,  safely, see her son and properly plan for the funeral arrangements.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: Do you know what those funeral arrangements are or whether Xiao Li's  mother Xing Lan Ren will be able to take her son's body back to China with her?

ALAN TUDGE: From what I understand she will be able to do that. She'll be in the country, at  this stage my advice is probably a week or two weeks in a self-quarantining arrangement  and then we'll be taking the body with her as well, obviously post the coronial inquest into  it.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: As you say, it's an incredibly tragic story. I guess there's some hope in  there in that they - the mother so generously offered for her son to be an organ donor. So  there'll be some life that comes from his death.

ALAN TUDGE: Yeah, I think that's right. And it is an incredibly generous act that she has  made and that he's obviously making. And you know, we really thank her for her  compassion in this absolutely tragic situation for her. I'll also just make a shout out to the  Transport Accident Commission in Victoria, they've been intricately involved in managing  this situation. They were there at the arrival at the airport to greet her, to escort Ms Ren to  the hospital, make sure that she was looked after, and have taken care of all of her needs  while she's been here. Obviously, the TAC kick in because it was a motor vehicle accident  that Xiao Li was involved in which led to his tragic death. But they've done so well, as well at  working cooperatively with the federal agencies here too, so. But overall, of course, we  really feel for Ms Ren but as you say, life will come out of it through the very generous gift  of those organs.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: Exactly right. And there is at least that, and it reminds all of us to have that  conversation with our family members and to discuss openly the idea of being an organ  donor and not leaving it to that circumstance, it's another good reminder of that.

Alan Tudge, when we spoke on Friday, there was to me, a surprising number of people who  on our text line here, who were angry at the thought of Xiao Li's mother coming to town and  potential coronavirus infection and the like. What would you like to say about that and to  them about that?

ALAN TUDGE: So we've been very, very cautious here and I can understand that people  would be concerned. But it's a very careful balance here that on the one hand we wanted to  show deep compassion for Ms Ren to be able to see her son, on the other, we will never at  any stage put the public at risk. And so that's why the Australian Border Force Commissioner  assessed the situation very carefully. Ms Ren was not from Wuhan, the affected area, she  was from another part of China. She had a health check when she arrived. She was escorted  separately the entire way. And so there was no risk to the broader public from her being  here. So we were very careful in that regard knowing that we didn't want to put the  Australian public in any risk at all from her being here.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: You may not have heard the conversation just before you joined us, Alan  Tudge, this morning, but I was speaking with a Melbourne woman who had planned to go  on a cruise ship but this cruise ship - Royal Caribbean lines - have decided to ban any guests  on board their ships who hold a Chinese passport, regardless of whether they're a resident  of and regardless of how recently or how long ago they may have been in China. If you have  a Chinese passport, you can't board their ships. What's your response to that?

ALAN TUDGE: I didn't hear that story and this is the first that I've heard of it. I mean if those  facts are correct, it doesn't sound right. You may be a permanent resident in Australia for  example of Chinese heritage and have a Chinese passport and not have gone to China for  years and in that regard that person would be the same as myself. And so I don't think that  person should be discriminated against if that indeed is occurring.

But I'm just going on the facts which you have presented to me here, I'm not across it. And  often with these cases I always want to delve into the details and understand it fully  before…

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: Understandably, I'm actually holding a statement from the cruise lines and  that's exactly what they say. Regardless of your residency and regardless of when you were  last in China or Hong Kong, all holders of China or Hong Kong passports will not be allowed  on board.

ALAN TUDGE: Again, on the face of it that doesn't sound right, because clearly if you've  been in Australia for the last year, two, three, four, five years there's no additional risk, than  if you were born here and lived here your entire life and never travelled abroad. So that's  why it doesn't sound right to me.

I'd make a broader point here Virginia as well in that I certainly know from speaking to many  Chinese Australians and also going to places like The Glen Shopping Centre on the weekend,  that many are feeling it deeply. Some people are saying that they've faced, I mean, they  won't use, what words would they described it, that they're getting second glances, they  feel as if people are walking away from them a little bit. And my message there is I think it's  in a time for us to embrace and support the broader Chinese community. I think they're  really feeling it at the moment and certainly going to sample it somewhere like Doncaster  Shopping Centre or The Glen, Glen Waverley, there's no additional risks from going there.  That is the advice from the Chief Medical Officer to the government and if you don't support  those shopping centres, those businesses suffer at the same time. So we can support the  broader Chinese community by going about our daily business.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: Alan Tudge, good to talk to you, there’s a lot of topics to get through this  morning, we didn't get to them, maybe another time. Thanks so much.

ALAN TUDGE: Thanks very much Virginia.

VIRGINIA TRIOLI: Alan Tudge, Acting Minister for Immigration.



[Ends]

