

JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA  THURSDAY, 27 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECT: Morrison Government’s failures in aged care.

TOM CONNELL, HOST: Joining me live now is his opposite number, the shadow minister  for Ageing and Seniors, Julie Collins. Thanks for your time. Let's just clear up exactly  where Labor sits right now. Are you saying the Minister should resign?

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS, JULIE COLLINS: Well, clearly, the  Minister doesn't have the confidence of the Prime Minister. He has been removed from key  decision making things in his portfolio. I mean, when to stand up an aged care response  centre in a state when there's an outbreak, I would have thought is a key responsibility of  the Minister for Aged Care. So clearly, he doesn't have the confidence of the Prime  Minister. I think he's losing public confidence. And Australians need to know that the Aged  Care Minister is up to the job and frankly, we don't think he is at the moment.

CONNELL: Right, but Scott Morrison still has him in the role, so the evidence is he has  enough faith in him. Are you saying Richard Colbeck should resign or should be sacked?

COLLINS: We think the Prime Minister should remove the Minister. Clearly, the Minister  has not been doing his job to say that the missteps were that he didn't have the figures on  Friday, I think is a bit of an understatement. The missteps are that we have, 353 residents  who have died in aged care facilities. We've had over 3,000 infections in aged care  facilities in Australia. We had warning bells from what happened in the northern  hemisphere. We had the infections in Dorothy Henderson Lodge and Newmarch House in  New South Wales. We had reports into those. They told us what could go wrong. And then  we had the same things go wrong in Victoria. Clearly, we didn't learn the lessons. And  clearly, whatever the Federal Government has been doing is not enough. When they talk  about missteps and being sorry for the things they got wrong, they need to be very clear  about what they did get wrong and have confidence so people can have confidence that  they've actually fixed it. Because at the moment we're getting these sort of half-hearted  sorrys about things that have happened. But we're not getting very clear about what they  did wrong and how they're fixing it. Let's be very clear. Staff did not have proper training  when it comes to personal protection and infection control. Staff did not have proper

access to personal equipment that they needed. Clearly, the surge workforce strategy was  not sufficient. We've had in Victoria a series of facilities and nursing homes where people  have been left without the care they need, sometimes for days.

CONNELL: The number cited by Scott Morrison was that four aged care homes have had  major outbreaks in Victoria, he said mistakes were made and that was not acceptable. But  given the scale of the outbreak was it inevitable, we were going to see aged care homes  affected in this way in Victoria? That achieving a figure of zero homes with an outbreak  was always very unlikely.

COLLINS: Absolutely, when there is community transmission, you expect outbreaks, but  what you expect is the Federal Government to have done its job and to have learned the  lessons of the outbreaks in New South Wales, that clearly didn't happen. We had the same  issues happen in Victoria that we had happen in New South Wales, three months later. We  had three months to get it right. We had three months where we shouldn't have had issues  in some of these homes in Victoria. And let's be very clear, there are now 10 facilities that  have more than 100 infections linked to them. So we're not just talking about four facilities,  there's 129  facilities in Victoria that have had an aged care outbreak of some sort. Now all  of the families who have loved ones -

CONNELL: What is some sort though? I'm just asking what number we're talking about  when you say 129?

COLLINS: Absolutely. Absolutely it is. But imagine being somebody at home, Tom, who  has their family member in a facility that has whether it be one or 10 residents with COVID  thinking will my loved one, be next. What is going on in that facility? How do I find out?  How do I make sure my loved one gets the best care they need? That is the issue across  129 facilities in Victoria, we're talking over 3,000 infections.

CONNELL: Could it be simply a case of one worker has tested positive and not  necessarily in the home? And I'm just talking about not necessarily alarming people with  that figure, would they all be classified as an outbreak per say, or could it be one case  linked to them? And for now, they feel like they've got it under control?

COLLINS: Well, in some facilities, they will get it under control quickly, but the point is  we've now got more than 10 with over 100 infections. Clearly, something has gone wrong  in aged care in Victoria, and it's the Federal Government's responsibility to make sure that  they learnt the lessons of the northern hemisphere and what happened in New South  Wales so that it did not get to the level it has gotten to. In Victoria, 3,000 people, either  workers or residents, have had an infection in Victoria. It's clearly not good enough. And  clearly, Richard Colbeck didn't do enough in the months between April and the infection  and outbreak in Victoria to make sure people were ready.

CONNELL: So you're saying Richard Colbeck should go, does someone need to lose their  job from the Victorian Government for allowing this outbreak out of what was a disastrous  hotel quarantine system?

COLLINS: Well, what we've had in Victoria is a Premier stand up and take responsibility  and take questions every day and do a judicial inquiry into what has happened in Victoria.  And I'm sure that that will be dealt with in time in Victoria. What we have here is different in  terms of the aged care situation. We have one Minister who didn't learn from what



happened in facilities in New South Wales. And then three months later, we had the same  things go wrong in facilities in Victoria under his watch and the Federal Government's  watch.

CONNELL: Right and I understand and you made that point, people watching right now  will know, what's happened in Victoria is all traced back to hotel quarantine. It's all traced  back to a very poorly run system. No assistance from the ADF even though that happened  in other states. Yes Daniel Andrews can say the buck stops with me, what does that  mean? If no one loses their job as a result? That's not really taking responsibility is it?

COLLINS: Well I'm sure that Victoria will deal with that down the track, but here what we're  talking about with aged care is is that it's a federal responsibility, the Federal Government  regulates it, they fund it, it was the Federal Government's responsibility to make sure that  staff in facilities have the appropriate training in infection control and use of protection  equipment. It's the Federal Government's responsibility to make sure these facilities had  enough protection equipment. It's the Federal Government’s responsibility and call about  when masks were to be worn. So it's absolutely his responsibility.

CONNELL: We're nearly out of time and you've made that point. Wouldn't the fact that  you're calling for the Minister to go over what's happened there mean someone - you say  that will happen down the track - but does that mean someone in Victoria would have to  lose their job once we find out who was ultimately responsible for the disastrous hotel  quarantine?

COLLINS: That's up to the Victoria and Premier Daniel Andrews to resolve what's  happening with that. I have a view that Richard Colbeck is not up to his job and he's clearly  not doing his job.

CONNELL: I understand that but don't you see the point here? Voters will be saying if he  loses his job someone in Victoria should as well? Surely you can equate that easily.

COLLINS: The Federal Government is responsible for aged care. We're talking about what  happened in aged care facilities. Richard Colbeck is ultimately responsible for not having  learnt the lessons. Nobody's saying everything should have gone perfectly but we should  have learnt the lessons and he simply did not learn the lessons of what happened in those  other facilities.

CONNELL: Okay we are out of time, Julie Collins, appreciate your time today.

COLLINS: Thank you, Tom.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119









