

JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  HOBART  TUESDAY, 28 JULY 2020

SUBJECT: Victoria nursing home outbreaks.

JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS:We are  hearing more concerning reports out of what’s happening in aged care in  Victoria today. I want to start by extending my sympathies and those of the  Labor Party to the families who have lost loved ones. And also the families who  have got loved ones who are being impacted by COVID-19 in Victoria.

The Federal Government should have really learned from what happened in  outbreaks in New South Wales. They're not responding fast enough or doing  enough, soon enough in Victoria. Let’s be very clear here, we know what  happened in New South Wales. We should have learnt the lessons. When  we're still hearing concerning reports from family members not getting  communication about where their loved one is and if they're safe when they're  in an impacted facility, surely we can do better than that. These infections in  Victorian residential aged care facilities now have been going on for almost two  weeks.

I'm pleased they're getting more resources in Victoria today but the  Government should have learnt the lessons of what happened in New South  Wales. It needs to be ready for these outbreaks in every state across Australia  in aged care. When the Prime Minister says we have to learn to live with this  virus, then that means the Government needs to be prepared for outbreaks in  aged care right across the country including in Victoria. The Federal  Government runs the aged care system. There is currently a Royal  Commission into aged care in Australia because we know the system was  already in crisis prior to COVID-19 and now sadly, we're seeing the stress on  that system and the wonderful staff in aged care and the families and the  relatives who are trying to and having to deal with that.



My empathy really is with the staff, the family and the loved ones today,  particularly those family members who are not getting the information they need  about their loved one and what is happening. We need to do better. The  Government should be able to do better. I'm very pleased to hear reports that  the Prime Minister is coming back from his trip in Queensland to deal with the  residential aged care outbreaks in Victoria. We need to learn the lessons from  New South Wales. We need to act more quickly. When we're still hearing  reports in Victoria yesterday that aged care workers are visiting older  Australians in their homes without masks on because their provider doesn't  have any masks. Now masks have been mandatory in Victoria for some time -  we need to do better than that. When the Federal Government asked providers  do you have any PPE, when they set up an inbox for people to request, they  get 1,300 requests. Why did they not do an audit of how much protective  equipment those facilities had so that they could deal with these outbreaks?  There are reports today they're now sending now more protection equipment to  Victoria - two weeks later from the first outbreak in residential aged care. We  need to do better at this. The Federal Government should have learnt the  lessons of what happened in New South Wales, in Dorothy Henderson Lodge  and in Newmarch. They should be able to respond faster, to what is happening  to aged care in Victoria.

JOURNALIST: Can you give specific examples of when and where the Federal  Government should have stepped in? Are you suggesting for example that the  Federal Government should have provided PPE to those workers?

COLLINS: What I'm saying is the Federal Government should have known how  much PPE facilities in Victoria had. So that they could make an assessment  and get the logistics behind it quickly to get the gear there faster. We shouldn't  have to be playing catch-up all the time. We should have learnt the lessons  from that. In Newmarch House in New South Wales, one of the big lessons was  the families didn't get enough information at the right time about their loved  one. We knew the communication with families was bad in Newmarch House  and the Government stepped in but that was 12 days after the first death at  Newmarch. In Victoria hopefully we've learnt more from that. Hopefully they're  getting people into these facilities to communicate with families earlier and  sooner to give them accurate information about what is happening to their loved  ones.

JOURNALIST: We've seen I think today the Prime Minister has asked Richard  Colbeck to look into these communications issues. What do you make of that?  What would you like to see from the Minister?

COLLINS: We saw what happened in Newmarch House with the lack of  communication, we saw the heartache and the impact it had on families and

loved ones, and the residents themselves. Here we are, it's been almost two  weeks since the first infection in Victoria in residential aged care and we're  looking at it today? Why didn't we learn the lessons of what happened in New  South Wales? Why has it taken two weeks?

JOURNALIST: What's your position, I guess, on the nursing home or the aged  care facility operator's role in this? Do you think that they have responded  adequately?

COLLINS: The point is the Federal Government runs the aged care system.  The Federal Government regulates the aged care system. If providers weren't  ready, the Federal Government should have known that. It's the Federal  Government's job to know that. That is the whole point of them regulating aged  care in Australia. They actually need to know what is the preparedness of aged  care facilities in Australia today to deal with COVID-19 outbreaks and to deal  with other emergencies.

JOURNALIST: Do you think that there are questions, though, about providers  and their response to the coronavirus?

COLLINS: Well, I think the Royal Commission will look at that later. The issue  here is the issues are widespread. They have been known for a long time.  Aged care in Australia was in crisis prior to COVID. We knew that there were  issues around staffing. We know there are not enough staff. We know they're  not paid enough. And we knew this before COVID. We knew this a long time  ago when the Royal Commission was called. To say that we didn't know all of  this would happen or that it wouldn't happen this way is just not true.

JOURNALIST: So there are criticisms that too many health workers and aged  care workers have inadvertently infected themselves and others because  they've not been shown how to properly put on and take off personal protective  gear. What's the point of handing out PPE if it's not being used properly and  people are still getting sick?

COLLINS: But part of the preparedness that the regulator and the Federal  Government should know is: are people trained in how to put on their personal  protection equipment? Have they been shown it properly? Are they trained  appropriately? The Federal Government regulates aged care. It’s their job to  know whether or not the workers can actually put on their PPE.

JOURNALIST: And what are we learning about that the management and  regulation of nursing homes? What is this showing us about how they’re  regulated and managed.

COLLINS: I think what it is showing is what I’ve said for a long time. The



Federal Government regulator doesn’t have enough resources and the  legislation is not enough for them to do their job appropriately. I said this when  the Government made the decision to join up the Complaints Commission and  the Quality Commission. I said at the time, are we confident that this regulator  has the powers they need and the resources they need to do their job.

JOURNALIST: And lastly are you, I guess your office would be hearing from  families who are quite distressed. That must be quite difficult?

COLLINS: It is incredibly difficult to hear stories of families contacting aged  care facilities trying to find out whether their loved one is infected with COVID.  In some cases, trying to find out whether or not their loved one is alive. They  need answers to these. The Government needs to step in on the  communication and make sure that people are getting the correct information in  a timely manner. It’s not too much to ask in the 21st century.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119







