RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS AM AGENDA

THURSDAY, 29 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECTS: AFL Grand Final; US Election; Labor united on energy; economy.



TOM CONNELL, HOST: Joining me live now is Deputy Labor Leader, Richard Marles, thanks

for your time. Well done for dusting yourself off after Saturday night, of course we won't,

maybe it's too early to delve into that.



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Way too

early, too soon.



CONNELL: The US election, though, there seems to be genuine fear around the transition,

because Donald Trump was asked of course, would he abide by the result essentially, he

wouldn't say yes. It's almost unprecedented, isn't it?



MARLES: Look, I mean, there's a lot of commentary about this, firstly, we've just got to let this

play out. My guess is that this plays out in a much more uneventful way than people are

thinking. I, you know, I have faith in the American democracy and the way it will operate. And

so my suspicion is that this will be an election which is respected.



CONNELL: Even in a very close result, mail in ballots, the skepticism already mentioned by

Donald Trump, you’ve got a lot of faith.



MARLES: Oh, well, I do have a lot of faith in the American democracy. And, you know, I've

read, you know, some quite apocalyptic kind of commentary about possibilities. I mean, firstly,

who knows what's going to happen. So, we need to just see that, but I do have faith that the

American system will handle this in its stride.



CONNELL: And do you think the world will breathe a bit of a sigh of relief if Donald Trump

does lose?



MARLES: Look, I, from Australia's point of view, and this is the point that we really need to

focus on, Australia is not an issue in this election, like the relationship between America and

Australia is not an issue. A re-elected Donald Trump will still be an administration, which is -

sees the alliance with Australia as very important. And the elected Biden administration will

see the same thing. So that's fantastic, from an Australian point of view. And that's from the

perspective of Australian politicians, that's really, as far as we should take it. That the Alliance

is critically important to our national interest. It's central to our strategic policy, it's central to our

national security. And under a re-elected President Trump or a newly elected President Biden

that will remain the case.



CONNELL: And let other countries and concerns around Europe, NATO, whatever it might be,

let them worry about themselves?



MARLES: We will have issues that we raise within the context of the alliance whoever is the

president. Now, it's really important, I think that we are advocating to the United States around

seeing an economic strategy in East Asia. And given that, you know, they are not participating

in the Transpacific Partnership. That's clearly in Australia's national interests, that's going to be

as much a matter of advocacy to a Democratic administration, as it would be to a re-elected

Trump administration. So, we'll have our issues but the important point here to understand is,

from an American perspective, their relationship with Australia is not at issue in this election,

both sides greatly support it and that's a wonderful place for our country to be.



CONNELL: We have two major unions pushing Labor to be unified on gas as a transition fuel,

why do you think they need to say that? Or they feel the need to say that?



MARLES: Well, they're representing their membership, obviously, in briefing members of the

Labor caucus, but the points that are making one eminently sensible, and, you know, I think,

very consistent with the place that we're at. We understand completely that gas is a

fundamentally important industry for this country, and we support it, Labor supports the gas

industry.



CONNELL: So just on that though, there's clearly been some tension between Mark Butler and

Joel Fitzgibbon on the extent of support, for example, for gas, talk about targets as well, but

gas seems to be the central debate right now, has that been settled?



MARLES: I think it's settled. I think what you see is a Resources Minister or Shadow Minister,

who's speaking in respect of resources, which is what you would expect and the Minister

responsible for Climate Change and the promotion of renewable energy, doing the same there.

But here's where both Mark and Joel agree, and indeed, there is agreement across the

caucus, we support the Australian gas industry, I mean Australia is the largest gas exporter in

the world, of course, we support the gas industry. We understand how important the role it is in

electricity generation. I mean, for some states, like Western Australia, it's the majority of

electricity generation. And it's a critical feedstock in relation to very significant manufacturing in

this country, including in my electorate, in Geelong. We won’t have a petrochemical industry in

Australia, without gas being a critical feedstock to it and we won't be able to recycle plastics in

this country, which is an important environmental outcome without having that industry in

place, so gas matters.



CONNELL: There are some indisputable uses but there's been more debate around how

much it might be used as a transition. It's still a fossil fuel, as I said there was clearly

disagreement between Mark Butler and Joel Fitzgibbon. My understanding is that's been

settled now.



MARLES: It is, it is settled. And everything I've just articulated is a view that is held by Mark

Butler and held by Joel Fitzgibbon. We also want to see net zero emissions by 2050. We want

to see an increase in the renewable sector in this country, it is possible to be both and that is

what we are.



CONNELL: But just on that, so there has, there is no longer, there has been some sort of

settled position between those two, there's no longer disagreement?



MARLES: The position between Mark and Joel, between them and across the caucus is

settled. And it's settled on the terms that I've just articulated.



CONNELL: Is it and how does it land in terms of being settled and gas use, is it along the lines

of the government's gas led recovery? Does Labor say, ‘yep, we'll give that a big tick?’



MARLES: Well, the gas strategy that's been put forward by the government is all well and

good, but it's a fair way into the future, if we're being honest, like there are a whole lot of issues

around gas, which present themselves right now that need to be focused upon. Like, I've got

manufacturers in my electorate who absolutely want to see more gas come on line, but that's a

few years down the track, they've got a much more immediate issue as to whether or not when

they're renewing their existing gas contracts, they're going to be able to do it on terms which

enable them to continue to manufacture. And that means we've got to see some form of

reservation on the East Coast, we support that. And so, you know, it's fine. But it's not the

whole story and there needs to be a much more here-and-now present policy from the

government, which we're not seeing.



CONNELL: Is that going to be easier for Labor now to come at this? Again, just finally, on the

Fitzgibbon-Butler question, that there was recognition, something there to be settled. There's

clearly the tension there.



MARLES:  Again, I think what we were seeing was a Shadow Resources Minister speaking in

respect of resources, which is what you would expect that person to do and a Shadow Climate

Minister speaking in relation to climate.



CONNELL: But normally they do that, they don’t do that with contrasting views they had that,

they no longer do, you have to sort of recognise the problem to say we've solved it.



MARLES: Yeah, and we have a settled, clear position, which I've just articulated. We want to

see net zero emissions by 2050. That actually, I assume that is the policy of the government,

although they never say it. And the reason why I assume it is because it's a consequence of

being a party to the Paris Accord, which our nation is.



CONNELL: The only point there is that the Paris Agreement could theoretically have Australia

with some emissions, other countries with negative but-



MARLES:  But that's, a commitment to zero net emissions is the fundamental outcome of

Paris.



CONNELL:  Well, it's an overall goal in the second half of the century-



MARLES: At the same time, we support-



CONNELL: I just want to get quickly on inflation. So, it's back up to 1.6 per cent. It's still well

below the RBA target band and seems driven by mainly petrol and childcare. So, I mean, costs

necessarily aren't going up that high in households at the moment.

MARLES: We are obviously concerned with the increase in childcare costs. And that's why,

you know, we were announcing the policy that we did on-



CONNELL: But it came off a base of zero for a lot of people.



MARLES: Sure, but it's still a situation where for many families, childcare remains inaccessible

and unaffordable in the sense that there comes a point in time where to go back and do more

days a week actually ends up not being financially viable for a given family. You know, we

want to make sure that childcare as an example is accessible in a way, which increases

participation within the workforce, which by and large is women. And that's a critical thing. It is,

obviously, it's great news in what we're seeing in Victoria, I think there is hope that we are

seeing the economy opening up again, and we do want to have hope for the economy going

forward. But this is a moment for the country to actually have some vision about an Australia

which is better in the future than it was going into coronavirus. And I think we need to change

our cultural relationship to science, for example, so that we are climbing the technological

ladder and making it much more a feature of our economy going forward. Childcare is a critical

reform. What you get from Labor here is vision about what the economy should be going

forward. What you get from the government is a whole lot of spending of money with very little

to show for it.



CONNELL: Richard Marles, appreciate your time today. Thank you.



MARLES: Thanks, Tom.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363

