



JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC MELBOURNE

WEDNESDAY, 25 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Impact of Coronavirus on the economy; Support payment

delays; Support for small and medium sized business; Concerns about

workers; Concerns about renters; Virtual Parliament.



VIRGINIA TRIOLI, ABC MELBOURNE: Jim Chalmers, good morning and

thanks for joining us.



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: Good morning, Virginia.



TRIOLI: First of all, there has been much discussion about whether a kind of

social wage should be paid generally. We've got supplementary payments

coming down the line and we can get to a discussion of that in a moment. But

can you see a compelling argument - looking as disinterestedly as you can at

the reality of Australia's financial position - for the need and the justification for

a so-called social wage?



CHALMERS: The Government's taken some steps towards that with the

additional payments for people who are on the JobSeeker payments. We

welcome that and we supported that very quickly through the Parliament. Most

people in Australia are concluding that more could be done and that the steps

that have been taken so far haven't been sufficient to see people through a

very difficult period. If there are suggestions for how more support can get out

the door more quickly, then obviously we'd be in the cart for that.



TRIOLI: What are your suggestions?



CHALMERS: First of all, in terms of what was proposed our suggestion was to

inject a sense of urgency. It's a bit troubling to us that some of these payments

won't reach people for another five weeks when it comes to business. Some of

the payments don't happen until July -



TRIOLI: Supplementary payments, yes.



CHALMERS: Yes, some of those. That's a concern to us. We've put forward

those concerns in a constructive way. We need to inject more of a sense of

urgency. There are still gaps in what's being proposed. For example, for New

Zealanders living in Australia there's still an issue. There's still an issue for

people who might not be eligible because of how much their spouse earns.

There are still gaps like that in the system so we're concerned about that as

well. Most of all, one of the things that people are really noticing in the last

couple of days is that Centrelink hasn't been geared up to deal with the

massive demand that we've seen.



TRIOLI: We know we're all working from home so who have we got there in the

background?



CHALMERS: That's little Annabel making her Victorian ABC debut.



TRIOLI: I hope she's demanding to watch ABC kids, is she?



CHALMERS: She typically is, yes.

TRIOLI: Okay. Alright. We can put up with any background noise of that kind.

That's just the reality we live in. When it comes to the real challenge of

tenancies and evictions, and we've heard just from the Premier that in the next

National Cabinet which is expected to take place on Friday, that's going to be

under serious consideration. What does the Opposition believe should happen

there?



CHALMERS: Please just repeat the start of your question, sorry Virginia?



TRIOLI: Of course. On the pressing issue right now of tenancies and the threat

of evictions because people can't make their payments but also on the other

end of it, landlords are required to keep making their payments to the banks for

mortgages they hold. How should all of that in that long daisy chain of events,

how should that be managed?



CHALMERS: I think one of the biggest issues, Virginia, that we've got to

manage at the moment is the issue of rents and tenancies. The Government

flagged that they would be working with the states on these issues. We

understood that this was going to be one of the outcomes of last night's

meeting of the National Cabinet. Unfortunately, that doesn't seem to be the

case. What we need here is to make sure that people aren't evicted because

they lost their job because of the virus. We want to make sure that people can

hang onto their tenancy, so that people aren't kicked out onto the street. As my

colleagues Jason Clare, Linda Burney and others have pointed out this is

something which is still substantially not addressed. We're ready, willing and

able to play a constructive role in trying to fix it.



TRIOLI: And do you feel it's working constructively? I mean, for weeks now,

sitting in this chair, I've been acutely aware that I do not want to be the person

sitting here carping for the sake of it, finding fault for the sake of it. At the same

time, you need to speak truth to power and call those in power to account. That

is my job. But one also needs to walk a careful line here of understanding that

it's a growing problem. Do you get a sense that all the resources, all the

intellectual resources that are available to the Government and those in charge

are being deployed at the moment usefully?



CHALMERS: Just on your first point, we're all walking that fine line in trying to

find the right balance between being supportive, but also being constructive

and recognising that being constructive doesn't mean being silent when there

are issues that need to be addressed. Everyone's trying to do that and I want to

acknowledge the work of you and your colleagues at the national broadcaster

trying to provide this kind of information. From our point of view, what we really

need here is clarity, urgency and coordination. It's very clear from the reaction

to the Prime Minister's press conference last night that people don't feel like

they're getting enough of any of those things. We need to quickly make sure

that we can get the information out there so that people can act upon it. Every

family is making decisions about how they respond here. The onus is on the

nation's leaders to be part of the solution rather than part of the problem. My

fear is that after last night people have more questions than answers, that there

wasn't enough clarity. If you listen to Carla who called in to you a moment ago

who is a hairdresser, people have different views. What we really need is that



leadership, that urgency and that clarity. I think we're getting it from Premier

Andrews. We need to get it from all of our leaders.



TRIOLI: Very quickly before I let you go, what's the possibility of a virtual

Parliament being called?



CHALMERS: There's the capacity to make some of those arrangements. I

thought it was a bit disappointing that the Government just cancelled

Parliament until August. You've got to be sensible, there needs to be

contingencies in place. We recognise that maybe not every sitting week can go

ahead but we didn't support just cancelling everything until August. We think

that there will need to be additional steps taken. The first couple of waves of

stimulus from the Government won't be enough to prevent job losses and

business closures. We need to give ourselves the capacity to come together, to

agree on what additional steps need to be taken, and we also need to

scrutinise the steps that have been taken so far. What's been announced so far

is not perfect, but it's urgent. There are issues with superannuation, with the

assistance for small business not guaranteeing that it will flow to workers or

keep workers on, and with the payments which I ran through before. We need

the Parliament to do its job. Ideally it wouldn't have been cancelled until August.



TRIOLI: Well, let's see if you can convene virtually - that's been floated. I'm

hoping to get some clarity also from the Speaker of the House about that. Jim

Chalmers, thanks so much.



CHALMERS: Thank you, Virginia.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













