

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY  DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  WEDNESDAY, 2 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: The Morrison Government running a protection racket for Richard  Colbeck; Tony Abbott’s appalling speech; aged care workers being left with one  glove; neglect in aged care; Prohibiting Items in Immigration Detention Bill; skilled  migration; Scott Morrison’s failure to train local workers; JobKeeper; Labor’s  support of the Citizenship Cessation Bill.

KRISTINA KENEALLY, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE AND SHADOW  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Well, yesterday in the Senate we saw the Government  running a protection racket for Richard Colbeck. Under John Howard, when there was one  kerosene bath incident, Bronwyn Bishop, the Minister for Aged Care lost her job. What  does it take in this Government to lose your job?

Yesterday Richard Colbeck told us there were over 460 deaths in aged care in Australia.  One kerosene bath under John Howard, the Aged Care Minister Bronwyn Bishop loses her  job. 460 deaths in aged care under Richard Colbeck and what does the Government do?  Defend him. He has still got his job.

Richard Colbeck is the Minister for Aged Care but really he's the Minister for Walking  Away. He walked away from the Senate. He walks away from media conferences. He  walks away from journalist’s questions. He walks away from accountability. The only place  Richard Colbeck should be walking is back to his office to clear his desk; do the  honourable thing and resign. There is an aged care crisis in Australia. There is no plan to  manage coronavirus - the Royal Commission told us so, the New South Wales  Government told us so. But what do we have? We have a Minister for aged care who  shrugs his shoulders and says “death is a function of the aged care system”. Not my  words; his words - “death is a function of the age care system”.

We heard Tony Abbott, last night, and I'm going to read Tony Abbott's actual words. Tony  Abbott, the former Prime Minister, who presided over cuts to age care, Tony Abbott said  last night about coronavirus and aged care: “It has never stopped families from electing to  make elderly relatives as comfortable as possible while nature takes its course.”



Tony Abbott is calling for Australian families to take a decision to just make their relatives  as comfortable as possible while nature - coronavirus - takes its course. That's appalling.  By Tony Abbott’s standards Richard Colbeck’s doing a fine job, because Richard Colbeck  is just letting old people die. He's just letting old people die in residential aged care.

And by the way, Richard Colbeck has failed not just with the coronavirus but with the aged  care system for the entire time he has been in the portfolio. Last year, a Royal Commission  report called “Neglect”. Neglect, just focus on that word, let's understand what neglect  means why the Royal Commission said neglect under Richard Colbeck was what was  happening in our aged care system.

We have amazing workers in aged care. They do so much; I’ve met with them. They’re in  tears when they tell me how hard they’re working. They want to give that care to their  residents. They know that they don't have the resources or the time to do it. They know  they’ve been starved of those resources by the Government. Here's what the Royal  Commission found.

Aged care workers - they've got one glove; one glove, all day. Aged care workers under  this Morison Government under Richard Colbeck are being given one glove all day to do  things like feed residents, shower residents, change incontinence pads for residents,  provide personal care for residents. One glove. Aged care workers are being asked to  decide which hand do they put it on - the left to the right? How often do they actually touch  their residents knowing that one glove is not sufficient for infection control?

The aged care system under Richard Colbeck has seen residents being left with maggots  in their mouths. Open sores with ants crawling through them. With malnourishment. With  residents being left alone in their rooms for hours without food, without showering. This is  the “neglect” that the Royal Commission talks about. One glove for carers and residents  left alone with open sores, maggots in their mouths, malnourished, signs of physical  abuse, signs of bruising. It's horrifying. No Australian deserves to be treated this way.  Under Tony Abbott's plan, people should just be allowed to die. Under Richard Colbeck’s  stewardship of the Aged Care portfolio older Australians are being left to die.

JOURNALIST: Senator, what does it say about the Prime Minister's leadership that  Richard Colbeck is still the Aged Care Minister?

KENEALLY: This is a Prime Minister who hates accountability, never takes responsibility.  He's always there for the photo opp, never there for the follow through. This is a Prime  Minister who will not accept what everybody knows - that aged care is a federal  responsibility and that this Government has cut the aged care budget, has presided over a  system of neglect as the Royal Commission said and has left a hapless and incompetent,  bumbling minister in Richard Colbeck in the portfolio. Older Australians, all Australians,  deserve better.

JOURNALIST: Senator in the House of Reps, I know that’s not where you are, but the  Prohibiting Items in Immigration Detention Facilities is going to be debated there. What are  your thoughts on that? Is Labor going to be supporting that particular Bill?

KENEALLY: Let's be clear. Illegal actions are illegal even in immigration detention centres.  I see Richard, excuse me. I see Alan Tudge out and about claiming that he knows about

cases of sexual exploitation material being possessed by people in immigration detention  centres. Hey, wake up Alan. Possession of child sexual exploitation material is already  illegal. Take the phones off the people who have that material. You already have the power  to do so. State and federal laws give it to you. I am appalled Alan Tudge is standing by and  not doing anything about people in immigration detention centres who are breaking the  law. The laws are in place, use them.

Labor will not be supporting this legislation because this legislation denies people in  immigration detention, most of whom have never committed a crime, most of whom are  there for administrative detention. For those people who are there having finished a prison  sentence, they need to be deported, and we saw the Government move a whole group of  those people to Christmas Island. The Government needs to explain why they're not  deporting these people. The Government needs to explain why they're not using existing  powers to deal with what is already illegal. But what we will not stand by and see is this  Government deny people access to a phone to be able to call a lawyer, to be able to call  their family members.

There is nobody out there who supports this law except the Government. Of 135  submissions to the Senate inquiry, only the Government and the two Government  contractors support these laws. So let me be clear, Alan Tudge. Use the powers you've  already got to deal with the illegal activities that you say are happening.

JOURNALIST: On the same portfolio, we've seen today a list of 17 high priority skills that  are designed to be - or are being prioritised to try and fill critical skill shortages. Have you  seen that list, and are you used to sort of surprised by the suddenness and the lack of  detail around that?

KENEALLY:  Let's be clear the situation we’re in - we have 1 million unemployed  Australians. We know from the Government's own projections that another 400,000  Australians will be unemployed by Christmas. We have a Government that has no jobs  plan. They're only plan is to freeze the pension, to cut JobKeeper. They've got no plan to  grow employment for Australians. They've got no plan for economic growth. Today we're  going to see possibly the worst ever, economic growth figures in the history of this country.  And yet we've got a Government, and particularly Scott Morrison and Josh Frydenberg,  who have no plan for jobs or growth. Now, Australians will accept skilled migration, if there  is a genuine skills shortage. But in a time of high unemployment, and in a time when the  Morison Government - for seven years this Liberal Government has cut funding to training,  has cut funding for skills. The question has to be asked what is the Government doing  about training and skills for Australians when there is a genuine skill shortage? So, while  we will accept, as a country, skilled migration while there's a skill shortage, the real  challenge for this Government is to outline how they're going to provide the skills and the  training for Australians to fill those skill gaps.

JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed to see JobKeeper… [inaudible]

KENEALLY: No, look, it is really important that we get the changes for JobKeeper in place  and provide that certainty. Now, of course, this Government has only got one plan, which is  to cut JobKeeper. They're also cutting superannuation. Well, that's what they’ve hinted at.  They haven't ruled it out. They are freezing the pension. They're going to cut Newstart  back to its original level - $40 a day. That's this Government's plan for the Australian  people - in the time of our greatest economic crisis, we've got our first recession in 30



years, we're going to the worst national account figures today. What is this Government's  plan? No jobs plan, cut support for Australians in a time of need. Come on, what are you  doing over there? Scott Morrison? Josh Frydenberg. You've had plenty of time to  understand the situation that Australians are in. Get a plan that supports them.

Can I say something else about some legislation that's before the House today? Peter  Dutton has introduced legislation to change the way in which people who engage in  terrorist conduct and are dual citizens would lose their citizenship. Labor strongly supports  these laws. This is a long overdue reform. Removing the automatic loss of citizenship, and  replacing it with a ministerial decision making model is something that Labor has called for.  It is something that our national security agencies have called for. It is an important and  necessary step. Now Labor has made clear to the Government, we support this legislation.  We expect it to be passed this week, and we will interrupt debate on other legislation to  ensure the quick and smooth passage of this bill through the Parliament. If Peter Dutton  fails to get this bill up, he is failing our national security agencies. He has no excuse. Labor  is here to assist the passage of this legislation. And I call on Peter Dutton to ensure that  this bill, the citizenship loss provisions bill, is put through the House and the Senate this  week without delay.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110







