MEDIA RELEASE Tuesday 17 November 2020

AUSTRALIA-GERMANY RESEARCH COLLABORATION BOOSTED BY $1.2 MILLION

Predicting falls among the elderly, making construction materials more durable, and using artificial intelligence to improve literacy programs in

schools are among projects funded by the Australia-Germany Joint Research Cooperation Scheme this year.

The $1.2 million in funding announced today will enable early career researchers from 19 Australian universities to partner with their

counterparts in Germany on 32 projects.

Universities Australia Chief Executive Catriona Jackson said the Australia-Germany Joint Research Collaboration Scheme has resulted in

significant investment in the innovation and research relationship between Australia and Germany.

“These early collaborations set the stage for deep and lasting cooperative work, the kind of research that delivers in spades for both

nations,” Ms Jackson said.

“If there was ever a time to recognise that, it is now, when research is so central to the global fight against COVID-19.”

The Australia-Germany Joint Research Cooperation Scheme has been running since 2015 and is an initiative of Universities Australia and

the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD) - Germany’s national agency for the support of international academic cooperation.

“Applications to the scheme have been consistently high - including this year, despite the COVID-19 global pandemic. This is a testament to

the strength of the scheme and the value our researchers and universities see in collaborating with partners in Germany,” Ms Jackson said.

Since 2015, more than $14 million in funding has been awarded to 398 projects.

Projects awarded funding in 2018 and 2019 for research activities scheduled to take place in 2020 have had their funding carried forward to

2021 to account for current travel restrictions.

Funding for the Australian researchers is provided by Australian universities and the cost of administering the scheme is supported

by the Department of Education, Skills and Employment.

More information about the scheme is available on the Universities Australia website.

Peter Lloyd

David Rose

Bella Counihan

0480 031 061

media@universitiesaustralia.edu.au

