





SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Finance  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Leader of the Government in the Senate

Senator for South Australia

TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  2GB, Drive with Luke Grant.        Topics: MYEFO; JobKeeper; Australia-China trade relations; state borders;  17/12/20  03:43PM

Luke Grant: Now, as we mentioned, the Mid-Year Fiscal and Economic Outlook has been released today.  The budget deficit is $16 billion lower than had been forecast just two months ago. It’s reliant on plenty of  things like state borders remaining open, a vaccine from March, and the containment of localised outbreaks.  On the line is the Finance and Trade Minister Simon Birmingham. Senator Birmingham, great to talk to you. I  hope you’re well.

Simon Birmingham: G’day, Luke. It’s great to speak with you again too. Thanks for the opportunity.

Luke Grant: Not at all. And to you. I appreciate your time very much indeed. It’s 10 weeks and down $16  billion. We are talking forecasts here, but it’s changed in a very short period of time. For people who think: oh,  well, you know, we can’t rely on these forecasts. What do you say to them, Senator?

Simon Birmingham: Well, it has changed a bit, but people, I think, need to appreciate that we are dealing  with, of course, incredibly challenging circumstances. What is pleasing about today’s update is the forecasts  have by and large all changed in the right direction. So we’ve seen more Australians get back into work faster  than we had anticipated, and that’s evidenced by today’s employment data, with now another 90,000 jobs  created over the month of November; 84,000 of those, full-time jobs. And we’ve got around 740,000 jobs that  have been created across the country in the last six months. So that getting people back to work is happening  faster than we had expected, which is good news. And what that means, of course, is that there is less  demand on government payments, more government revenue coming in in terms of what it means for tax  forecasts. And so all of that is the type of virtuous cycle that we want to keep continuing into the future by  driving that jobs recovery and growth, which is so essential to our success.

Luke Grant: You’ve been very measured. I’ve watched with interest what you’ve had to say about China.  But it doesn’t appear like the trade relationship is going to repair itself well with the help of you and others  anytime soon. To what extent have you included that in these figures?

Simon Birmingham: Luke, I think you make a reasonable observation there, that a high degree of patience  is going to be necessary in relation to the China trade relationship. We will have to maintain a sense of calm  as a country in supporting our exporters as they seek to access other markets and pursue other opportunities  which we’ve created for them through trade deals with a raft of other nations that we’ve secured. We’ve got to  maintain consistency in all of our policies and values. That means being consistent about not selling out  Australian values, maintaining our national security settings, but also consistent in the message that we send  to China, which is that we value the partnership with them and we want to actually sit down and resolve these  issues to enable our exporters and businesses to get back to business. Now in today’s budget update, we  indeed have updated various forecasts taken from agriculture and resources departments and agencies that  look at some of the decisions China has taken, such as their duties they’re applying to barley and wine, and  this is all factored into the improved overall outlook, which reflects the fact that some things are getting a little  bit more challenging, such as those issues. But elsewhere, we continue to see strong recovery from the  COVID recession, and that’s what we’re very focused on making sure we continue.

Luke Grant:  How do you account for all those people that will come off government benefits, those that  have had their jobs maintained, or at least have received a payment? Thankfully, I think you’ve done a brilliant



job with the Government by not signing Australia up for years and years of extra payments like previous  governments have done. This had a start point and will have an end point, which frankly it should. But when  that comes along, will there be- is there a concern about what happens to the economy at that point?

Simon Birmingham: If you look back right to the start of when programs like JobKeeper were born, and  the Government set out some very clear principles that were going to guide our decision making through this.  That support that we had to provide should be temporary, it should be targeted, and it should be  proportionate. And we’ve sought to really stick to those principles on the way through, recognising that this  was an incredible period of time with great uncertainty as you’ve said, but the temporary nature is important  because we know the pandemic will end. This isn’t a shock to the Australian economy because there was  anything particularly wrong with the Australian economy. It's a shock because there was a global pandemic by  the name of COVID-19 that’s hit all nations around the world.

So, that's why we thought support should be temporary, targeted and proportionate, which is where we've  really sought to, in terms of programs like JobKeeper and the JobSeeker supplement, step them down over a  period of time, adjust the rate of that support, adjust the different eligibility criteria, in recognition that you didn't  want to have a significant shock that came when those programs came to an end. And I think, again, what  we've seen in terms of not only today's economic update, but also today's employment data, is that those  decisions have been demonstrated so far to be the right ones, that we are seeing that growth in people getting  back into jobs, more people coming off of JobKeeper than we had anticipated, which means that the step  downs that we had sought to calibrate are working in terms of their calibration of people moving swiftly and  quickly as they can off of these programs, and businesses getting back on their feet and graduating from  reliance on these programs, which enables us to stay the course in terms of keeping that temporary and  targeted nature of the programs.

Luke Grant: We’re speaking to Senator Simon Birmingham, the Australian Finance and Trade Minister. If  there is a state border closure, Senator, even if there is for a week or two, do we have the knowledge of what  impact that has on the figures? I assume somewhere someone said, you know, if one state or two states  close their borders to, for example, New South Wales, that will have some kind of impact. And do you know  what that impact is?

Simon Birmingham: So, obviously, there’s a- it depends to that as to which state closes to another state…

Luke Grant: Of course.

Simon Birmingham: … and the scale of impact there. But we do know that there are real impacts. The  only week in recent months in which consumer confidence went backwards rather than improved was the  week in which South Australia faced its cluster, wherein lockdown there was announced and where states  were variously closing their borders to South Australia. And so, that reverberated across the nation with  consumer confidence slipping backwards, whereas every other month it has grown and grown and grown to  very, very strong levels again now. So, people will understandably look at what's happening in New South  Wales with a degree of concern as to what does this mean. But the message, and I gave it on Perth radio a  couple of hours ago, that I would urge people, including the different state premiers, is to recognise that what  Gladys Berejiklian and the New South Wales Government have done through the course of this year is world  leading in terms of the capacity to be able to identify where different COVID clusters have come from, to get  on top of them through world class contact tracing and isolating practices, and to ultimately extinguish those  clusters. Tthe New South Wales Government has shown a capacity to do that time and time again. And I  encourage the other states to recognise that capacity, to give it time to work, rather than to risk undermining  the returning confidence that we're seeing for Australians to be able to cross state borders again, plan to  reunite with loved ones ahead of Christmas, plan work trips and other things that ultimately help to underpin  recovery of jobs in some of the areas of the economy that remain relatively more fragile than those that have  come back already.

Luke Grant: Simon, time has got us. Thank you so much. You're very generous with it. Can I wish you and  your family all the best for Christmas.

Simon Birmingham: Thank you, Luke. And to all of your listeners, you've done an incredible job out there  showing great Aussie resilience this year. Let's keep it going into hopefully a much better 2021.

Luke Grant: Thank you, Senator Simon Birmingham.

Media Contacts  Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644

Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.

