







The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology

The Hon Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

SUBMISSIONS SOUGHT ON COVID-19 VACCINE & TREATMENT  PRODUCTION

11 August 2020

The Morrison Government’s vaccine and treatment strategy is set to take another  positive step forward, with the Government putting a call out to local manufacturers  as part of our preparations to produce a future vaccine and treatments for COVID-19.

The request for information builds on the Government’s $333 million investment in  vaccine, treatment and therapeutic research and development.

Total funding in vaccine-related activity since the pandemic started is over $256  million, comprising $19 million in Australian research funding, $230 million for the  establishment of the Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness (ACDP), and $7.5  million for the Coalition of Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI).

Submissions received will be used to determine the extent to which the production  and distribution can be supported locally once an effective candidate is found.

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said she was  confident Australian manufacturers would rise to the challenge.

“Australian scientists are at the heart of the global quest for a vaccine and we want  to make sure Australian manufacturers can be central to the production once that  vaccine is found,” Minister Andrews said.

“Australia already has impressive capability when it comes to producing vaccines,  which as a Government we are well aware of. This request for information is about  identifying more niche manufacturers, including those who may be able to pivot or  have the capability but would need support to scale up their operations.







“This information will help prepare Australia for the future as well, building our  knowledge and strengthening our manufacturing capability to respond to other  pandemics down the track.

“This is not a request for tender, but a request to manufacturers to tell us what they  can do.”

Minister for Health Greg Hunt said the Government’s vaccine strategy currently  includes four key elements - research, purchasing agreements, international  agreements and onshore manufacturing.

“This next stage follows on from our research into vaccines, treatments and  respiratory medicines,” Minister Hunt said.

“In addition to the work we are doing with CSL on production, international and  domestic producers on acquisition, and the GAVI Covax facility on shared  international access arrangements, this request seeks additional expressions of  interest from those who could contribute to any part of the vaccine research,  production or distribution process.

“We are confident these actions and investments will secure early and sufficient  access to vaccine identified as safe and effective.”

Local manufacturers can find more details and learn how to make a submission  here.

The closing date for submissions is 20 August 2020.

The request for information is part of the Australian Government’s COVID-19  Vaccine and Treatment Strategic Approach that provides a framework for securing  early access to safe and effective vaccines and treatments.



Media Contacts:

Minister Andrews’ office: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846 / Jen Jennings 0435 121 347

Minister Hunt’s office: James Perrin 0447 534 427 / Matthew Kelly 0417 101 712



Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

