

MURRAY WATT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR NORTHERN AUSTRALIA  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DISASTER AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT  LABOR SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS   TUESDAY, 17 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: COVID-19; gaps in Morrison Government’s response; impact on  Queensland tourism.

ANNELISE NIELSEN, HOST: -We've got the public health response and then the budget  stimulus response as well. If we can start with the public health response, Gerard Rennick  do you think this has been appropriate? There is that concern about potentially  overcorrecting in a situation like this, especially when it comes to things like school  closures.

GERARD RENNICK, QUEENSLAND LIBERAL SENATOR: Look, I think the best thing to  do is follow the advice of our experts. You can go onto www.health.gov.au, the key things  are obviously to maintain high hygiene, basically cover up and minimise your exposure and  your contact and limit your activities to basically essential activities. So look, as for schools,  look, you know, I trust the advice of our medical community. Look, if you've got concerns, I  guess as a parent, you have the right to pull your child out. But at this stage, I think that we  should - if you're comfortable - follow the advice of the medical experts.

NIELSEN: Murray Watt, do you think that the approach by the Government's proportionate  or do you think we should be putting our foot down on the pedal?

MURRAY WATT, QUEENSLAND LABOR SENATOR: Well, obviously, the Opposition has  been following a bipartisan approach when it comes to this virus. I think the last thing the  country needs at the moment is politicians bickering unnecessarily. That said, there are a  number of things that we have been calling for the Government to do to beef up its public  health response. I think most people would acknowledge that the advice that we've been  getting from the Government to date hasn't at all times being crystal clear and consistent.  So we would like to make sure that there is that kind of consistent advice going out to  people. And also, there's things like the number of fever clinics which have been  announced. Some of them won't be open until May. We'd like to see them really open as  quickly as possible. And also, when it comes to providing Medicare rebates for telehealth  at the moment, we'd like to see the expansion of Medicare rebates so that anyone can get  access to their GP for a consultation through telehealth, whether that be over the phone or  Skype or Facetime rather than only certain groups having that access at the moment. You  know, the more we can do to be getting people medical advice quickly, preferably from

their home, the better.

NIELSEN: Gerard Rennick, Murray Watt raises a good point there about the public  information campaign - it has been slow to start. We've only seen these ads really coming  through over the weekend and today about what we should be doing. And this is really  simple advice like washing hands that really could have helped stem a lot of the spread  already. Do you think that the Government has done enough in that public messaging  space?

RENNICK: Look, I think we have, we've ramped it up over the weekend, but a lot of that  information has been out in the community for the last month. We ran a campaign - we've  basically been promoting high hygiene levels for number of weeks now, so, look, you know  it's a moving feast. I think we've handled it reasonably well so far. Obviously, we've got a  long way to go. But as I said, in Australia, we've got a world class health system and we've  got fantastic experts in the field. And I think so far we've done okay.

NIELSEN: Murray Watt, when it comes to the budget stimulus this is really a  unprecedented crisis the Government's dealing with. We've never had borders closed like  this before and businesses stop outside of wartime. Do you think that this stimulus  package announced - about $19 billion last week will be enough? Do you think we're going  to have to see a lot more soon?

WATT: Well, we certainly welcomed the stimulus that the Government announced - again,  you know, trying to be constructive and bipartisan about this. When the announcement  was made, we did make the point that we'd have to wait and see whether it was going to  be enough. And I note it hasn't taken the Government long to announce that it's going to  have to come out with further stimulus. I think there are some pretty significant gaps  remaining in terms of what the Government has announced so far. And I'm particularly  thinking about sole traders. There is support in place for small businesses who employ  staff, and that's a good thing. But sole traders, currently, there's no support there for them.  And we still think that the support that's being provided for casual workers is insufficient as  well. I might just say from a Queensland point of view - and both Gerard and I are senators  for Queensland - the impact on the tourist industry is absolutely devastating. I was at a  function on the Gold Coast on Friday with tourism leaders, I was in Mackay last week as  well, hearing about the impact on particularly the Whitsundays. And I've been in regular  contact with Senator Green, our senator based in Cairns, which is really suffering from the  tourist downturn. So we are going to need some specific injections from the Government  and as soon as they can get moving on, that the better.

NIELSEN: Do you agree, Gerard Rennick? Should the Government be doing more, in  particular with tourism, we're looking at just this huge impact that's come through with  Qantas this week, 90 per cent of international flights cancelled. There's going be huge flow  on effects, should we see more targeted stimulus for those industries?

RENNICK: Look, I think we should wait until the Prime Minister comes out with further  measures as he announces them. The difficulty at this stage is obviously knowing how  long economic activity will be subdued because of the virus. I mean, this could go three  months, could go six months. So obviously, we need to be measured. But in terms of the  stimulus so far, it should be noted that casual workers, basically they take sick leave or  have to take sick leave on the 14 days probation if they think they've got the virus. They  are entitled to two weeks of sick payments. And the Government has already put a billion  dollars on the table for the tourism and agricultural sectors as well. So there are stimulus



measures there for those particular sectors.

WATT: And Annelise we'll have to wait and see how quickly the Government can get that  sort of thing out. I mean, unfortunately, one of the problems we have seen with the  Government so far around bushfire recovery is that they make announcements which then  take an eternity to actually hit the ground. So I probably have to disagree with Gerard  slightly when he says that we need to wait and see what the Government's got to  announce. The last thing we can afford at the moment is as a nation to see the kind of  complacency that unfortunately has riddled some of the Government's responses to other  issues that the country has faced. We've got to get in there and get the economy moving  now and keep as many people in work as we possibly can.

NIELSEN: We've only got a minute left, but Gerard Rennick, do you accept that, has the  Government been complacent?

RENNICK: Absolutely not, and I think that's an unfair accusation. I think we've been  cautious and measured. As I said, this is a moving feast and it's important to make sure  that we do target these areas properly and we need to get feedback. But we are totally  committed to supporting the Australian economy.

NIELSEN: We have to leave it there. Murray Watt and Gerard Rennick, thank you for your  time.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TALI ELEY 0448 078 456





