SENATOR MALARNDIRRI MCCARTHY

DEPUTY OPPOSITION WHIP IN THE SENATE

CHAIR OF FIRST NATIONS CAUCUS COMMITTEE

SENATOR FOR THE NORTHERN TERRITORY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

TODAY SHOW

FRIDAY 30 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Queensland election; NRL backflip on scrapping national anthem; ANZ

Climate Change policy.



ALLY LANGDON, HOST: Will she, or won’t she? That is the big questions and in a few

hours’ time we’ll find out if the Queensland Premiere, Anastasia Palaszczuk will reopen the

states border with NSW. It is a huge call on the eve of the election and to discuss, I’m

joined by Minister for Agriculture, David Littleproud, and from Canberra, Northern Territory

Senator, Malarndirri McCarthy. Good to see both of you this morning. David, keeping the

borders shut has proved very, very popular in regional Queensland. I mean she’s not going

to risk losing those votes just one sleep before the election, is she?



DAVID LITTLEPROUD MP: No, she’s not. This is all about parochial politics. I mean that’s

been her own message to the people of Queensland, is that she’s kept Queensland safe.

Well the message to the Premiere is that’s business as usual, that’s what every politician is

paid to do, but what Queenslanders have to decide is how we’re going to pay for all this.

Even Peter Beattie has got this right. We actually have to think past lines on a map that

were put there 120 years ago and start to think about how we do this properly and evolve

past Federation and those lines on a map. And have localised lockdowns and say to other

states that we trust your science, we trust your contact tracing and if you get it right then

we only have to lock down suburbs or particular areas. And Queensland did that

themselves up here. We locked down particular parts of Brisbane and the Darling Downs

while the rest of the State could keep on moving and that’s why Federation has to evolve

past these lines on a map. Palaszczuk’s just using this as a political football and it’s her

only selling point to the people of Queensland but that’s just business as usual. If she can’t

do that then she shouldn’t be premier.



LANGDON: Malarndirri, it is a selling point that has worked so far. What do you think she

should do?



SENATOR MALARNDIRRI MCCARTHY: Well firstly Ally, I’d just like to pick up on what

David just said there about being a political football. Seriously, we know the Prime Minister

and just about every Coalition member in the Federal Parliament, has used this opportunity

to really hammer and criticise the Premier of Queensland who actually has done an

incredible job for the Queenslanders. I certainly know from talking to people certainly in Far

North Queensland as well, that they’ve felt really, really strong that they’ve been able to

keep safe throughout this whole time, and the fact that Queensland could open up, I mean,

we just saw the AFL game played there on the weekend. I mean they have done a

tremendous job and the people of Queensland are going to make their decision tomorrow.



LANGDON: And you know what, politicians playing politics; it’s kind of in the job

description isn’t it? You all do it.



MCCARTHY: Absolutely. Absolutely.



LANGDON: Queenslanders will go to the polls tomorrow.



LITTLEPROUD: But you’ve got to pay the bills. You’ve got to pay the bills. We had the

worst unemployment rate before the COVID came along and we’ve got the worst after it, I

mean I get it gives people the comfort of feeling safe but we can do that as a nation if we

work together rather than just working on Federation that was put in 120 year ago. Back

yourself with the science, that’s what the Prime Minister’s said.



LANGDON: In a word, who’s going to win, David?



LITTLEPROUD: Look, I’m an optimist. I think Deb Frecklington’s done enough. I think

Queenslanders look past what Palaszczuk has done or lack of therefore, what she’s done

over the last four years, and we couldn’t have been scared enough to go for another four

years of it.



LANGDON: I don’t know, I’m thinking, Malarndirri, that maybe a Labor-Greens kind of deal

is looking likely. What do you think?



MCCARTHY: Look, it’s going to be tight. Yeah, Ally, it’s certainly going to be tight and

that’s what I’m hearing from people on the ground there. But I must point out as we all

know that the jobs factors as David keeps raising, I mean we don’t know what the LNP is

going to do. We know that Deb Frecklington was in the Campbell Newman Government

who cut so many jobs. Thousands of jobs.



LANGDON: Aw come on Malarndirri, I don’t know if you can put that one on her. That was

two terms ago, and she was a first term MP.



MCCARTHY: Come on, come on. She was in that Government. She was in that

Government, Ally, and people have long memories.



LANGDON: I think there’s plenty to criticise Deb on, I’m not sure if that’s one you should

be pulling up. But I want to move on because State of Origin and the anthem. What

happened yesterday! First announcing that it would not be played, then two hours later

reversing the decision, after the PM got involved. Guys, of course, as you know this came

about after the protest last year by Indigenous players who opted to stay silent during

Advance Australia Fair. Malarndirri, what do you make of this backflip?



MCCARTHY: Yeah, yeah, look, I was certainly surprised when I heard it, Ally. I was in the

middle of Estimates and then saw the news story come through. I mean, as you said, 12

months ago we did see our First Nations players raise their concerns around it. I do have

to commend V’landys for actually trying to do something here. I don’t think this was the

right decision, and clearly he’s changed his mind on it, but I do think there needs to be a

conversation about the national anthem and how people are feeling and he was obviously

listening to his players. But I would also like to point out too Ally that maybe it’s time to

actually talk about what kind of anthem we should have. I mean Judith Durham from the

Seekers and Kutcha Edwards put together a really beautiful anthem and maybe it’s time to

have a look at that and see if we can improve on what we’ve got.



LANGDON: Well, we’ve certainly reached the point where our anthem is controversial

unfortunately. And I think, as you say, what V’Landys was trying to do was avoid

controversy, but in fact what he got was more. David, was the Prime Minister right to get

involved?



LITTLEPROUD: Yes, he was. We appreciate there are wrongs of the past that need to be

righted for our First Australians, but we need to find ways to do that that brings us all

together and the national anthem is there for all of us and while I appreciate some may

have an aversion to it, most Australians don’t, and I think we need to find those areas

where we can come together. We need to right those wrongs from what we’ve done to our

First Australians in years gone past but lets find the ways that we can do that, unite and

make real meaningful change on it but I think the Prime Minister was right. I think the

NRL’s right and I think its now time for us to focus on Closing the Gap and making sure

right those wrongs and get on with the football and watch Queensland tear up NSW.



LANGDON: Yeah, in your dreams, David, but you just, you hold onto that, whatever gets

you through the night I say. We are running a poll on our Facebook page so jump on board

and give us your thoughts and we’ll be speaking to the NRL Chairman, Peter V’landys in

the next half hour. Now a big question for you: who’s responsible for tackling climate

change? Is it the Government of Big Business because the ANZ Bank has enraged the

Nationals, haven’t they David, after warning it will axe some of its largest customers unless

they come up with plans to adopt a more climate friendly approach to business? I mean,

David, why are you upset? Isn’t this a good thing?



LITTLEPROUD: No, I mean, dead set, are we going to have Australian banks become the

moral compass and arbiters of our society?



LANGDON: So what, should we leave that up to politicians?



LITTLEPROUD: Yeah well that’s what we call democracy, Ally, and that’s what the

Australian people---



MCCARTHY: Well, if they’re listening to their shareholders.



LITTLEPROUD: This isn’t about whether we should reduce emissions or not. This is about

allowing Government, who has a policy, to do that through technology not taxes do it.

Rather than someone, an organisation that has a privileged position in our society, to

provide capital, to keep the economy going. To come in and think they know best, just

some well-heeled CEOs and boards that have a philosophical view, want to impose that on

our economy, that’s not their place to do that, they’re place is to lend money.



LANGDON: But come on David, I mean it is their place isn’t it? They’re only talking about

the top 100 companies. If they don’t like it, they can go to another bank. And more of the

companies they’re talking to are on board, including the Farmers Federation, the Grain

Growers, they’ve all endorsed the plan because I think they think reducing emissions is a

good thing, isn’t it, Malarndirri.



MCCARTHY: Well absolutely. I mean Ally, one of the things that I note with this and just

obviously looking into the issue this morning, that this is again another reason why the

Coalition seem to not what to believe in any of the changes that have to happen in relation

to Climate Change and I think in terms of the banks, looking at this closely, it also comes

back to the shareholders and the conversations that they’re having. I mean this isn’t

something that would have been made in isolation to the conversations that they’re having

with their members and shareholders.



LITTLEPROUD: We have a clear policy on climate change. I think there’s two or three

different ones within the Labor Party. There’s Joel Fitzgibbon, then there’s Albo, I mean we

have a cogent policy to go forward. So we’re saying lets us do. Let the Government do it.

Big Business needs to stick to their knitting.



MCCARTHY: Oh no David, we want to look after country, you know. Let’s care for country.



LANGDON: This discussion could get a little out of control on this one. Alright guys well,

nice to see—Malarndirri can you explain t me what’s happening behind you there. Have

you been feeing the birds or something? There’s a frenzy going on.



MCCARTHY: Yeah, and you know, great to see Parliament House and our workers here

are cleaning up after the seagulls, Ally, so can you get the shot there behind me?



LANGDON: We can see them.





MCCARTHY: Anyway, I don’t think there’s any pollies here today.



LANGDON: You and David are there. You can catch up for a cup of coffee later. Guys go

and enjoy Halloween this weekend. We’ll talk to you next week, thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MARTHA TATTERSALL 0417 387 775



