

TONY BURKE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ARTS  MANAGER OF OPPOSITION BUSINESS  MEMBER FOR WATSON





ARTS SUPPORT A FRACTION OF WHAT’S NEEDED

It is absurd that the Morrison Government’s refusal to provide any specific relief funding to  the arts sector during the coronavirus crisis has forced the Australia Council to suspend its  usual funding programs to pay for urgent coronavirus crisis relief.

Labor makes no criticism of the Australia Council, which is having to respond to an  emergency situation with no additional help from the government after enduring years of  funding cuts by the Abbott-Turnbull-Morrison Government. But it should not be in this  position.

The arts sector needs a specific, tailored relief package from the government, and it needs  it now.

Australia’s arts sector was already fragile before the coronavirus crisis due to years of  Liberal cuts and neglect. They simply have no buffer to help them ride out this crisis.

The arts sector was one of the first to be affected by this crisis, when restrictions on  gatherings of 500 people or more were announced, and it could be the last to be released  from restrictions.

Hundreds of thousands of people who work in the arts sector have been put out of work  due to direct government decisions.

This is a sector dominated by sole traders, independents, freelancers and self-employed  people - some of the most vulnerable in this crisis.

These are workers who work gig to gig, event to event, show to show, and festival to  festival.

Arts organisations could close within weeks, rather than months, without more support.

In the months ahead Australia will look to its artists, entertainers and cultural institutions to  help us all recover and heal from the trauma of this crisis - but right now they need our  help just to survive.

We have to ask ourselves: once the crisis is over, what will Australia look like if our arts



sector is gone? That’s a future Labor isn’t willing to accept.

THURSDAY, 26 MARCH 2020

MEDIA CONTACT: ADAM GARTRELL 0427 008 525









