

JIM CHALMERS MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR RANKIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC BRISBANE DRIVE   MONDAY, 26 OCTOBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Australia Post; Morrison double-standards on ministerial rorts; Clive  Palmer text messages.

STEVE AUSTIN, HOST: Let's go to Canberra and speak with Labor's Shadow Treasury  spokesperson and also the Federal Member for Rankin, the electorate based in the south  of Brisbane here. His name is Jim Chalmers. Jim Chalmers lovely to have you back on.  Happy Monday.

JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: Happy Monday to you Steve, how are you?

AUSTIN: I'm doing alright. Are you in Canberra or in Rankin? Where are you?

CHALMERS: I'm in Canberra. This is the second week of a sitting fortnight so I came in  last night and back home Thursday night.

AUSTIN: A lot of reaction over the weekend to the news that the boss of the government  owned corporation but independently run Australia Post gifted her executives a brand  name watch for getting a good deal for the company. So let me ask you, Jim Chalmers,  have you got anything against executives being remunerated or recognised for good work  and good service?

CHALMERS: I certainly have an issue with how this was done.

AUSTIN: That wasn't what I asked though. Have you got anything against executives  being remunerated and recognised for good service and getting good business?

CHALMERS: It's one thing in the private sector where I think it's fine but this is a public  company. It's got two shareholders which are federal cabinet ministers. It's got a board  which the Government has stacked with former Liberal politicians -

AUSTIN: Both sides of politics do that when it when they get the opportunity.

CHALMERS: If you have a look at the board there's eight non-executive spots and four of  them are former Liberal politicians and officials which seems to me to be overdoing it. The  other issue I think Steve is that Australia Post has been saying for some time now, and the

Minister Paul Fletcher has been saying for some time that Australia Post is under a lot of  pressure and we've got to make all these changes and we've got to deliver less frequently  because there's so much pressure on the business model. I think a lot of your listeners  would have been hearing that over the last few years and then seen these pretty  extravagant gifts. They’ll think that the two things don’t square and I think that's fair  enough. I agree with them.

AUSTIN: The reason why they got it according to the head of Australia Post was that they  delivered a really great business deal to the financial benefit of Australia Post. In other  words by proxy the taxpayer benefits so her executive staff who negotiated the deal get a  reward. It's a government owned corporation, and it acts like a business so it operates like  a business.

CHALMERS: But it's not entirely like a business. It's a public company and it has two  shareholders which are government ministers. Well done to them if they've done a good  job but that's their job to get good outcomes for Australia Post. I don't have anything  against those four executives, I don't know their names. The point that I'm making is that at  a time when a lot of Australians are doing it extremely tough and people are being asked to  tighten their belts, and when Australia Post has been saying they're under a heap of  financial pressure and that justifies all of these cutbacks to services, most people would  think it doesn't pass any type of test and I would agree with them. I think it's entirely the  wrong time to be giving these those sorts of gifts. I think it's entirely inappropriate.

AUSTIN: My guest is Labor's Jim Chalmers, the ALP Shadow Treasury spokesperson.  Australia Post have what has what's called a universal service obligation to the people of  Australia. The federal government allowed that universal service obligation to be reduced  or cut back or changed this year because of the amount of parcels that were coming  through Australia Post so they only have to deliver letters or mail every second day by law.  I'm told it's even working out to be every third day in practice. Was the Opposition asked  about this? Were you consulted about that?

CHALMERS: We opposed it. What happened was it became clear in I think about April of  this year that Australia Post and the Government had in mind these sorts of changes for  some time. Our criticism at the time in April and subsequently was we felt like they were  using COVID-19 as a bit of an excuse to push some of these changes through which  would have meant less frequent services for a lot of people, as you rightly point out from  daily delivery to every second or third day. If you think about sending something from  Brisbane to regional Queensland that went from three business days to more like five  business days or a week. When these changes were proposed the Government said, oh  look it's because letters are down, that's true. They said parcels are up, and parcels are  up, but we would have thought that a boom in parcels would have been a reason to have  more jobs and more deliveries not fewer of both of those sorts of things so we opposed it.

AUSTIN: So when these universal service obligation requiring daily deliveries of mail was  put up, you guys said no. So what should they have done? Just hired more staff to deliver  the mail?

CHALMERS: I've been speaking to some posties about this. I had some good meetings  with posties in my local electorate in Logan City and the southern suburbs of  Brisbane.  There wasn't the right amount of consultation. There wasn't the right amount of  sitting down with the terrific people who work for Australia Post. There wasn't enough of an  effort to say look, we've got lots more parcels, we've got fewer letters because of COVID

but also because of longer term trends people are buying a lot of stuff online, so how do  we use this as an opportunity to build the business, rather than chop it back. There was  talk of job losses. There were these changes to the universal service obligations and we  just thought if anything the fact that there was a boom in parcel delivery should have meant  more jobs and more services, not the other way around.

AUSTIN: And you argued that in Parliament?

CHALMERS: Yeah we did. I have a great colleague Michelle Rowland, who's our Shadow  Spokeswoman in this area and a heap of colleagues kicked up a lot of fuss trying to get  this overturned but unfortunately the changes to the frequency of the deliveries is  something that we have to live with now.

AUSTIN: My guest is Jim Chalmers. Let’s move on from that. We'll see how this unfolds.  How do you feel about the Prime Minister rapidly asking the boss of Australia Post to stand  aside after hearing about the gift of the watches to the executives?

CHALMERS: I think that's fine but what I don't like about that is that a number of his  Ministers have been sprung doing far worse than that and they're not asked to stand aside.  So the CEO of Australia Post does what I think was the wrong thing and the Prime Minister  gets all angry about it and puts on the big performance in Question Time. I think a lot of  people are entitled to ask okay well if that's the punishment for $20,000 in expensive  watches, what's the punishment for the Ministers involved with paying a Liberal donor $30  million for a parcel of land that was valued at $3 million. You know what's the penalty for  people who -

AUSTIN: That's being investigated so they might be punished but it might be a criminal  charge. That's being investigated currently isn't it?

CHALMERS: So is the Holgate Australia Post issue, she was asked to stand aside and the  Prime Minister got all angry and said how inappropriate it was. Sitting behind him in the  Parliament, I was looking at them today thinking how strange it is that the Prime Minister  can get so angry about that but not some of these far worse rorts like sports rorts and  forged documents. The Treasurer got sprung sitting for five weeks on information that the  chair of ASIC had overclaimed his expenses by more than $100,000. The Treasurer kept  that quiet for five weeks then pretended he only just heard of it. All of these things I would  have thought warrant just as much, if not more, anger from the Prime Minister.  But instead  he largely ignores that and tries to get everyone focused on the CEO of Australia Post.

AUSTIN: What would you do about the head of ASIC getting tens of thousands of dollars  for tax advice, written off, what would you do instead?

CHALMERS: Well, I wouldn't have sat on it for five weeks. So he found out about it -

AUSTIN: That's easy to say when you're in Opposition but what would you've done about it  instead? What would you have proactively done about it?

CHALMERS: I would have started the process of properly investigating it as is happening  now. He found out about it on the 15th of September, he put out a press release saying he  found out about it on the 22nd of October, total rubbish, which he conceded in the  Parliament today was wrong. There's been five weeks where the Treasurer of Australia  has known that the chairman of ASIC overclaimed his expenses by more than $100,000.

He kept that quiet for five weeks and now we've got a bit of a process. I think the process  should have kicked in earlier and people had a right to know better earlier.

AUSTIN: 11 to 5, news at 5. Labor's Jim Chalmers is my guest. He's the ALP Shadow  Treasury spokesperson, also the Member for Rankin. Before I let you go Jim Chalmers, let  me ask you something that is appearing on mobile phones today. Many of my listeners  today sent me screenshots via Twitter saying that Clive Palmer sent them a text saying  you guys are planning a death tax. When's it coming in?

CHALMERS: Total rubbish. I feel restricted by the language rules on ABC Radio to say  what I really think about it. I got my text at 11:52am today Steve. I was going to forward it  to you but it sounds like others did. It's total, complete rubbish, absolutely wrong, and he  knows that. I think Australians should just delete it, and vote for Anastasia Palaszczuk who  has been right and resolute throughout this whole crisis and deserves another term.

AUSTIN: Although it needs to be pointed out that you guys were doing the same thing  when you said the Coalition was going to sell off Medicare.

CHALMERS: They set up a Medicare Privatisation Taskforce, Steve.

AUSTIN: Lots of people have working groups though don't they Jim? People examine  options but it's still not happened. It's never happened. It sounds to me like it's the same  thing except from a different player.

CHALMERS: No it's not the same thing Steve. They set up a taskforce to examine it. We  kicked up a stink. If it's not going ahead that's a good thing. This Clive Palmer effort, which  by the way comes from his company Mineralogy, it's got the text that you read and it's got  a link that you can click on. I say to every single one of your listeners, don't be fooled, it is  complete rubbish, he's taking you for a mug. Just ignore it.

AUSTIN: The ALP up here is saying that Deb Frecklington has a plan to sack 30,000  workers. When I asked Stephen Miles if they had a copy of the secret plan, he said they  didn't have a copy of the secret plan, they were just trying to add it up. Doesn't that indicate  that this is simply the thrust and parry of state election campaigns and the ALP up here  have been making up things about the Opposition as much as Clive Palmer is about the  death tax?

CHALMERS: No it's not the same thing Steve. I'll very quickly explain how they get to that.  Deb Frecklington says that she's going to get the budget back into surplus. The only way  that they can do that is to chop back on public servants. That's what they did last time they  were in office when she was working for Campbell Newman.

AUSTIN: They don't have to chop the back they just don't have to promise to hire as many  in the first place.

CHALMERS: They're all jobs Steve and they all matter. Queenslanders should be fearful  of a rerun of the Campbell Newman era. Think about what that did to my community and  Queensland more broadly. In my community it was devastating, all the job cuts. If Deb  Frecklington becomes the Premier of Queensland we'll see it all over again.

AUSTIN: Thanks for coming on.



CHALMERS: Thank you Steve.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949











