T +61 2 6272 3232  E media@agriculture.gov.au  agriculture.gov.au/abares  @DeptAgNews | @ABARES

Media release 7 December 2020

Farmgate value likely to hit $65 billion, but watch on trade

Australian farmgate production is expected to be $65 billion in 2020/21 on  the back of the nation’s second largest winter crop and promising rainfall  outlook.

ABARES’ December quarter 2020 Agriculture Commodities report points to  continued recovery for the farming sector from drought—and resilience in  the face of COVID-19.

“Overall, Australian agricultural production is bouncing back from the  drought,” ABARES executive director Dr Steve Hatfield-Dodds said.

“Australian producers manage one of the most variable environments in the  world so ebbs and flows in production are to be expected.

“We’re expecting a near all-time high winter crop, the best ever in New  South Wales, and a more favourable outlook for summer cropping than we  have seen in recent years.

“Livestock prices have also stayed high with herd and flock rebuilding,  and  continued international demand.”

While production is forecast to rise by seven per cent to $65 billion, exports  are expected to fall by seven per cent from last year to $44.7 billion.

“Exports have continued to find markets during the pandemic but the   residual effect of past dry seasons and trade uncertainties are pushing  down export value,” Dr Hatfield-Dodds said.

“Recovery from drought is limiting production and exports of livestock  products and fibres, with meat prices also falling as the Afr ican Swine Fever  impact on China’s pork production begins to lessen.

“There are a number of risks present for the rest of 2021 that remain a  watch point, including wine trade with China and labour shortages for the  horticulture sector.”

The December quarter 2020 Agriculture Commodities report is available  here from 12.01am, 7 December 2020.

MEDIA NOTE: ABARES’ head of forecasting and trade, and chief commodity  analyst, Dr Jared Greenville is available for interview upon request. Please  email media@agriculture.gov.au

