

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

Transcript

Monday 6th April 2020

Interview with ABC Topical North Queensland

Topics: Agricultural worker visa changes during COVID-19

MEECHAM PHILPOTT: Well, onto this story. So, we’ve known for quite some time, I  mean, Bowen is a major food bowl on the east coast of Australia, and there’s all sorts of  fresh fruit and veggies comes out of there which is so important at this time of COVID-19.  Now the Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management, the Honourable  David Littleproud has made quite a big announcement on the weekend. But there's still a  few questions to go that a lot of our farmers want to hear. And very happy to say that the  Minister invited our invitation to have a chat this morning.  Minister, thank you so much for  your time, really appreciate it.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, thanks for having me.

MEECHAM PHILPOTT: So, first thing's first, let's talk about the announcement with the  extension of visas; can you just walk us through that please?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah. Look, the three visa classes that agriculture primarily use  through the Working Holiday Maker or the old backpacker program, the Seasonal Worker  and Pacific Islander program. Now there's around 140,000 backpackers in the country at  the moment, and there's around 8000 Pacific and Seasonal visa holders at the moment.  Now, out of the backpackers, there's around 35,000 that are working in agriculture and  they usually, it usually sits around 30 per cent of the total backpacker cohort works in  agriculture and that's normally at around 210,000 a year and we're down to around 120.  So, obviously we're concerned about what may happen, not just in the short-term as a  number of these visa holders head home, but also as we get into the end of the year and  we hit another seasonal juncture where there's a high demand for workforce, is that we've  got a plan in place to give that continuity to primary producers.

Now, while we understand there's been a number of Australians who've lost their job, it's  not practical for some of them to travel thousands of kilometres to get up into north-  Northern Australia in particular when they've lost their job in Brisbane, Sydney or  Melbourne for a season. So, we've had to be practical about this, we put a labour testing  model [indistinct] farmers still have to put these jobs up online, and those that have visas  have to register with aus.gov.au to make sure that we know where they are and they'll be  in isolation for 14 days because we need to protect the community. But this is the balance  that we believe we can give the continuity to farmers and the labour supply they need,  protect the community from the spread of COVID-19 and give Australians a crack at these  jobs if they're so inclined and they get up there. But farmers really don't have the luxury to

Transcript



Transcript

sit around and hope that someone might turn up, they really need to know that someone’s  going to be there when it's ready to get out of the paddock.

MEECHAM PHILPOTT: Minister, tough one, extraordinary circumstances we're living in  these days, but you brought it up there and that is backpackers. For instance, on the  Country Hour this morning, couple of stories of various backpackers around Queensland.  One that’s managed to get out of Melbourne before we shut the borders in Queensland  and was thrilled to be up here to work but many people in Queensland would just say,  Melbourne, really? I mean, you know, there's a little bit of fear about people coming up  from down south to our part of the world. How do we protect ourselves against the spread  of the virus do you reckon?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, that's why we’ve worked with industry, and I’ve got to say,  the agricultural industry themselves have been very forward leaning on this because we're  going to give them an extra twelve-month extension under these visa cohorts. So, what  we're saying is we need to give those communities protection of the spread, so when they  get up, they actually have to be in isolation for 14 days with that employer, to be able to  undertake that work so that they have that comfort and the employer has comfort too.  There's also some work around accommodation, and this is where industry, through the  NFF, we've worked through with state and now local governments we're working through,  to ensure that there’s social distancing in terms of accommodation. Because normally  what happens is we see six or seven people in one house sharing bedrooms, and that's  not on and the Prime Minister himself said that. So, we've said to industry, you need this  labour force, we are making sure that we can get it for you, but there is an onus of  responsibility, a mutual obligation for you to make sure that these people, these visa  holders come up and they are accommodated appropriately, to the standard the Chief  Medical Officers have indicated. And any backpacker, any- or any seasonal Pacific Island  visa holder that is in breach of any of the social distancing rules that is caught by any state  or local official and is reported to the Department of Immigration will be sent home. They  will lose their visas. This isn't a free for all for backpackers who think they can run around  the countryside having a fat old time and putting people at risk. The reality is…

MEECHAM PHILPOTT: …Just on those backpackers, Minister. You mentioned the self-isolation side to it, where do they self-isolate? Are there, I don’t know, is there somewhere  you can go for 14 days and get your papers stamped that I've been self-isolated and  signed off by a doctor?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, now to get into Queensland you must have, you must get a  pass, and you're going to have to prove that you're going up for employment. So that is  where the backpacker and industry and the farmers will have to be able to provide  appropriate accommodation for them to self-isolate.

MEECHAM PHILPOTT: Okay.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: That is the responsibility and they are making that declaration.  And if, if the visa holder does not live up to that, then I've already spoken to Peter Dutton  about this, is that we will start to send them home. We will not mess around with this.  There are communities, quite rightly, particularly some smaller ones that don't have the  medical facilities to support an outbreak and they need the comfort to know that those  people that are coming into their community are being dealt with appropriately, that we’ll  keep them safe but continue to give our farmers the continuity they need. We’ve all got the  responsibility in this and we're just expecting everyone to live up to it.

Transcript



Transcript



MEECHAM PHILPOTT: Okay. The Pacific Island workers, of course, out in the South  Pacific, there's no registered cases in places like Vanuatu and so forth. But is that a worry  to you that someone that works on a farm may, when they go home, may actually be  carrying COVID-19?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well obviously, that's why we’re hoping that that cohort - there's  around 8000 between the Pacific and seasonal programs. We're hoping that they will stay.  And in fact, Marise Payne, the Foreign Minister and I have had conversations about the  recovery out of COVID-19 and keeping this program going because there may be another  cohort that will want to come to Australia. How do we give comfort to those that will come  from those nations into Australia and those that we're sending home? And we're working  between ourselves, our Foreign Affairs and Trade Department, Department of Agriculture  in ensuring that those that go back, we can give some protection to. And obviously each  one of those nations have their own sovereign rights and responsibilities in what they're  imposing.

MEECHAM PHILPOTT: Sure.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: But we're looking to be able to provide some continuity to that  program because it is an important one, not just to our farmers but also to those nations  for those people to come over and help support agriculture here and make a living here as  well.

So we need to, this is about being a good global citizen and looking after our Pacific family  as best we can. So we're trying to get the balance right and what that might look like in six  to nine months as well and Marise Payne and I are working through that, her department  and mine.

MEECHAM PHILPOTT: Okay. Now, I would imagine, you know, in Queensland you'd be  very focused on the likes of say Bundaberg, Wide Bay, that's a big food bowl, obviously  Bowen then I guess, what? The Tablelands, just west of Cairns, they're the hotspots for  our fruit and veg, aren't they?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well and I'm a Southern Queenslander. In my electorate of  Maranoa, we very much in the granite belt …

MEECHAM PHILPOTT: Okay. Yup.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: … and then obviously down the Lockyer Valley. So there is, all the  way up, I mean Queensland is the food bowl, let's be honest about this. And the thing is  that this is the practical application, this is, it’s the sheer distance of this and I get that  there are people out there saying: well why don't Australians take these jobs. But the  practical reality is many of the people who have lost their jobs, it is impractical for them to  travel those thousands of kilometres up into Queensland. They have family commitments,  they have mortgages and homes of their own, in the cities down in southern, southern  parts of the country. It's impractical for them to get up there at the time it does take for a  six-month window, a six week window really, the cost just outweighs it.

MEECHAM PHILPOTT: Yeah.

Transcript



Transcript

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: And that's one of the challenges. Farmers do not have the luxury  to sit around and wait and hope. They need certainty and that's what we're trying to  provide them with, is the certainty. They get the balance right. They've still got a market  test these jobs. They’ve still got to put it out there and give an Aussie a go, but we’ve got  to understand this is time critical. They they have a perishable product and they need to be  supported and agriculture is underpinning our nation's security at the moment by  underpinning our food security. So it's important we support them. They're essential to us.

MEECHAM PHILPOTT: Final question, Minister. Queensland State Government, they've  signed off, they're on board with all this, because you need a fair bit of help locally, aren’t  you? To get all the jobs done to make sure that we remain COVID-19 free in these food  bowls.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: We are working with all the states. In fact, every week I meet over  the phone with all the agricultural ministers from around the country. So there is real  continuity and collaboration and coordination with this.

Every state is, has been asking for these visa extensions, the further 12 months we've  provided them. But we've said to them, their responsibility now is to work with local  government and also industry to get the accommodation piece right.

So they've all signed up to it. They’ve all ensured that that's right and that's not just been  for this, it's also for things like our processing sector as well, who also can benefit from  these visa changes as well, but also protocols around COVID-19 to ensure we keep the  continuity of our processing sector going as well.

The industry, state and Federal Government have all worked very closely. We'll continue  to do that. And if there's roadblocks, then we'll work through them, predicated off the best  medical advice we have to ensure we keep the continuity of supply.

MEECHAM PHILPOTT: I'll leave it there this morning. And I thank you so much for your  time this morning, Minister.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks for having me. And please stay safe.

MEECHAM PHILPOTT: Cheers. The Honourable David Littleproud, who's the Federal  Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management. The Deputy Leader of the  Nationals.



Media contact  Douglas Ferguson, 0455 448 985

