

MICHELLE ROWLAND MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS

MEMBER FOR GREENWAY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS AFTERNOON AGENDA

MONDAY, 17 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECT: Google’s response to the ACCC’s Draft Mandatory News

Code.



TOM CONNELL, HOST: Let’s return to our top story now. Google are fighting

back against an attempt to make tech giants to pay more to news companies

when they use that information. Joining me now is Shadow Communications

Minister, Michelle Rowland. Thanks very much for your time. You would have

seen the statement that Google has pasted and of course are trying to get out

to as many people as possible. What’s your reaction to the claims Google is

making?



MICHELLE ROWLAND, SHADOW MINISTER FOR

COMMUNICATIONS: Well, the stakes are high - I think that’s the first thing

that it says. The language was quite intense. Although it was not a particularly

long statement, there was a note at the end to say that Google would have

more to say in the near future. Of course, the consultation period closes in a

matter of days. So, Google is clearly pacing itself for a fight on this.



CONNELL: The ACCC has come out and said that Google is spreading

misinformation in this statement. Do you agree?



ROWLAND: Well, I think in some aspects, the statements that are made are

quite broad. I think, for example, some of the statements that go to consumer

welfare and the notion that consumers obtain these Google services for free;

sure, in some cases, you mightn’t be required to provide a monetary payment.

But there certainly is a value exchange and the value is in the data. For digital

natives, this may come as no surprise, it is very common for one to give over

one’s data. But at the same time, I would note that Google makes the point

about consumers’ privacy being in danger. I think it needs to be noted, and it is

a matter of fact, that the ACCC actually does have two matters on foot in

relation to privacy against Google in Australia at the moment: one in relation to

location services, and the other in relation to the expanded use of consumer

data. So, in that sense, I think there was quite a bit of information that was

missing from that statement.



CONNELL: And to that point then: if Google is saying here it’s going to the

guardian of your data against news companies, that seems a bit rich given the

cases you’ve just cited?



ROWLAND: Well, it’s also somewhat perplexing because some of Google’s

language there is we want to protect your data from big business. Well, I don’t

think they get much bigger than Google to be quite frank. I respect the fact that

the algorithm that they use is something that they have developed over time by

engineers and so forth, but I think it’s very important to note that the draft code

that they’ve put out is not only about price but also non-price terms as well

which is an aspect that is particularly concerning to media companies and

where searches appear in what particular order when they are undertaken. In

one aspect, I can understand that Google will say “well, we want to have the

most accurate searches when people use our search engine”. But, at the same

time, let’s remember that this a company that is private and operates for profit

as well. They are going to want to do what is in the best interests of revenue

and their profit motive.



CONNELL: So, nothing you’ve seen in here will change your view - somewhat

qualified at times - but your support for the changes being brought in by the

Government?



ROWLAND: Well, I would like to see a proper, functioning code, and I think that

is essential for news media in Australia, particularly at a time when revenues

have been under such stress. We’ve had COVID, we’ve had this disruption

going on for such a long time, advertising revenues going through the floor. So,

this really is a test quite frankly for the Prime Minister. I mean, he has made this

front and centre. He was Treasurer when this inquiry was announced. Now, it’s

up to him to land it; land it not only in the interests of consumers, but also news

media in Australia is relying on this actually occurring. If Google were to

withdraw from Australia, as some have said they might end up doing, you’ve

got to realise that it’s not only consumers for whom that would be a bad

outcome, it would also be a bad outcome for news media outlets.



CONNELL: All right, but it wouldn’t be Australia’s fault if Google withdrew

would it? Is that a warning to Google the company?



ROWLAND: No-one is saying it’s Google’s fault, but if you look at what has

happened overseas, for example, where Google shut down some of its search

services for news, what it ended up doing was Spaniards were searching on

domestic news sites rather than through Google. And we’ve discussed recently



the case in France in relation to snippets. I mean, that’s got a way to play out

as well.



CONNELL: Michelle Rowland, appreciate your time, thank you.



ROWLAND: Pleasure.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ADAM BOIDIN 0406 009 019





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











