

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA  WEDNESDAY, 1 APRIL 2020

SUBJECTS: NSW and Victorian enforcing social distancing measures; wage  subsidy; spending on tax cuts and submarines; coronavirus cases.

ANNELISE NIELSEN, HOST: Joining us now, live via Skype, is Deputy Labor Leader  Richard Marles. Richard Marles, thank you for your time. Now we have seen some pretty  strong responses from New South Wales Police, in particular dealing with people out  flouting these rules, sunbathing when they should be staying home. Do you agree with the  severity of those measures?

RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: I think  people need to be doing the right thing. That's the point to be taken here. This is changing  our lives in a radical way, all of us are doing things differently and I think fundamentally the  Australian people have responded magnificently to this. But life is changing and where  people think that they can continue life in a normal way, and that those normal social  activities are going to continue well that's just not how it is. And we need to be making sure  that we are putting that in we're enforcing the rules that are there and that people do play  their part in putting in place appropriate social distancing.

NIELSEN: Victoria's taken a harder line than it seems we've seen from other states, saying  that partners who don't live together can't see each other, unless it's some kind of  caregiving. The definition of that seems to be pretty vague. Do you think that's fair to ask  partners to not see each other?

MARLES: Well again, I think that the rules are in place and they're based on households  maintaining social isolation and people being within in the households that they're in. This  is an unprecedented moment and it is really important that we have appropriate social  distancing in place, that's how we're actually going to get past this. And you only need to  look at what we've seen from overseas to understand how significant this is.

NIELSEN: But if you live alone and your partner lives alone is it not just as risky for you to  see each other as two partners that live together? Even still, less so, really.

MARLES: Well I think again, I just think we need to be abiding by what are the guidelines  that have been put in place and those are not guidelines actually- they're enforceable  proclamations from government. And it's really important that households are maintaining  social isolation. So I think this is a difficult period of time. But we've got to abide by those  rules. If we're going to get through this and avoid the kinds of things that we've witnessed  in places like Milan and New York.

NIELSEN:  If I could ask you about the wage subsidy program. This has been one of the  biggest injections of money in the Australian economy by a government basically in history.  Do you think that this has been the right move? Or are we going to be paying this off for  decades to come without seeing the benefits that really that amount of investment should  bring us?

MARLES: It is important that we are taking the economic action needed to get Australia  through this moment. Now we've been calling for a wage subsidy for a number of weeks  now. And to give credit where it's due, what the Government has announced in the last  couple of days puts that into effect. And I think it's going to be a matter of enormous relief  for the tens of thousands of working people around Australia who have been stood down in  the last couple of weeks. So the Government deserves credit for that. And we support it.  And we do think that this is a very important measure. And we've made it clear that as  soon as the government gets the legislation drafted we stand ready to attend Parliament to  make sure that this goes through the Parliament.

NIELSEN: What do you make of this story from The Australian today that the Treasurer  contacted four retail leaders in making this decision on the wage subsidies including  Solomon Lew, who very early pulled out of paying any rents which was a seismic thing to  do at a time like this. Others who've been accused of underpaying staff on a systemic  basis, was that the right call?

MARLES:  Well I mean the Government is going to engage in the consultation that it does  to understand what it needs to do to take the next step forward. I think basically what we  witnessed last week, with the enormous queues outside of Centrelink stood as- made it  completely obvious to everyone that there needed to be a wage subsidy or else what we  were going to see was literally millions of people shifted from work to welfare- and that  cannot be a good outcome. It's really important through this that the relationship the  employe- employee relationship is maintained. That's the importance of the wage subsidy  because it allows that to occur. And that's why we were calling for a couple of weeks ago.  But you know I think those cues made it very plain to the government about what they  needed to do. It would have been better if we hadn't seen them and that the Government  had been there a bit earlier but they have got to the plate here and they deserve credit for  that, and we support the steps that they are taking.

NIELSEN: What do you make of the Government sticking to its guns on tax cuts- income  tax cuts and the submarines spending program. Are those two things that we should be  cutting back on at a time like this?

MARLES: Well firstly, they’re two different questions. In relation to the proposed tax cuts;  we've been saying for a long time that it's very hard to judge what the economy is going to  be come 2024-25. Certainly that was hard to judge back in 2019. I think what has played  out in the last few months makes it clear that it is hard for any of us to exactly see what the  future holds in relation to this. So as to the future of those tax cuts, we've always felt that



that's a decision much better made closer to the date, when we've got a proper sense of  where the Budget is at. And that continues to be our view and to be honest, I think that  looks like a pretty good call now that we made last year- given what has played out. In  relation to the spend on the submarines; it is a very important asset in terms of shaping our  strategic circumstances which were as complicated as they'd ever been since the Second  World War, prior to the corona virus but I made even more complicated by this. And it is  one of the emerging stories in relation to coronavirus, perhaps not so much now but as we  come to the back end of this. It stands with the very real prospect of rewriting the strategic  landscape that Australia finds itself in. In that context, we need to have an ability to shape  the world as best we can, given who we are and submarines are completely central to that.  So, I don’t think our strategic circumstances are going to go get any easier going forward,  as a result the coronavirus. And it is the difficulty of our strategic circumstances which  fundamentally shapes how we should be spending in relation to defence.

NIELSEN: And just finally; the medical authorities have been keeping a very strong eye on  the coronavirus cases curve. They've said that it does seem like there is progress being  made, that they have landed a punch but it's certainly not over yet. Do you think we're  doing everything we need to do to keep this curve going the way it needs to?

MARLES: I think we are- we've taken enormous steps in the last couple of weeks in  relation to social distancing, I think the country has come on a very long journey.  Australians get it now about what needs to happen if we're going to avoid the scenes that  we have witnessed overseas. And the sacrifices being made by people has been  magnificent, and Australians deserve an enormous amount of credit. I think the restrictions  that we've put in place on our border are also really important and we've obviously got to  make sure that we continue with significant amounts of testing of the coronavirus. I hope  that if we are able to do all of these things that we will see the curve go in the right  direction. But it's very important that we remain vigilant. It's very important that we're not  proclaiming a premature victory here. There's a lot of water to go under the bridge and a  few days of pleasing results in terms of a reduction in the number of new cases is  obviously a good thing but that doesn't mean that this crisis is over. There is still a long  way to go and we've got to remain vigilant.

NIELSEN: Absolutely. Richard Marles, thank you for your time.

MARLES: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363









