





SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Finance  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Leader of the Government in the Senate

Senator for South Australia

TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Parliament Doorstop   Topics: NZ working holiday makers; Australia-China relationship; Last day of Parliament for 2020.  12/10/2020

Simon Birmingham: ... Australian farmers and industry in terms of getting the necessary workers by  encouraging young New Zealanders to come and have a working holiday in Australia. For young Kiwis who  might have been thinking about taking a gap year, to come and do it in Australia, to travel around, to work  your way around our great country. And of course, they can do that because we have opened up across most  states, quarantine-free entry into Australia. Ordinarily, at this time of year, there’d be around 135,000 working  holiday makers in Australia, spending billions of dollars that they earn while they’re here, that they bring with  them from their savings, even mum and dad's money that they ask them to send over and transfer into their  accounts. This is about, of course, making sure we support a key part of our tourism industry - the working  holiday maker sector - but also recognise that as well as being big spending visitors to Australia, working  holiday makers do valuable jobs while they’re here, supporting parts of Australian agriculture and Australian  tourism industry and delivering real benefits across the country. This isn't going to fill the entire gap we have  for working holidaymakers, but it's an example of the fact that the Government is supporting agriculture, but  also investing in the sectors of our tourism industry everywhere that we see an opportunity to help get them  back on their feet.

Question: Minister, can I ask you, your comments in the Senate yesterday in regards to China and the  ChAFTA? The Embassy says last night, your claims are totally unfounded. They hope Australia can do more  to enhance mutual trust in bilateral cooperation, in line with the China-Australia Comprehensive Strategic  Partnership. Given the 14 grievances from the embassy, what do you understand enhancing mutual trust and  bilateral cooperation in terms of doing more to mean?

Simon Birmingham: Well, from Australia's perspective, the first thing that could be done to enhance  mutual trust and understanding would be to sit down and talk, to actually engage in ministerial dialogue.  We've been clear all year of our willingness to have those discussions. They won’t see us compromise in  relation to the types of principles we adopt around Australian values or the protection of our national interests,  just as we don’t ask China to compromise in relation to their national interest issues. But clearly, clearly, the  most sensitive thing that can happen is for parties to talk. In relation to the idea that there isn't an issue, well  the evidence clearly demonstrates otherwise. The pattern of disruption to a range of Australian export  industries right throughout the course of this year does demonstrate that there is a real problem. We don't  accept the claims in relation to the individual evidence. There is clearly a bigger issue that requires China to  come to the table and be willing to actually engage in dialogue.

Question: Is it Australia that has to do that?

Simon Birmingham: No, I think that China has to be the one to step up and be willing to sit down and talk  and engage.

Question: Final day of sitting here. Is there a bit of a final note of school year(*) about today, Minister?

Simon Birmingham: 2020 has been a year unlike any other. And this place, the Parliament and the  Government have sought to respond to unprecedented times in ways that has thankfully gotten Australia  through the craziest of years, by keeping people safe, by keeping people secure, they remain our priorities.



And one of the last acts I expect the Senate to do today will be to pass, hopefully, the extension of the  coronavirus supplement, part of our economic response that has been so important to helping to keep  Australians safe and secure through these tough times.

Thanks guys.





Media Contacts  Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.

