Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.







Professor Brendan Murphy  Australian Government Chief Medical Officer

TRANSCRIPT

9 February 2020



DOORSTOP  MELBOURNE

E&OE…

Topics: Coronavirus update

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Good Afternoon. My name is Brendan Murphy. I'm the Australian Government Chief  Medical Officer and I'm just giving an update on the coronavirus situation.

As you've probably all heard, the situation intentionally is much the same as it's been in the  past few days with continued, significant growth in numbers, particularly in the Hubei  province of China.

There are now just over 37.5 thousand cases worldwide, just over 800 deaths, and just over  350 exported cases in 27 countries.

In Australia, there remain 15 cases only.

We've had no more cases detected, which is good. And all of the people who have contracted  the virus in Australia are in a stable condition, and as you know, some have already been  discharged from hospital, having cleared the virus.

I'm pleased to report that the girl on Christmas Island who was recently tested has been  proven to be negative. She does not have coronavirus so there is no confirmed cases of the  virus in the Christmas Island quarantine population, who remain well and are well looked  after.

I'm also pleased to inform you, as you already know I imagine, that the second flight from  Wuhan arrived early this afternoon in Darwin.

All of the 266 people on board have been health screened four times now before they left  China. Twice on the flight and once on arrival at the Darwin Airport.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



They are all clinically well and they're in the process of being transported to the Howard  Springs quarantine facility, where they'll have another health check, be cohorted and  quarantined for a 14-day period.

So, that's the current situation at the moment and I'm obviously very happy to take any  questions.

JOURNALIST:  How many evacuees are there in the Howard Springs facility, do you know?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  There'll be 266.

JOURNALIST:  And they're all- healthy, as you said?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  All very well, and they've all been screened a final time on arrival at Darwin, yes.

JOURNALIST:  How many people are considered to have recovered from the coronavirus in Australia?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  The three that have confirmed to have completely cleared the virus on testing.

There are another couple that are clinically well, or in fact more than another couple.

There are several that are clinically well but we haven't proven them to clear the virus yet.

And we won't say that they've completely recovered until all their tests are negative.

But there's nobody who is clinically in a serious condition. Everyone is stable, which is great  to hear.

JOURNALIST:  If someone does get sick in one of these facilities, what is the plan of attack, so to speak?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  So, if anyone becomes unwell in any of these facilities they will be immediately taken to  quarantine.

In the Darwin facility they will go to the Darwin Hospital, where they will be tested, and if  they are negative that is good; if they are positive they will be properly treated there.

At Christmas Island, the AUSMAT team have set up an isolation hospital on the island and  they would be taken there for testing and isolation.

JOURNALIST:  Is there now a bit of confusion about how the virus started?

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



BRENDAN MURPHY:  I don't think we know yet. I think we do know that it almost definitely was a bat coronavirus.

How it crossed from the bat into animal species and then to human is still a matter of intense  investigation.

WHO are sending in an expert team into Hubei province and Wuhan in the coming days, and  that will be a very important thing to determine just what happened in terms of it coming  across to human transmission.

JOURNALIST:  Are there any updates on the third boat that is also stranded in Japan?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  No. We have no more information about the people on the cruise liners.

We know there were seven Australians who have contracted the virus, have been taken off.

It's lucky that they're in Japan because they have got a wonderful health system, like ours,  and they are being well looked after.

And obviously, our Department of Foreign Affairs is providing consular assistance to others  on board the ship. But they can provide more information on that.

JOURNALIST:  Are you expecting other flights like this to arrive in Australia? You say Christmas Island is  full. If Howard Springs becomes full what's the plan after?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Look, there are no current plans for any further assisted departure flights.

I know that the Department of Foreign Affairs is in contact with people on the ground in  Wuhan.

We've certainly brought off the people of greatest risk. There are another 92 children on this  flight that came from Darwin.

I think they will be reviewing that situation. If there were any further flights there's certainly  more capacity at Howard Springs, but Christmas Island also may become vacant again after  the quarantine of the first flight.

But there are no current plans for further flights.

JOURNALIST:  And is there a reason as to why this virus is spreading so quickly in China but not so much in  Australia?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Well, I think the fact that we have contained it so far. We have only had a relatively small  number of people with the virus come here, but we have got onto it very quickly.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





Our public health units in every one of the state and territories has been incredibly quick to  isolate and manage people who have contracted the virus, contact trace, and make sure that  those people are isolated.

There's still a long way to go. There's still significant potential for further infection, but it  shows that our public health measures so far have been very effective.

JOURNALIST:  Do you know if Australia's contributing to the $2 billion request fund?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Australia will be considering, as we always do, global assistance. That's a matter for the  Department of Foreign Affairs and the Foreign Minister.

JOURNALIST:  Can we expect any changes in the travel bans?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  The travel bans, as the Prime Minister announced, will be formally reviewed at the end of a  two-week period, which comes up at the end of this week.

JOURNALIST:  Can I just double-check those figures with you? Was it 266 (inaudible) on the flight to  Darwin?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Correct. Correct.

JOURNALIST:  And you mentioned four health screenings. So, is that in total or did they do four before they  left?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  They did a health screening, but the Chinese checked them before they got on the flight and  wouldn't let anyone on who was not unwell.

Our AUSMAT clinicians checked them twice during the fight and they have been checked by  health officials at the airport, the RAAF Base in Darwin where they've arrived, and they'll  have a further check when they get to Howard Springs to make sure that they are absolutely  well.

JOURNALIST:  Okay, and there were 92 children out of the 266?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  I believe so, yes.





Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



JOURNALIST:  DFAT's going to put out the numbers of that.

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Okay. Thank you very much everybody. Thank you.

ENDS

