

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER

JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN

BRIAN MITCHELL MP  MEMBER FOR LYONS

SENATOR CATRYNA BILYK  LABOR SENATOR FOR TASMANIA



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  HOBART  THURSDAY, 17 DECEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Aged care; Tasmania visit; MYEFO; Government’s proposed  industrial relations changes; NSW COVID cases; state borders;  unemployment; unemployment in Tasmania; manufacturing; regional  jobs; infrastructure; Tasmanian tourism.

JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS &  MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN: Well, it's great to be here on Hobart's waterfront  and to have our Leader, Anthony Albanese, with us back in Tasmania.  Obviously, with border closures, it's wonderful to welcome Albo back to Hobart.  And it's great to have with me my colleagues, Senator Catryna Bilyk and the  Federal Member for Lyons, Brian Mitchell. What we saw yesterday from the  Federal Government in relation to aged care was more announcements with  little detail, but nearly again, a drop in the ocean for what's actually required to  deal with a crisis in aged care in Australia today. I'm happy to take some  questions on that afterwards. But now, I'll hand over to Anthony.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR  PARTY: Thanks very much, Julie. And it is great to be back in Tasmania with  Brian and Catryna also. I'm on leave from tomorrow, Richard Marles will be the

acting Leader. And I am looking forward to spending a few days here in this  great state of Tasmania. But I do want to say that as MYEFO comes out today,  the challenges remain. This is a Government that will say that the economy is  doing better, but at the same time has introduced legislation for wage cuts.  That's why it needs to back off this proposal to get rid of the Better Off Overall  Test. The idea that you would reduce wages after the pandemic, and after the  sacrifice that workers have made, is quite frankly an outrage. And yesterday, I  was on a picket line in southwest Sydney with workers who have been locked  out of the Coles Distribution Centre over a wage and conditions dispute. What  we know is that wages continue to flatline. What we know is the economy  continues to struggle. But this Government won’t assist that if they pursue this  cut to wages that is in their legislation. What we know is that there's a huge gap  between what the Government says and what it actually delivers. And there's no  area greater than that, of course, than that of aged care, as Julie has effectively  been pointing out for a long period of time. We have a circumstance whereby  there are almost 700 aged care residents who have lost their life to COVID. The  Government has responsibility for regulating the aged care sector, for funding it.  And they clearly have responsibility for looking after people in aged care  residences. But they know that they were warned. We had an interim report that  was titled Neglect. And yet today again we find that in New South Wales with  the revelation that it would appear that one of the people who has been tested  positive for COVID is an aged care worker. We continue to see aged care  workers work across multiple facilities in order to survive. We continue to see a  Government that hasn't delivered, even in spite of the interim reports, an aged  care specific strategy for dealing with COVID. It's just one of the examples of  where this Government continues to fail. We also know that Christmas is just  around the corner. The Prime Minister said he would get Australians home by  Christmas, but the list has got longer, not shorter. We could use a lot of  taxpayers' money flying Mathias Cormann around Europe, but we haven't been  able to get Australian citizens home, including around about 8000 who were on  the list at the time that Scott Morrison made that commitment. It's simply not  good enough that so many Australians won't be able to spend their Christmas  with their families. And the Government just needs to do better. And they need  to have a New Year's resolution for 2021 to actually deliver on what they say  they will do rather than leave this constant gap between promises and actual  delivery. Happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: You just said this is your first trip here since borders reopened.  The Premier in Western Australia is already threatening to close borders again  because of the new cases in New South Wales. What do you say to that?

ALBANESE: Well, no one wants to see borders closed. And, of course, the  Tasmanian border was closed originally until December 1. And that was an  announcement made many months in advance of that. I haven't been critical of

any of the state premiers, whether they be a Liberal Premier here in Tasmania  or a Labor Premier in Western Australia. I think that it's up to the national  political leaders to show leadership. Scott Morrison has presided over a so-called National Cabinet process where premiers have done their own thing and  he is announcing them rather than show any leadership and bring people  together. But it's been left to the state premiers. I don't think you can do that on  the one hand and then be critical of decisions that they've made on the other.

JOURNALIST: How tough is it to be talking about borders and closing down  nursing homes in Sydney's northern beaches over Christmas?

ALBANESE: Look, it's really tough for people. 2020 has been such a tough  year. I think that Australians want to put it in the bin, frankly, and move on and  just hope that 2021 is much more positive. But we have to deal with what's in  front of us. And the COVID threat and the pandemic was real. The Australian  public have responded magnificently to the challenge that they've been given.  But it is going to be a very difficult Christmas. It will be a difficult Christmas for  those people who've lost loved ones and haven't even been able to say  goodbye to them, who were aged care residents. Having to say goodbye to a  loved one over FaceTime is something that shouldn't happen. But that is what  people have had to deal with. And it will be a very difficult Christmas for so  many Australian families. And my heart goes out to them.

JOURNALIST: Should the $11 billion in JobKeeper savings be spent on  extending the payments for casuals?

ALBANESE: Well, what we should have had was less people left behind by  JobKeeper. And this Christmas, there are so many people who weren't able to  receive JobKeeper, whether they be casual employees, people in the arts and  entertainment sector, people who worked at universities, people who worked in  local government. And they've been forgotten. And whilst the Government likes  to pat itself on the back continually, the fact is, they left them behind, too many  people, and they are continuing to do so. So certainly what the Government  should be doing is using every opportunity to take the principle which is that  people shouldn't just be left behind, we need to help foster that relationship  between employers and employees, which JobKeeper has done, and make  sure we maximise that. Because the truth is that investing a dollar now will save  you many times that down the track. And this Government half understood that  but keeps letting ideology get in the way, which is why they introduced their  legislation for wage cuts just last week.

JOURNALIST: So where would you like to see those savings spent  specifically?

ALBANESE: I'd like to see it supported for those people who are most  vulnerable. And there's a range of areas where the Government could do that.  In people who've missed out on wage subsidies. I want to see the Government  announce a permanent increase to unemployment benefits prior to Christmas  so that people can have some certainty going through this period of time. I want  the Government to intervene so that people aren't locked out of work until  February who have been a part of stacking our supermarket shelves during this  difficult pandemic. I want to see some funding for aged care residences. We still  haven't seen any response from this Government when it comes to the aged  care crisis, which was titled as Neglect. Home care packages are one thing, but  we know also that 30,000 Australians have died waiting for the home care  packages that has been approved for them.

JOURNALIST: The ABS has just released jobs data. Have you seen it? What  do you make of it?

ALBANESE: Well, I note that Tasmania still is the highest unemployment of any  state. And that's a problem. We need to have strategies specific for tourism, for  other industry policies. I note Brian Mitchell was out there talking about industry  policy, he might want to add something there about how we can create more  jobs here in Tasmania. But one of the things we continue to see is massive  underemployment as well and a whole lot of people just dropping out of the  labour market. And we need to do better than that. We need to have a strategy  to increase workforce participation. We need a strategy for economic reform.  Our childcare policy that we announced as part of the Budget Reply, as our  centrepiece, is about women's participation in the workforce. It's about  productivity. It's about boosting our economy and boosting jobs. And that's one  of the reasons why we had it as our centrepiece. Throughout this crisis, in spite  of the fact that we've seen the largest ever deficit in Australian history, we see  debt rising to $1 trillion, approaching that now and peaking over the next decade  at $1.7 trillion dollars, we don't have any economic reform to show for it. The  only reform the Government came up with in the last sittings of Parliament is  wage cuts.

JOURNALIST: Unemployment isn't expected to peak as high as originally  forecast. Is that good news?

ALBANESE: Look, it's always good news when people are able to find work.  The problem here is so many people who can't find enough work. And that's the  problem that is really there. People being underemployed. So, you are counted  as being employed if you're doing a couple of hours, what we need to do is to  make sure that we have strategies which boost full-time employment. And  perhaps one of my Tasmanian colleagues might want to talk about the Tassie  employment issue.



BRIAN MITCHELL, MEMBER FOR LYONS:Thank you. At the moment, we've  got 50,000 people in the state looking for work. There are 22 people out of work  for every single job that's available. So, 21 people are going away from a job  interview disappointed. That's not good enough. It's one of the reasons that I've  proposed in the northern papers today that Tasmania build a plastic  replacement facility and precinct to make use of natural plantation fibres to build  manufacturing packaging and advanced manufacturing packaging to replace  plastics. It's good for the planet and it's great for Tasmanian jobs.

JOURNALIST: How long have you been working on this?

MITCHELL: I have been working on this for a few weeks. I've been speaking to  industry about it. The next step now is to work out the feasibility of it and make  sure that it passes muster. There's a number of sites in Tasmania, of course,  that we've been looking at. And I'll take advice on that. But this is just the sort of  thing that Anthony was talking about when he gave a terrific speech on regional  communities and regional employment in Coffs Harbour in September.  Advanced manufacturing. Rebuilding our regions. Jobs for the regions. This  ticks all those boxes. And hopefully they'll be boxes made out of recycled  packaging.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).

ALBANESE: Well, the fact is, what you need to do is to have a plan to grow the  economy so that debt is decreased over a period of time. Look, Labor doesn't  say that you shouldn't have had an economic stimulus. Indeed, we were calling  for. So as a result, there was going to be an increase. But what we do say is  that the Government has presided over an economy that was struggling before  COVID. We already saw wage stagnation, productivity going backwards,  consumer demand going backwards, business investment going backwards.  We saw economic growth downgraded repeatedly. And we saw the Reserve  Bank repeatedly decrease interest rates in order to stimulate the economy  because the Government wasn't stepping up. This Government is great at  announcements. They're not good at actually delivering. So that we've had, for  example, in infrastructure, a $6.8 billion underspend over the life of this  Government. Infrastructure investment is good because it grows the economy in  the future, which adds to receipts. That's why we need areas like industry policy  that Brian's speaking about. We had a whole centrepiece as well in the Budget  of a Future Made in Australia. We need to look at how we grow jobs here, how  we become more resilient as an economy. And what that will do is reduce debt  by growing jobs, by allowing taxes to be paid by workers and businesses, and  for that money to stimulate the economy as it flows around. This Government is  retreating back into its old ideological position, having responded to the



pandemic in a way that, frankly, in many ways is consistent with an orthodox  Keynesian response, something that they said was wrong during the Global  Financial Crisis. The difference is that Labor under my leadership has been  constructive. And that stands in stark contrast to the destructive way that the  Liberal and National parties acted during the Global Financial Crisis.

JOURNALIST: Are you saying that you don't think the Government has a plan?

ALBANESE: This Government doesn't have a medium or long-term plan for the  economy. What they have a plan for is the next press release and the next  announcement. They don't even have a plan to deliver on what they announce.  For them, it's all, the announcement is made, and then job done. They just  move on to the next announcement and often don't even go back to what was  there in the system.

JOURNALIST: You said you are going on leave in Tassie. Rumour has it that  you are going hiking. Can you tell us what you are going to be doing here?

ALBANESE: I am. I'm going on a walk here, one of one of your famous walks  here. I'll be happy to report back afterwards on how it goes. This is, I might add,  a self-funded trip in terms of air fares and all of that, just to pre-empt that. But  I'm really looking forward to it. I think Tasmania is a great state that has so  much to offer. And I always enjoy my visits here, whether it's for work or for  recreation. And I think that Australians should do, whenever they can, should  holiday here in Australia. That's not a new thing that I've said. Indeed, this was a  trip that was originally booked, I think, last December. I booked in early last year  in 2019. So I paid for it a long time ago. And we had to reschedule because of  the bushfires, because I worked each and every day during the bushfire crisis,  because I thought that was what was appropriate. So, I haven't had leave really  for a long time. So I'm looking forward to being able to do that. And I'm sure that  Richard Marles will do a fantastic job in my stead. And the team will be  continuing to work. But I'll be back next week. I have one more thing to do, a  work announcement that we have, a policy announcement on the 23rd of  December. But until then, I'll be off air. And fortunately, one of the great things  about Tasmania, I encourage people to come, is you can go places where  people can't find you on the phone. No Wi-Fi, no phone coverage. It's a big plus.  It's a big plus. It's almost like the nirvana of what this Government's approach to  the NBN was, make sure that no one can actually have contact with each other.  So, I'm looking forward to that. Thanks very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053









