

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY

DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RN BREAKFAST WITH HAMISH MACDONALD

FRIDAY, 27 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Coronavirus crisis and border protection; Sydney airport; Ruby

Princess; temporary migrants trapped in Australia.



HAMISH MACDONALD, HOST: As we speak, borders around the world are closing to

stop the spread of COVID-19, but there are some pretty serious concern about authorities

allowing sick travellers into this country without proper screening. There were reports,

videos stories online yesterday about chaotic scenes at Sydney Airport with crowds of

passengers filing out of the terminals, cheek by jowl. Adding to the chaos, a number of

cruise ships remain off the coast of New South Wales and Western Australia with

passengers in limbo and State governments barring them from docking. Kristina Keneally

is Labor's Shadow Home Affairs Minister. Welcome back to breakfast.



KRISTINA KENEALLY, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE AND SHADOW

MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Good morning Hamish and good morning to your

listeners.



MACDONALD: I want to start with the mayhem scene at Sydney Airport and we've heard

from a lot of listeners about similar scenes at other international terminals across Australia.

Passengers were filing out of the terminal without maintaining social distancing rules. It

wasn't clear, that there was much screening going on, whose responsibilities is this?



KENEALLY: The Federal Government has core responsibilities and one of the most

significant of those responsibilities is securing our borders. That's not just an immigration

function. It is also a function of keeping Australians safe, and that includes from biosecurity

and the threat of a pandemic. Now what we have seen at our seaports and our airports is

quite concerning and when we look back on this coronavirus crisis we may well see that

what has happened at our seaports and airports is a tipping point. That is, it is the point at

which the virus was enabled to take root in the community, and it's also the point at which,

quite regrettably, it seems some of the cooperation we've seen thus far between the state

and the Commonwealth governments started to break down.



MACDONALD: So, just before we proceed further, can I ask you, though. about this

question of responsibility that you say lays the feet of the Commonwealth. In the case of

Sydney Airport, where those pretty worrying seem to emerge from yesterday, it was the

State Government that immediately responded with changes to the health screening

processes that were in place there. And, in fact, as I understand it the staff that had

already been deployed there were deployed by the State Government. So, there is a

division of power here that is creating some of the confusion, isn't there? That's fair to say.



KENEALLY: What we know from the Sydney Airport situation that emerged online

yesterday and those concerning images on social media is that Australian Border Force

frontline officers had been raising concerns all along with the Federal Department of

Agriculture, which has responsibility for biosecurity about what was taking place in our

international airport terminals. Had those frontline Australian Border Force staff had been

listened to it's possible some of those problems that we saw yesterday would have been

sensibly avoided. But, you are correct to point out that State Government stepped in

yesterday and, as a former Premier myself, I completely understand and support the steps

that have been taken by Gladys Berejiklian here in New South Wales and Premier

McGowan in Western Australia. They are going to face as State Premiers the challenge of

keeping our health system, our hospital systems, running effectively. When - if - this virus

takes hold right across the Australian community, they're the ones who are going to face

that challenge and they're the ones stepping in at our borders to ensure that the proper

health checks are being done. Hamish…



MACDONALD: What is it, what should the Federal Government be doing to ensure that

the right checks are happening, that the right people are getting tested. I mean, is there a

national policy that could be implemented right now given the broad community fear about

this.



KENEALLY: Of course there is, the Commonwealth has significant powers under their

biosecurity laws that were passed with bipartisan support a few years ago to be able to do

these sorts of measures. To be able to implement these sorts of steps. It is the

Commonwealth's responsibility to secure our borders, and it is the responsibility of the

Minister for Home Affairs Peter Dutton and the Commonwealth Government to work

cooperatively and to provide clear advice, medical advice and direction to the Australian

Border Force, and to their state counterparts.



MACDONALD: What should the be advice be, that that every person returning is tested?

What do you actually think should happen at our borders?



KENEALLY: Last week, I participated in a briefing with several of my Labor colleagues in

relation to the National Coordination Mechanism the Government had stood up, and I

appreciate thank the Government for giving us that briefing. But in that briefing we raised

this very concern: that not enough health checks are being done at the borders. There was

not a sufficient and clear protocol. That temperature testing was not occurring. That

passengers weren't being provided with the appropriate advice. And when it comes to

cruise ships, Hamish, we've known now for several weeks that cruise ships presents a

particularly significant set of circumstances and a significant risk when it comes to

coronavirus, and the fact that the Ruby Princess was allowed to disembark 2,700

passengers and allowed those passengers, those passengers were allowed to spread out

across the Australian community. That they now account for some 10 per cent of the cases

in New South Wales, as well as a number of cases, in every state and territory, just goes to

show that we had not put in place those appropriate testing and quarantine protocols. Let's

not forget that when people came back from Wuhan, Australian citizens, or when we had

an earlier cruise ship issue, people were put in quarantine. Now, that has not happened

here. In fact, it has, we have seen 2,700 people from one ship alone now accounting for a

significant spread of coronavirus throughout Australia.



MACDONALD: So whose fault was that, in your view, was that the State Government's

fault or was that the Commonwealth Government's fault?



KENEALLY: It's a breakdown of the National Cabinet processes, ultimately border security

sits with the Commonwealth Government. A Premier of New South Wales cannot direct the

Australian Border Force on what they should and shouldn't do and the biosecurity laws do

sit with the Commonwealth Government, but…



MACDONALD: It does seem that the New South Wales Health Minister had some

responsibility here and it was ultimately New South Wales that advised the border security

teams that they viewed this ship as low-risk.



KENEALLY: That's not entirely clear, who provided what advice -- and as I pointed to, this

is what we are seeing happen in real time -- the unfortunate breakdown in cooperation

between the Commonwealth and State governments. And, at our borders it is incredibly

important we have that cooperation in place. And, as I said, I do support the measures that

have been taken by State Premiers now to implement their own health and security

checks, above and beyond what the Commonwealth has put in place, because it is their

hospital systems and it is their population that is at risk.



MACDONALD: In terms of these cruise ships it's obviously a much broader problem. On

the one hand, there's a number of cruise ships waiting to come into Australia with

Australians on board as well as foreign nationals. At the same time, there are a lot of

Australians stuck in cruise ships in other parts of the world and the Australian Government

is trying to seek safe passage for those people back to aircraft. Is it a bit difficult for

Australia, on one hand, to be blocking cruise ships from coming in and docking, and at the

same time asking other countries to let our people off on their soil to get to two aircraft.



KENEALLY: The contradiction looks it looks like it exists, I understand that, but these

things can be done with proper health checks and quarantine measures in place.



MACDONALD: What would that look like?



KENEALLY: Well, Hamish, this morning we can't design an entire system on your radio

programme, but it would include being able to use hotel facilities or other facilities that are

available to the Government to quarantine people when they come off cruise ships. To be

able to do the extensive testing whether it's temperature testing or coronavirus testing for

the passengers who we know are at significant risk and then working cooperatively with

other countries to transit their passengers home, or indeed to send flights, whether they be

Qantas, Virgin or other charter flights to foreign jurisdictions to collect our citizens.



MACDONALD: We've been focusing on Australians, obviously, returning home. Of course,

there are 1.6 million people in Australia who are not permanent residents or citizens. Many

temporary migrants don't have access to welfare or Medicare. What risk do they pose in

terms of the spread of the virus?



KENEALLY: This is a public health challenge and it confronts all people in Australia,

whether they are a citizen or not. A virus does not check your visa status before it's

conveyed or before a person is infected. And, if we have 1.6 million people who will soon

be trapped in Australia, many of them will have been caught here because they lacked the

financial resources as borders started to shut down and international flights started to

disappear, to be able to get home. Some may be trapped here because they're unable to

go through various transit points to get to their home country. And, many of these are in

casual work or areas like hospitality where they are losing their jobs just like many

hundreds of thousands of Australians are. If these 1.6 million people are not able to access

medical care, coronavirus testing or income support, they will be forced to keep working or

to keep seeking work. They risk unknowingly spreading the virus in the community. It is in

Australia's national security interest or public health interest that, for all people who are in

the country during this crisis, citizen or not, be able to access those, those measures. Now,

in the Economic Stimulus Package that passed on Monday in the Federal Parliament,

Labor worked cooperatively with the Government. We amended that legislation. We gave

the Minister for Social Services broad, sweeping discretionary powers time-limited until the

end of December to vary the eligibility and payment amounts criteria for social services

payments. I encourage the Government, and I urge them to use those quickly. I note they

already have for some categories of newly arrived migrants, and for some categories of

Australians, including domestic students, but I encourage them to consider the national

security and public health interest in ensuring that 1.6 million people, who are living in the

country, can access that support.





MACDONALD: Kristina Keneally, thank you very much.



KENEALLY: Thank you



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













