

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T

Monday 14th December 2020



Minister Littleproud 2GB iv with Chris Smith



CHRIS SMITH: David Littleproud is the Federal Minister for Drought, Agriculture and  Emergency Management and he joins me on the line. Good morning to you, David.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Good morning, Chris. Good to be with you.

CHRIS SMITH: Have you made any progress with Beijing? Are they picking up the  telephone? Is someone talking to someone there, and vice versa?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No. Not at a ministerial level - but, at an official level, yes. But at a  Ministerial level we continue to have our hand out ready to talk - we won't turn our back.  The best way to resolve any issue is through dialogue, whether that be internationally or  even at home. So, we'll continue to do that, but we will not, we will not compromise on our  values and principles or our sovereignty. There are hundreds of thousands of Australians  who lost their lives protecting that, and any nation around the globe that thinks Australia  will ever, ever relent on that, they are truly and surely mistaken.

CHRIS SMITH: Former Resources Minister, Matt Canavan, says the Government must  force Beijing to pay a price for its trade bans. He reckons we should impose a levy on iron  ore exports to Beijing. Do we need to start matching their tariffs with a few levies of our  own?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: We've got to play this cool, Chris. We're a rules-based trading  nation, not just with China, but with the rest of the world.

CHRIS SMITH: But they don't play by the rules.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: And that's why the rules-based trading system is- there's a  mechanism for us to express that, and a process for us to express that. Now, if we, if we  go off of the hymn sheet with respect to that, then other trading partners might become  spooked, and in fact, that may escalate it. And when you talk about the bush and someone  like me who represents 10 percent of the Australian landmass, all of which is rural and  agricultural, it may have unintended consequences for other commodities that we do not  necessarily need.   Now, we're being the adults in the room with this, we're not going to throw our toys out of  the cot. We are going to make sure that we act maturely, we stick to the procedures that  we signed up to. We expect China and every other trading nation; the other 13 free trade

Transcript



T R A N S C R I P T

trading nations that we have agreements with, to do exactly the same. If they don't, then  we will accelerate that process and make sure we stick to it. But we will not relent on our,  on our values, our principles, or our sovereignty.

CHRIS SMITH: We started this hour, this morning, and I was pushing for the idea that we  need to create a rallying call - a significant, loud, widespread media rallying call - whether  it be 60 second television commercials, 60 second radio commercials, full page ads in the  papers, may be supported by the trade division of government. But, revving up and  showing the producers that make our food, and showing how tough they're doing it, and  rallying everyone to say, no more foreign made goods, we're not going to buy, we're going  to buy local and we're going to do it really emphatically just to try and lift them out of the,  you know, the pit that they're in because of China. I just wonder whether that has crossed  the minds of Cabinet at all?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah. We're not going to parochially go against other nations. But  what we have done - and we did this a couple of years ago - is just ask consumers when  they go to the supermarket today, take an extra two seconds. On everything on that shelf  it'll have a green and gold kangaroo with a barcode on the bottom, and that barcode tells  you the level of Australian ingredients in that product. We produced this about three years  ago; this is to give consumers choice and power. So, every time you walk into that  supermarket, you have the power. We've already given it to you. If it doesn't have a green  and gold kangaroo, then it is not from Australia and you need to look for another brand.   We had given the Australian consumer that power to be able to back Australian primary  producers. We're now reviewing that to extend it to cut flowers and also, and also to  seafood, which are- they're also doing it pretty tough. And I'd just say, have a crack at  some seafood dishes from Australia, make sure it's Australian produce. And the other  piece that I've actually got McDonalds to sign up and Domino's, is even when you go into  the fast-food outlets, they're now disclosing the level of Australian ingredients in their  product. Now, Hungry Jack's and all these others haven't quite done it.   But, if we all actually disclosed and gave the power to the consumer; people like you,  Chris, and the programmes that you do can empower our Australians to go into those  shops, look for that green and gold kangaroo, look for the barcode and support the one  that has the most Australian ingredients.

CHRIS SMITH: Even just drinking wine; like $1.2 billion worth of wine won't go into China -  they won't dare put it on the shelves in China if, of course, they're going to have 212 per  cent tariff whacked on it, so, we've got to start turning to Australian wine, as opposed to  other wine we might buy, and do something about it.   Now, I want to talk about fruit picking and the gaps in the work market there. You've struck  a deal with the states to bring in more workers from the Pacific Islands. I noticed that not  all the states are on board. Can't we quarantine in isolated- on isolated properties where  they have to work?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah mate, look, the frustrating thing on this is a deal had been  struck back in August. We had 22,000 pre-vetted, work ready men and women, from ten  Pacific nations ready to come in. Now, the Commonwealth found them, and we simply said  to the states, you arrange the quarantine arrangements that you want because you want to  hold and own public health. We respect that, that's your responsibility, but you need to tell  industry exactly how you are going to bring them in. So, we've had that since August, but  because they've done three fifths of bugger all, we said, okay, let's even formalise these  even further so you have even more confidence. In Queensland, credit where credit's due,  they're now allowing them to quarantine on farm…

Transcript



T R A N S C R I P T

CHRIS SMITH: Yeah.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: while they work. This a…

CHRIS SMITH: But, not in New South Wales?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No. Nor- And in Victoria they still have- they're still thinking about  putting them through Howard Springs, up in the Northern Territory at $8,000 a head, that's  a lot of money that the producers got to come up with. So, we said to the states, get your  chief health officers. They want to own this, they've owned it from the start, they've wanted  to want to control the state borders.   Well, you get them, sit them down and actually work with industry and say, yeah, you can  actually put them out on these properties. They can't leave these properties for 14 days.  They could be work; they can make money - end of the 14 days, if the health officials say  you're right to go, they can go…

CHRIS SMITH: If the AFL in the NRL can use their own biosecurity advice to create  bubbles at football stadiums and in various areas around Australia where they play the  game, you can do the same thing in the bush? There's automatic distancing?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Exactly. If you wanted- if the intent was there, Chris, you'd be able  to do it. I mean, some of these towns, hundreds of kilometres from the nearest COVID and  they've never had a dose of COVID. I mean, this is just not common sense. This goes to  show that our chief health officer and premiers are decisions for capital cities, not for the  bush.

CHRIS SMITH: Yeah. One last one. Some listeners have raised concerns about China  establishing a $200 million fish processing plant 185 kilometres to our north. It's been  quietly endorsed by PNG, even though we're told there's no commercial fishing ground  close to the site. This is, this is something in fish clothing, isn't it?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, this is something I know the Foreign Minister, Trade  Minister, and I are working through closely with PNG - they're our close ally - and we want  to make sure we get underneath the bonnet of this very quickly and work with them. We're  obviously being very solid partners with PNG as well, not just in terms of emotional support  but financial support over the years, and we just want to ensure that the PNG Government  understands all the implications of the decisions they make.

CHRIS SMITH: Yeah. Stinks to high heaven - sorry to use the pun. But thank you so much  for your time, David. All the very best.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Any time, mate, have a good one.

CHRIS SMITH: Alright. Federal Minister for Agriculture, David Littleproud.

Media contact:  Douglas Ferguson, 0455 448 985

