

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  SYDNEY  THURSDAY, 30 JANUARY 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; Suicide Prevention; Bridget McKenzie’s Sports  Rorts.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH:  Well thanks for coming  this morning. I'm pleased to be joined by my friend and colleague Dr. Mike  Freelander here in Liverpool. A couple of issues I'll deal with before taking any  questions.

Firstly obviously coronavirus. The Opposition regards it as a sensible  precaution to quarantine those who were evacuated out of Wuhan and accepts  as sensible the Government's proposal to do that at Christmas Island.

There'll be significant issues to work through not least of which are with the  Christmas Island community. I've been speaking with the local member  covering Christmas Island Warren Snowdon last night and this morning and he  I know has been talking to the Government directly as well. This is a fast  moving situation. While it is not clear there can be human to human  transmission of the coronavirus before somebody is symptomatic, if there is any  doubt that that's the case it is sensible to quarantine the people who are being  evacuated from harm. We welcome the fact that that evacuation is getting  closer. As I said a couple of days ago I don't underestimate the complexity of  the situation. The Government has our support as they go about that process.

I also welcome the fact this morning that Greg Hunt clarified that people who  are being evacuated will not be charged for the evacuation. I was concerned to  ensure that nobody was disadvantaged or that nobody who is not of wealthy  means was disadvantaged in that process. And I welcome the fact that that  evacuation according to Greg Hunt this morning will now occur free of charge.  That's a good development.

So we have all through this process been providing the Government with  support. I've received regular updates from the Chief Medical Officer indeed as  recently as this morning on the evolving situation. Where we see the  Government doing the right thing we will say so.

I was disappointed in Minister Tehan’s intervention which was clearly not in line  with the best advice to people. But nevertheless I do welcome all the other  steps that the Government has taken over the recent days and support the  efforts being put into place by the Chief Medical Officer and his state and  territory colleagues.

The second matter I'll deal with this morning is the Government's  announcement of the investment in suicide prevention and response to  Christine Morgan’s report. Now of course I welcome any steps to tackle suicide.  Again we've given the Government consistent bipartisan support. I've not yet  seen Christine Morgan's draft report despite the fact we had previously offered  the Government close bipartisan support. Nevertheless when I do see it I will  study it closely.

Can I say I do welcome the Government's recognition of the social  determinants of suicide which we have been pointing out for some months. But  this must be taken into account. By social determinants obviously the impact of  people's everyday lives. It's not just a matter of mental illness, they are  separate related matters. It's a matter of people coping in difficult  circumstances and if the report and the response highlights that, that will have  my full support. I do say it's not enough though to give people payments or  support after a suicide attempt. What we need to do is tackle the social  determinants of health and suicide across the board. That's why we support for  example an increase in Newstart.

That's why we wish the Government had cracked down years ago on payday  lenders, the pernicious activity of financial exploitation and the Government had  listened to its own report on payday lending and the mental anguish-- mental  health anguish that poor practices and unethical practices in payday lending  generates right throughout communities in communities like this in south west  Sydney and elsewhere in the suburbs and regions of Australia.

So we will look at this closely will support what is sensible but we'll also point  out what more needs to be done and I very much hope and expect that this is  simply a down payment. This is simply a draft response, an interim response.  We're yet to see the final report of the Productivity Commission on Mental  Health for example, there needs to be much much more done. We need a  revolution not an evolution when it comes to mental health and we'll continue to  provide sensible policy suggestions to do so.  Happy to take any questions.



JOURNALIST: So a few of the Labor members including your Leader have  raised concerns about Christmas Island as a quarantine facility. Why isn't it  suitable?

BOWEN: As I said we support as sensible the steps to quarantine people at  Christmas Island. I recognise the Government doesn't have many facilities  available to them. What we've pointed out and various people have pointed out  and I've been in constant contact with the local member Warren Snowdon for  example is that there are issues to work through. There is issues to work  through for example people looking for reassurance that the family that is  currently being housed there from Biloela is protected.

Now my understanding is that they're housed at Phosphate Hill I understand  most of the quarantine will occur at North West Point a separate facility but  these are issues that need to be worked through. The Government should be  given time to work those issues through. If we are not at the end of the day of  course I'll say so. But I'm not going to overly politicise what is a fast moving  situation where the Government is responding with the resources they have.  We'll provide suggestions where we think things can be done better and I'm not  going to be unnecessarily critical. I'm going to provide appropriate and  necessary support and also hold the Government to account at the same time.

JOURNALIST: What do you think about the response to the coronavirus here  in Australia in terms of schools for example? The conflicting information  between states and federal…

BOWEN: That has been one shortfall if I could say so. I thought Minister  Tehan's intervention was irresponsible and unfortunate and I thought the  actions taken by the New South Wales Government here obviously in contrast  to what the Federal Minister for Education had said. I think the Federal Minister  for Education is to reflect on that. That's my criticism. I think the steps being put  in place by the Department of Health, the Chief Medical Officer by DFAT in  removing people from Wuhan, we do support those measures. I think other  Government Ministers should have thought more carefully before they  blundered through this very sensitive and important area.

JOURNALIST: Would you have liked to have seen a more federal approach?

BOWEN: I think the Minister for Education, I think his contribution was  unfortunate.

JOURNALIST: On sports grants if Labor believes the Auditor General's report  is serious enough to warrant Bridget McKenzie’s sacking or resignation from  the Ministry, why do you need to launch another inquiry in the Senate?





BOWEN: Because she’s still there. I mean she shouldn't be there. She should  have gone weeks ago. This is now an ongoing saga of weeks and Scott  Morrison appears to be the only person who doesn't think this is a problem.  Now this is theft frankly, this is theft from communities like the ones that Mike  and I represent. Sporting clubs who wouldn't-- who have dreamt of change  rooms for years and who miss out when the National Party engages in this  theft. Now this is pure and simple political corruption of a process here by  Bridget McKenzie. She should pay for that with her job. She's still there. So I  fully support Don Farrell's efforts to get a Senate inquiry because we need to  keep the focus on this and if and if the Government thinks they can arrogantly  smirk their way through it all go away. I'm afraid they're sadly mistaken.

JOURNALIST: How confident are you that an inquiry in the Senate will lead to  some sort of change then if that's what you?

BOWEN: We’ll take every avenue available to us through the mechanisms of  the Parliament in either House to pursue this matter and we will do so because  it stinks and it's not on.

Thanks very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ANDREW GARRETT 0412 300 994













