TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

CRONULLA

FRIDAY, 18 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Launch of TWU organising hub for Qantas worker in Cronulla; Job

losses in universities; JobKeeper payments to a foreign university based in

Australia.



RICHARD OLSON, NSW STATE SECRETARY TWU: We're here today to officially open

our office here in the seat of Cook in the Cronulla Sutherland Shire to bring home to the

Prime Minister and the aviation industry, the seriousness of this situation that is occurring

within our aviation industry. As a lot of people live and work from this area we thought it's

important that this launch takes place here today in the Sutherland Shire area to bring

home to Alan Joyce, Scott Morrison and the Federal Government of their mismanagement

of JobKeeper in particular, where we see hundreds of aviation workers still not being able

to claim JobKeeper. They're without a job, they're without any form of payment and

support. We were all in this together at the start, but unfortunately the cracks are widening.

JobKeeper is wound back and still we have people in the aviation industry from Dnata,

Captain Services and other places who still unable to claim JobKeeper and JobSeeker.



They are falling behind the cracks severely. We've asked people to come here and join us

here today to have discussions and highlight the plight of transport workers in this area of

aviation. You will recall that early in 2020, where a flight came from Wuhan China, we

found out about it and HSRs, health and safety representatives on Qantas decided not to

board that plane and clean that plane because they were not given the appropriate PPE

and they were not given the appropriate cleaning equipment that would be necessary to

keep them safe. Up to three health and safety officers on behalf of transport workers were

stood down at that time and we still have a person stood down some nine months later.

This is a total outrage but this shows the depth in which Qantas is able to go to, to try to

hide what exactly occurred on that day in late January of this year.



We've had a pandemic as we know, flights have been grounded for quite some time.

We've been stood down. We're now being replaced. There's two and a half thousand

people that are currently with Qantas that are now been told that their jobs are on the line,

it's going to be outsourced, they will be replaced by a cheaper and less professional outfit.

This is un-Australian. We need to make changes and today is the commencement of those

changes. We're going to engage with the public as much as what we can and the affected

workers in this area to bring home to the Federal Government, to bring home to Alan Joyce

that there is no aviation plan here. People are falling through the crack and we cannot

afford to wait any longer. It won't be long before planes get in the sky, there is no excuse to

continuously hit the aviation industry in the manner in which it has been hit. We need to

look after these people as I say again, we're in this together and if we're in this together,

then every worker must be looked after and we are not being looked after either by Scott

Morrison nor Alan Joyce.



So we need changes to occur, we need JobSeeker for all and we need the Qantas board

and Alan Joyce to keep all these workers on and not go through this charade and

attempting to get rid of a further two and a half thousand people under the wing. That is

totally un-Australian, where we're at today.



Thank you for this, I'd like to introduce you to Tanya Plibersek from our Federal

Parliamentary Party. Thank you.



TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Thanks

so much, and it's so great to be here with my friends from the Transport Workers Union

today. I always love coming to Cronulla. I spent a lot of time here as a kid and as a

teenager and right behind me is where Jean Egan's café used to be, down the road. I used

to go to Joe's Milk Bar and get a chocolate-covered heart and 60 cents worth of hot chips.

My niece met her husband at Northies. This is a place that is very familiar to me. And

because it's very familiar, I know that there are a lot of people who live in the Sutherland

Shire who work at the Qantas jet base. Who work for Qantas, who work for Virgin, who

work for Jetstar, who work for the old Qantas catering, which is now Dnata. It's a great

place to live because if you're working odd hours, it's a very quick run across the Captain

Cook Bridge to the airport.



And I've got to say I understand that Scott Morrison might not care what the Labor Party

says about supporting the aviation industry with JobKeeper. Scott Morrison might not care

about what the Transport Workers Union says about supporting the aviation industry with

JobKeeper. But Scott Morrison should care what his constituents say about the jobs

they've lost and the income that they've lost during this pandemic.



This is an area that has a lot of aviation workers living in it. Their Prime Minister, their local

member Scott Morrison should listen to them about how they are struggling. I've heard

about people who have been cut down to two or three hours a week or two or three hours

a fortnight work. People who are really struggling to make ends meet, particularly in

families where both people work in the airline industry, and that's a lot of families in this

area. So the plea today and the campaign that the Transport Workers Union are running is,

please Scott Morrison, listen to how this pandemic is affecting people in the transport and

aviation sectors, your constituents, the people who live in your community who are really

struggling to make ends meet.



My dad worked for Qantas for more than 20 years. I can't tell you how many times I've

been to the jet base, how many times when I was a little kid I met people who worked in

Qantas catering. And they always had a little treat for me, a little bit of shortbread or

something, the decent people who have spent decades working for the same company

and what changed for them it's not their job, not the fact that they're Australian taxpayers,

not the fact that they live in Scott Morrison's electorate, nothing's changed except for the

ownership of their company that they've got no control over. Because of that they've been

denied JobKeeper, despite the fact that they have been paying taxes as Australian citizens

all their working lives.



It's not fair and the Prime Minister should listen to his constituents when they tell him it's

not fair.



OLSON: Thank you Tanya. Thank you. I'd also like to introduce you to Daniel Mookhey

from the State Parliamentary Party as well. Thank you.



DANIEL MOOKHEY MLC: Thank you, Richard. I'm Daniel Mookhey. I'm New South Wales

Labor's Shadow Minister for Finance and Small Business. I'm here to congratulate all the

Qantas workers who are today commencing a neighbour to neighbour campaign to fight for

good jobs here in the Shire, good jobs for their families, good jobs for this community.

What is clear is that when you destroy good work you hurt communities, like Cronulla.

Cronulla's economy can't rebuild unless people have good secure work.



Every worker here should be congratulated for the efforts that they're taking to stand up for

that Australian ideal of secure work with high wages. Now can I say, a global pandemic is

no excuse to set up a race to the bottom when it comes to labour rights and conditions. It's

equally worrying that we saw this week Qantas wanting to initiate a battle between the

states about who can get the most corporate welfare for them to keep their jobs in Mascot.



Can I say not a cent of New South Wales taxpayer dollars should be going to any

company, unless they're prepared to guarantee the job security of their workforce. The

campaign that the TWU has kicked off today, the campaign that the Qantas workers have

kicked off today has the full support of the state parliamentary Labor Party. We look

forward to joining them as we go about persuading people that the right way to rebuild this

economy, the way in which we bring jobs back to New South Wales, is by making sure that

people have good stable wages, good stable work. Our economy cannot recover unless

working people have decent rights and conditions.



OLSON: Thank you, Daniel. I would just like to introduce you now to three Qantas workers

with decades of loyal service to this company and a huge amount experience at both

international and domestic airports. First one will be Jim.



JIM METROPOLIS: Hey everyone. My name is Jim Metropolis. Worked for Qantas for 34

years up to two weeks ago. Between myself, my dad, my uncle and my brother, it's close

to a hundred years of loyal service to the company. I was on a committee that was part of

the redundancies when they were announced by Qantas. At no time was it ever ever

mentioned to us that the company would be outsourced, but I've known through the years

that Qantas management has always wanted to outsource us. They've always considered

us dinosaurs, and I find it quite sickening as to what's happened to this great company that

it used to be and I hope Mr. Morrison steps in and helps all my mates behind me that have

been left behind and have been left unemployed. And also for the poor people that work for

Dnata that aren't allowed to take JobKeeper because, I don't know, some silly rule that

they're foreign owned by another company, yet they're Australian taxpayers. Like I said, it

makes me sick in the guts as to what's happened to this great company, and I hope there's

a change to it very soon, thanks.



OLSON: Thank you so much for that contribution Jim. Our next speaker is called Cole

Rainer from Qantas International.



COLE RAINER: Morning everyone. Thanks for the opportunity to speak on behalf of my

colleagues today. As I said, I'm at the end of my working career, but I believe that I should

do a little bit to help the people who have to stay you know? We've been in the news over

the past few days. We've had Premiers clambering over each other to take the Qantas

brand to their state. Queensland, Victoria, South of Australia and New South Wales.

Gladys is doing her best to maintain the Qantas headquarters in New South Wales. It's

imperative that we do as much as we can to hold on to these jobs for these hard-working

people. These people work their guts out for this company and it's imperative we do

everything within our power to maintain those jobs. It's very sad if we let these go. These

people deserve the right to have a job. The hard-working people in all sorts of conditions.

In the pouring rain etc. The loading these planes and they deserve better. Well as I'd say to

Mr. Morrison, from my perspective I haven't heard you speak about the near two thousand

Qantas workers that live in your electorate. The silence is deafening Sir. You as Prime

Minister of this country should be addressing this issue to try and save these Qantas

worker's jobs, and I implore you to do something about it. Thank you.



OLSON: Thank you Cole. Our next speaker is Don Dickson for Qantas domestic. Thank

you Don.



DON DICKSON: Hello everyone. Thank you Richard. First of all, I'd like to say on behalf of

everybody here, thank you to - take them off? - thank you to the New South Wales Police

Force. Their sensible approach has allowed us to voice our opinions here in a respectable

manner so thank you for the New South Wales Police for letting us do that, and all the

other people, from Members of Parliament, the TWU and workers from Qantas that have

turned up today and I think maybe 20 odd, so we're respectful of the Covid conditions.

Okay, we've been probably state-to-state. We went down to Canberra. We had a talk in

front of Parliament House and Members of Parliament supported us there so you've heard

quite a bit and some would say "Oh we're starting to hear the same old story." Well, it's not

the same old story, because when you're replaced you feel like you're left out of the fridge,

you're a bit of rotten fruit. So we're also in the Fair Work Commission. We've got a lot of

faith in the Commission will listen to both sides, Qantas and our TWU legal team side and

the outcome will be fair and just, that's our hope. Unfortunately, we've got little Scotty

Morrison there. We can't find him. Now if Scott could like stop being Where's Wally and

come out and have a bit of a speech that would be great. We're in front of his office now

and the doors are closed and I think sometime in some political speech he said that he

was always open - looks like there's no-one there, but maybe he's been replaced and he's

in the same position that we are. So we're hopeful that both political leaders from both

sides can now come out from the dark corridors and have a bit of a speech on how the

Australian workers can be replaced with potentially overseas companies. We're in fear that

now that the JobKeeper and all the money that they put towards JobKeeper, at the end of

this month will disintegrate, the unemployment rates will go up through the roof - that's our

taxpayers money. So Scott, if you're listening or you're awake or you're on holidays,

wherever you are, could you please respond in some way back so we can think where's

our future going and not only do we stand alone in this, that the word replacement because

there's an election coming up in a couple of years do so maybe you'll be replaced. I don't

know. So come out of the dark and have a bit of a say, that's all we got. Thank you.



OLSON: Thank you. I'd just like to introduce lastly Mark Buttigieg from the state Labor

Party.



MARK BUTTIGIEG MLC: Thanks Richard. Look, I do want to say a few words about this.

It's an issue that's very close to my heart for the similar reasons to my colleague Tanya

Plibersek. I lived in this area for almost 40 years. My mother and father live down the road

in Sylvania. My sister is a flight attendant up here at Cronulla. She still she's on JobKeeper

as we speak now. This used to be a great company, a symbol of Australia, the national

carrier. They used to treat workers decently and I think the taxpayers of Australia and New

South Wales want to know why their Prime Minister is subsidising a company with $800

million in subsidies. Now, let's remember, this is the lion's share of the subsidies that have

been given to the aviation industry - 800 million of the 1.3 billion have gone to Qantas. On

top of that, we've got two and a half thousand people who are about to be thrown on the

scrap heap allegedly, because they have to find a hundred million in job savings. Now if

Morrison is handing our taxpayers money for JobKeeper, don't the Australian people

expect that a company, a national carrier, would keep those people on? Isn't that the whole

point to keep those employment connections going? Now the people you've heard from

today, the workers who are about to be thrown on the scrap heap are real people. You've

heard the stories. They participate in their local economy, they contribute to the company

for 30-40 years, just like my sister and mother have and do and yet the loyalty is not repaid

notwithstanding the fact that they're getting taxpayers money to keep those employment

connections going. It's absolutely and utterly unacceptable and as Australian citizens, we

shouldn't accept it and we should hold this government to account and get them to

intervene. If Morrison's going to hand out our taxpayers money to keep an airline afloat,

they should do the right thing by their workers and keep those employment bonds solid so

that people can participate in the economy, feed their families and put food on the table.

It's absolutely unacceptable and we should never, ever stand for it and I congratulate the

TWU for the fight. It's only started today. This is just the beginning. They're are good

campaigning union and they have the full backing of the State Parliamentary Labor Party

along with my colleague, Daniel Mookhey, and the Federal Labor Party with my colleague

Tanya Plibersek. So again, I congratulate the TWU. This is only the beginning. We won't

be stopping here. Thanks.



OLSON: So I think in summing up for this event, we have seen in the past nine months

just in this short period of time throughout 2020, people been stood down as a result of not

going onto a plane, to clean a plane which was totally unsafe. We've seen the grounding of

the airline industry. We're seeing the standing down of people. We've seen the redundancy

that has been made throughout this aviation industry. We have now seen two and a half

thousand people having the bid for their own job or take a job with lower pay, terms and

conditions, if they can find it and now we have got the Qantas group outsourcing all of its

staff behind the scenes trying to get some more money from any state government that will

take them. This is all in nine months. There is no aviation plan by this government and

that's what is wrong. That's what we need to rectify. ScoMo needs to stand up to the likes

of the Qantas board to ensure that these people are being looked after and we'll do

everything possible to continue highlighting that over the coming months leading up to the

next federal election. Thank you so much, and we're happy to take any questions.



JOURNALIST: Can you tell us about why, where we are today, and why (inaudible)?



OLSON: Look it's very easy obviously for us here to make this determination that this is

the right place to be. There are 3-4,000 workers in this electorate,  right here within the 10

kilometre radius of the seat of Cook and the surrounding area. Our head office of the TWU

is in Minchinbury, probably don't know where that is, but way out west, okay? We want to

bring this fight here in the area where it's needed most and that's this area leading from

here up to Kingsford Smith Airport. And therefore, as these people as we know they're on

the scrapheap, they're on JobKeeper, it's a much more accessible place to be and we're

lucky enough to find a place this close to the Prime Minister's office and others. So

hopefully they'll meet with us on a regular basis and we put out that invitation.



JOURNALIST: People that work in this industry, for decades, can't imagine it's an easy

thing if they find they're without a job and they're just to pick up something?



OLSON: It's going to be very difficult obviously. You have just heard from three people with

well over a hundred years' experience in total working at the airport. For them to transition

into another field, another profession, will be very difficult for them to pursue. But the

question is why should they have to? There are jobs here. There are jobs that need to be

done. We need an airline industry operating in this country and these people are ready.

They are professional and they want to do the job. Tanya?



JOURNALIST: Is JobKeeper going to the right places?



PLIBERSEK: Well, I think JobKeeper has been absolutely vital to keep many employees

attached to their jobs, but we know that there are real problems with JobKeeper as well.

We've seen the university sector, excluded we've seen casuals excluded, people in arts,

the Dnata workers - there are many areas where we think JobKeeper has been inadequate

and the real world consequence of that is jobs are lost. There are thousands of extra jobs

lost because this government has denied many Australian workers JobKeeper payments.



JOURNALIST: What did you make of news that New York University Sydney Campus

staff there were given JobKeeper, while staff at Australian universities  have missed out?



PLIBERSEK: I'm absolutely gobsmacked that this government has decided to give

JobKeeper to a foreign university but has denied Australian universities access to

JobKeeper. I'm absolutely gobsmacked. We have already lost 10,000 jobs in Australian

universities. That's, of course, that's teaching staff, its administrative staff, it's

groundskeepers, it's librarians, it's the people working in the cafeteria.10,000 jobs already



gone. Another 10,000 jobs expected to go by Christmas and this government has turned

its back on those people. I would like Scott Morrison to answer to those families that have

lost jobs, why is it that their jobs don't matter? Why is it that these Australian jobs don't

matter and yet the government has subsidised this very wealthy foreign university.



JOURNALIST: The Treasurer has said with universities it's like comparing apples with

oranges because he says Australian universities have received  $18 billion in funding but

foreign universities haven't. Is that fair?



PLIBERSEK: It is insane talk. Australian universities receive that funding to teach

Australian students. They have actually spent the money on teaching students and

research. What's happened now is we are losing thousands of university staff because of a

deliberate decision this government has made to exclude universities from receiving

JobKeeper. Scott Morrison must answer why he's turned his back on the 10,000 people

that lost their jobs and the 10,000 more that are estimated to lose their jobs by Christmas,

all the while paying a subsidy to a foreign university. Thanks.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DANIEL DORAN 0427 464 350



