Media enquiries: Alison Verhoeven, Chief Executive, AHHA  0403 282 501

Telehealth—long-term vision nowhere to  be seen in Budget   6 October 2020



‘The Australian Government’s lack of strategy or vision for telehealth services in tonight’s Federal  Budget is disappointing’, says Alison Verhoeven, Chief Executive of the Australian Healthcare and  Hospitals Association (AHHA).

‘While telehealth consultations are continuing, as announced before the Budget, affordability will be an  issue for people doing it tough as a result of COVID-19.

‘The reason is that there is no longer a requirement to bulk-bill these services’, Ms Verhoeven said.

‘With so many people out of work or hurting financially due to the COVID-19 pandemic, decisions should  be made to help them access telehealth appointments, which have proved to be such a ‘winner’ during  the pandemic, and which will be continued in some form after the pandemic is over.

‘The trouble is that there is no indication from the government of a long-term vision for these services in  the interests of patients.

‘So far, the Government has been simply doing the bidding of provider groups.

‘For example clinicians scored a “win” through the government’s recent decision that telehealth  recipients need to have had an existing and continuous relationship with a GP—defined as seeing that  GP in the last 12 months—in order to receive MBS-funded telehealth services.

‘While this may have stopped some “pop-up” online services opposed by doctor organisations, and  limited opportunities for over-servicing, it is a huge barrier for rural communities where access  to any GP can be a problem, for healthy people who infrequently see their GP, people whose local  practice is booked out for weeks, and people who want to change doctors.

‘That decision also put a stop to telehealth consultations for sensitive matters like sexual and  reproductive health, where patients might want or need to see someone other than their regular GP.

‘We are calling on the Government to have some vision, have some forethought, and have the courage  to change to a better system of virtual healthcare that can deliver better value.

‘But above all please listen to patients, and take into account what worked best for them in order to  make lasting improvements.

Please start by considering telehealth care models better suited to team care arrangements for chronic  disease management—especially in older patients with multiple and complex chronic conditions.

‘The whole future of telehealth and other forms of virtual healthcare requires not only forethought but  courage—courage to rethink models of care and payments to better suit modern healthcare and  technology, and courage to put patients at the centre of changes.’



This media release is available online.



The Australian Healthcare and Hospitals Association is the national peak body for public and not-for-profit hospitals, Primary Health Networks, and community and primary healthcare services.

