Over 4kgs of cocaine seized at Gold Coast Airport



Monday, 23 March 2020, Publish time: 6:07pm



Click to View Gallery of images (showing 1 of 1)   This is a joint media release issued by the Australian Federal Police and Australian Border Force

A 35-year-old Australian man from Palm Beach, Queensland has been charged by the Australian Federal  Police (AFP) for importing cocaine, after Australian Border Force (ABF) officers at Gold Coast Airport  allegedly located almost 4.5kgs of the drug concealed inside the lining of the traveller’s two suitcases.

The man was on a flight from Singapore that arrived on Saturday 21 March 2020. He was selected for a full  baggage examination after displaying nervous and erratic behaviour at the customs clearance area.

An X-ray examination of the two suitcases revealed a total of three bags containing white powder concealed  in the lining of both suitcases. Presumptive testing indicated the substance in each bag was cocaine.

The total weight of the three bags was just under 4.5kgs. Further forensic testing will be conducted by the  AFP to determine the exact weight and purity of the substance.

The man was arrested by AFP officers and charged with importing a commercial quantity of a border  controlled drug, namely cocaine, and possessing a commercial quantity of a border controlled drug, namely  cocaine, contrary to sections 307.1(1) and section 307.5(1) of the Criminal Code Act 1995 (Cth). The  maximum penalty for these offences is life imprisonment.

The man was remanded in custody and is due to appear in the Southport Magistrates Court today (Monday  23 March).

ABF QLD Regional Commander, Chris Waters said that the work carried out by the ABF has not stopped as  a result of COVID-19 and our borders remain strong.

“It is business as usual when it comes to detecting illicit substances and stopping illegal imports,”  Commander Waters said.

“This detection is another great example of the skills and initiation of our officers who maintain a strong  presence at our border.”

AFP Northern Commander Operations, Jamie Strauss, said the AFP and its partners maintain a vigilant  presence at Australia’s major designated airports.

“This is a message for organised crime networks seeking to exploit a global crisis - this is not a time to think  our borders are a soft target. We will continue enforcing the law and put people before the courts, for the  safety of all Australians.”



Media contact

afp.gov.au/news-media/media-releases/over-4kgs-cocaine-seized-gold-coast-airport

Australian Border Force (02) 6264 2211

Immigration and Border Protection (02) 6264 2244

AFP National Media (02) 5126 9297













































































