SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women

MEDIA RELEASE  AMBASSADOR TO LAO PDR

Today I announce the appointment of Mr Paul Kelly as Australia’s next Ambassador to  the Lao People's Democratic Republic (Lao PDR).

Australia and Lao PDR are close bilateral and regional partners, with diplomatic  relations since 1952. Australia and Lao PDR are parties to the ASEAN-Australia-New  Zealand Free Trade Agreement (AANZFTA) and recently signed the Regional  Comprehensive Economic Partnership - the world’s largest free trade agreement.

Australian businesses have a long history of investment in Lao PDR’s mining, transport  and logistics services, and banking sectors. We share a common interest in an open  and prosperous Indo-Pacific region.

In 2020-21, Australia provided an estimated $40.1 million in official development  assistance to Lao PDR. Our development assistance is helping Lao PDR respond to  COVID-19 by strengthening health system preparedness, supporting economic  recovery and protecting the most vulnerable, including people experiencing gender- based violence.

We also continue to help Lao PDR improve access to education, strengthen its human  resources and build a more competitive private sector. The new Mekong-Australia  Partnership will further deepen Australian and Lao PDR ties as we work together to  ensure a resilient Mekong subregion.

Our strong people-to-people links are underpinned by a well-established alumni  network,   including several current and former ministers. More than 15,000 people in Australia  identify as having Lao ancestry.

Mr Kelly is a senior officer with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and was  most recently Assistant Secretary, Humanitarian Response, Risk and Recovery Branch.  He has previously served overseas in Honiara, Ho Chi Minh City and Suva.

Date received: 16 December 2020



I thank outgoing Ambassador Jean-Bernard Carrasco for his contributions to advancing  Australia’s interests in Lao PDR since 2018.

Media Contact  David Wroe: 0429 531 143  Melanie Ruiz: 0427 888 392



