

SENATOR MALARNDIRRI MCCARTHY  SENATOR FOR THE NORTHERN TERRITORY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   TELEVISION INTERVIEW  TODAY SHOW NEWSCHAT  TUESDAY 25 FEBRUARY 2020

SUBJECTS: ASIO Director General’s speech; Coronavirus; Joel Fitzgibbon and  Barnaby Joyce; meat-free meat pies.

KARL STEFANOVIC, HOST: Welcome back to the show, it’s good to have your company  this morning. Well it is the stuff of a spy thriller but unfortunately it’s real and very  disturbing. Foreign agents running a complex network of agents in a foreign country,  threatening security, plotting terror attacks and destabilising the foundations of democracy,  to discuss, I’m joined by Senator Malarndirri McCarthy and Triple M’s Gus Worland.  Senator, to you first of all, this is an unprecedented warning from ASIO Director General,  Mike Burgess: spies, terrorists plotting to harm our country. It is a huge wake up call, isn’t  it?

MALARNDIRRI MCCARTHY, NT LABOR SENATOR: Absolutely Karl and I have to  commend the Director General for coming out so publicly, and he’s only been in the job  quite recently, so I think it’s telling the country that this is the direction that he’s going to  take in terms of being quite open and transparent about what his concerns are.

STEFANOVIC: Among these threats, he’s also suggesting there are neo Nazis in our  suburbs.

MCCARTHY: Yeah that’s a real concern.

STEFANOVIC: Isn’t it.

MCCARTHY: Absolutely, and I think that’s the thing now isn’t it? It’s about the  conversation with the Australian people about how are we going to curb this real concern  and growing threat and I think most Australians need to be very aware, not be complacent  about this issue.

STEFANOVIC: That’s true, Gus?

WORLAND: We’re living in a world very different to perhaps we grew up, our kids and so  forth are going to be growing up in this world that is completely scary. And in a way when I  heard this, I thought: little old Australia, why would they even want to worry about us and I  was quite sort of happy that they had their eyes on us, but now when you think about it and

you hear about neo Nazis in the suburbs and all this other stuff, I totally agree with the  Senator. I’m glad they’ve got a bit of leadership here and someone is going to come down  like a tonne of bricks.

STEFANOVIC: You know even the coronavirus has reminded us all about how fragile we  are and that’s smack bang right in your neck of the woods, Senator. How is that going?

MCCARTHY: Yeah, totally. Look, I think certainly for the people of the Northern Territory  we've done our best to cater for our fellow Australians who have needed support and  we’ve seen certainly the first load leave from Christmas Island and also from the Howard  Springs village there, and we've still got a few people, quite a few people, who are in  Darwin but hey we're doing the best we can.

STEFANOVIC: You sure are. Huge developments this morning from New York: disgraced  movie producer Harvey Weinstein found guilty of sexual. Gus, this is a case of the Me Too  movement which has sprung from it, has changed not just Hollywood but the entire world,  you'd have to think

WORLAND: Absolutely right. I mean have a look at him there, he only brought that walker  out when he actually went to court, that’s the first thing.

STEFANOVIC: Makes you sick.

WORLAND: It does absolutely make you sick. And this movement which has come out of  it - Me Too - and rightly so and thank god he’s going to jail and hopefully there’ll be  sentencing that he’ll go there for the rest of his life.

STEFANOVIC: When it was announced what the decision was, his lawyer outside court,  Malarndirri, said: “Well, he accepted it in good grace. He accepted it like a gentleman.”

WORLAND: Wow

STEFANOVIC: Is it any wonder lawyers have a bad reputation?

MCCARTHY: Yeah, look when I think, if anything, when I heard the news, I thought about  the two women involved in this Karl, and I just think, for them, we can have commentary all  around the globe, but for those two women, it’s been an incredible journey and no doubt  they’re deeply relieved at the outcome. Sure, it was two out of five charges but they were  really significant outcomes of those two particular charges that he's got and obviously  sentencing’s next month, but it's also about the movement across the globe, that you  know, this sort of behaviour is just not on, Karl.

STEFANOVIC: Yeah, exactly, right. Gus? Men are on notice.

WORLAND: Yeah, absolutely right. Men are on notice. It's just the right way to deal with  people, just be kind to everyone.

STEFANOVIC: And what about this for men behaving badly yesterday?

[FOOTAGE OF JOEL FITZGIBBON AND BARNABY JOYCE IN PARLIAMENT PRESS  GALLERY INTERVIEW]



STEFANOVIC: Malarndirri, it’s like the two old muppets. Remember those guys who used  to sit in the in the theatre and pass commentary and argue with each other.

MCCARTHY: I think they still sit there.

STEFANOVIC: They’re still there. This, again, is a reminder of why people have such a  bad idea of politicians, isn't it?

MCCARTHY: Yeah, look, it’s certainly unedifying, but I have to say that if Barnaby wanted  to come out and be the clown there, he certainly did. And of course, you know, I think Joel  Fitzgibbon handled it very well. You know, so, but it is hard. You know, politicians are  always walking past each other in the hallways, but this was clearly about an opportunity in  the media to have a go. And that's what Barnaby did.

STEFANOVIC: Maybe there should be more of it.

MCCARTHY: Oh, well, I mean, how long did you tune into that for? I mean, didn't you get  a bit tired of it?

STEFANOVIC: I gave it five seconds.

MCCARTHY: Yeah that’s what I thought.

WORLAND: Question Time is just ridiculous as it is. I mean, the speakers are going:  “Could the member, could the member!” because they’re shouting over the top of each  other. No one gives each other a chance to have a proper conversation, so these are  people leading our nation!

STEFANOVIC: It’s like a rap, isn’t it, a bad rap?

MCCARTHY: And maybe someone’s going to do a rap on it, who knows.

STEFANOVIC: We are finished with this segment except for this little piece here; a Four’n  Twenty pie containing absolutely no meat is coming next month made purely out of soy  protein. Senator, you have a job to do in the Senate of Australia and you have to rule on  that very, very urgently.

MCCARTHY: I think I need to be tested because I love my meat. I mean you just ask my  staff and my friends, I love eating red meat in this country and really proud of our meat,  especially up north. But I think I'd have to be tested as to whether I'd notice the difference  and I think I might, Karl, you know, but I'm not too comfortable about moving away from the  good old meat pie.

WORLAND: Senator it is un-Australian. Karl, it is un-Australian. Meat pies, Holden cars,  everything going, it’s done, it’s all gone.

MCCARTHY: Don’t let the meat pie go!

STEFANOVIC: What's happened to this country, it makes me want to cry!



WORLAND: You can have your plant based, but give us our meat pie.

STEFANOVIC: No, I agree with you, just leave us alone. Senator, thank you for that, Gus,  you too.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MARTHA TATTERSALL 0417 387 775









