

The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Deputy Prime Minister

Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals  Federal Member for Riverina





The Hon Paul Toole MP

New South Wales Acting Deputy Premier  New South Wales Minister for Regional Transport and Roads  State Member for Bathurst



MEDIA RELEASE

10 October 2020  *Vision and images available to download below

FINISH LINE IN SIGHT: ROAD PAVING COMPLETE ON PACIFIC  HIGHWAY UPGRADE

After more than 20 years, $15 billion in joint investment by the Australian and NSW Governments and  more than 40,000 pairs of hands on the job, the final section of road paving has been completed on  Australia’s biggest ever regional road project, the Pacific Highway upgrade.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the finish line for the duplication of the Pacific Highway between Hexham and the  Queensland border was now firmly in sight, after the final truckloads of material from local quarries  made their way on site to complete travel lanes.

“The greatest dividend from this investment is the improvement in safety for road users - whether  you’re travelling on it every day or once a year on family holidays,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“The death toll on the highway has reduced by more than 50 per cent since work began to make the  entire length four lane dual carriageway.

“It has been a remarkable feat of engineering. At completion, there will be 170 bridges over rivers,  creeks, and floodplains, including new major bridges crossing the Clarence and Richmond rivers.  The travel distance between Woolgoolga and Ballina will be about 13 kilometres shorter and about 25

minutes faster.

“We want to get people where they need to be sooner and safer and upon completion, the Pacific  Highway upgrades will mean that people can get from Hexham to the Queensland border in two and  a half hours less time than they would have previously, before the upgrades started.”

New South Wales Acting Deputy Premier and Minister for Regional Transport and Roads Paul Toole  said the Pacific Highway duplication was a huge undertaking, made even more challenging by  bushfires and COVID-19. He thanked the workforce for getting the job done and the north coast of  NSW for supporting the project.

“It is the culmination of over two decades of work on the Pacific Highway, but the final section,  the Woolgoolga to Ballina upgrade, has been a mammoth task in itself,” Mr Toole said.

“Over the past five years, our workforce has moved more than 15 million cubic metres of earth,  pumped 785,000 cubic metres of concrete and 240,000 tonnes of asphalt for paving on this final  section. During peak construction, we’ve seen a record of 25,000 tonnes of material, or 800 truckloads,  delivered in a single day.

“This section of the upgrade alone has been an important economic and employment driver for  northern NSW, with 3000 people directly employed at its peak and many other indirect jobs created  by the project.

“The project engaged 10 local quarries to supply the rock, sand and gravel required for pavement and  other construction activities, including earthwork and drainage.”

The final trucks deposited materials to finish paving the travel lanes on the eight-kilometre  Wells Crossing to Glenugie stretch of the upgrade.

The final section of the upgrade is expected to open to traffic in December 2020, with finishing works  continuing into 2021. Motorists are encouraged to plan their journeys ahead, as traffic conditions  continue to change and there will still be truck movements in and out of the area.  around the upgrade.

For more information about the Woolgoolga to Ballina upgrade, contact the project team on 1800 778  900 (dial 1) or email w2b@pacificcomplete.com.au.

*Vision and images available to download here: https://we.tl/t-hHReI6wSDT

Media Contact:  Mr McCormack - Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Mr Toole - Ella Smith 0428 745 348

