



SENATOR THE HON LINDA REYNOLDS CSC  Minister for Defence  Senator for Western Australia

MEDIA RELEASE

ROBOTS AID RESCUE DURING NAVY EXERCISE IN BRISBANE



The Royal Australian Navy and defence Industry have put robots to the test in a  simulated counter-disaster operation in Brisbane.

Autonomous Warrior Genesis - the first of Navy’s flagship events exercising Robotics,  Autonomous Systems and Artificial Intelligence (RAS-AI) - saw Unmanned Vehicles  (UxVs) deployed by air, land and water to respond to a fictional Humanitarian and  Disaster Relief (HADR) scenario on the Brisbane River.

Minister for Defence, Senator the Hon Linda Reynolds CSC said the exercise  demonstrated Defence working with Australian Industry to integrate emerging  technologies with Navy platforms to rapidly respond in emergency situations.

“Australia’s commitment to maintaining a strong and secure region is predicated on  ongoing modernisation of Defence capability as new and disruptive technologies  emerge,” Minister Reynolds said.

“As announced in the 2020 Force Structure Plan, the Government recognises the  exploration of autonomous and un crewed systems will further safeguard Australia’s  capability and achieve expanded reach across the region.

“Using autonomous systems to respond to disaster scenarios is a potential game  changer for Defence by providing the agility and technological edge to rapidly support  our region in times of crisis.

“Navy’s recently launched RAS-AI Strategy emphasises the importance of  strengthening Defence’s relationship with Australian Industry to ensure together, we  develop innovative new capabilities to respond to an evolving geostrategic  environment.”

Autonomous Warrior Genesis took place at HMAS Moreton in Brisbane in a COVID safe  manner, in partnership with Emesent, Boeing Australia and EPE Pty Ltd.



Navy’s RAS-AI Strategy is available to industry on GovTeams.



Media Contacts  Ben Martin (Minister Reynolds’ Office): +61 447 219 902  Nicky Hamer (Minister Reynolds’ Office): +61 437 989 927  Defence Media (02) 6127 1999, media@defence.gov.au



Authorised by Senator the Hon Linda Reynolds CSC, Minister for Defence, Australia.

