

PATRICK GORMAN MP  MEMBER FOR PERTH



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS ON THE HOUR  THURSDAY, 30 JANUARY 2020

SUBJECT: Prime Minister’s NPC Address; Gas policy; climate  change; coronavirus.

TOM CONNELL, HOST: My next guest on the program is Labor MP Patrick  Gorman. Joining us for the first time in 2020. Thanks for joining us Patrick. Well  I think we'll have your old sparring partner Jason Falinski back next time. So I  suppose I'm playing his role. I'll do my best today. Let's begin on Scott  Morrison's speech yesterday a lot of talk about gas being an important  transition as Australia perhaps reduces reliance on coal over the next 10 years.  Do you agree? He really pointed to the moratoria from New South Wales and  Victoria being unacceptable.

PATRICK GORMAN, LABOR MP: Well firstly I think on the Prime Minister's  speech yesterday it seemed like the old campaigner Scott Morrison was back in  the room. The first half was very much a campaign stump speech. When it  comes to gas policy obviously I'm sitting here in Western Australia. We are very  lucky to have a gas reservation policy which has been a huge benefit to local  industry. A huge benefit for electricity prices and just makes a bit of common  sense. So I know that a number of members of the National Party are looking at  a gas reservation policy and I encourage them to continue to push the Prime  Minister in that direction. And on the reality of gas as a transition fuel - of  course it is. We should look in any sort of effort to reduce carbon emissions.  We should look at the simplest lowest cost ways to reduce carbon emissions.  That doesn't mean going from 100 to zero straight away you know, gas is very  effective at doing that. When it comes to nonconventional gas the reality is  Australia has huge gas reserves both under the ground and under the sea.

HOST: Doesn't this mean though Victoria in particular having a total ban on  even conventional gas exploration. That's absurd right now isn't it?

GORMAN: Well I think the reality in Australia is that we are lucky to have an  abundance of energy sources. We do have an abundance of coal. We have an  abundance of gas. We have more sunshine than most parts of the world. We  have better locations for wind power and hydro than many parts of the world.  So some of these things we are lucky to have the choices. And indeed in terms  of Victoria, people have made their voice very loud and clear on that issue  locally.

HOST: Have they on conventional gas? But when was that made loud and  clear on conventional gas exploration in Victoria. Where's the clear vote or  decision that they'd rather for example keep using brown coal?

GORMAN: Well I think Victoria has an ambitious renewable energy target. I  couldn't name what it is right now. And of course as we know gas is purchased  on the international markets. One of the things I mentioned earlier was a gas  reservation policy. One of the challenges that Australia has is that we end up  buying our gas on the international market more expensive than had we've had  our reservation policy that said we're going to put Australian industry and  Australian electricity generation first.

HOST: So it's a lot easier than gas reservation isn't it. If there's a big new  source of it somewhere that'll be a lot easier than reservation.

GORMAN: Well there's there is heaps in Western Australia absolutely heaps,  and there are a range of new projects coming off the North-West Shelf that will  provide energy not just for Australia but for international markets well into the  future. So as I said we're a country with an abundance of energy and  abundance of options.

HOST: What did you think when the PM said no the way we get there to a  lower carbon future is not with a tax?

GORMAN: Well as I said it was campaigner Scott Morrison back on the stage  just rolling out slogans. The reality is we do need to look at the most cost  effective way of reducing carbon emissions; a market based mechanism is one  of the smartest ways to do that. And the price on carbon essentially while a  market based mechanism there's some would argue that the National Energy  guarantee indeed was a market based mechanism that sought to do a few  things one of them was to help the government achieve its carbon emissions  reduction targets. He just wants to fight on wars. Simple as that. I still question  whether the Prime Minister really believes that climate change is a challenge  that we need to address. I think he just sees it as a political challenge that he  needs to have a smart answer to. I was disappointed that he didn't rule out  using Kyoto credits in meeting their 2030 carbon reduction targets.



HOST: He pointed out that was something in previous agreements Labor had  helped deliver. Anyway I do want to get to a couple more topics.

GORMAN: Look this but let's be honest, Labor hasn't been in government for  more than six years. There's been numerous international conferences, huge  changes in technology, huge changes in what science is around, and how  quickly we need to address climate change. I think that saying Labor did  something seven plus years ago - I’m just a bit sick of it.

HOST: Christmas Island. Is this a good strategy of being able to get people out  but still making sure we're avoiding contagion on a large scale?

GORMAN: Well obviously Labor has supported the government's efforts to do  whatever is necessary to help Australians in coronavirus affected areas of  China. That's the appropriate thing to do when it comes to Christmas Island. It's  appropriate that people would ask questions of is this is the best way to  manage this particular outbreak. I'm not a medical scientist nor am I an  infectious disease specialist so I don't know the answer to that but obviously it  was done in a very rushed way which doesn't give much confidence. It doesn't  give much confidence to the fact that the proper policy processes were gone  through. I did see the local government on Christmas Island say that they were  very concerned about this and obviously no one had spoken to them. The  Premier here in Western Australia said that no one had spoken to him as  premier about using Christmas Island. I think there's a bit of a pattern here that  when crises happen proper process seems to go out the window.

HOST: They’re saying their advice in this area is following the medical experts  and you know I'm going to put my hand up as well, I drowned in humanities for  a few years at university, but it does seem strange this direct flight from Wuhan  the last one that came into Sydney a direct flight was the 24th of January not  long ago at all. Now anyone that's been in the whole Hubei province is being  told that they should be isolating themselves. I mean are we at a point where  we can question whether or not Australian medical experts within the  government are being cautious enough

GORMAN: Well it when it comes to what level of caution it is. I mean that that's  ultimately I guess a measure that different people have different takes on. I  know that for my son's day-care notices went up saying that they're asking  parents who've been affected provinces in the last couple of weeks to stay  home as a precaution. That was before there was advice from the Education  Department. I think it's appropriate that people take precautions without being  completely panicked. As for how the government continues to handle this crisis  obviously the World Health Organisation is the authoritative voice in terms of



how these matters are addressed. And I think the Australian public just want  clear unambiguous direction about how they protect their own health. That's the  most important thing and that's for the vast majority of us. We need to be given  clear advice on what to do what not to do. And that's all it is. For those people  who are being evacuated out of China, they also need to have a clear path of  what is going to happen to them. Are they going to be able to get onto that  plane? What happens once they leave China if they're going to Christmas  Island what are the conditions that they're going to be accommodated in. What  access to support will they have once they arrive back in Australia. And of  course whether they will actually be able to leave Christmas Island in 14 days’  time. I think some clarity on all those things will be important.

HOST: We’re running a little bit short on time. We were going to get to Bridget  McKenzie but we might save that up for when Jason Falinski is back. I'm sure  you will enjoy making comment at that stage.

GORMAN: We will still be talking about it.

HOST: I suspect that might be the case. Patrick Gorman thanks for your time.

GORMAN: Thank you Tom.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DYLAN CAPORN 0437 055 472









