SENATOR MARIELLE SMITH

SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

5MU ADELAIDE HILLS, SOUTH COAST & MURRAYLANDS

TUESDAY, 22 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: JobSeeker Christmas snapback; Regional economies; TAFE.



JENNIE LENMAN, HOST: Labor Senator Marielle Smith joins me now to have a chat

about what’s come up including the jobs crisis amid the recession and Coronavirus

pandemic. Welcome to the studio Senator Smith.



MARIELLE SMITH: Thanks Jenny great to be with you and great to be in Murray Bridge.



LENMAN: So, what has brought you here? Why were you inspired to come and chat to

people in the community?



SMITH: Well look as a Senator for South Australia my constituency is the whole state and

whilst I live in Adelaide, I do try my best to get out to our regional areas as often as I can

so that I can hear directly from South Australians about the issues that matter to them and

take their opinions and their voices to Canberra. So I do spend quite a lot of time in Murray

Bridge, this is part of my regular outreach in this community and I was holding a mobile

office to allow people to make an appointment to come and see me a bit closer to home

and have a chat about the issues which matter to them in their town.



LENMAN: And were there some common things that came up quite a lot today?



SMITH: Absolutely. So, more than half the people who came to my mobile office today

raised their concern about the future of JobSeeker and their concern about what would

happen if JobSeeker went back to its original base rate of $40 a day at the end of the year

as it is scheduled to.



I also had plenty of concern raised with me about the economy more broadly in Australia

and what that might mean locally here in Murray Bridge in terms of jobs and opportunities

in this town. I had a few local issues raised as always, issues which I'll work with my

council colleagues and my state colleagues to address, but really it was JobSeeker and

the broad economic issues which were most significant.



LENMAN: Is the uncertainty of it a big problem?



SMITH: Absolutely, I mean I think in certain parts of South Australia we know JobSeeker is

having a much bigger impact on the economy than in other places and that's certainly true

in Murray Bridge. There's a lot of concern that if JobSeeker goes back to its base rate of

$40 a day at the end of the year not only is that very, very difficult for the people who are

required to live on JobSeeker, but it also has flow on impacts in terms of the economy of

the town.



So, we know for most job seekers the majority of what they receive from the payment gets

spent in their local community, local retail outlets and local businesses. Now if you take

that away, or if that rate is unsustainably low it necessarily has an impact on local

economic development. The same is true if you raise that rate of JobSeeker, then a lot of

that investment goes directly into the town and has other broader effects for people in the

local economy even if they're not receiving the payment directly.



LENMAN: Right. So, we're still waiting to hear from the Liberal Government as to how

much it'll go down to. So, we'll have to wait and see. The Member for Barker, Liberal MP

Tony Pasin, says many people in the region who run food manufacturing and production

companies are struggling to attract people to jobs. We certainly know this is the case for

backpacker seasonal work because we've depended upon immigrants coming in. What do

you make of his call to reduce the rate, the welfare rate, to better incentivise people from

taking on less desirable work?



SMITH: Look, some of the issues that Mr Pasin raises are not new issues to this

pandemic. We’ve had issues in terms of the workforce particularly in our Ag sector for

years and years and years and we've seen years and years and years of inaction by the

current Government who have actually been in a position to do something about it. So, I

reject the idea that workforce shortages are only an issue in this sector because of the

pandemic. Yes, there have been some significant challenges which have been amplified

by the pandemic and when we're looking at workforces as you mentioned, that has been

an issue and that is there, and I certainly think that needs to be addressed.



When we're talking about JobSeeker though we're talking about the Government taking

JobSeeker back to its original rate of $40 a day. There has been an additional supplement

during the pandemic that was $550 per person, this week it drops down to $250 per

person. Now we need to know what is the future of this payment, what is the future at the

end of the year and it's not clear to me if Mr Pasin is saying JobSeeker should go back to

$40 a day or indeed if it should go to less than that. That's not clear in his call.



LENMAN: Well he did say, because I said there are a lot of people who are concerned

about it going to below the poverty line which it was before and he agreed that it shouldn't

be but I don't think we know yet from the Liberal Party how much they're going to make it

yet, do we?



SMITH: We really don't know what they are going to do with this payment at all. And look

the other thing I would say to Mr Pasin’s comments is, the data that we have shows us that

in Adelaide there are 22 job seekers for every vacancy, in regional South Australia that's

more than 42 job seekers for every vacancy. There are not enough jobs to match the

number of job seekers in regional South Australia, so the data just doesn't support the

claims he's making.



I'm not saying that in certain industries and particular industries there is not an issue and

we need to address that, but on global levels it’s not the case. And I have to tell you every

single person I speak to on a JobSeeker payment wants to be working, they want to be

part of that dignity of work and that connection to their community, but the jobs do not exist

for them to take that work up.



LENMAN: Labor Senator Marielle Smith is with me we're talking about the job crisis that

we have at the moment essentially. The Morrison government says it is investing $63

million in local jobs as a local task force to aid jobs recovery in our electorate here in

Barker. What do you make of this and is there an approach that Labor thinks should be

taken?



SMITH: Look I welcome any investment which is designed to grow the local economy here

in Murray Bridge and to support jobs and support jobs in regional South Australia. But what

we do know is that we don't have a federal jobs plan from this Government. They’re yet to

release a jobs plan and now during the pandemic more than ever we need to know what

their plan is for the future of work, what their plan is for those people in industries that have

been seriously impacted and affected by this pandemic and what their plan is for

JobKeeper and the future of JobSeeker.



LENMAN: Do you think that there needs to be a big investment in re-skilling people? I

mean we're seeing a huge shift particularly with robots taking on automated jobs, you know

we don't really have as much manufacturing anymore, we do have some advanced

manufacturing but people are kind of left a little bit in the lurch where they might not have

the right skills to fill the right roles.



SMITH: Look I think that's true and we have seen as well, years and years of

underinvestment in our TAFE system in Australia which I think is very tragic and very sad.

The economy is changing rapidly, automation is changing the future of work. New

industries like the on-demand industry and the tech industry are changing and it's changing

what work used to look like in Australia.



We need to make sure that our education system is nimble enough to adapt to that and

people have the opportunity to retrain for those high skill jobs of the future. Now that can’t

all be done through the University system, some of it is and again we're seeing significant

funds ripped out of the University system, but it also needs to happen through TAFE and

vocational training at that level in the economy, and what I'd really like to see is the Federal

Government take a greater role in supporting the training in vocational education in our

TAFE sector so that all Australians can be equipped for the jobs that not just exist now but

will exist in the years to come.



LENMAN: Yeah. Will you be coming back to the murrylands or through the Adelaide Hills

or South Coast in the coming weeks or months?



SMITH: In the coming months I expect to. I'm in my third trimester of pregnancy so as long

as those plans aren’t waylaid by a new arrival it's my expectation to. So I'm hoping to get



here for the opening of FoodBank in Murray Bridge in November. That’s a really important

community asset which is now in the town and I'd really like to be here to support that, but I

do make it to Murray Bridge and around the region regularly and will continue to do that as

long as I'm a Senator.



LENMAN: Can we reach out to you if we want to make an appointment?



SMITH: Absolutely, absolutely. Look my office is always open to help and support people

in the region so they’re welcome to call me at my office to send me an email and even if

I'm not here to meet them in person I'm happy to chat over the phone and I've also got a

great team of staff who are always happy to help too.



LENMAN: Well Labor Senator Marielle Smith thanks so much for joining me today.



SMITH: My pleasure Jennie. Thanks for having me on.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: TARA FATEHI 0418 616 964



