









SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Finance   Leader of the Government in the Senate  Senator for South Australia

STATEMENT

22 December 2020

Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment

It has been an honour to serve as Australia’s Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment in the  Morrison Government for the past 847 days. I congratulate Dan Tehan on his swearing into this  portfolio.

With one in five Australian jobs reliant on trade, our export sector is such a critical part of our  economy and will play a crucial role in Australia’s ultimate economic recovery from COVID-19. My  number one priority as Trade Minister has been to continue to provide Australian farmers,  businesses and investors with better access and more choices to export to markets around the  world.

This started with overseeing the implementation of the Comprehensive and Progressive  Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership, which provided our first ever trade pact with Canada and  Mexico, as well as improved access into markets like Vietnam and Japan. I also had the honour of  seeing our bilateral free trade agreements with Peru and Hong Kong come into effect as well as  the Indonesia-Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement, which will give our  exporters access to a booming market of over 270 million people.

More recently, I signed the 15 nation Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement,  which cements Australia’s place as an integrated regional partner of the 10 member states of the  Association of South East Asian Nations. And, just a few weeks ago, we also saw the entry into  force of the Pacific Agreement on Closer Economic Relations, which provides new opportunities for  economic collaboration with our Pacific Island family.

We have also continued to forge ahead and have seen great progress with negotiations on our free  trade deal with the European Union and earlier this year I had the honour of launching negotiations  on an ambitious free trade agreement with the United Kingdom. Subject to each of these  counterparts showing sufficient will to liberalise their markets, each of these agreements should be  concluded within the next year.

In the past few years we have also seen stronger trade ties with India, which last week launched its  own companion to our India Economic Strategy, and we continue to make headway in growing our  trade engagement across the Middle-East and Africa, and in South America which will be further  assisted if we can finalise our Pacific Alliance agreement with Latin American nations.

Our exporters have shown incredible resilience this year, despite massive economic shocks. With  the collapse of global aviation when COVID-19 hit, we moved quickly to establish the International  Freight Assistance Mechanism to help ensure that sufficient planes are flying out of Australia to get  our premium goods to market. So far, it has helped more than $3.5 billion worth of Australian  produce reach customers overseas and kept thousands of Australians in jobs.

This month, the Parliament passed landmark reforms to the 40 year old Export Market  Development Grants (EMDG) Scheme that will cut red tape and better assist Australian exporters  to enter new markets or expand their presence in existing markets.



Providing our farmers and businesses with access to more markets around the world has seen  Australia record 34 consecutive monthly trade surpluses, with us routinely exporting more as a  nation than we import. This, in turn, contributed in the June quarter last year to the first quarterly  current account surplus for Australia since 1975.

We also shouldn’t discount the importance of Australia’s services sector to our economy and jobs.  Australia doesn’t just export commodities and agricultural products, and whilst our tourism and  international education sector has been severely impacted by COVID-19, our services sector grew  to a record $102 billion in 2019. Although it will take a while to get back to these levels, we  continue to pursue opportunities in a range of highly skilled capabilities like mining services,  Fintech and AgTech that will help drive this recovery.

Likewise, we continue to drive and attract investment in emerging areas such as critical minerals  like lithium and rare earths. I am also proud of the progress we have made in the hydrogen space,  with a number of exciting and visionary projects already generating significant investment interest.  These projects as well as close collaboration with partners such as Japan, South Korea and  Germany mean we are well placed to be a world-leader in the production and export of hydrogen.

Australia also continues to lead the charge to modernise trading rules, having last year launched  World Trade Organization (WTO) negotiations on e-commerce and this year sealed a Digital  Economy Agreement with Singapore that sets a standard for much of the rest of the world.

I am also proud of leading ambitions in the Cairns Group - a long-established coalition of 19  nations in the WTO - to pursue the aim of capping and halving agriculture subsidy entitlements by  2030. If achieved, this would be a great result for Australian farmers, some of the least subsidised  in the world, by tackling unfair distortions that hurt us in many overseas markets.

It’s also no secret that the WTO itself needs modernising too. Australia played a leading role in  forming the Multiparty Interim Appeal Arbitration Arrangement to maintain a pathway to resolve  WTO disputes, which provides an important backstop in resolving current issues with China. We  continue to actively advocate for WTO progress and reform wherever possible, because as a mid-sized trading nation it is demonstrably in our interests to have good global trade rules transparently  applied.

On the tourism front, it’s no secret our amazing industry, including our intentional education sector,  has been deeply impacted by COVID-19. Prior to last summer‘s bushfires and COVID, Australia  had achieved record international visitation of 8.7 million and international spend of $45.4 billion in  2019. We also surpassed our Tourism 2020 spend target a year early. As at December 2019, total  visitor spend (domestic and international) had reached $126.1 billion.

We continue to implement our strong plan to support our tourism industry, through targeted  assistance to specific sectors within the industry to help them rebound and save as many jobs as  possible. In this year’s Budget, we also provided a record $231.6 million to Tourism Australia for  2020-21 to ramp up domestic marketing activities to encourage Australians to Holiday Here this  Year, travel to bushfire affected areas and ensure the organisation is well placed to aggressively  execute new campaigns to again attract international visitors when overseas travel is back on the  agenda.

I thank Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Investment Andrew Gee, previous Assistant  Minister for Trade and Investment Mark Coulton and Assistant Minister for Regional Tourism Jonno  Duniam for their support within the portfolio. I especially thank all the staff at the Department of  Foreign Affairs and Trade, Austrade, Tourism Australia and Export Finance Australia for the  incredible work they do here in Australia and overseas, as well as extending my gratitude to all of  the Australian exporters, tourism operators and other stakeholders that I have had the pleasure of  working with.

I know Dan Tehan will do an exceptional job as the new Minister for Trade, Tourism and  Investment. As the Minister for Finance I look forward to working closely with him to continue to  back our exporting farmers and businesses, attract necessary investment and to support our  tourism industry to emerge from these challenging times stronger than ever.



Media enquiries  Benn Ayre: +61 428 342 325   Julia Ebbs +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia

