

30 March 2020

Bob Katter: The Foreign Investment Review Board is the  ‘Abominable Never Say No Man’  WE applaud the Treasurer’s announcement that all foreign investments require  approval regardless of value or where they are from, but everyone knows the FIRB is  the ‘Abominable Never Say No Man,’ said Kennedy MP, Bob Katter.

“Leaving the FIRB to protect what’s left of this nation’s great assets is like leaving  Sylvester the Cat to protect the canary cage,” Mr Katter said.

“If you think the Chinese aren’t going to swoop in on our suffering businesses and  landowners then you believe in the tooth fairy.”

Mr Katter has been calling for a hold on the sale of all strategic, and in many cases  non-strategic assets to foreign corporations and powers.

“The Black Plague and the Spanish Flu epidemic didn’t last forever and nor will the  Coronavirus. In fact on current figures the surging numbers of infections seem to be  abating here in Australia,” he said.

“There are shovel ready key projects that need progressing. The Federal Government  has the buying of a trillion dollars at one per cent interest - so let’s invest in the dams  and irrigation projects.”

Just last month Mr Katter introduced The Foreign Acquisitions and Takeovers  Amendment (Strategic Assets) Bill 2020, to replace the FIRB altogether.

Subsection 3 replaces the FIRB with a Foreign Ownership Assessment Board (FOAB).  The Bill determines that the Board’s members are to be chosen by a majority of the  Senate of Australia; and any determination of the FOAB is to be reviewable by an  appeals tribunal.



Subsection 2A places a ban on the acquisition of assets of strategic economic or  defensive importance to Australia.

“Again, right now, we plead with the Federal Government to put a stop on the  purchase of any significant assets of strategic economic or defence importance,” Mr  Katter said.

“I am starting to sound like a broken record on this topic, but even a stopped clock is  right twice a day.”

—ENDS—

