JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN





SCOTT MORRISON MUST FINALLY FIX HOME CARE CRISIS



The Morrison Government must use the upcoming Budget to finally fix the crisis of more

than 100,000 older Australians waiting for aged care at home.



The stark difference in COVID-19 outcomes in aged care will only accelerate the number

of older Australians wanting to receive aged care at home.



The latest data shows there has been seven deaths among the nearly one million

Australians receiving aged care at home, compared with more than 600 deaths among the

200,000 people living in aged care homes.



But with a waiting list of more than 100,000 for home care packages, older Australians who

choose to receive aged care at home will sadly face unacceptable delays in receiving care.



Almost 30,000 older Australians died waiting for care in just two years and more than

30,000 went into aged care homes prematurely.



Scott Morrison has failed to properly respond to the Royal Commission’s call in its interim

report for urgent action on the home care waiting list which the Commissioners called

‘neglect’.



There were more than 100,000 older Australians waiting list home care when Scott

Morrison called the Royal Commission and there are still more than 100,000 waiting today.



Documents tendered at the Aged Care Royal Commission recently revealed the Morrison

Government will deliver just 300 ‘new’ home care packages by 2024 despite a series of

announcements promising tens of thousands more.





The time for stopgaps is over and the Morrison Government cannot simply bring forward

another miserly announcement of packages.



The Government  must fix this crisis properly. The crisis in home care follows years of cuts

to aged care and neglect from the Morrison Government.



The upcoming Budget is an opportunity to not just offer more announcements, but genuine

action for older Australians waiting for care.



Day after day the evidence mounts of serious neglect in aged care and every day all we

see from the Morrison Government is running away, passing the buck and not accepting

responsibility for its own failures.



Neglect. That’s the legacy of this Government when it comes to aged care.



WEDNESDAY, 23 SEPTEMBER 2020



MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119



