





SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Finance  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Leader of the Government in the Senate

Senator for South Australia

TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Interview on Radio National Breakfast with Hamish Macdonald.        Topics: Defence Treaty with Japan, China-Australia trade relations; COVID in SA  18/11/2020  07:35AM

Hamish Macdonald: The Morrison Government will today declare that it is willing to rebuild respectful and  beneficial bonds with China. But the relationship, which is fractured over trade and COVID-19, is set to be  tested even further with Australia signing a landmark Defence Treaty with Japan. The Prime Minister says it's  a pivotal moment for our ties with Tokyo.

[Excerpt]

Scott Morrison: The only other nation that Japan has entered into such an agreement was the United  States some 60 years ago, and so we respect and appreciate the special trust that you have placed in us in  getting to this important point of our agreement today.

[End of Excerpt]

Hamish Macdonald: Scott Morrison speaking from Japan there about the Reciprocal Access Agreement,  as it's called, which will see potentially joint military exercises in the East and South China Seas. Simon  Birmingham is the Minister for Trade and Finance. Good morning to you.

Simon Birmingham: Good morning, Hamish. Good to be with you.

Hamish Macdonald: What's the strategic importance of this agreement? What does it mean?

Simon Birmingham: Well, agreement means that Australia and Japan can have closer and clearer  relations in terms of our Defence Forces and their cooperation with one another - all sorts of cooperative  activities can be joint exercises, humanitarian, disaster relief operations. These are the sorts of things that  Japan's Self-Defense Forces and the Australian Defence Force as two G20 economies, leading nations within  our region, are often expected to participate in. Japan, of course, has historical limitations on the operations of  their Self-Defense Forces, but this will provide for closer operations, more cooperative operations, and clarity  in terms of the way those operations occur for our two nations.

Hamish Macdonald: Obviously though, Japan is a strategic rival of China. How will this soothe our  relationship with Beijing?

Simon Birmingham: This would have no bearing in that regard. Japan and Australia are nations that share  common values, we share a commitment to democratic principles, principles around freedom. And it’s little  surprise that we would want to work cooperatively, and particularly work more closely and cooperatively in  areas such as humanitarian or disaster relief operations. And so building confidence is-

Hamish Macdonald:   With respect, Minister, that’s a bit fanciful to think it'll have no bearing on our  relationship with China. I mean, it is widely understood the way China will interpret this.



Simon Birmingham: Well, it shouldn't be interpreted as anything other than Australia and Japan working  closely together - we have a long and deep relationship. This is, of course, a significant step for Japan. They  have only ever struck one such agreement with another nation, and that was with the United States 60 years  ago. Japan is not only an important partner in terms of strategic relations, it's a very important long standing  trading and economic partner for Australia too, but we see this as a logical step in terms of the partnership  that Australia and Japan have.

Hamish Macdonald: The Prime Minister, though, says the Defence deal will be a key plank in our  response to, in his words: the increasingly challenging security environment in the region. Other than China,  what are we talking about? What's posing a challenge to the security in this particular region?

Simon Birmingham: Hamish, other nations, other players across the region or globally, shouldn't view this  in any way other than the closeness of our cooperation. And they certainly, if they support peaceful respect for  international rules and norms, should see nothing other than two close nations of similar bonds and values  enhancing and deepening their cooperation.

Hamish Macdonald: I'm just wondering if you can point as to any other security challenges in this part of  the world?

Simon Birmingham: Hamish, we see, we see numerous security challenges that emerge in terms of the  challenge of terrorism at times, the instability that occurs in different nations, the challenges sometimes that  natural disasters bring. There are a number of different security challenges that occur, not just some of the  tensions that exist in relation to maritime access or the like, and it's about being able to cooperate across the  full reach and breadth of those challenges.

Hamish Macdonald: Some significant comments coming from the Treasurer Josh Frydenberg, today. He is  going to throw his weight, it would seem, behind efforts to try and restore relations with Beijing - we can't- for  everything you've just said, we can't ignore that reality. He's expected to tell a strategic forum that Australia  stands ready to engage with the Chinese Government in a respectful, mutually beneficial dialogue. What does  that mean? What's going to change in terms of the tone and tenor of our relationship with China compared  with what we've seen in recent months?

Simon Birmingham: Well Hamish, those are, those are points that I have reinforced time and time again,  and I welcome very much the fact that the Treasurer is reinforcing them as well publicly. Australia has been  clear all along that our position has not changed, we do wish to continue a mutually beneficial relationship and  dialogue with China - we know that that is best for the peace and prosperity of our region to have that a  common approach of engagement. And we have, as I say, reinforced time and again that Australia is willing to  come to the table for such dialogue and to work through difficult issues and differences that we may have.

It doesn't mean that we will compromise at all in terms of our values, our security, our interests, but it does  mean that the door is open from the Australian perspective and that the ball is very much in China's court to  be willing to sit down and have that proper dialogue.

Hamish Macdonald: I mean, the Foreign Ministry spokesman in Beijing rejected that statement about the  ball being in China's court yesterday, outlining a litany of complaints about Australia. And he said what he  calls a Cold War mentality and ideological prejudice and blatant violation of the basic norms of international  relations. It doesn't sound like they're picking up what you're putting down, Minister.

Simon Birmingham: All I could reinforce there, Hamish, as is well publicised, I and other Australian  Government Ministers are willing to take phone calls, engage with our counterparts, have meetings with our  counterparts. We have expressed that very clearly - we're willing to have that dialogue. The ball is in Beijing's  court in the sense that it is up to them as to whether they are willing to come to the table to have those talks  too.

Hamish Macdonald: But is there anything else that you are doing? Are you, are you changing the way  you’re trying to approach this then? If you’re saying that your position hasn’t changed I’m just wondering  whether, given the ongoing deterioration of this, whether you’re actually taking any steps to try and get those  phone calls happening?

Simon Birmingham:  I note that some of the comments that come from, from the Chinese Foreign Ministry  indicate or often reference Australian statements that we assume relate to matters of human rights or the like.  The point that I would make is, Australia's position hasn't changed in those areas. For decades, Australia has  had a consistent position when it comes to international human rights obligations - that has at times been a  point of tension in the Australia-China relationship, as it has with relations with other countries. But previously,



it hasn't prevented us from being able to work past those issues, and cooperate in the areas of mutual  agreement and mutual benefit - and that is precisely what we want to be able to continue to do.

Hamish Macdonald: Sure. But with respect, Senator, I don’t think you answered my question, which is  whether or not you're doing anything different now to try and actually get those phone calls happening? I  mean, it seems like there's a sort of retelling of history here. I suspect the Chinese Government would be well  aware of that history.

I just want to know whether you can tell us anything about what you're doing to try and re-establish some form  of communication with Beijing. This has been going on for so long. We're hearing all of these concerns from,  from the various exporting industries in Australia, but they want to know what the Government is actually  doing other than repeating the same lines over and over again.

Simon Birmingham: Well look, if your question is what are we going to change about Australia's policy  here, and to be very clear that we are…

Hamish Macdonald: No, no. My question is, is that what you are practically doing to actually re-establish  some kind of communication channel?

Simon Birmingham: Well, practically we have reached out at every possible level and pathway in terms of  writing to Beijing, in terms of representations by our Ambassador in Beijing, in terms of representations to  Beijing's Ambassador in China. Our messages have been consistent through the course of this year and for  much longer. Our approaches have been consistent to indicate our willingness to engage in that type of  dialogue. It is fanciful to suggest that we haven't sought and tried pretty much every possible or conceivable  avenue in terms of expressing that willingness.

And I have been asked on more occasions than I could possibly count or care to remember about the  willingness to have that dialogue, whether I had sought calls or discussions. We have, we are, we're  consistent. Our door remains open, but we cannot force the other party to come to the table. That's why when  I say the ball is in their court; it is, because only they can decide to now take that call or have those meetings.

Hamish Macdonald: Thanks for answering that question. Appreciate it. Your home state of South  Australia; I think we can hear the birds in the background there this morning, you're obviously enjoying the  morning. But the state is dealing with this alarming outbreak of COVID-19.

The Parafield cluster, as it is being described, linked to a hotel quarantine breach - it's grown to 20 that we  know of. This is the first real test of South Australia's contact tracing systems. Is it therefore reasonable for  other states, territories to be effectively shutting the borders again?

Hamish Macdonald: Hamish, it is a beautiful morning in Adelaide, and I'm pleased the birds are chirpy. But  the locals are nervous - it's safe to say these are challenging times for SA and everybody is, is on edge as to  exactly what will unfold.

It is pleasing to see the strengthen of the state government's response, around 4000 South Australians have  now been placed in isolation as a huge effort in terms of testing, contact tracing and isolating, has been  underway. And the authorities are to be applauded for the extent to which they have mobilised all of those  resources, and that gives us the best possible chance of successfully suppressing COVID in this state to  maintain that type of momentum.

And that indeed has been a message that the Commonwealth has had and has worked through consistently  with all the states and territories for some time. We had the Chief Scientist, Dr Alan Finkel, audit the contact  tracing capabilities of states and territories, and, and we did that knowing that these types of outbreaks were  always possible and it would be so crucial to make sure that states could scale up rapidly in the way SA has  done in the last couple of days.

Now, in terms of border closures, I respect the rights of other states to, to act in different ways, but they do  need to be mindful of being proportionate to the circumstances and also trying to act so far as possible in a  way that is considerate of individual circumstances. And I think there've been some tests in that regard as to  the way states have acted, and we would also really urge the states and territories to be looking at common  approaches when it comes to what is a hot spots definition, and how do they respond to that.

And, and I guess one of the real challenges for our tourism industry, wearing my hat as the Tourism Minister,  is the enormous uncertainty that the different reactions of different states, applied in vastly different ways, is  created as a result of the, the outbreak here in SA.





Hamish Macdonald: You got so many hats; we lose track these days. We are going to have to go, but very  briefly, Simon Birmingham. I suspect many will note that you are applauding the South Australian Government  in this circumstance, given that there's been a breach of hotel quarantine. It stands in stark contrast to the way  the Federal Government responded to a similar set of circumstances in Victoria - it came down very hard on  Dan Andrews and the government there.

Briefly, is there something that South Australia- makes South Australia different in this case? Why are they  being applauded where, where Victoria was so severely admonished?

Simon Birmingham: Well, I don't want to get into word semantics, but, but I think the breach is certainly  profoundly different at this stage. And what’s happened in South Australia appears to be that a cleaner in one  of the hotels, through some contact point in the hotel, has managed to contract COVID. Now, that's going to  require everybody to analyse very closely what has happened there, but it's nothing as sensational as, as  people being let out, or guards sleeping with, with the people that are meant to be being contained there. So-

Hamish Macdonald: I'm not sure that was- that ever proved to be correct.

Simon Birmingham: Well look, I can't remember. I can't say that I followed all the steps of the Victorian  inquiry closely but, but I do, but I do think that-

Hamish Macdonald: Alright. Well, you might want to fact check yourself on that one, Senator Birmingham.

Simon Birmingham: Well, I would happily take the correction if need be, Hamish, but I think SA, within the  space of 24 hours, had identified clearly the cause, the link and has, has engaged rapidly in a contact tracing  activity. And if you do recall, much of the concern that was happening in Victoria were the huge delays in  relation to contact tracing.

Now, we threw support at Victoria in terms of the Defence Forces and support for the Victorian Government,  just as federally we’ve thrown support at South Australia in terms of Defence Forces and the support of the  Federal Government.

So the treatment, the actions in terms of support for the state are the same. The circumstances that we've got  the states to these, these positions were, though, somewhat different, and the immediate capabilities of the  state in responding with contact tracing appears at this stage to be quite different as well. And that's what  gives us hope at least in terms of SA’s management.

Hamish Macdonald: We'll leave it there. We'll let you go and Google to check yourself on that. Simon  Birmingham, thanks very much indeed.

Simon Birmingham: Thanks, Hamish. Cheers.



Media Contacts  Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.

