UNOFFICIAL





The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT HOUSE, ACT  SUNDAY 22 MARCH 2020



EO&E…

PRIME MINISTER: We’re a strong nation, we’re a strong people, and in the months ahead, we're going to  find out just how strong we are. We have the example and inspiration of generations that have dealt with  challenges like this before. And we have the advantage of the lessons that they have passed on to us about  how we can stick together to stick this through, to build a bridge to the recovery on the other side.

We cannot prevent all the many hardships, all the many sacrifices. That we will face in the months ahead.  And while these hardships and these sacrifices may break our hearts on occasion, we must not let them  break our spirit. And we must not let them break our resolve as Australians.

Today, we are making important announcements to support those Australians that will be in the frontline  of the blows that we will experience, the economic blows we will experience as a result of the global  health crisis, which is the coronavirus and its severe economic impacts. To cushion the blow as much as  we can to build a bridge to the recovery on the other side. But we must remember first and foremost that  this is a health crisis. The health battle is the main battle that we face. The health battle is the battle that  all Australians are enlisted in as we fight this virus. As a national cabinet we have already taken significant  actions. But we know more will need to be done.

Our capacity in hospitals and aged care facilities and our workforce challenges are all matters that the  National Cabinet is addressing as is indeed our individual cabinets at federal and state level, securing the  essential medical supplies has been a daily task that the Health Minister has been leading together with  the Industry Minister and other Ministers across the Cabinet. And enforcing the social distancing, keeping  a healthy physical distance from one another. This is one of our most, if not our most important weapon  against the spread of the coronavirus, which means we can save lives and we can save livelihoods. I  brought forward the next meeting of the National Cabinet to this evening after consulting with Premiers  and Chief Ministers yesterday on a range of matters. As you know, last Friday when we met, we had  scheduled our next meeting to focus on the issue of further and stronger measures to deal with local  outbreaks within state jurisdictions. We are bringing forward consideration of those matters to a meeting

this evening. Also, after consulting Premiers and Chief Ministers overnight, we have decided that we are  moving immediately to recommend against all nonessential travel in Australia. So that is that all non-essential travel should be cancelled. Now, essential travel, what referring to is for work related activities  that are essential. It could be the compassionate grounds and issues of those types of arrangements. But  also when it comes to essential supplies and activities, movements of health workers and and other  important arrangements that are needed to keep Australia running.

Our other message as a group of leaders at national and state and territory level is this, to fight the virus  we need you more than anyone. We need you to comply with the healthy distancing, the social distancing  measures that we have put in place. What happened at Bondi Beach yesterday was not okay and served  as a message to federal and state leaders that too many Australians are not taking these issues seriously  enough. So the measures that we’ll be considering tonight means that state Premiers and Chief Ministers  may have to take far more draconian measures to enforce social distancing, particularly in areas of  outbreaks, than might otherwise need be the case. The more Australians themselves assist us in this fight  against the virus to protect lives and to protect livelihoods, the more and the better able we are to ensure  that Australia comes out stronger on the other side. So it's a simple plea. We need you, we need you to  do your bit when it comes to social distancing, to keeping that healthy distance, to respecting and  following the rules that we're setting down. But more stronger measures will be coming and they will be  coming in more localised areas to deal with outbreaks. Those decisions will be being made by state  Premiers and Chief Ministers as they apply to their individual jurisdictions. We will also be working hard  to ensure that the scaling of those measures and the identification of areas of outbreak that require those  measures will be as far as possible, consistent between state and territory jurisdictions. What that means  is what may be necessary in a part of Sydney may not be necessary at all in rural New South Wales or  indeed in Perth or other parts of the country. But please be assured that what we're working on is to  ensure that there is a consistent, as far as possible, set of measures, set of tools that state Premiers and  Chief Ministers can use to apply in each of their cases. So if you see it happening in one part of the country,  that doesn't necessarily mean it has to apply in your part of the country. There are parts of the country,  particularly in Sydney, where these outbreaks have been more severe. And I know the Premier in New  South Wales has been focusing on this very, very keenly, particularly over the course of recent days, as  we've seen the increase in the number of cases in New South Wales.

The other point I'd make is that the Commonwealth is working to support state jurisdictions wherever we  possibly can. Not only have we increased our resourcing to the health system and working closely with  them through the medical expert panel. But even as recently as last night, we were mobilising additional  personnel out of the Australian Defence Forces to assist state and territory jurisdictions with things like  contract tracing, so these are people with medical backgrounds or at least some form of knowledge gained  through their training and experience in the defence forces, which means they'll be able to add further  weight and support to states, some of which are coming under great pressure with the rising number of  cases.

Let me now turn to the economic support package and I'll ask the Treasurer to go through these measures  in greater detail. And I thank the Expenditure Review Committee and all Ministers who've been working  closely on these issues over the course of the past week. I also want to commend the state and territory  governments for the measures that they have been taking when it comes to addressing the economic  needs in their jurisdictions.

The package of measures, combined with those we've already announced sums to some $189 billion or  around 10 per cent of the size of our economy. 10 per cent of the size of our economy, that is

unprecedented in this country. What we'll be doing as I said is focusing on those in the frontline. Those  who will be feeling the first blows of the economic impacts of the coronavirus. We will be supercharging  our safety net. We'll be supporting the most vulnerable to the impacts of the crisis. Those who will feel  those first blows. To preserve the businesses that comprise our economy so on the other side, they can  bounce back strongly and don't have to reassemble themselves from the ruins of failed businesses. I also  want to note that this is a set of measures which is about looking over the next six months. There is no  two week quick fix. There is no four week shutdown and it all goes away and we all get to go on about our  businesses. I've seen those suggestions. The medical advice is very clear. There is no quick solution. We  have to steel ourselves for at least the next six months and the measures that we put in place we need to  be prepared to carry on for at least the next six months. They need to be sustainable. They need to be  scalable.

I also want to note, the measures that we announced today, come on top of the normal stabilizers that  occur in our economy, access to family tax benefits, access to other benefit payments, rental assistance,  all of these things as access to primary payments like the jobseeker payment and others kick in. So when  someone gets access to the jobseeker payment and the Treasurer will be taking you through that because  we're expanding the eligibility, that means they also get access to many other payments that can add  hundreds and hundreds of dollars per fortnight to their annual income. This is about supercharging the  safety net. The measures will double income support for those on jobseeker. They will help Australians to  access more of their own resources to get through this time of crisis. They'll provide more support for  pensioners and carers and the other most vulnerable groups who are recipients of benefit payments. It  will provide a life line to cushion the blow for small and medium sized businesses with grants of up to  $100,000 to see them through, and it'll also provide a shield to protect you. Whether it's issues of  insolvency or bankruptcy, the normal rules aren't going to apply here. We want to make sure people are  there on the other side. We have to change the rules for this period to make sure more, more and more  Australians get through this to the other side so they can bounce back strongly when it's over.

This will not be the Treasurer and my last visit to this podium, these podiums, to make announcements  on these measures. This is the next tranche. It's focusing on those who are going to feel the first blows.  There will be more packages. There will be more support. There will be more issues that even now haven't  presented themselves or even couldn't be conceived at this point with what we may face over the next  six months. And we will be working night and day to ensure that we bring forward the measures that  Australia needs to get them on this bridge to the recovery on the other side.

The more we work together, the more we share the load, the more we share the sacrifice, the more we  do the right thing together as Australians, the more lives we will save, the more livelihoods we will be able  to preserve, and the stronger we will all be on the other side.

Treasurer.

THE HON. JOSH FRYDENBERG MP, TREASURER: Well, thank you, Prime Minister. Since the government  announced its first stimulus package just over a week ago, the global and the domestic economic  environment has deteriorated. We now expect the economic shock to be deeper, wider, and longer. Every  arm of government and industry is working to keep Australians in jobs and businesses in business, and to  build a bridge to recovery on the other side.

Today, the government is announcing a second package, $66 billion dollars to cushion the blow to  households as a result of the coronavirus and to support businesses, and we are enhancing in an

unprecedented way Australia's safety net. This package is consistent with our principles. The initiatives  are targeted, are temporary, are proportionate, are scalable, and are using our existing systems. Today,  this package, together with the other initiatives that have been announced, sees the government's  support for our Australian economy, announced over the last 10 days, at $189 billion dollars or as the  Prime Minister said, around 10 per cent of GDP.

Today's package has three parts involving 10 separate initiatives. The package will support households,  including casuals, sole traders, retirees and those on income support. It will provide assistance for  businesses to keep people in a job and it will provide regulatory protection and financial support for  businesses to stay in business.

Today, the government is announcing the doubling of the Jobseeker Allowance, formerly known as  Newstart, through the introduction of a temporary coronavirus supplement. The government will also  waive the assets test and waiting periods for the Jobseeker Allowance, allowing more Australians to more  quickly access the support that they need. The coronavirus supplement will provide an additional $550 a  fortnight on top of the existing jobseeker or Newstart payment and will be available to sole traders and  casual workers who meet the income test. This means anyone eligible for the maximum jobseeker  payment will now receive more than $1,100 a fortnight, effectively doubling the jobseeker allowance. In  the first package on the 12th of March, we announced a $750 payment for Australians on income support.  Today, we announce that from July 13, a further $750 payment to those on income support that are not  eligible for the coronavirus supplement. This includes those receiving the age pension, the carer's  allowance, family tax benefits and the Commonwealth Seniors Health Card. In total, 5.2 million  Australians. We are also reducing the deeming rates by a further quarter of a per cent to reflect the recent  Reserve Bank interest rate cut. Over 900,000 thousand social security recipients on income tested support  will now benefit. Our economic response will allow those Australians who are in financial stress as a result  of the Corona virus to access more of their own money in superannuation. From April, those affected will  gain access to their superannuation capped at $10,000 this financial year, and a further $10,000 next  financial year. These withdrawals will be tax free. I repeat, these withdrawals will be tax free and available  to those who are eligible for the coronavirus supplement, as well as sole traders who have seen their  hours worked or income fall by 20 per cent or more as a result of the coronavirus. So if you're a sole trader  or you're a casual and you've seen your income or your hours worked fall by 20 per cent or more as a  result of the coronavirus, you will be able to get early access to your superannuation. Applications will be  made online through a simple declaration to the tax office. This initiative builds on existing provisions that  allow early access to super in the event of hardship or on compassionate grounds, and it is estimated to  put up to $27 billion dollars of superannuation back into the pockets of hardworking Australians. This  comprises less than 1 per cent of the 3 trillion dollars in superannuation today. APRA, the prudential  regulator, has advised the government that they do not expect this initiative to have a significant impact  on the industry overall. The government is also giving retirees more flexibility over their superannuation.  Currently, retirees are required to draw down a minimum of 4 percent a year from their superannuation,  a number that increases with their age. The government is halving this requirement to 2 per cent for this  year and for next year, to give retirees more discretion over the management of their assets.

The second part of our package sees a massive scaling up of support for small and medium sized  businesses across the country. We are increasing cash payments to SME’s to boost their cash flow and to  keep their workers employed. All employing businesses will receive at least $20,000. All employing small  businesses will receive at least $20,000 and some of the larger SME’s will receive up to one hundred  thousand dollars. And we are extending this measure to around 30,000 not for profit organisations, which  have an annual turnover of less than $50 million dollars. This will be a lifeline for hundreds of thousands

of employers like the local hairdresser, the local cafe, the local mechanic whose income has been  significantly reduced over this difficult period. This is the single largest measure in this second package,  and together with the first initiative in the first package for small businesses is worth $31.9 billion dollars  in total. This payment will be automatically paid through the tax system largely over the next six months  with the first payment after 28 of April. No new forms will be required from Australian small and medium  sized businesses.

Over the course of the last week, $105 billion dollars is being injected into the financial system by the  government and the Reserve Bank of Australia, the purpose of which was to lower the cost and increase  the availability of credit, particularly to smaller, medium sized businesses. Today, the government is going  one step further and is guaranteeing in a 50/50 partnership with the banks and other lenders, more  lending to Australia's small and medium sized businesses. This $40 billion scheme, which will start in early  April, will provide loans of up to $250,000 for up to 3 years for a business with a turnover of less than $50  million dollars. No repayments will be required for the first six months. These will be unsecured loans and  they will help build a bridge for small and medium sized businesses to the other side of the coronavirus,  and I urge small businesses to go and talk to their bank about these new opportunities that are available.  These funds will provide hope and confidence to a vitally important sector and together with the red tape  reduction for SME lending announced on Friday, more credit will be coming their way.

The third part of our package will provide a regulatory shield for what are otherwise profitable and viable  businesses that find themselves under severe financial pressure as a result of the coronavirus. Now is the  time for more flexibility in insolvency and bankruptcy laws to keep these businesses alive and to trade  through this period. The government is proposing to increase the threshold at which a creditor can take  action to initiate insolvency or bankruptcy from as low as $2,000 today to $20,000 and giving companies  and individuals 6 months instead of 21 days to respond. We will also provide relief from directors, from  personal liability, where the company is trading while insolvent. This relief will be provided over the next  6 months and will be vital to helping companies get through this period. As a result of the health related  restrictions being put in place to reduce the impact of the coronavirus, it will not be possible for many  companies to comply with their obligations under the Corporations Act, for example, holding general  meetings in person. A temporary 6 month power will be provided to me as the Treasurer to deal with  these situations as they arise.

These extraordinary times require extraordinary measures and we face a global challenge like we have  never faced before. But by working together, we will get to the other side and we will bounce back  stronger. Today's announcement will provide hope and support for millions of Australians at a time when  they need it most. We know that there is more to do and we will continue to do what it takes.

PRIME MINISTER: Thank you, Josh.

Phil.

JOURNALIST: You’ve announced an enormous amount of measures today on top of the ones a couple of  weeks ago and you're flagging more, without sort of getting too far ahead but are you anticipating doing  more and measures in the nature of what you've announced today or are you looking at something  different in terms of community support or?

PRIME MINISTER: There are two points to make. The first one is that we set out some very clear principles,  which I, in fact, ran through at the AFR event last Monday week. And those principles are being applied

to all of the measures, you'll see them in the measures we've announced today. They scale up from things  we've already announced. They're sustainable, over that, and they're focused on that six month period in  particular. They're temporary. They're not structural, with the exception of the one measure relating to  deeming rates, which reflects the decision we also took last week. And so we have clear principles that  are guiding the types of, the types of arrangements we're putting in place. Now, those principles are  important because they're protecting Australians in the future. They're protecting Australians down the  track. So that what we do now, we do right now and then we build back from that period of time. And we  don't as as as little as possible, put that burden on future generations.

So that's the first point, as you've seen in this package, which is very much as I've been saying now for the  past week, about comforting, if you like, shielding and softening the blow, cushioning the blow that is  different from the the focus that we had in the first package. And what is becoming very clear as these  events go from week to week to week is new challenges emerge very, very quickly. And we need to be  very agile to respond to those. So there are all, there are more challenges across the economy, how we  can put those who will find themselves in in a distressing situation or stood down or out of work or their  businesses unable to earn what they did before. How we can be better deploying that effort across the  economy. We want people where possible, subject, of course, to the health restrictions, ensuring that we  can keep the economy functioning as much as possible in these rather extreme times. Workforce issues  in particular are very important. You heard me announce earlier this week the additional support we're  putting into aged care. There will be challenges there. But one thing I'm very encouraged by has been the  business to business, government to business engagement that's been taking place as people just solve  practical problems, unforeseen problems. And what I would say, particularly in terms of the last measures  that Josh was going through, if you've booked a wedding or if you've booked a trip, understand the person  you booked it with, they're going through a hard time, too.   And what we need to do is give each other a break at the moment and sit down and just work through  these issues practically as Australians, understanding that if you force your issue, you make someone  else's issue harder, which at the end of the day is going to make your issue harder at the end of it. So it's  very important that Australians, I think, work together practically.

Lanai.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you’ve been standing here for a week telling Australian's about social  distancing and why it’s important. Why do you think Australians are not listening?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, it's more a challenge to Australians, I'd say, Lanai. It is very important. It is very  serious. It is deadly serious. And that's why I would appeal to them that they all have a role to play. People  cannot be cavalier about these things. They must take them extremely seriously because lives and  livelihoods are at stake. What we saw on the weekend at Bondi Beach, I know would have been innocently  done, but negligently done. And it's important that that serves as a wakeup call for the entire country to  ensure that they take these social distancing policies very seriously and the states are moving quickly to  mandate them and enforce them. And as I said, they'll be taking even stronger measures in particular  areas and potentially more widespread. They will upgrade as necessary. But the more social distancing  we do, the less severe the economic impacts have to be. And so that's why I appeal to Australians that  you are enlisted in our fight against the virus. You have a role to play.

Tim, Tim.

JOURNALIST: On that issue, Hubei Province’s numbers or Australia's numbers of coronavirus now, as I  understand it, have passed Hubei province’s at the time that China imposed the total lockdown in that  area. How confident are you today that we actually don't really need similar measures? And might we  even see some similar measures in some of the regional areas you were alluding to earlier?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, this is exactly what I'm suggesting Tim. This is exactly how Premiers are working.  I'd be careful at comparing Australia's data to other jurisdictions. Australia's testing, for example, shows  that we have the lowest, one of the lowest, if not the lowest test positivity in the world. We're at 0.7 per  cent compared to USA at 13, UK at 5, and Korea at 3. And we're also seeing a less severe impact of the  virus on those who have contracted it in Australia than we're seeing by the more general levels overseas.  So I would caution people to be very careful about the international comparisons made because the data  is not necessarily directly comparable. But the point is the same and that is as things escalate, more severe  measures have to be taken. And what I'm telling you is they're coming, they will be coming. They will be  applied by states and territories in more specific ways and they will be done and as consistent a way as  possible, as considered by states and territories  and we will be considering some of those further this  evening.

Yeah Greg.

JOURNALIST: [inaudible] it’s going to be in the first instance particular suburbs or particular towns where  there is a high infection rate, they will be, that will be, there’ll be locked down for, as I said, particular  suburbs before you consider a widespread lockdown?

PRIME MINISTER: What we've done as a National Cabinet is to establish a baseline for healthy distances  between people and a common set of rules that work across the whole country. Now, you've already seen  in Tasmania and the Northern Territory further measures taken because in those cases especially, they  have more vulnerable populations. So you’re already seeing a more tailored response in specific locations  based on the risk that is presented there. And what I'm saying is, is that you will see more of this, you will  see more regional focus to this, you will see more targeted responses from states and territories and that  will be done at their instigation based on their health advice. And they will seek to do it as consistent as  possible, as states that have faced with similar outbreaks in similar situations and where possible, that  will seek to be restricted. But in some cases then I suspect states and territories will take a broader  application. But this is what we're now facing. This is the next stage of this. This is what was anticipated  some weeks ago, almost a month ago when I said we were now moving to prepare for pandemic like  situations. And so that's why there's been an enormous amount of information flowing between the states  and with the Commonwealth on everything from hospital arrangements to medical supplies and a lot of  these other measures. So the National Cabinet continues to work on these.

Shane.

JOURNALIST: Treasurer, what is the measure of success for the package you've just announced? Do you  have a forecast from Treasury in terms of jobs saved or unemployment going forward?

TREASURER: Well what Treasury say is that the spending that we are announcing today and with our first  stimulus package is putting around 5 per cent, equivalent to about 5 per cent of GDP in the June quarter  and around 7 per cent of GDP in the September quarter. What that could mean for growth in the June  quarter is about 2 and 3/4 quarters per cent. And what it could mean in the September quarter is around

3 and 1/4 per cent. But what that is, does not take into account of is the dramatic impact on economic  activity as a result of the Coronavirus, which Treasury obviously say is very hard to to be definitive about  at this point, but what is absolutely clear about this package it's all about cushioning the blow. Enhancing  our safety net to support Australian retirees. Support Australian pensioners. Support Australian casuals.  To support Australian sole traders. To support Australian families, get to the other side. And we know that  small businesses are enormously resilient. But this is really hurting them where it is, whether it's a cafe or  a mechanic or a hairdresser. And so these measures by providing at a minimum $20,000 and up to  $100,000 for small businesses who employ people, gives them a chance to get to the other side.

JOURNALIST: You mentioned at the start that non-essential, people should not be doing non-essential  travel. Are you talking about travelling to another city or are you talking about driving across town to go  to a playground? What does that actually look like? And if I might, to the Treasurer, you mentioned the  other day that you'll be introducing the money bills this week to parliament because the Budget's been  pushed back. Is that a concession that the May parliamentary sittings won't go ahead? And would that  have to be passed on Monday as well?

PRIME MINISTER: I'll probably deal with both and Josh can add to both of them. What we're saying is non-essential travel should be avoided, and particularly when we're talking about interstate travel over longer  distances. You know, the sorts of travel that wouldn't be normally part of your, your daily life. So going to  the shops is something you have to do. Getting to work is something that you have to do, other important  tasks that you have on a daily basis. Sure, but I think Australians can exercise their common sense about  things that they they know are not essential. And this is, again, the point I'm making to people. We will  give you as many rules as we can, and as many guidelines as we can. But we also need you, we need you  to think carefully about what you're doing and your own behaviour and the impact that it has on others.  This is incredibly important. It's not just about each of us individually. It's about the person standing next  to us. It's about the person who lives across the road. It's about the elderly resident in the same apartment  building as you, or where ever you might be. We need to think, obviously, about making sensible decisions  for ourselves and our own families. And we also need to think about the decisions that we are taking and  its impact on other Australians. So it does mean those, those holidays that you might have been planning  to take interstate over the school holidays, cancel them. That's what it means. That's regrettable and I  know the impact that will have for many people in those communities where those holidays were going  to take place. These decisions are not taken lightly and for those who are arguing for extreme measures  all over the country, we would only take the further measures based on the medical advice, because at  the same time that we're trying to protect lives, we are also trying to protect the livelihoods of Australians  and that means acting on the medical advice and ensuring that we remain totally at locked groove with  them on the, on the incremental changes that we're making. So regrettably, it is the case that that travel  has to be reduced to stop the spread of the virus around the country. Other states will be making other  decisions on these issues. And I understand they'll be making further announcements today. I will leave  them to do that. But know, all of these decisions, whether it was in Tasmania, the Northern Territory or  elsewhere, they are making those decisions in concert and in consultation and talking those issues through  with our other Premiers and Chief Ministers to ensure that we all understand what we're each doing.

Now, when it comes to the Budget, what we will be doing this afternoon is I'll be sitting down with the  Treasurer and other members of my senior leadership team with the Opposition, and we'll be working  through a range of issues to go to the operation of the Parliament in the months ahead and we have some  specific proposals which I don't propose to go into here because we intend to work those through. There  have already been quite a lot of discussions we've had with the Opposition this week, and I thank the  Leader of the Opposition for facilitating that process. I'm looking forward to meeting with them this

afternoon here in the Cabinet rooms and we will also at that time be talking through the measures that  the Treasurer has been announcing today and the legislation around that, the supply arrangements we  would need to put in place. We have to be conscious of the fact that because of the spread of the virus, it  may not be physically possible to convene the Parliament over the next six months. So we have to prepare  for those contingencies. So the plan is to move to a much more emergency mode operation for the  Parliament, but to ensure the primacy of the Parliament is respected in ensuring that any of the measures  that are taken to support Australians are done so consistent with our Parliamentary democracy.

Kath, you’re patiently- and well distanced.

JOURNALIST: Just a point of clarity, that the doubling of the jobseeker allowance with the supplement, I  think you said that that's available for sole traders and casuals who meet the test, so what is the test?  Because I think you said for superannuation, you could lose 20 per cent of your hours and then get access  to your super payments. So is the jobseeker thing, have you got to lose your job? Is that the test? And  also, if I may, just on that second $750 payment, just I'm just looking at the press release it says it goes  out in July. Is that right?

TREASURER: From the 13th of July.

JOURNALIST: So given the likelihood from what you both foreshadowing that we're moving into  lockdowns, we're moving into regional lockdown. So you’re confident that you will get the bang for your  buck out of a $750 payment dollar payment in July?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, let me make a couple of points and then I'll let Josh go to the specifics. The nature  of these these payments and the purpose of these payments are changing. What this next payment is to  indicate, is that we know this is going to go for six months. So we had one payment scheduled for April.  We have another payment now scheduled for for July, for the next quarter. This is clearly saying that we  expect this to go on for some time. And we know that those vulnerable groups may need additional  income support during those periods. So, yes, it will provide some sort of support into the economy. Sure.  But it will also provide some very real financial support for the most vulnerable in our community. So it  has that broader purpose to that payment on that occasion. If we have to revisit these things again, then  of course we will. In terms of the eligibility I'll let Josh go through the specifics. But the point about it here  is there's sort of two tiers. There's a loss of income for a sole trader where they can access their own  savings to get them through, through their superannuation. But there is also the ability for them to keep  working in their business, to keep earning income around the income test and to ensure that they can  also access the jobseeker payment and that jobseeker payment, even if it would be at a very low level  because of the taper, they would still get the full $550 supplement that goes to everybody who is on the  jobseeker payment. And I’d note that in addition to that, it also would enable them to access the energy  supplement rates, the pharmaceutical allowance, the rent assistance, which is up to $139.60 potentially  per fortnight for those with no dependent children, $185.36 per fortnight for families with three or more  children. There's family tax benefits A and B, which can, including supplements, which can see hundreds  of extra dollars per week for those families. There's carers allowances, there's mobility allowances, there's  education supplements. There's a range of other payments and supplements that are triggered by getting  access to the jobseeker payment. And so this will go to people who are stood down, not technically  unemployed, but stood down. And this is about keeping them connected to the business, keeping their  income flowing. I agree in still a modest way and not what they'd be usually getting if they were earning.  But what we're trying to do with this package is ensure it's targeted to those who will feel the blow first  and most, and getting as much income support to them whether further income support is required to

broader groups. Well, that's something we can always look at. But now it's those who feel the blow first  and hardest.

Josh?

TREASURER: Well, thanks, Prime Minister. So we've waved the assets test we’ve waived the waiting  period, but there's still the income test. So if you earn less than a $1,075 a fortnight, you will get that full  $550 dollar coronavirus supplement. So this is good news for a sole trader who may still be in work, but  have seen their income reduced they will now get $550 a fortnight, if you're a casual and you've still got  some hours but again, your income has fallen below that $1,075 a fortnight. You will get the full $550.

PRIME MINISTER: So up the back here.

JOURNALIST: The issue of dealing with cruise ships is one that is having international implications. For  example, the Norwegian Jewel has 282 Australians currently trapped on it, that ship has nowhere that it  is allowed to dock. What is being done specifically for those Australians, but also more broadly, who is  taking charge? We saw over the weekend the debacle between New South Wales Health and Border  Force, who's actually leading the response and dealing with Australians on cruise ships, particularly when  there's an increasing likelihood that they'll have coronavirus on those ships?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, there are two separate issues you're raising. One is for those Australians who find  themselves overseas on a cruise ship or indeed Australians who find themselves isolated like several  hundred that we know to be in Peru. Now, in terms of both of those groups, that is the priority of the  Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and they are working on a range of measures right now as to  how they can best support to return, allow, enable people to be able to return to Australia. It's not a  straightforward issue, but it is something that DFAT are working on very carefully right now through a  range of options that have been well advanced from when that question was first put to me a few days  ago, the same types of arrangements are being worked on for those Australians who are on cruise ships.  So if you have family or relatives who are stranded in any of those places or are on cruise ships, understand  that it is high, very high on the list of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade to find a way to safely  ensure that those Australians can return home and even more importantly, ensure that they can get  access to medical treatment should they require it.

More broadly on the issue of cruise ships. There is a very clear set of rules, and I'd simply say this with the  issues on on the weekend, we're going to have lots of challenges and all of those who are working on  these issues, whether it's those who have to provide the health clearance for those to leave the ship or  which as we know it's done at the state level, or those of Border Force who have their job as part of this  process, they have to work together carefully. So I'm not going to get into any issue of of commentary on  that event. What I'm going to commit to and as the Premier I discussed this yesterday is just double down  on our commitment to working together as closely as we can on every occasion things won't go exactly  as we might like it. People are working under extreme stress, often with limited information. And we're  going to support those people to make the best decisions they can. And the states and territories are  standing shoulder to shoulder with each other and with the Commonwealth to resolve any problems  where they came up, that enabled a lot of clarity to provided to other states that can face the same  situation. And you always learn from these situations. And I think all of those, whether in the New South  Wales Government or the Commonwealth Government that was working on that issue, and I'm very  confident that those issues will be addressed in the future.

Andrew, you've been very patient.

JOURNALIST: Thank you Prime Minister. Just on behavioural aspects that you've talked about at length,  just on some of the tin tacks element of this, you've talked about people showing a lack of common sense.  But when it comes to this meeting that you’re having tonight in the National Cabinet, what about pubs,  clubs and restaurants? Many of them are still heaving with people. Are people either ignorant, wilfully or  just cavalier? Will you tackle that issue tonight? And secondly, can I ask you what what are you trying to  do to improve home delivery, which for a lot of people, has been simply cancelled for God knows what  reason,

PRIME MINISTER: You mean from commercial providers?

JOURNALIST: From you know Coles, Woolies cancelled home delivery because they can't find enough  spots. What are you doing to ensure that they, that really ramps up?

PRIME MINISTER: Two things, I've already flagged that issues of of internal gathering's and more targeted  regional responses to that is what is being considered by the states and territories as part of the National  Cabinet this evening. As you say, if there have been pubs and clubs that are heaving with people on the  weekend, that is simply an invitation for the states and territories to shut them down. And if they are  unable to get a handle on that, then they are bringing on what would be their worst outcome. And there's  a responsibility, both of those who run those venues and the patrons, I underscore, and those who are  going to these venues, I mean, coronavirus is not a secret. Everybody knows it's it's wall-to-wall on every  coverage and every conversation happening around this country today. And so there is no excuse to say  you don't know, it's one to one and a half metres. It's a four square metre rule. You've got to keep your  healthy distance between each other. If Australians can't do that on a broad scale, then they are denying  the governments and the authorities the most important weapon we have to save lives and to save  livelihoods. And states and territories will have to take more severe responses to deal with that. So we  are simply appealing to people to show common sense, to respect each other. And do the right thing  when it comes to following these very simple rules. But inevitably and I suspect soon, there will be need  for in particular locations for more extreme measures to be taken. And that is exactly why I took the  decision to bring forward the next meeting of the National Cabinet from Tuesday evening to this evening  where those specific issues will be managed. Now,

JOURNALIST: About Coles and Woolies?

PRIME MINISTER: Coles and Woolies. Now, this has been something that the Minister for Home Affairs  has been working on, and part of the national coordinating mechanism. There are a range of issues that  need to be addressed to establish better warehousing and depots for distribution when it comes to home  supply. Also, you would have seen this week, the Victorian government for example, I know other state  governments are doing this, we have done it also to increase the resources, going into things like Meals  on Wheels and things of that nature to support those on home care packages, the elderly and so on, who  are very dependent on these services. And so it's important that we provide that resource support. But  what I am impressed by is that these private companies, whether it's Coles, Woolies or others, are working  very closely with us to ensure that we can resolve some of those logistical challenges that are being  presented. And the Minister for Home Affairs, Peter Dutton, has been, together with his department,  working closely with them to resolve some of those problems.

JOURNALIST: You mentioned the testing rate, and you said the other day 85,000 people have been tested,



PRIME MINISTER: It's well over 100,000 now.

JOURNALIST: And Greg Hunt said 97,000 testing kits are coming in. Obviously, they're going to be running  out over a certain period of time. So what's being done to bring in more testing kits? Can we actually make  those testing kits in Australia?

PRIME MINISTER: Two things. Yes, we are bringing in more. And the Health Minister has been successful  in the course of the past week to be addressing what the the immediate supply requirements are. But  that also means that we must be judicious in the way we use those testing resources. I mean, as I said  we've got the lowest test positivity in the world I'm advised at 0.7 per cent. That means we have a lot of  people who are being tested who are testing negative, in fact, more than 99 per cent. So we need to be  judicious in the way that we use these testing kits. Now, these testing kits and resources are very  important for how we manage the spread of the disease as well, the virus as well, because it helps us  understand where people are and what the intensity of infection is. And so we'll continue to use that data  and the testing kits are important for that purpose. But the immediate issues around the supply of those  tests have been addressed for the foreseeable, over the, I'm not going to go into a specific timeframe  because it's a function of demand and those demands can vary. But also the work that has been done  with the Doherty Institute to ensure that we're getting domestic sourced testing options before us as well  as other- they're not replacement tests, but they are tests that can be helpful, which can even be done in  surgeries. So there are, this is one of the highest priorities the Health Minister is working on every day  along with PPE equipment and ensuring that's getting to the places it needs, it's needed most. I also want  to thank the Western Australian state government and other state governments are moving on this, that  they are looking at their own elective surgery waiting lists and ensuring that they're focussing on only  stage one, and urgent stage two cases. This is a matter we've discussed. Now, each state and territory will  make their own calls on that. Western Australian made that decision and that's a sensible decision,  because the less urgent elective surgery means there is less of a demand, obviously, on theatres and ICU’s,  but also importantly on PPE equipment, which is used in those procedures.

Yeah, I'm trying to give everybody one go so I’m-

JOURNALIST: I’ve just received a text message saying we've just broken the news that New South Wales  and Victoria are pushing for a total shutdown of all non-essential business. So a state-wide lockdown and  school closures from Tuesday. Would you support that? What's your reaction to that?

PRIME MINISTER: My reaction to that is the medical expert panel, the AHPPC is meeting this afternoon.  That includes the health officers of all the states and territories. They will form a view on the range of  issues I've asked for them to form a view on, that will be presented to all the Premiers and Chief Ministers  this afternoon. And we will meet as a National Cabinet tonight to consider our response. And that's where  I intend to provide any any response to those recommendations. That is the orderly and the calm way to  deal with these things and to make decisions in a responsible manner.

JOURNALIST: Have your girls been at school every day this week and will they continue to go?

PRIME MINISTER: I don't go into the health status of my children. Thank you.

JOURNALIST: Are you still on the same page as the state leaders, when it comes to keeping school, schools  open and is there any more certainty for parents about whether schools will remain open after the school  holidays?

PRIME MINISTER: Just just in relation to the last question. I can assure everybody that I've been following  the same health advice and for attendance at school, that I have offered to all Australians. I want to be  very clear about that, but I would also ask, and this goes for all Members of Parliament and all public  figures. I would ask you to be respectful about the privacy of our families and of our children. I am aware  of circumstances where the children of of members of Parliament and the schools they are attending were  the subject of some attention. I don't think that's fair to our kids. I really don't.

JOURNALIST: Are you still on the same page with state leaders about keeping schools open? And is there  any more certainty to parents that schools will remain open after the school holidays?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, that is the position of the advice, and that is the decision that National Cabinet  has taken, if there was any change to that that would be based on any change to advice we received from  the medical experts and any decision that has been made by the the National Cabinet. The issues that  we've been presenting on importantly, on the medical advice that we've had remain the same challenges.  It is still the case, and the the the evidence is that the incidents of the coronavirus amongst younger people  is far lower than it is for the rest of the population. And so the health risk to children is less, is our advice,  than to other parts of the population. It is also still the fact that if there were widespread school closures  across the country, then that would seriously impact and disrupt the health workforce that is needed to  save lives. And so that is a paramount consideration also of the National Cabinet. But we will continue to  consider all of these issues based on the expert advice. We will do that in a calm and reasoned manner  according to the disciplined process with the set for ourselves, which means we're all working together  and being nationally coordinated in our responses.

I’ve got time for a couple more, Brett? Then I’ll come here, and then I’ll come here. Yep?

JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister I know it’s not your favourite platform, but a lot of our viewers have been  in touch on Twitter. There are Australians who are overseas. They can't get commercial flights home.  They're quite anxious about getting back to family and friends. Could you see a scenario where we might  see some more repatriation flights? And also, could you maybe spell out when you talk about parliament  operating in an emergency type scenario? What could that look like? Virtual meetings of Parliament, for  example?

PRIME MINISTER: Well on the first question. I gave an earlier response. I'm not sure you were here when  I gave that response, but the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade are working on those consular cases  and particularly where there are larger groups. Lima is a good example of that. There's the cruise ship  examples. They are the two most pressing at the moment. But for those who find themselves isolated or  stranded in other places, then there are the ways that they can get in contact with the Department of  Foreign Affairs and Trade, even if that's being done through a family member, to ensure that DFAT can  become aware of where people are and what the options are and what consular support and advice can  be provided to help get them home. But this is one of the many challenges that we're working on and at  this stage on not going to advance to the point of suggesting any particular flights, but obviously we are  working to solve that problem. The problem is people are isolated and trying to get them home. And that's  the problem I'm seeking to solve. And that's what DFAT is working to solve.

Now over here.

JOURNALIST: [inaudible]

PRIME MINISTER: Oh on parliament? Well, we've got a meeting this afternoon with the Opposition. I don't  want to pre-empt that meeting. I don't think that would be fair to the Opposition. We're working through  issues that would enable the Parliament to be reconvened on an emergency basis to deal with any  essential legislation that was required, particularly to address the coronavirus pandemic that is going  around the world. So that's the priority for Parliament. There are many other issues, though, supply,  government services and so on, which needs to be maintained. And there are very sensible and rather  conventional things we can do to support the supply. There are also terminating programs and things like  this, which would also need to be addressed. But the more more challenging element will be that in the  weeks and months ahead, where there are further measures that require legislative support, that would  be able to ensure the Parliament can meet in whatever form it can to ensure that those measures went  through the appropriate democratic process.

JOURNALIST: Treasurer, on the superannuation, particularly the $10,000 withdrawal, will that require  legislation or regulation? And secondly, a lot of the package has been focussed obviously on SME's for the  larger companies are you open to having to maybe take equity states, effectively nationalise some  industry, some critical industries? Given the pace and change and things like that you're seeing with the  virus? Is that something that is going to have to be on your agenda?

TREASURER: In relation to your first, it's a legislative change. And I just want to point out that the  superannuation funds last year had about $300 billion in cash. So the superannuation funds have the  ability to provide what Treasury estimate to be about a $27 billion injection into the economy. What we're  talking about is less than 1 per cent of the funds that are currently under management in superannuation.  This is the people's money and this is the time they need it most.

In respect to your second question both the Prime Minister and I, as well as the Finance Minister, have  said that is not our priority right now. That is not our focus right now. When it comes to some of the bigger  companies you would have seen in a sector like aviation that was hit and we made a number of  announcements that is providing some relief there. We continue to do some work around other measures  that the government could take. But as we've both made very clear, the Prime Minister and I today, this  is not about set and forget. This is the second package. The first package was a stimulus package. This  second package is a safety net package. We'll continue to do what is necessary to support the Australian  economy, to support Australian jobs and support Australian businesses.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister where does sport come down on this essential to nonessential-

PRIME MINISTER: Sorry?

JOURNALIST: Sport come down on the essential or nonessential scalable- will teams still be able to travel  interstate for games that are still going on. Or is this, because these new domestic travel measures spell  the end for 2020 sport?

PRIME MINISTER: I would say not.

JOURNALIST: Non-essential?



PRIME MINISTER: That’s right.

JOURNALIST: So that’s the end of sport, potentially for the year?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, it's not the end of sport.

JOURNALIST: The end of AFL, NRL?

PRIME MINISTER: But what we're saying, no no, so you’re talking about the AFL and the NRL? We will  work closely with them about how those arrangements- I thought you were talking about children's sport,  people travelling to competitions and down, you know, the Nationals for the- well the Surf Lifesaving  Championships I understand have been cancelled anyway. And a lot of the arrangements, particularly for  kids sport and wide participation sport, I mean, netball’s been cancelled in the Shire and things like that.  And that's to be expected. But in terms of the NRL and AFL and those types of arrangements, well, I think  the principle is important. But we, I'm sure we can work with both of those agencies with with their  respective state and Chief Medical Officers at a federal level. If there are new arrangements that need to  be put in place there, that protect the health and safety of everyone. Well, that may be possible. So I'm  not going to pre-empt those outcomes, but I'm sure we can work those issues those issues through on a  on a practical case by case basis.

Michelle's got a question. If you don't let Michelle have question... Michelle?

JOURNALIST: You've obviously got quite a lot to get through tomorrow in the Parliament. Would you hope  to get it all done and dusted and just have a one day sitting or is it going to go into two days?

PRIME MINISTER: If it needs to go into 2 it will. And so that will depend a lot on how the procedures work.  We also want to make sure the Parliament, the Parliament still has to do its job and and  there are  important ways that needs to take place in the Chamber on the presentations of measures and the  essential debate that should take place on those measures. But I do appreciate the practical spirit in which  the Leader of the Opposition is engaged in these discussions, as well as the Leader of the Government in  the Senate, and Penny Wong working together with Mathias Cormann, Christian Porter has worked closely  with Tony Burke. So people are being very practical about these things and that will mean that it will meet  for as long as it needs to. If we can get through the business in a day, well, good. If it takes another day,  well, it'll take another day.

JOURNALIST: Are you bringing Western Australians here by any special flight? Because I noticed Mathias  Cormann [inaudible]?

PRIME MINISTER: We’ve been making some arrangements to support flights for Members to be able to  get here. That also helps minimise some of the risk. But I mean, each party is gone to its own arrangements  on the pairs. And we have focussed on those Members who are coming from longer distances, those who  are more, older or those who indeed might have other health issues potentially. And that's worked pretty  sensibly up until now. And I'm sure that the arrangements will work very practically tomorrow as well.  And again, I think the Leader of the Opposition.

You started, Phil, so I’ll let you finish.



JOURNALIST: In relation to what you were talking about with the airlines and so forth. Some of the bigger  businesses are starting to experience trouble raising capital on markets and so forth. Is there a potential  for, say, the Government extending a line of credit for some of these larger companies or if they start  experiencing such [inaudible]?

TREASURER: Well Phil as you know, one of the major pillars in our economic response, in addition to our  two stimulus packages, has been the move by the Australian Office of Financial Management, as well as  the RBA to inject $105 billion of liquidity into the system. This will help the banks meet some of the  demands from their existing customers. Let me emphasize, whether you're a big or small business there  is an alignment of your interest with the bank’s interest. The banks want their customers to get to the  other side. In fact, the bankers know there is the other side to the coronavirus. I've been in daily  discussions with the banks. And there is a real willingness to work with their customers to help them  through this very difficult period.

PRIME MINISTER: So look, while Australians may be self-isolating in many cases and keeping their distance  from each other. I want to assure all Australians of this, that together we will get through this. We will not  want to see anyone go through this alone at the end of the day, through the support that we're providing.  But we need to support each other. We need to care for each other and together Australia we will get  through this, and we will emerge stronger.

Thank you.

[END]

Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney



