

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

INSIDERS

SUNDAY, 9 FEBRUARY 2020



SUBJECTS: Climate Change; Sports Rorts; Bushfire response; the economy



DAVID SPEERS, HOST: Richard Marles, welcome. Would you like to see a new coal-fired

power plant built in Australia?



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Well,

when the energy industry itself aren't touching this with a barge pole, why on earth would

governments be in the business of subsidising it.



SPEERS: So that's a no?



MARLES: Well that’s the bottom line.  You made the point up there that industry are not

going anywhere near coal-fired power stations, and so that's that. The fundamental point

from Government is to say that - should Government be subsidising coal-fired power

stations or not? And the answer to that is obvious, no.



SPEERS: What if industry does it alone? Do you have any problem on environmental

grounds with a new coal-fired power station?



MARLES: Well the market is making its own decision here. In a sense that's ultimately a

really academic question because-



SPEERS: No, it’s an environmental question as well.



MARLES: No, it’s an academic question as well, because the market are not touching this

with a barge pole.



SPEERS: But I'm saying if someone did.



MARLES: The market aren't going anywhere near this with a barge pole.



SPEERS: Do you have an objection if they did?



MARLES: The fundamental question for Government is whether or not you're willing

to subsidise a new coal-fired power station.



SPEERS: Or give environmental approval.



MARLES:  Yes, but whether or not you're, but whether or not you’re going to subsidise a

coal-fired power station-



SPEERS: I'm not asking about that. I'm asking if industry decided to build a coal-fired

power station, would you be happy with that, or would you block that?



MARLES: Ultimately, this is a matter for the market.



SPEERS: No, for the Government to give approval.



MARLES No, well then the normal environmental approvals should apply. And that

process should apply.



SPEERS: So that's a maybe? That’s a maybe



MARLES: Ultimately, the question here is for the Government. In terms of whether or not it

will fund a coal-fired power station. Now, what's going on here is - this Government is

walking down that track. This Government is walking down the track of actually putting up

public money to subsidise something-



SPEERS: They haven't decided to do that. They're holding a feasibility study, to be clear.



MARLES: Which is being paid for with public money.



SPEERS: They haven't decided to go ahead with it.



MARLES: Yes but David they've already gone down the path of putting public money into

this. And it makes no sense at all, and that's obviously our position, but half the Liberal

Party are saying that as well



SPEERS: Just to be clear, just so there's no confusion. A Labor government may allow a

new coal-fired power station if industry were to fund it?



MARLES: A Labor government will have the normal environmental approvals for power

stations.



SPEERS:  Okay.



MARLES: A Labor government is not going to put a cent into subsidising coal-fired power.

And that is the practical question as to whether or not it happens.



SPEERS: What about coal exports. You said last year the collapse of global coal markets

would be "a good thing". You then said that those comments were "tone deaf". Where do

you stand on this - the future of coalmining?



MARLES: You can have the most aggressive position in relation to putting renewables into

our economy, and certainly, a very ambitious position in relation to dealing with climate

change, and that would represent our position and my position, and even with-



SPEERS: What about coal?



MARLES: Even with that, coal will continue to play a part within our economy for decades

to come. That's the reality. So in that context, I absolutely support coalmining jobs and

coalminers and the role that that plays within our economy, and it will continue to play a

role for a long time to come. And the reason I said that my comments last year were "tone

deaf" is because I think they didn't acknowledge the significant role that coalminers play

and the communities play within our economy, and it's a very significant one.



SPEERS: OK, but are you happy to see new coalmines open, or not?



MARLES: Well, again, this ultimately is a question for the market.



SPEERS: No, no, I appreciate- It's also a question for Government about approvals.



MARLES: So Government should go down the path of having the normal environmental

approval process, and that's what we support.



SPEERS: So no philosophical objection to new coalmines?



MARLES: At the end of the day, the practical reality here - it comes down to whether or

not a decision of Government is going to put public money into coal-fired power or coal

powered mining, and it shouldn't.



SPEERS: I'm not asking about that, I'm asking about any environmental objections to new

coalmines. So no objection to new coalmines?



MARLES: This is a matter for the market.



SPEERS: And for Government?



MARLES: And the normal environmental approvals should apply.



SPEERS: So that's-



MARLES: That's what it is.



SPEERS: That’s not a ‘no’ to new coalmines?



MARLES: The normal process should play out.



SPEERS: Let me ask you this - on climate change generally, where do you differ from the

Government right now?



MARLES: Well, the Government don't have a position in relation to climate change. We

will look back-



SPEERS: They have a target.



MARLES. We will look back at this period of time and it will be a lost decade.



SPEERS: So what do you object to- Inaudible



MARLES: Let me finish. It will be a lost decade in terms of action on climate change under

this government.



SPEERS: What do you object to it?



MARLES: At a time when climate change is so important.



SPEERS: Tell me what you object to?



MARLES: They are not going to meet the Kyoto target. They are not going to meet their

Paris commitments. I object to both of those. We're talking about right now-



SPEERS: They say that they'll meet and beat it.



MARLES: And it's a patent lie. It is a patent lie.  Here are the facts - under Rudd-Gillard,

we saw a 15% reduction in emissions. That’s what occurred during that period of time.

There were coalmining jobs going on then too, but we acted in terms of renewables. And

saw those reductions-



SPEERS: So what should they do that they're not doing?



MARLES: Let me finish. What we've then seen since they came into power is that that has

plateaued. They've got to a point now where under their projections, they're going to get a

0.3 per cent reduction on emissions on 2000 levels by 2020. Kyoto is a five per cent

reduction. They're not going to meet Kyoto. They're not on target to meet the 26 per cent

reduction.



SPEERS: So what should they do that they're not currently doing?



MARLES: Firstly, you could start by having a proper energy policy.



SPEERS: What would that look like?



MARLES: It's a matter for them, David. They've been in power for seven years.



SPEERS: And you've been in opposition for seven years.



MARLES: Exactly, and I wish we weren't, but they're the ones in government.



SPEERS: You can put forward an idea or policy?



MARLES: And we have over that period of time. And more than that, we've said - look at

what we've done, but we're happy to go with what you recommend, just let’s have

something to have an agreement on.



Inaudible



MARLES: They come up with the National Energy Guarantee, which we would have

ultimately supported-



SPEERS: You didn’t say that when it counted, Labor did not support it.



MARLES:  No, no, no no. We absolutely had the door open.



SPEERS: The door open is not saying, "we'll support this".



MARLES: Before we even get to a chance of doing that, this thing didn’t even get to the

Parliament.



SPEERS: Can I ask you where we are now, I'll read you what your Labor colleague Mike

Kelly said in Parliament on Tuesday during the bushfire condolence motion. He said "I'm

begging and pleading for this on behalf of my tortured, bleeding region, that we now work

across this chamber to create a mechanism for forging bipartisan policy for what more we

need to do on climate change." Do you agree that there is a moment now for some

bipartisanship between like-minded Labor and Liberal MPs on this?



MARLES: I completely agree with that and I agree with the sentiment. And I'd go a bit

further and say - we've been crying out for that moment for a long time. I'll come back to

the National Energy Guarantee. When they were walking down that path, this was not our

idea, it was their idea. But we were absolutely engaging in relation to that. It did not even

get to the floor of the Parliament. And this goes to the fundamental issue. They have a

rump in their party who do not actually think that climate change is happening.



SPEERS: But to be clear, you are-



Inaudible



MARLES: They cannot deliver a climate change policy.



SPEERS: We're talking about that this morning but from Labor's perspective, you're

extending an olive branch here today to say that there is a moment for bipartisanship?



MARLES: We have been seeking bipartisanship for a long time in relation to this. But to

get bipartisanship, we actually need to have a side that we can talk to. Right now, we're

watching a whole lot of people having a war with each other inside their party room, which

you've detailed eloquently this morning. And that’s preventing the conservatives in this

country even coming to the table to have a discussion about this.



SPEERS: Let me ask you about bushfires. We saw Defence assets obviously deployed

during the height of the crisis, and many of them are still in the field. The Prime Minister is

talking about new powers to make it easier to call out Defence during natural disasters. Do

you see the need for the new powers?



MARLES: Look, I think that we can have a look at all of that, but I don't think that it is the

critical issue.



SPEERS: So it’s not obvious to you right now that we need these new power?



MARLES: What I would say is I do think that we need to have a proper review of all that

exists in the light of what's happened over the summer. And we're open to what comes out

of that. But I don't think that that is the issue here. When we had the Prime Minister saying

that this was somehow new, that effectively this was a state issue and there was this kind

of new expectation on the Commonwealth Government to act in a moment of a national

disaster, that is patent rubbish. That is an excuse of a prime minister who has avoided

responsibility at every moment along the path here. The ADF has played a role in national

disasters as long as anyone can remember - Black Saturday, the Brisbane floods, Cyclone

Yasi.



SPEERS: If we are seeing more of these disaster and we

are going  to see  Defence deployed more often in greater numbers, do we need to look at

the capacity of Defence, the structure of Defence to play this role?



MARLES: Again, there are various ideas out there in relation to that, and I think that it is

worthy to-



SPEERS: Do you like any of them? You're right, Peter Jennings at the Australian Strategic

Policy Institute has floated a couple, like a disaster-ready reserve element of Defence?



MARLES: I take what Peter says very seriously, and I do think that it is important to have a

look at and examine all of those ideas, so I think that it is worthy of exploration. But again I

make this point: humanitarian aid and disaster relief has been the core business of

Australian Defence for a very long time, both in this country and overseas. What we did

with the Indian Ocean tsunami in Aceh. What we have done with cyclones in PNG and Fiji.



SPEERS: But are they going to get stretched and could it take away from the combat

readiness if they're doing this?



MARLES: Again, I think that's a really important question to examine.



SPEERS: What's your view?



MARLES: What's implied in what Peter is putting forward, this notion that the world

has changed and we need to be prepared for this, is an acceptance of, if you like, climate

change and a new world in which we're operating. That's something that the Government,

itself, does not accept.



SPEERS: But you're going to look into this as well?



MARLES: We'll absolutely have a look at it. But if you want to get to the bottom of - why

did the Government act with such clay feet over the course of this summer in response to

these bushfires, it is ultimately because to be on the front foot and to accept the reality of

climate change means you need to do that, and half of that mob don't.



SPEERS: Let's talk about sports grants, Richard Marles. This has angered a lot of voters.

This whole issue.  Can you sit here today and give us an assurance that Labor would

never have a minister, a politician, involved in making decisions on how grants like this

are spent?



MARLES: Well, there's a role for ministers in terms of making decisions. No-one is

suggesting that. But the point here is that the-



SPEERS: Why, why not expert bureaucrats? Once the Government sets up a scheme, let

the experts decide how the money is allocated?



MARLES: Because, ultimately, ministers need to bear responsibility. But the killer point

here, David, is that the majority of the recommendations that were made by the

independent authority that went to the minister were ignored. If you have a scheme where

you've ignored the majority of the recommendation that come to you, and when you run a

line over that scheme and it turns out that the great majority of where you've spent that

money is in marginal held Liberal seats in the lead up to the election or seats that you are

trying to win, you can expect that to be a whole lot of scrutiny...



SPEERS: So you're still saying there should be a role for the minister. Why can't the

minister set the program guidelines and then let the experts decide how to allocate money

based on merit?



MARLES: Experts should be there making recommendations about how to allocate

money on the basis of merit. And it should be a big thing for the Minister to go against

those recommendations.



SPEERS: A big thing? Why should it still be possible?



MARLES: Because at the end of the day, the Government needs to be run by the people

who are elected. And there needs to be a fundamental ministerial responsibility here.

That's why you have experts.



SPEERS: Do you think that there is trust for politicians to do this?



MARLES: I certainly think the way in which this Government has gone about the

sports rorts affair has fundamentally eroded that trust and made the whole challenge of

Government that much more difficult.



SPEERS: Labor doesn't have an unblemished record on these sorts of funds. Here’s what

the Auditor-General found about Labor’s Regional Development Australia Fund overseen

by then Minister Catherine King. The Auditor-General said "27 per cent of the applications

approved by the minister, representing 48 per cent of total funding awarded had not been

included by the panel as recommended for funding. 56 per cent of the applications

awarded funding had been assessed by the department as not satisfactorily meeting one

or more of the criteria." Maybe not as brazen as the Bridget McKenzie example, but a far

from perfect approach to these schemes.



MARLES: Well, the fact that there are independent people making recommendations - and

it's very important that those recommendations are, in turn, made public, so that there is

transparency about how this operates, and to be fair, that's occurred here because that's

how we know what has then transpired. But what we've seen with the sports rorts is pork-barrelling on really an unprecedented scale. And I think we all understand what was going

on here. They didn't think that they were going to win the election. They got desperate and

they started to spread money around the seats that they were after like confetti. They'd

need to be held to account. And the other point to make here, it's not actually why Bridget

McKenzie ultimately was ultimately forced to resign. Her stated reason is about her

membership of one club. This isn't just about a gun club. This is about how $100 million

was distributed, not on the basis of merit, but on the basis of policies.



SPEERS: Couple of other things just quickly - the coronavirus. We have already shut the

borders, essentially, to non-citizens who have been in China. How long do you think

that that should remain in place?



MARLES: I mean, it's a very good question. The answer, really, is that we need to be

taking the best possible advice from our medical experts, and we do have really

good medical experts.



SPEERS: This could be weeks or months and this is very, very costly?



MARLES: It might be, and it will be costly. If it plays out over that period of time. But we

need to be listening to our experts in relation to this.



SPEERS: How worried are you about this virus?



MARLES: I think we're all worried. Again, it is hard to come to grips with it and part of it is

because of the information and the sense that's coming out of China, which is where

the centre of this is. I would make one other point though, in relation to this, David. If

coronavirus turns out to be a significant issue, economically, and when it's all said and

done, and the fires do as well, it puts into stark relief actually, the complete inaction on the

part of this Government in managing the economy before both coronavirus and fires came

along. In the middle of last year before any of those things happened, we were pointing out

economic growth was slowing, you had record low wage growth. The Government actually

needed to act and they've done nothing.



SPEERS: You've segued and hit on the Government's economic management. Can I ask

you then right now - do you think that we should have a budget surplus?



MARLES: The budget surplus is a political test that the Government set for itself.



SPEERS: What do you think right now? Economically, should we have a surplus now?



MARLES: It is the Government right now who won the election.



SPEERS: I'm just asking you?



MARLES: Yeah, I get it, I get it, but they are the ones who are sitting in the chair. You

made the point-



SPEERS: You're in this chair. Do you have a view about whether we should have a

surplus?



MARLES: You made the point to Josh Frydenberg last week. They didn't say that they

were budgeting for a surplus. They said that they had achieved it. They’d literally already

achieved it.



SPEERS: And everyone saw that. But I'm asking you now, should we have a surplus?



MARLES: I think given that this is the bar that the Government has set for itself, they

should be judged on whether or not they meet it.



SPEERS: Do you have a view on this?



MARLES: I mean, they are the ones who are managing the budget. And what I see is a

Government who set a test for itself, and is really scared it's about to fail it.



SPEERS: Richard Marles, thank you for joining us.



MARLES: Thanks David.



ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363



