



SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY

DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC NEWS BREAKFAST

FRIDAY, 31 JULY 2020



SUBJECTS: Ruby Princess; Border Force confusing negative flu test

results for negative COVID test results; the need for Scott Morrison to

apologise for failing to stop the one boat that mattered; the need for paid

pandemic leave.



MADELEINE MORRIS, HOST: The ABC has revealed that the Australian

Border Force allowed passengers to disembark the Ruby Princess after a

senior officer mistook negative flu results for the results of COVID-19

screening.



BEN KNIGHT, HOST: Well, to get more, let's bring in the Shadow Home Affairs

Minister, Kristina Keneally, who joins us now from Sydney. Kristina Keneally,

good morning to you. This story that appeared on 7.30 last night showed that -

it appears that a Border Force officer looked at a list of results, thought they

were COVID-19 results, and they turned out to be flu test results. What does

this tell us?



KRISTINA KENEALLY, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE AND

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Good morning, Ben. Good

morning to your viewers. You know, the documents revealed on ABC's 7.30

program last night showed a number of mistakes made by the Morrison

Government with the arrival of the Ruby Princess. It showed us, one, that it was

Australian Border Force officials on board the Ruby Princess that morning who

made this tragic mistake, misreading flu test results for coronavirus results, and

who made the decision, Australian Border Force, to allow passengers to

disembark the ship.



It was also Federal Agriculture officers on board the ship that morning, and they

failed to complete the required traveller with illness checklist to manage for

COVID-19. But what these documents also reveal is that, despite the fact the

Prime Minister, Scott Morrison, said that his Government would cooperate fully

with the New South Wales Special Commission of Inquiry into the Ruby

Princess. In fact, the Morrison Government has been fighting a legal summons

and refusing to allow federal officials to appear at the Special Commission of

Inquiry. So, what we know from these documents is that from 20 March, the

day after the Ruby Princess arrived, Australian Border Force realised and

understood this tragic mistake, but Peter Dutton and Scott Morrison have been

covering it up ever since, seeking to blame New South Wales Health, and

refusing to cooperate with the special commission of inquiry.



KNIGHT: Well, the Border Force has put out a statement. It says that it strongly

refutes the story, because it says, "The officers simply don't have the authority

to allow people off the ship."



KENEALLY: Well, they don't have the authority, but this isn't about what legal

authority they have. It's about what they did. And right there, in black and white,

in these documents, it is very clear that it was the Australian Border Force

officers who gave what's called "practical pratique". That is, the permission for

passengers to leave the ship.



It was Australian Border Force officers that were receiving the health results. In

fact, one of the officers actually created his own Excel spreadsheet in order to

tabulate the results of those flu tests. This response from the Morrison

Government, quite frankly, is Trumpian. It doesn't surprise me, though, that

Scott Morrison's Government would take such a Trumpian response to these

allegations. They're not just allegations, they are there in black and white. What

the Morrison Government is trying to do here is deny the reality of what actually

happened.



Now, Scott Morrison and Peter Dutton can clear this up today. They can say

what they knew and when they knew it. They can make sure, they can direct

federal officials to go to the Special Commission of Inquiry and answer Brett

Walker's questions in public. And quite frankly Scott Morrison should today

apologise. He should apologise to those front-line Border Force officers who he

left without the resources. Because let's not forget it was the Prime Minister

who said that arriving cruise ships would be “under the direct command of the

Australian Border Force.” He left them without the resources and the training to

do their job.



But the Prime Minister should also apologise to the hundreds of Australians

who contracted coronavirus from this Ruby Princess wave, and the Prime

Minister should apologise specifically to the dozens of Australians who lost

husbands and wives, brothers, sisters, fathers, mothers, partners, loved ones,

because they died as a result of coronavirus they contracted through the Ruby

Princess.



KNIGHT: That's a big stretch, saying that the Prime Minister should apologise

for those deaths?



KENEALLY: The Prime Minister should apologise for the failures at our

borders. The Commonwealth Government, under the Constitution and in

practice, are responsible for our borders. That's why Australian Border Force

and Federal Agriculture officials were on board the ship, Ruby Princess, on the

morning of 19 March, and New South Wales Health wasn't, because the

Commonwealth are in charge of our borders. Now, this is a Prime Minister

who's got a trophy on his desk that says, "I stopped the boats." Well, Scott

Morrison and Peter Dutton failed to stop the one boat that mattered, the Ruby

Princess. And the Australian people should be able to trust their

Commonwealth Government to manage the borders. Tragically, here in this

case of the Ruby Princess, that did not happen.



They failed to stop the one boat that mattered. People died. Australians died as

a result of this. Australians contracted coronavirus. We had a wave as a result

of the Ruby Princess. And so the Prime Minister and Peter Dutton need to

apologise this morning for the consequences of the failures of the Federal

Government at our borders.



KNIGHT: OK, well, there has also been some pretty big failures in Victoria,

where clearly there is an intense second wave unfolding at the moment. And

what - it appears... We certainly heard the Premier, Daniel Andrews, yesterday

saying that people who have the virus have been going to work. Now, that's put

the focus back on paid pandemic leave. That is, a special payment for people

who can't afford not to go to work, in order to make a sort of more... well in

order to keep them at home, essentially. Now, this is under discussion by the

Federal Government. It says it's going to talk about this with employers and

also with unions. You're saying that it needs to happen sooner?



KENEALLY: Absolutely. If anything, what this virus has exposed is the

uncertain and difficult situation that casual workers, in particular, are placed in,

in Australia. The increasing casualisation of our workforce, the gig economy,

the fact that people don't have the capacity to access sick leave, that they're

forced to go to work otherwise they're not going to get paid. You know, if we're

asking people to isolate at home, if they've got suspected cases of COVID, or

while they're waiting for a test result, they need to have the surety that they can

still put food on the table and they can still pay the rent and they can still look

after their kids. You know, I have to say, this is one of those things - if we're all

in this together, we need to make sure that when people, particularly those in

insecure work and casual work, if they need to isolate at home for the good of

themselves, their families and our whole community, then we need to make

sure that they're able to do that, and paid pandemic leave is a way that we can.



KNIGHT: Who pays for that? Because business are saying, "This is just not

something we can absorb at the moment in any amount."



KENEALLY: Quite frankly, we are in a circumstance where the Federal

Government has - and I will give them credit, rightfully acknowledge, we

needed a direct wage such as JobKeeper. They were late coming to the table,

but they got there eventually. They increased the JobSeeker payment. This

needs to be part of the Government's response to coronavirus. You know, Scott

Morrison is fond of saying "we're all Melburnians now, we're all in this together,"

well, he can show that, he can demonstrate that by stepping up, working with

the unions and employers, and putting the Federal Government's resources

behind a paid pandemic leave.





KNIGHT: Alright, we'll leave it there. Thank you for talking to us this morning,

Kristina Keneally, the Shadow Home Affairs Minister.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.









