

MATT THISTLETHWAITE MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR THE REPUBLIC  MEMBER FOR KINGSFORD SMITH



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS  TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2020

SUBJECTS: Bettina Ardnt; Liberals in climate denial; Head of ASIO’s warning on  foreign interference and right-wing extremism.

ANNELISE NIELSEN: Welcome back. We're joined by a pollie panel with Liberal MP Tony  Pasin and Matt Thistlethwaite from Labor. Thanks for your time.

MATT THISTLETHWAITE, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL  SERVICES: Hi Annelise.

NIELSEN: Now the big discussion today that's got quite a few people worked up as Bettina  Ardnt being stripped of her Order of Australia, that's going to be a motion in the Senate  today. Matt Thistlethwaite, do you think she needs to be stripped of her Order?

THISTLETHWAITE: I do, Annelise. I read her comments on Twitter on the weekend and I  just thought that they were disgusting, this man murdered his wife and two children, three  children, and to incinerate your children in their car whilst they're still locked in their baby  seats, it's just incomprehensible and comments like that are not becoming of someone that  is given what is one of the highest orders in this country and recognitions in this country  and I think she should be stripped of the title.

NIELSEN: Tony Pasin?

TONY PASIN, MEMBER FOR BARKER: Annelise, I thought the comments were  incredibly ill-advised, they were very poorly timed. Sitting in the House of Representatives  yesterday, I'm expecting that Matt shares this view, listening to the Leader of the  Opposition and the Prime Minister speak of this tragedy was one of the hardest things I've  had to listen to in this place. To leave that and then late in the afternoon be sitting in my  suite and reading those comments, it literally sucked the oxygen out of my lungs.

NIELSEN: Does this go to a greater issue because she was referencing what a lot of  men's rights people say, that they can be driven to these kind of events because of the  Family Court system and this is likely to be a feature of the Family Law inquiry because

Pauline Hanson has been an advocate in that space?

PASIN: Look, we don’t need to synchronise those two things completely. You know, as  Matt correctly points out, this was a unspeakable tragedy. Separate to that then there  needs to be a discussion about getting the balance right in terms of the operation of the  Family Court. Now I'm not linking those two things at all, I want to be completely clear  about that.

NIELSEN: But Pauline Hanson is on the Family Law inquiry, does she need to go?

PASIN: Well that's not something that I'm gonna comment on via the presence of  colleagues on Committees.

NIELSEN: How do you feel about that, should Pauline Hanson be on the Family Law  inquiry?

THISTLETHWAITE: We've got deep reservations about her being on this inquiry and she  made some comments that I thought were  quite unnecessary as well about this incident.  There's no comparison at all in respect of these issues, this man was a murderer, it's the  most serious crime that you can commit under our laws in this country and there's no way  that you can use that as a justification for anything that's going on in terms of policy around  the Family Court.

NIELSEN: Now if we move on to one of the more contentious topics between Labor and  the Coalition has been this this 2050 target, why has Labor moved so early without a plan,  without costing, repeating the same mistakes of the election?

THISTLETHWAITE: Well it's the right thing to do by our economy, by our environment and  more importantly by our kids. Annelise, the world signed up to the scenario of trying to limit  warming globally to two degrees. Now to reach that, the international community said we  need to work toward zero net emissions by 2050. The cost of not doing that are  catastrophic, particularly for a nation like Australia where you're going to see the Great  Barrier Reef wiped out and all of those jobs that go with it. Farming would be under risk,  we've seen what the drought’s done and the effects of climate change on the drought and  the loss of income for farming communities and farmers. We've seen the bushfire season  be extended, all of these catastrophic events will get worse and worse and worse if we  don't move to net zero emissions by 2050. There's actually a net benefit to our economy  and that you'll create jobs and new industries particularly in alternative fuels like hydrogen,  so we think it's a net benefit for the economy and it's something that we should be doing  for our kids.

NIELSEN: Tony Pasin, what do you think, is it the same mistake all over again?

PASIN: Absolutely it is, look I held out some hope a fortnight ago when I heard that some  very sensible people got together at the Otis restaurant, but I learned now that effectively  all they were doing was signing the surrender document, they're giving up on Australian  farmers, they're giving up on Australian coal workers, they're giving up on the transport  sector. It is complete bumpkin to say you've got a target for 2050 but no way of getting  there, I mean and it's equally rubbish frankly to say that oh well we can't tell you how we'll  get to the 2030 target but will target the 2050 target. Now, Matt might well say we'll hang  on a minute you know the next election is not till 2022 but I remind your listeners that in

2013 we took to the Australian people, a plan step by step to get to us to our 2020 target,  that's seven years, it would be eight years. So the real question for the Labor Party is why  don't you have a plan to get to 2030? You've got a target and asking the Australian people  to trust them on 2050 with no plan when they aren't prepared to put something on the table  for 2030.

THISTLETHWAITE: Tony, the South Australian Liberal government has a policy of net  zero emissions by 2050, that's the party that you're a member of, your home state has the  same policy that the Labor Party, how can you be critical of us and not criticise your own  party?

PASIN: Matt, I'm a member of the Federal South Australian parliamentary team, to  suggest that I'm not on occasion critical of the South Australian Liberal Party is an  understatement.

THISTLETHWAITE: So you don't support the South Australian government?

PASIN: I'm saying that I don't support a 2050 emissions target. Matt, you refer to New  Zealand on this as a support but you don't tell the Australian people, hang on a minute  even an Ardern government in New Zealand has exempted agriculture and they've done  that for good reason. But I'm not going to sign a surrender document on my farmers, on the  coal workers in Queensland or transport workers. We need a sensible and balanced  approach, we have it, to be honest your proposal is bumpkin.

THISTLETHWAITE: Well that's incredible, that's actually breaking news here, Annelise,  Tony doesn't support the South Australian Liberal government's approach to climate  change and their target because that's what all of the States and Territories, Australia's  doing it already, every single square kilometre of land in this country has signed up to net  zero emissions by 2050.

PASIN: We as the government signed up to something that says we've got a plan to get  there by the second half of the century. But to say that we'll be using the same technology  today as we're using then is to say that we're using the same technology today as we were  using in 1940.

NIELSEN: Tony Pasin raises a good point with the agriculture point, it is exempt in New  Zealand and we have the National Farmers Federation being quoted by both sides even  though their policy is that they want to hopefully be on track to be in a position to try to  achieve a 2050 net zero emissions, or 2030, why are you using that as an example of  where we can achieve when that's not the plan of anyone in that sector?

THISTLETHWAITE: Well it is the plan of the Meat and Livestock Association, they've  come out and said that they want to achieve net zero emissions by 2030 and what we're  saying is that we should set this goal and then work with all of the respective industries and  State and Territory governments, interest groups and indeed the Australian people to  achieve that, so we work together to ensure that there aren't job losses, that industries can  continue into the future and thrive around new technology. It's about setting a roadmap and  then working with Australian industry and with the Australian people to achieve it.

PASIN: So you can't take this seriously, you can't say we've got a 2050 target and then  say we're going to work on how we get there, the uncertainty that that creates you're

bringing this to the Australian people at a time when there is unprecedented headwinds for  our economy, we've got obviously bushfires, we've obviously got the effects of the drought,  we've got the impact of the Coronavirus, this is ill-advised times and with no plan to get  there quite frankly it's just bumpkin.

THISTLETHWAITE: That's the whole purpose of this, Tony, we're trying to not use this as  a political weapon anymore. Your party has used climate change as a political weapon to  campaign against the Labor Party and the Australian people on this for close to a decade  now and the Australian people are sick of it. They want to set a goal that we can work to  together on a bipartisan approach with industry with the Australian people to achieve it and  that's what we're trying to do, we're holding out an olive branch to you guys to work with us  on this. There’s an Essential Poll that was published today on the 2050 net zero emissions  targets, 68 per cent of Liberal-identified votes support the targets. So Liberal voters  throughout the country and the rest of us are trying to do it in a cooperative manner. to  take this war against climate change and science out of it and work together in a scientific  approach to ensure that we maximise the results for the Australian economy.

NIELSEN: Just finally if we can move on to Mike Burgess’ speech, this is pretty iconic to  have the Head of ASIO give a public speech about the focus of his Department, in  particular he's talked about the rise of right-wing extremism, we've just had Ed Husic in  here saying that he wants an inquiry into the rise of right-wing extremism because it hasn't  had the focus it should. Tony Pasin, would you support that?

PASIN: I don’t, I think the work of the security agencies needs to be left the security  agencies. I want to be clear, what that speech underlined for me is the need for us as a  nation to remain vigilant, extremism wherever it’s found along the ideological spectrum is  the threat. The threat of terrorism is at unacceptable levels, the threat of foreign espionage  is unprecedented and so we need to back in our agencies and I don't think an inquiry of the  type that Ed was speaking of earlier will assist in that. Let's leave the professionals to get  on with doing what they do so well.

NIELSEN: There are a lot of social causes, things like that of right-wing extremism. Matt  Thistlethwaite, would you support an inquiry?

THISTLETHWAITE: I think Ed's on the money. For Mike Burgess to specifically say that  there's an issue with right-wing extremists in his first speech, major speech, about an  update to the Australian people on these issues I think was quite significant. And it's not  just Australia, it's other countries throughout the world, Western democracies that are  facing this challenge with right-wing extremists as well. Let's face it, in our region, in our  backyard we had one of the largest massacres by right-wing extremists in New Zealand,  it’s a serious threat and it's something that we need to ensure that our security and  intelligence agencies are across.

NIELSEN: Would you support an inquiry if it wasn't PJCIS if it was in another form?

PASIN:  Look, I haven't turned my mind to it, obviously this call has just recently been  made, but my first inclination in this space is to always back the agencies.

NIELSEN: Well, Tony Pasin, Matt Thistlethwaite, thank you for your time.

THISTLETHWAITE: Thanks Annelise.





ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: BEN LEESON 0404 648 275









