







THE HON ANDREW GEE MP  Minister for Decentralisation and Regional Education   Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Investment   Federal Member for Calare



MEDIA RELEASE

28 July 2020

Regional Universities Roundtables

Last week, the Minister for Decentralisation and Regional Education, Andrew Gee, convened  the second and third meetings of the Regional Universities Roundtables series with  Chancellors and Vice-Chancellors and senior representatives of Australia’s higher education  sector.

The Regional Universities Roundtables were initiated by Minister Gee to provide key  stakeholders with a unique opportunity to discuss issues currently impacting country  universities and communities, particularly in light of COVID-19 and the Government’s new  proposed tertiary education reforms.

“These consultations will play a crucial role in informing the Nationals’ Party position on the  proposed tertiary education reforms and it’s important that we engage with a broad range of  regional education stakeholders to ensure we get this policy right,” Minister Gee said.

Social Work, Behavioural Studies and Psychology

“Like the previous Roundtable, Chancellors, Vice-Chancellors and sector representatives  recognised that regional Australia experiences a shortage of social workers and other mental  health professionals in country Australia.

“Representatives attending the Roundtables made it abundantly clear that there is a  maldistribution of social, mental and community health workers between the cities and  country communities.

“Country Australia has been devastated by drought, bushfires and now the COVID-19  pandemic.  It is crucial that country communities continue to have the ability train  professionals in the regions to ensure that the current and future needs are met.

“Both the peak organisations and universities acknowledged that job opportunities for  students studying these disciplines are strong in the bush with many city-based graduates  staying in metropolitan Australia.

“The concerns from the sector expressed in all three Roundtables were such that serious  consideration will have to be given to moving these types of courses into a lower cost band  for students.

Tertiary Access Payment

“The introduction and implementation of proposed $5,000 Tertiary Access Payment  designed to assist school leavers from outer regional and remote areas to undertake high-level tertiary education was a common theme raised by sector representatives during the  discussions.

“Like the previous Roundtable meeting, universities and sector representatives  acknowledged that the Tertiary Access Payment may have unintended impacts on  enrolments at country universities.

“Regional Universities feel that the Tertiary Access Payment could be combined with other  financial incentives to encourage country students to study in the cities rather than the bush.   Again this would be a perverse outcome of the proposed policy change.

“A number of representatives noted that refinements to the proposed payment could be  made before legislation is introduced into the Parliament for consideration.

University Places Clearing House

“The establishment of a clearing house mechanism to allow universities to trade excess  places was also raised by Chancellors, Vice-Chancellors and peak bodies.

“Further clarity regarding the operation of the clearing house is being sought by universities,  with the institutions and peak bodies seeking to see the establishment of long-term  collaborative agreements between individual universities wishing to trade places.

“Representatives believe this approach will allow for the development of stronger and more  effective partnerships between universities wishing to trade places through agreements that  promote sharing of knowledge and personnel which will benefit teaching, learning and  research outcomes for country Australia.

Regional University Centres

“Representatives of the higher education sector welcomed the Australian Government’s  investment in Regional University Centres, recognising that these hubs play an important  role in providing locations for regional students to study and access their university.

“The proposed expansion of the program by the Australian Government will assist country  students take up opportunities to continue their studies.  Representatives advised me that  there are opportunities that could be further developed to create opportunities for greater  industry and sector collaboration which will benefit country students and our communities.

“I would like to thank all those who have participated in this important consultative process.  I  have valued the opportunity to meet with the sector’s leaders and to hear first-hand their  thoughts and ideas regarding the proposed reforms to our country universities.

“I will be continuing to consult with community representatives and the sector and will be  providing this important feedback and insight to my colleagues in the Nationals Party Room  as we discuss how the parliamentary party proceeds with these reforms.

Media Contact: Gabi Phipps 0400 917 405, Gabrielle.Phipps@dfat.gov.au



