

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES  MEMBER FOR HUNTER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SUNRISE  MONDAY, 17 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Rapid response aged care centres; COVID-19 vaccine.

NATALIE BARR, HOST: Well, National Cabinet is set to sign off on aged care  rapid response centres across the country, in a bid to get ahead of a new wave  of COVID cases in facilities. More than 200 aged care residents have now died  from coronavirus, 186 of them in Victoria alone.

DAVID KOCH, HOST: Yeah, the rapid response centres would be similar to  those in place in Victoria. There have been claims the sector is still unprepared,  still, to deal with the challenges brought on by the pandemic. Let's bring in  Nationals MP, Barnaby Joyce, and Shadow Resources Minister, Joel  Fitzgibbon - good morning to you both. Barnaby, this is a tragedy not just in  Australia. Around the world aged care facilities have borne the brunt of the  deaths of COVID. The centres would bring together state and federal  emergency management in Australia - the ADF medical experts. Why has it  taken so long to do something about it?

BARNABY JOYCE, MEMBER FOR NEW ENGLAND: Well, I suppose  everyone believes that, in the first instance, they've got control of it. But of  course, aged care facilities by their very nature, they have comorbidities, they  have people who have great exposures to diseases, and that means the  capacity when we have something like COVID that gets into a centre, an aged  care centre, it's obvious it's devastating, and 90 per cent of them unfortunately  have died in Victoria. But it's not just the deaths; it's also the people who are  sick. Well, they are on to it now, Kochie. Maybe they should have got in to it  earlier, but they are on to it now and that's the main thing. We can't start  scoring points. We're trying to have people save their lives.

BARR: Yeah, but Joel, the inquiry is hearing; we had Europe; we had people  dying in their droves. We had 22 people dying in Newmarch House - that was

back in April - then we had Melbourne, people have died in several centres,  and this sector is still not prepared. So, why the wait? Why weren't we prepared  until now?

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER:They are all very good  questions, Nat, and of course we had the Royal Commission rolling out even  before COVID-19. There's been some pretty damning evidence in recent days  before the commission. But at the risk of you cancelling our segment, I'm going  to agree with Barnaby again. We have to stop the blame game, learn the  lessons, and I think if there's two big lessons to come out of COVID-19  amongst the many, its food and fuel security - our independence in that regard  - and ensuring that in sensitive areas like aged care, where it really matters, we  shouldn't always stick to the orthodoxy of the economic textbook. We have to  put people before economic efficiency. The public aged care facilities seem to  have performed best, particularly with infection control, and I think there's some  very important lessons to be learned there.

KOCH: Yep. All right, let's move on to something a bit brighter. Health Minister,  Greg Hunt, has confirmed Australia is in advanced negotiations to have a  vaccine manufactured here in Australia. Barnaby, we're starting to get some  encouraging news aren't we about a vaccine on the horizon? How close is it?

JOYCE: Well, this is very encouraging and obviously borrowing the technology  from Oxford University and biomedical companies in England, and then  hopefully getting CSL with a license - very strict license - to produce it, means  that we are within sight of a vaccine. I think if it's not even the UK, we also see  America working with messenger RNA - mRNA - another form of bringing  about a vaccine, and the Chinese themselves. The Russians have brought out  a vaccine and put it into production, but I note, they're chancing their own arm  on that one because it hasn't been through the proper phase tests like these  ones. What this shows the Australian peoples is a sense of hope. It says that  this is not forever, it's till we get vaccine. It means we can start planning for how  we work our way out of this and, well, it's good on Greg Hunt for being on the  balls of his toes and making sure that when this vaccine is properly developed,  authentically developed for Australians to get their hands on it as quickly as  possible.

BARR: Yeah, look it sounds positive. But Joel, your side is saying we should of  have had a deal in place before now?

FITZGIBBON: Yes, Chris Bowen has made the point that we seem to be  lagging the rest of the world in chasing and entering into these important  commercial agreements. But look, we welcome the progress. We know we  can't get the economy back to something like normal until we have a vaccine.  So, what a wonderful Christmas present it would be if we could secure one.





KOCH: Yeah, Barnaby, are we really behind? Because I think we've put in over  300 million ourselves into research, particularly at the University of Queensland  as well.

JOYCE: Yeah, well, the University of Queensland is at another stage of  development - a separate stage development - apart from Oxford University is  doing. We're not behind; there's no one in the world that has got a tested and  proven vaccine out in the marketplace. It looks like the first one that will be out  there is the Oxford University vaccine, and Australia is part of that. What else  can we do but be with the people who are coming first? So, I understand why  it's so hard for people to debate around this because people's lives are  involved. I understand what Mr Bowen is doing, but Mr Bowen is wrong. We're  not behind. We're actually dealing with the people coming first.

KOCH: Okay. All right Gents, have a great week. Good to see you.

JOYCE: He looks like a Stanley Kubrick movie. Look at him, he's completely  orange.

KOCH: He's got the sunshine coming in on his face

FITZGIBBON: The sun has come up on me.

KOCH: Yeah, see you guys.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641





