

BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR SCIENCE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  MEMBER FOR GORTON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  MELBOURNE  THURSDAY, 19 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: ABS Labour Force Figures; Qantas; Tasmania in lockdown.

BRENDAN O’CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT: Thanks very much  for coming. I just wanted to firstly report on the ABS data that is out today reflecting the  unemployment figures. It's clear that there's been a modest increase in employment  opportunities. And we welcome, of course Labor welcomes, any additional job.

However, it is important to note as we have been saying now for months, and in fact years,  there is a real challenge now when it comes to dealing with underemployment and  underutilisation. If you look at the total aggregate hours of work in this nation there is a 3  million hour decline in those hours, which speaks to the fact there are part time employees  losing hours in sectors across the economy.

Now what is also clear, and this was confirmed by the ABS, that none of this data would  have been impacted upon by COVID-19. The virus has no impact on these figures  because they are for last month. But we do know, I'm sure the Government knows, the  Federal Opposition knows and others do know, that we are dealing with very significant  challenges to our economy and to our labour market. We have a real issues when it comes  to looking after casual employees, labour hire workers, gig workers, sole traders who do  not have guaranteed hours and who will be unfortunately losing their jobs, if they haven't  already.

Already we know of many thousands of casuals who have lost their rosters. They may not  be technically unemployed but they do not have hours and therefore they are not gaining  any income. That's happening as we speak, and that's going to continue to happen.

We also note that Qantas has announced that 20,000 or its 30,000 direct employees have  been asked to stand down and they will be obviously taking various forms of leave and  also they are talking to their partners about trying to find their workers some other work  with other employers. That's a really big challenge and I happy to answer questions in  relation to that matter too.

But it is important to note there's a series of other things we'd like to see happen. Firstly  those people that missed out on the first stimulus package such as sole traders should be  considered by the Government in any new stimulus packed. The second thing we are  concerned about and we have been saying for some time, is that those workers in insecure  work who are finding themselves without work or with far less work need to be protected  and need to be provided support. That has not yet happened but we'd ask the Government  to seriously contemplate along with supporting businesses and supporting sole traders  also supporting in particular insecure workers who do not have guaranteed hours and are  really struggling and are going to have trouble paying the bills if there is no support for  them.

We’ve also asked the Government, I wrote to Senator Cash to stop the requirements of  physical engagement between job seekers and job service providers and Centrelink staff.  We don't think it's wise for job seekers, particularly at a time where there will be fewer job  opportunities, having to physically engage with job service provider staff or Centrelink staff.  It's not necessary.  We would ask the government to consider an exemption of those  activities that may increase the likelihood of a health risk for either workers, commonwealth  employees, providers of employment services or indeed job seekers themselves. We have  asked the Government to attend to that and we will be asking to answer that question very  soon and hopefully act upon that.

We'd also hope that in relation to the these workers as I say that are insecure, that they are  going to be a significant part of the response in what seems to be a second stimulus  package by the government. It seems absolutely critical that the government gets this right  because whilst as I say we welcome the unemployment figures today, there is no doubt  we're going to see many, many potential job losses over the course of the next weeks,  months, and possibly beyond that.

It is important, as Anthony Albanese has said, if we felt like we needed to do something  next week, we should be doing it today. Speed is critical in relation to supporting our  economy, our labour market, our businesses, our workforces, and their families, and  therefore we call upon the government. Yes, we will work with them, yes we're going to  expedite the passage of legislation to get through the stimulus package, but we've asked  them to do more, to do it quicker, to do it bigger and to respond so that our economy is  better off overall over the medium to longer turn. I'm happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: Is it fair that Qantas workers are being asked to work without pay? Seem to  have been asked to take leave without pay?

O'CONNOR: I think it's really important for companies like Qantas to be looking after their  workforce. Clearly the aviation sector has been a sector that's been very hard hit by the  COVID-19 challenge, and for that reason we understand why they have to make decisions  in relation to their staff. But we would say that they need to be mindful of the economic  impact and social impact on their employees. And of course we've called on the  government to make sure they've provided sufficient support to the aviation industry -  Qantas, Virgin, Rex, other regional airline. That is critical because of the nature of this  challenge has meant that the air traffic, particularly internationally has either stopped or will  be stopping and of course domestic travel will be declining.

So it is important that Qantas looks after their staff and it is important that the Government  as a priority support the aviation industry. I mean there are other industries too that need  support but certainly the aviation industry is a priority.



JOURNALIST: Have you seen anything like this for workers in your life - such a  catastrophic shock?

O’CONNOR: I guess the last occasion where we saw this type of economic shock was  during the Global Financial Crisis. And I think it's fair to say, that while we didn't do  everything perfectly, the Government at the time responded faster and bigger than most  developed nations. As a result we avoided a recession and we saved up to 200,000 jobs  and thousands and thousands of businesses. Now this challenge is more complicated in  some senses because of the clear health risks to our fellow citizens. But there are big  economic challenges too, and the one thing we learnt about dealing with the Global  Financial Crisis was that you had act big and fast in order to protect the economy, in order  to protect businesses and in order to protect jobs.

JOURNALIST: The State Government here has flagged survival payments. Is that  something you'd support on a federal level instead of tax cuts and direct monetary  handouts to businesses perhaps?

O’CONNOR: I think everything has to be on the table here - whether it's providing grants to  businesses, whether it’s supporting those industries that are on the front line, whether it's  providing extra support for health workers so that their families are safe and secure while  they're doing their work. I think direct payments are important. Concessional loans may  well be important, and other forms of industry support. I'm engaging with many industries  now and they're putting up their own industry specific requests and Federal Labor will be  examining those, talking to the Government about those initiatives, and seeing if we can  assist in any way we can. We will be very co-operative but we just want to see the  Government move quicker if possible and there needs to be a more comprehensive  response - not just at the federal level but of course, at all levels.

JOURNALIST:  When you say everything is on the table, does that go as far as re-nationalising Qantas, for example?

O’CONNOR: I haven’t seen that suggestion. I do think that there are questions around  whether in fact the Government should expect equity in a company that it's saving,  protecting or providing support for. So I think we have to seriously consider that. That's  something the Government should actually have an open mind to, whether, in fact, the  Government, and by Government I mean the taxpayers of Australia, have some equity in  companies, particularly when a large amount of taxpayers money has been dedicated to  support the survival of that particular company or companies or industry.

JOURNALIST: Tasmania has gone into a lock down. What's your understanding of what's  going to happen to Tasmanian MPs in Federal Parliament?

O’CONNOR: Well, I've only just heard that news today. I think it was only announced today  and that's of course, a pretty significant decision. I'm not sure that anyone would be  exempt. I mean, when it comes to health matters, you can't delineate between Members of  Parliament and people who are not Members of Parliament. So if there are rules that apply  to Tasmanians who travel to the mainland and want to return home, I imagine they will  apply to Federal Members of Parliament from Tasmania. So you can't have two separate  rules, you have to have the same set of rules for every Australian and therefore whatever  the State Government has applied there I imagine will apply for all Tasmanians.



Thanks very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ERIN SMITH 0458 950 010









