

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  TODAY SHOW  FRIDAY, 23 OCTOBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Auspost; Need for a federal ICAC; National Cabinet;  new Australian Centre to Counter Child exploitation; AFL Grand final.

ALLISON LANGDON, HOST: Australia Post boss Christine Holgate has stood  aside following explosive claims she spent $12,000 on Cartier watches for  senior staff. The Prime Minister going postal in Parliament yesterday.

SCOTT MORRISON: She's been instructed to stand aside and if she doesn't  wish to do that, Mr Speaker, she can go….

I was appalled. It's disgraceful. And it's not on.

LANGDON: Didn't hold back, did he? For more we are joined by Home Affairs  Minister Peter Dutton and Deputy Opposition Leader Richard Marles, who is  wearing his heart on his sleeve right there, Richard. Peter, just looking at  that yesterday, I mean, the optics are bad buying these watches. It was a very  dumb decision. But the Prime Minister, he was pretty full on yesterday.

PETER DUTTON, MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Well, he was rightly very  angry about it, Ally. Christine Holgate obviously has come from the  private sector and that might be an acceptable way to provide a bonus or  reward to staff, but in Australia Post where you're talking essentially  about taxpayer’s dollars, the Australian Government, the Australian people are  the shareholders in Australia Post, then it's unacceptable. The Prime Minister  made that very clear. There's an investigation under way. She stood aside and  I think the Prime Minister acted very decisively, within an hour of these  revelations the Prime Minister had responded and dealt with the issue and  let's wait for the investigation to be returned.

LANGDON: So why wasn't he so enraged when someone within your ranks  spent $30 million on a parcel of land worth $3 million? I mean, that was a waste  of taxpayer’s money.

DUTTON: Well, I think he's equally outraged and I think he’s made that point.  The fact is that there is a police investigation under way, as there should be  and if people have done the wrong thing, then they will be held to account for it  and that investigation, actually, more than one investigation, the audit  office actually conducting their own investigation, the department,  but importantly the police as well. Both equally unacceptable and we've been  very clear about that.

LANGDON: Richard, your thoughts on this, because Holgate, she earnt $2.2  million last year. I don't know how that's an appropriate salary for the role when  Australia Post isn't doing too well. But the Chair made this call regarding the  watches. The board backed it. Is Christine Holgate being singled out unfairly  here?

RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR  PARTY: Well, I certainly think Christine Holgate has a lot of questions  she needs to answer, but you are right in pointing to the board as well. This is a  board packed full of Liberal mates. There does need to be action in relation to  the Board. But the other point that you made is this is not the only issue.  You mentioned the land out at Badgerys Creek. What we actually need to have  is a federal Independent Commission Against Corruption. That's what we  should be having. Apparently the government agree with us in having that idea,  but they're doing absolutely nothing about it. It's time the government actually  got off its backside and started walking down the path of implementing a federal  ICAC. They say they've got draft legislation. Not that hard to go and push  the print button and let us have a look at it.

LANGDON: Why don't you push that button, Peter?

DUTTON: Well, you know, I can go through each line of what Richard just said  and point out the inaccuracies, but given that he's so excited today, I won't do  that. You know, Christian Porter, the Attorney-General, has pointed out the fact  that we are working on this legislation and we’re not going to rush into it. We're  not going to put in place a very significant piece of legislation without  there being proper consultation. The government's really, to be honest, spent  most of our effort this year on responding to COVID and dealing with the  devastation of that across our community. That, in our mind, has been the  priority and we're working on the ICAC legislation, but not going to rush it  through.

LANGDON: Well, I think people will be happy to see that in place sooner

rather than later. National Cabinet is meeting today. I tell you what, it might get  a little awkward after a fiery war of words between the New South Wales  Premier and her Queensland and WA counterparts. Gladys Berejiklian wants  them to foot the bill to the hotel quarantine bill, for their own people. Just take a  listen.

ANNASTACIA PALASZCZUK: Well, I don't think Gladys Berejiklian should be  criticising anyone, frankly. I think she's got enough of her own internal  problems.

LANGDON: So, Peter, apparently Palaszczuk owes Berejiklian $35 million.  Should she cough up?

DUTTON: Well, trouble is she's got no money. The Queensland Government's  out of money. They went into this crisis with more debt than Victoria. They had  a higher unemployment rate than any other state in the country. So  if Queensland's got a debt, it's pretty hard to see how they can afford to pay it. I  mean, Labor always runs out of money, they do it at a federal level. And in  Queensland, there is no way in the world Labor can lead Queensland out of  the COVID disaster because they just can't manage the budget, they  can't manage money or the economy. At a time when we want industry to  be growing, jobs to be created and a certain future, clearly Premier Palaszczuk  can't provide that.

LANGDON: Peter, you just said you weren’t going to rain on Richard's parade  today because you're so excited about the Grand Final and look, he's  almost weeping after you said that. Aren't you, Richard?

MARLES: Well, look, what this shows is that the National Cabinet is broken. I  mean, you've got State Premiers having a real crack at each other and now  we've got federal members of Cabinet, like Peter, who have essentially  been sitting on the sidelines as hecklers in chief. I mean, the federal  Government is the one who's responsible for bringing everyone along here.  We're talking about people returning to Australia and quarantine, that’s got a  federal dimension to it. They ought to be the ones who are leading the nation,  not sitting on the sidelines, basically yelling out, "fight, fight, fight", as we watch  two Premiers have a crack at each other.

LANGDON: What is good to see though, we have a whole bunch of  Aussies getting on planes today, heading back to Australia. Hopefully we will  get some of the 32,000 stranded overseas back for Christmas. But Peter, I just  want to ask you, because we should mention you're at the new Australian  Centre to Counter Child Exploitation in Brisbane. Can you just tell us why that's  so important?

DUTTON: I just don't think as a society, as a government, we have got a higher  priority than protecting kids. I think all children deserve the innocence of  childhood. And when you look at the cases where kids have been sexually  abused or they've been targeted online, we've seen through COVID about 160  per cent increase in the number of - in the amount of child exploitation,  the number of cases over the course of COVID. So when kids are  spending more time online and predators are spending more time online, that's  a really toxic mix. And this centre, which will open today, with the Carly Ryan  Foundation with Sonya Ryan and also with Bruce and Denise Morcombe, it’s  the biggest investment we have ever made into protecting children against  child sexual abuse and exploitation. and the work here is quite phenomenal. In  the last 12 months the Federal police have had 21,000 referrals of child abuse  or exploitation, but they've rescued about 134 kids from that abuse. So it's a big  day in my mind because I just don't think we've got a higher responsibility than  protecting children.

LANGDON: And no-one's going to argue with that money being spent there,  that's for sure.

MARLES: Can I just say, Ally, this is a really important initiative. And  Peter deserves a lot of credit here. I know that personally he's been very  much a supporter of making this happen. And he's absolutely right, you  know, there is no bigger priority for government than this. And today is a very  good day.

LANGDON: You know, what we like it-

DUTTON: Thanks mate.

LANGDON: We like to see it when you two are getting on.

MARLES: We get on.

LANGDON: It is a great initiative. You are!

DUTTON: I am going for the Cats as well.

LANGDON: You are actually great mates behind the scenes.

MARLES: But don't tell anyone.

LANGDON: We know. We know. It is a huge weekend-

DUTTON: That's the kiss of death, Ally, right there.



LANGDON: Richard, I mean, you're wearing your loyalty right now, aren’t you?  It's a big one.

MARLES: Look, it is a very big night. It's fantastic for the whole of  Geelong. We're very grateful to Queensland, actually, for the role  they've played in making this season happen. I just feel so proud of the club,  I think the AFL's done a great job to get this season completed. I'm not really  sure what's going to happen tomorrow night, I just know that at the end of it,  one way or another, I'm going to be in tears.

LANGDON: Oh, whether they're happy tears or sad tears is still to be  determined. Just very quickly, Peter, who are you putting your support behind?

DUTTON: Well, I'm going for the Cats, but I don't know if you can see it, but  I'm going Lions 21, that's where I am at. I moved on from this Grand Final  already. I'm done. No, I think the Cats, for Richard, I'm going for the Cats.  Sorry, I think Richmond will probably get up. But, Richard, you deserve, you  know, some reward for your effort, you dress-up in a silly way each week  and hopefully there's some dividend for you. I think the Storm will get up and  the Broncos in the women's league, Brisbane will get up on Sunday as well. So  fingers crossed.

MARLES: Go Storm, go Broncos.

LANGDON: I just love watching this bromance blossom between you two, it’s  fabulous, enjoy your weekend, guys. And I hope the Cats get up for you,  Richard.

MARLES: Go Cats.

LANGDON: Alright, Karl.

KARL STEFANOVIC, HOST: Just two big teddy bears, aren't they?

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363









