





THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP  MINISTER FOR POPULATION, CITIES AND URBAN  INFRASTRUCTURE





THE HON RITA SAFFIOTI MLA  MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT

THE HON SIMONE MCGURK MLA  STATE MEMBER FOR FREMANTLE





MEDIA RELEASE

The Hon Alan Tudge MP, Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure   ASHTON, VICTORIA



Monday, 17 August 2020

SWAN RIVER CROSSING REACHES NEW MILESTONE

Proposals to develop, design and construct a new Swan River Crossing in Fremantle are  officially being sought from industry.

The $230 million, jointly funded project will replace the deteriorated Fremantle Traffic  Bridge with two new crossings that will meet future needs for road, rail, walking, cycling  and boating.

Construction is expected to start by late 2021 and will support 1,400 jobs over the life of  the project.

Federal Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure Alan Tudge said the  Morrison Government is providing $115 million towards the replacement of the existing  Fremantle Traffic Bridge.

“This is part of our $100 billion, 10 year infrastructure pipeline across the nation,” Mr Tudge  said.

“We are committed to creating local jobs and boosting communities at a time when it’s  needed most.”

“Fremantle continues to be a bustling hub and we brought forward funds so construction  on this project could kick off sooner.”

Western Australian Transport Minister Rita Saffioti said the project was one of a number of  major Western Australian transport projects to have procurement fast-tracked.

“Procurement for the project has been brought forward six months earlier than initially  scheduled, to support the WA economy and local jobs during the road out of COVID-19,”  Ms Saffioti said.

“Community consultation is now underway and will inform the project’s development and  design to ensure we reach the best possible outcome for this significant infrastructure in  Fremantle.

“The project is being reviewed by the independent State Design Review Panel and  heritage and architectural leads will form part of the alliance contract, which is anticipated  to be awarded in early 2021.

“This project will also include new and improved pedestrian and cyclist links boosting our  Principal Shared Path network, linking Fremantle to the Perth CBD.”

State Member for Fremantle Simone McGurk said the new bridge is a great opportunity to  replace the 80-year-old structure with something that appeals to the community.

“A lot of work has gone into getting the project to this stage - securing state funding,  building a case for federal funding, identifying constraints and mapping out technical  requirements,” Ms McGurk said.

“We recognise the importance of this project to the Fremantle locals, so facilitating  informed and meaningful community input on the new structure is essential.

“A number of community sessions will be rolled out in coming weeks and I encourage all  interested locals to attend and have their say.”

The Department of Main Roads is seeking an alliance contract, which will include a focus  on heritage and architectural feedback received through the ongoing community  consultation process.

The $230 million project is jointly funded by the Australian and Western Australian  governments, which have committed $115 million each.

[ENDS]

Media Contact:  Mr Tudge - Michael Bennett 0434 782 923  Ms Saffioti - Caitlin Goddard 0437 234 249  Ms McGurk - Electoral office (08) 9336 7000



