ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2SM MARCUS PAUL IN THE MORNING

WEDNESDAY, 23 DECEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Sydney Northern Beaches coronavirus outbreak; COVID-19 vaccine; new

strain of COVID-19 in the UK; economic recovery from the coronavirus pandemic;

importance of listening to medical advice; state borders; Christmas plans.



MARCUS PAUL, HOST: Good morning to you, Anthony.



ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Good morning,

Marcus. How are you?



PAUL: Look, I am okay. Looking forward to a bit of a break. No doubt you are as well. But

look, there's still lots to get through, lots of news. And I see front page today of the newspaper

that you are calling for a quick vaccine rollout. The Government's insistence on rolling out a

COVID-19 vaccine in March has been countered by yourself, Labor Leader Anthony Albanese,

who's declared Australia needs more COVID-19 vaccine doses more quickly. Albo?



ALBANESE: That is right. The Government is saying that the TGA, the independent health

authority that examines pharmaceuticals, will have a look at what it is looking at right now, the

Pfizer vaccine, that it's likely to be approved in January. Now, if approved in January, common

sense tells you that as soon as the appropriate health authority says it's ready to go, it should

be ready to go.



PAUL: Well, absolutely. Why the wait? Look, I don't know whether or not, I'm not a medical

expert and, of course, Anthony, neither are you, with respect. But look, I think for the sake of

maintaining our economy, getting people back into work, ensuring that we continue with the

standard of response that we've had, and if the evidence is there, let's roll it out.



ALBANESE: Absolutely. Look, as you say, Marcus, neither of us are the health experts. That

is the job of the TGA. And they're doing their job. They are likely to approve the vaccine in

January. But, because of the deal that the Government has signed with Pfizer, there will be 10

million doses available. That's not enough. But it won't be available until March. To me that just

fails the common sense test.



PAUL: Are you suggesting, are you saying, that we are tied to a timeline because of Pfizer? Is

that right?



ALBANESE: Because of the Government deal that the Government has done with Pfizer.

Now, the Government should be, there's plenty of time, they should be saying, 'Hang on, if we

have approved it, we need to get the vaccine sooner and we should also be upping the amount

that we get'. We were behind the rest of the world in terms of signing up to these deals that

have been put in place. So, other countries started the negotiations in March, we concluded

our first deal in September. World's best practice is to have six such arrangements, we have

now gone with the failure, unfortunately, no fault of their own. But that's why you hedge your

bets. Because sometimes they fail. The Queensland vaccine being organised with CSL and

UQ wasn't successful. So therefore we are in a more vulnerable position than we should be.

This isn't something that we're just saying now. Chris Bowen and myself and others in Labor

have been saying it for some time, that we need to be ready to go here because we know that

there's an impact on people's health if they have COVID. There's also mental health impacts if

they're in isolation, the sort of experiences that we're seeing, all those people who will be

sitting around at Christmas time without their loved ones because there are still almost 40,000

Australians stranded overseas.



PAUL: Look, I tend to agree. If we have access to a safe and effective vaccine, the sooner the

better. The sooner we get it rolled out, the better. And I don't like the idea that the Government,

through its deal with Pfizer, has effectively, as you suggested, tied us to some sort of timeline

that looks at around March. I mean, we know, unfortunately, we've got a new cluster now in

Sydney. We have seen it now just start to spread ever so slightly into other areas of New

South Wales. Again, we've had border closures, effectively, Sydney, the greater metropolitan

area. So many people affected by border closures now around Christmas time, tens of

thousands of families have had their Christmas turned upside down. Now, no one's suggesting

it's the fault of the Government. But I mean, understandably, we do want to try and get this

vaccination rolled out as quickly as possible so, in 2021, we can go about our business as

hopefully as normally as possible.



ALBANESE: That's right. Look, it's been a very tough 2020. But Australians have shown their

resilience, their commitment to look after each other has been quite remarkable. And it's been

something that we should be proud of as a nation. But we don't want 2021 to be a repeat of

2020. We are over 2020.



PAUL: Very true. What do you make of travel bans? The Prime Minister has basically said

through the Chief Medical Officer, Professor Paul Kelly, that we will not be banning flights from

the United Kingdom despite the threat of a highly infectious mutant strain of COVID-19

discovered in England.



ALBANESE: Look, I think you have to listen to the medical advice on that. Throughout the

pandemic, we haven't been opportunistic. We've said consistently that you have to listen to the

medical advice, whether it be the state border issues where state premiers have made

decisions based upon the advice they received or whether the other issues in terms of listening

to the Chief Medical Officer. That's been our position. But I think once you bring politics into it,

then you diminish the confidence of the public in those decision-making processes.



PAUL: A lot of people have called on me to go hard, if you like, or be a little bit more insistent

in my questioning in our conversations around Dan Andrews. And I've resisted it. And I'll tell

you why. And I, as I've told them, and I tell my listeners all the time, you're operating from the

pragmatic approach that health officers in each jurisdiction in each state give their premiers the

advice and they act accordingly. The Prime Minister has obviously, Scott Morrison, has

basically said, 'Well, it's an issue for the states'. A lot of people jump up and down and say,

'Oh, well, border closes are unconstitutional. We shouldn't deny free trade or free passage

between New South Wales and Queensland and Victoria and New South Wales, etc, etc'. You

know, these are, and we use the word probably too much, but very unprecedented times. And I

think, overwhelmingly, on a global scale, being fair, I think we've done quite well.



ALBANESE: That's right. And the Federal Government made the decision to hand

responsibility for the practical issues to the state. They even, I think, abrogated some

responsibility on issues like quarantine and who comes into the country. I think if that's not the

responsibility of the National Government, I don't know what it is. But at the same time, I

haven't been critical of Gladys Berejiklian's decisions to shut the border between New South

Wales and Victoria, or Tasmania, for that matter, announced a long closure. They announced

many months before December that the borders will be closed until December 1. That's a

decision that they made. Mark McGowan, I think you'll find, had enormous support for the

decisions that he made.



PAUL: Sorry to interrupt you, but the only problem with Mark McGowan that's upset me this

morning is that he's kind of made it a bit political, in fairness. Mark McGowan has said New

South Wales should look to WA. And that's unfair, I think. Because of the fact that, obviously,

Sydney is a major gateway and New South Wales has taken the lion's share of overseas

return travellers. So, I mean, the latest stats that I've got in front of me, Anthony, 90,000 people

have returned to hotel quarantine in New South Wales in Sydney in particular, while less than

10,000, far less than 10,000, have returned to Western Australia. So I think sometimes some

of the premiers had been a little outspoken and made it a touch political, perhaps?



ALBANESE: Well, I don't think it's unusual that a state premier will tend to talk about their own

state and say it is the best state. I think the difference is, Scott Morrison's visit to Queensland, I

know, during the Queensland election campaign, assisted Annastacia Palaszczuk by going

around that state with the then-Opposition Leader and being critical of Queensland's decision

to keep the borders closed and to keep Queenslanders safe. Clearly, I know for a fact, I've

discussed it with the Queensland Premier. And she certainly regards the criticism as being

really counterproductive. And I think the evidence at the polling booth showed that was the

case.



PAUL: Well, that's true. I mean, as you say, different state premiers will talk up their own

states. And obviously, in Queensland's case, I think it's been found quite clearly that the

measures taken by the Palaszczuk Government were, in the main, very receptive from people

in Queensland. Now I guess Dan Andrews, he certainly, despite issues with hotel quarantine,

he certainly pulled his state from the brink with the outbreak. And now, it's up to New South

Wales. So, I think we should stop all the politicking about this. And we should become, as

much as we can, Albo, one country where everybody's supporting everybody. Because

ultimately, if we have a major outbreak in Sydney, if we don't nip this in the bud right now, well,

I can guarantee you that it will, unfortunately, look to spread its ugly tentacles throughout most

of our country. And we need to nip it in the bud. We need to support the current health

regulations in New South Wales and do everything we can to try and enjoy Christmas but

follow the rules.



ALBANESE: Indeed. The thing that has really seen Australians through 2020 is the actions of

just ordinary Australians who looked after each other, regardless of who the premier is. The

Northern Beaches at the moment have done, I think, a remarkable effort to see the decline in

the number of infections with massive testing going on. People are doing the right thing there.

And good on them for it. And we stand with them. Just as we stood with Victorians, who, you

know, endured a really tough lockdown. But guess what? They got on top of it. And because of

that, I was in Melbourne just last week. Their economy's open. Things are happening again.



PAUL: Well that is good to know. Albo, what's Christmas looking like for you and your family?



ALBANESE: I'm going to be spending a bit of time with the family. I'm going to head just up

the coast, if that is possible, for a couple of days, and continue, though, to keep my eye on

what's happening. And I wasn't intending to be working today. I have already done a TV

interview as well as talk to you. But looking for, hopefully, a bit of a quieter time. And for me,

Christmas is a special day. I was with Bill Crews out at the Exodus Foundation yesterday. He

does incredible work feeding the homeless and those who don't have somewhere to go on

Christmas Day. And I went out and helped there. I'm not doing that this year. I'm spending time

with some friends. But I'm really looking forward to it. And looking forward to that first ball at 11

o'clock on Boxing Day.



PAUL: Well, that's right. With a beverage, a cold beverage, in one hand and an eye on the

television and eating leftovers from Christmas Day. Sounds good, Anthony. Have a wonderful

safe Christmas to you.



ALBANESE: You have a wonderful Christmas as well.



PAUL: Thank you, mate. Before you go, I promised my partner, Ash, that I would read out a

joke. She's a big fan of yours. Are you ready? We want to get a chuckle out of this for

Christmas.



ALBANESE: I'm ready.





PAUL: All right. Albo, why didn't anybody bid for Rudolph and Blitzen on eBay when they went

up for sale?



ALBANESE: They were two deer. I got it.



PAUL: What about this one? Why didn't the sesame seed want to leave the casino?



ALBANESE: I don't know.



PAUL: Because he was on a roll, Anthony. Come on. You have a wonderful Christmas. Take

care. We'll chat again in 2021. And thank you for your time this morning.



ALBANESE: Good on you, Marcus.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053



