

CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC INSIDERS

SUNDAY, 8 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; Morrison Government’s lack of a plan for the economy.



DAVID SPEERS, HOST: Chris Bowen, welcome. Just on that point, is a 50-50 funding

share when it comes to the hospital part of dealing with this, is that a fair share?



CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW HEALTH MINISTER: Well, it is appropriate that the

Commonwealth works very proactively with the states and does increase funding to deal

with this health challenge. We've engaged very constructively with the Government in a

bipartisan fashion. That's what constructive and responsible Opposition should do. That's

what we have been doing. We've also been providing constructive feedback to the

Government, suggestions and ideas, and saying where we think that things could have

been done better. One of the instances was the breakdown in communications between

New South Wales and the Commonwealth during the week with Minister Hazzard calling

out the Federal Government on the front page of the newspaper. But we've been engaging

constructively. There's been a lot of briefings from the Chief Medical Officer to myself and

to the Leader of the Opposition, and we've been providing feedback as we go as well.



SPEERS: So the comment from the Prime Minister is really a response to the issue you

point to there, and they said that they'll cover 50 per cent of the hospital costs. Is that the

right figure?



BOWEN: Yes, it is. And as I said, the Commonwealth does need to be working proactively

with the states. That is happening at the bureaucratic level. I think Australians can take

comfort in the fact that our institutions are working. The Australian Health Protection

Principals Committee, which is the Chief Medical Officer of the Commonwealth and each

of the state and territory jurisdictions is meeting every day and advising the Government.

The Government is accepting that advice, as a Labor government would do. So when the

government is doing what a Labor government would do  they have our support in doing

so.



SPEERS: What about protective masks? Some doctors and dentists have complained that

then haven't been able to get their hands on enough. We hear this morning that the army

could be sent out to source more than 50 million more globally. Is enough being done to

ensure that the protective equipment is there?



BOWEN: I've spoken to some GPs who say that they aren't getting enough support and

protection and advice. I've spoken to others who say that they are. I think that the

important thing is that the Government engages very proactively with the Royal College of

General Practice and the AMA and with individual feedback from doctors - some of which I

passed on directly to the Government when I received it. There's 20 million masks roughly

in the national stockpile. States and territories have their own stockpiles of different things.

Of course, if the Government can procure more masks from overseas, remembering that

most of the masks in the world are produced in Wuhan, which is an unfortunate confluence

of events, and that has damaged world supply of surgical masks. But of course, if the

Government can procure more for the stockpile, because while 20 million sounds like a lot,

it would be used quickly. Of course, that would also have our full support.



SPEERS: What have you made of the doctor in Toorak, who unknowingly, treated 70

patients while he had coronavirus. He says he only had a runny nose, very mild symptoms.

The Victorian Health Minister slammed him and said he no way should have been at work.

He says - look, it was pretty mild. And other doctors, the AMA have come to his defence.

What should happen here? Should every doctor with a runny nose stay at home for two

weeks?



BOWEN: I think it's a reminder to everyone, including medical practitioners and everyone

involved in the medical workforce, to be checked if there is any concern, and that is a very

important reminder. One of the challenges here is that we know from international

experience that 80per cent of people who get the virus are likely to get it very mildly.

Certainly not needing hospitalisation. And they may not even know. And one of the cases

New South Wales, the first human-to-human transition we've seen in Australia, the

originator of that has not yet been identified and may not know that they had the virus

because they had it mildly.



SPEERS: This is the point, isn't it? With those doctors and others, the other health

workers, if they get even the mildest of symptoms, should they stay home? Because you're

going to run out of doctors quickly?



BOWEN: They should report to another doctor and get checked. And take the best advice

available to them. And to follow the medical advice, and they shouldn't be treating

themselves, of course. And they need to follow all of the medical protocols - as all of us do.

It's important, David, that we keep this in perspective. That the nation goes about its

business and we don't have panic buying and we don't have unnecessary self-quarantining, but it's also important that we take the advice and that we do get checked if

there is any concern. There's been thousands of Australians checked already. We have

around 70 cases out of those thousands and thousands of people who have been

checked, so it pays to get checked. I do think that it is important, again, in terms of

constructive feedback to the Government, that they introduce the telehealth rebate as soon

as possible so that doctors can be paid for treating people over the phone or via Skype. I

think that that is urgent that that occur, because it is appropriate that we don't want people

infecting each other in doctors' waiting rooms, if there are other ways of dealing with it.

Again, we'd have the full support and we give that feedback to the Government that we

think that is an urgent reform that is necessary.



SPEERS: What about other issues. Staff at a Sydney nursing home worried about turning

up to work after an outbreak of the virus there. Is that understandable? And what should

happen to find substitute staff in these situations?



BOWEN: Well, again, it is understandable, but it's also important that, of course, all of our

health facilities, including aged care facilities, are properly staffed.



SPEERS: So what happens? Should they be made to go to work?



BOWEN: I think that the Government, again, needs to ensure that there is full information

going to the medical workforce and the aged care workforce as well as more generally.



SPEERS: I think that they had the information. They knew that there was a problem at the

nursing home. What should happen? Should they be told - you have to go to work?



BOWEN: I think that the Government should be interacting, both state and federal, very

strongly with the two relevant unions here. The representatives of those workers, the

Health Services Union and the Nursing and Midwives association, and making sure that

staff have all of the information available to them.



SPEERS: Say they've got the information, what should happen? Should they be made to

go to work?



BOWEN: Of course people should go to work if the information is made available to them.

Of course, we need to keep our medical facilities and nursing homes and functioning and

operating. And we need to ensure that people have the information from the Government

and from the healthcare providers and from the aged care facilities. And I stress that the

Government needs to continue to interact with the representatives of the work, the Health

Services Union with whom I've been talking constantly, or regularly, and the Nursing and

Midwives Association as well.



SPEERS: What about workers who are told to self-isolate. Not just the medical workforce,

but generally. There are a lot of people are being told to self-isolate. Should they be paid?

Is there a risk to their income? Should the jobs be guaranteed even if they're told to stay

home for a couple of weeks?



BOWEN: This is a genuine and real issue, which again, the Government needs to

address, and Anthony Albanese and I have written to the Government about a range of

matters and we do say that this is one of the areas that needs to be addressed. The ACTU

was right to raise this.



SPEERS: How should it be addressed?



BOWEN: The Johnson Government in the United Kingdom has taken some steps. That's

something that the Government could look at.



SPEERS: What are the steps?



BOWEN: They've made arrangements with sick leave and other arrangements. That's not

the only answer. The other thing, David, is that it is not just people affected directly who

need to be considered. If your kid's school is closed or the childcare centre locked down as

a precaution, it's not a good idea then to send the kids to their grandparents in this

situation.



SPEERS: That's the point... You may not be able to go to work.



BOWEN: You may not be able to go to work even if you're not directly affected or self-quarantined.



SPEERS: I want to pin this down. If you have enough sick leave, great. But if you don't, or

if you are a freelancer or a casual or whatever it may be working in the gig economy,

you're going to lose income for those two weeks?



BOWEN: Yes, and that's something that the Government needs to concentrate on very

quickly. We're not saying that there's only one answer here. We are saying that they

should sit down.



SPEERS: Should they get Newstart or something?



BOWEN: That's one option.



SPEERS: One that you would support?



BOWEN: We would support any sensible steps here to support casual workers.



SPEERS: Is that a sensible step. I'm just trying to get an answer here?



BOWEN: It's up to the Government to put a solution forward.



SPEERS: What's your view though? Should Newstart be paid to those who lose income

during self-isolation?



BOWEN: That's one option that would work, but I’m not going to be prescriptive and say

it’s the only option. We would support any options here to support the workforce who are

impacted weather directly or indirectly.



SPEERS: There's been a sharp rise in cases in Europe during the week. Raises the

question about whether the travel bans are adequate, whether they need to be expanded?

And I suppose, once it spreads in the community here, whether they're still effective. What

do you think on the travel bans?



BOWEN: I think that the Government should continue to accept the advice of the health

protection principles committee, which is the combined state and Federal Chief Medical

Officers. That's what I would do as Health Minister, that’s my understanding of what Greg

Hunt has done so far as Health Minister and the Government more broadly and that's what

they should continue to do. These aren’t easy calls, there's a different approach between

Italy and South Korea for example, I get that. I think that's fair enough. There's not a one

size fits all answer here, and it will evolve. The Government has had to change its travel

bans as we've gone, and that's understandable. Again, we support the travel bans being in

place. We done think that they should be lifted lightly. We don’t think they should be

relaxed lightly. They are slowing the spread of the virus, there’s no doubt about that. And

that's an important thing, as we frankly give the hospital and health system more time to

prepare for the inevitable rise in cases.



SPEERS: Let's turn to the economy. Should the Government have announced its stimulus

response already?



BOWEN: Yes. Yes, it should have. And the important point here, David, is the coronavirus

will have a significant impact. Nobody is denying that. We're not denying that. But the

problems in the economy didn't start with the coronavirus and they won't disappear when

the coronavirus is dealt with. There has been ongoing weakness in the economy.

Economic growth is slowing. Business investment...



SPEERS: OK, hang on. The Reserve Bank Governor Philip Lowe said on Tuesday, "Once

the coronavirus is contained, the Australian economy is expected to return tonight an

improving trend." The Treasury Secretary said, "Economy is quite solid and travelling quite

well." Are they wrong?



BOWEN: No, but the Reserve Bank has had to cut interest rates four times in the last ten

months. Well before coronavirus and bushfires. So the economy has been weakening.

Now, the Government does need to respond. One of the things that they could do is adopt

the policy we took with the election with the Australian investment guarantee - an upfront

investment deduction, 20 per cent up-front for all businesses, all investments big or small.

That's a good step. One that they dismissed arrogantly at the time and said wasn't

necessary. I do think that they'll have to adopt something like that. And there are other

measures that need to be put in place as well.



SPEERS: How big should this stimulus package be?



BOWEN: It's not just a matter of how big it is David - it's how it’s designed and the better

designed it, is, the better bang for buck you.....



SPEERS: But the quantum matters?



BOWEN: Of course it does, but the Government has the advice of Treasury available to it,

which we don't have. The Government of the day has the best advice of the economic

institutions.



SPEERS: Should it be similar to the Rudd Government's stimulus package during the

global financial crisis?



BOWEN: I won't put a figure on it. It would be irresponsible for me without the advice

before me...



SPEERS: Anthony Albanese said about ten days ago that that would not be necessary?



BOWEN: The Government has got the best and latest advice available to it from the

Treasury.



SPEERS: Is he right, that you don't need to go that far?



BOWEN: Well, the Government should adopt the advice of the Treasury. We don't know

what the latest advice is. Of course, it was a very, very big stimulus necessary during the

global financial crisis which the Liberal Party and National Parties dismissed at the time. It

saved Australia from recession. This is a different circumstance. But it's a serious

circumstance, but it's not just about coronavirus. There's a broader weakening in the

economy as well.



SPEERS: OK, the Government argues that there wasn't quite the weakening you're talking

about here. A key question in designing the package though - the Government is talking

about protecting jobs and business investment. But should households receive some

money?



BOWEN: There's various options available to the Government. And again, we're not privy

to the internal discussions they are having. One thing that's obvious is that the

investment... Some sort of investment depreciation boost is necessary. The Government

has flagged that and that's one of the problems, is that business is delaying some

investment as they wait and see what the depreciation allowance is. That's more reason to

be urgent about it. Newstart could be increased as well - that's another option available to

the Government.



SPEERS: One that you would support?



BOWEN: Of course, every dollar of that would be spent and it would have positive social

implications as well. But look, we'll look very closely at this stimulus package when it

eventually arrives.



SPEERS: But I'm asking in a principle sense, a lot of principles you’ve touched on there

including Newstart, but what about money directly in household pockets?



BOWEN: That's an option available to the Government?





SPEERS: One that you would support?



BOWEN: If it's sensibly designed, of course we would support any sensible measures. But

we haven’t seen hem David. To be fair to everybody you’re asking me whether we would

support or oppose things we haven't seen. It depends on the design mechanisms for them.

But I can assure you this - I know, as soon as the Government issues a stimulus package,

I know that Anthony Albanese will convene a shadow cabinet meeting, we’ll process it

quickly, we will e facilitate any sensible packages through the Parliament, unlike the Liberal

and National Party who were very irresponsible during the global financial crisis. We're

better than that and will act very responsibly.



SPEERS: Just finally on that, that's an interesting point you make - you will not block this

stimulus package?



BOWEN: We haven't seen it David, but if it is good, we will support it and not only support

it- facilitate its passage through the Parliament. But we also, of course,  reserve the right to

criticise it if it needs improvement, if it is not big enough or some of the measures are

poorly designed. We reserve those rights, because we haven't seen it David.



SPEERS: Shadow Health Minister, Chris Bowen, thank you.



BOWEN: Great pleasure David.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











