



The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

MEDIA STATEMENT

Friday 30 October 2020

APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF THE OFFICE OF NATIONAL  INTELLIGENCE

I am pleased to announce that I intend to recommend to the Governor-General Mr Andrew Shearer as  the new Director-General of the Office of National Intelligence (ONI).

Mr Shearer has served Australia and its national interests domestically and overseas through a long and  distinguished career in national security and intelligence.

Mr Shearer has served as Deputy Director-General at the Office of National Assessments and, Senior  Adviser on Asia-Pacific Security at the Centre for Strategic and International Studies in Washington DC.  He has an international reputation as a strategic and foreign policy analyst.

He has served as the Prime Minister’s senior national security adviser to both The Hon John Howard AC  and The Hon Tony Abbott AC. He was a senior diplomat at the Australian Embassy in Washington DC and  has held a range of positions in the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and the Department of the  Prime Minister and Cabinet.

Since 2019, Mr Shearer has served as Cabinet Secretary to the Commonwealth Government and worked  through an unprecedented time in Australia’s history.

In this role, he has helped establish the National Cabinet, made up of the nation's first ministers - the  Prime Minister, premiers and territory leaders - to co-ordinate and deliver a robust and consistent  national response to COVID-19.

This whole-of-government approach has, and continues to, deliver outcomes for all Australians. I thank  Mr Shearer for his service as Cabinet Secretary.

I also thank outgoing Director-General of the Office of National Intelligence, Mr Nick Warner AO PSM,  for his service as Director-General since December 2017.

Mr Warner's expertise and distinguished career is without peer, and he has well-served our government  and our nation, including his role at ONI and as Director-General of the Australian Secret Intelligence  Service.



Subject to the Governor-General’s agreement Mr Shearer will commence as Director-General of ONI in  December 2020, for a five-year term.

ENDS

Media Contacts:  Prime Minister’s office: 02 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

Press Office of the Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Prime Minister, Canberra



