MEDIA RELEASE  JOBSEEKER

Senate votes down motion calling for Government to maintain $550  Jobseeker supplement and to keep income support payments above the  poverty line

"We are now officially in a recession and it’s more important than ever that  leaders show support for unemployed workers", Greens spokesperson on  Family and Community Services Senator Rachel Siewert said.

"I’m so disappointed that the Senate didn’t see the importance of showing the  Government that we are unified in our support for unemployed workers and that  they can’t get away with putting the 1.8 million people on Jobseeker on a  payment below the poverty line.

"What the Government is doing to people on income support is cruel.

"People in our community are already experiencing high levels of stress due to  the pandemic and the Government won’t even give them some certainty and  assure them that Jobseeker won’t go back to poverty levels.

"In the midst of a recession we can and should choose to support people."

The motion reads:  That the Senate -  a) Notes that this is the last sitting week before the Federal Budget will be  handed down on 6 October 2020;  b) Recognises that the poverty rate for people on Jobseeker Payment  dropped from 67% to 6.8% after the introduction of the $550 coronavirus  supplement;  c) Acknowledges that when the coronavirus supplement is cut by $300 a  fortnight on 25 September 2020:  i. The number of people in poverty will increase by 740,000;  ii. People in our community will be in mortgage stress and rental  affordability will plummet to 0.2% for people on Jobseeker Payment; and  iii. More than 1.1 million children will be living in households that have their  incomes cut;

No publication date: received by Parl Library 02/09/2020



e)      Recognises the importance of leaders showing support for unemployed  workers during these times; and  f)       Calls on the Government to:  iv.         Maintain the rate of the coronavirus supplement of $550 a fortnight to  ensure people on income support don’t slip into poverty during this pandemic  and recovery; and  v.          Include adequate increases to income support in the October Budget  that ensure that people on income support can live above the poverty line.





Media Contact:  Lucy Cowcher-Guthrie; 0418 401 180



No publication date: received by Parl Library 02/09/2020

