BILL SHORTEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT SERVICES

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE SCHEME

MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  TODAY SHOW  TUESDAY 8 DECEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: International travel returns to Melbourne; Hotel quarantine; WA border re-opens;  Australia-China relations; Family Christmas.

TOM STEINFORT, HOST: Welcome back. Well, it is a first big test for Melbourne's overhauled hotel  quarantine program. On just day one, we've got a returned traveller suffering COVID symptoms,  moved to a so-called hot hotel where authorities can enforce tighter biosecurity measures. At the  same time, it has now been revealed that GP’s working at those hotels will still continue to treat  other regular patients out in the community. Lots to discuss today, and to get through it all, we're  joined by Shadow Minister for Government Services Bill Shorten and Triple M's Gus Worland. Good  morning to you both. Bill, we might start with you. Once bitten, twice shy. Are you confident that this  time around, Melbourne's total quarantine system will stack up?

BILL SHORTEN, MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG: Well, I think everyone in Victoria has learnt a lot  of lessons, you know, we’re the new COVID experts down south. I think you can't be too careful. I  think that the Andrews Government is showing that you've got to do everything just right. So, you  know, I think we've got to take no risks at all.

STEINFORT: Gus, for a lot of Melburnians, it might be nervous hearing that there could be a COVID  case coming into quarantine today, but they can probably take solace from the fact that that does  happen almost every day in Sydney and it hasn't leaked out too badly into the community.

GUS WORLAND, TRIPLE M: Yeah, exactly right. And you can understand them being a little bit shy  about it all. They've only just got back to normal where the rest of the country has been pretty normal  for quite a while. So, yeah, it's just it's not a perfect world, not a perfect system, but they're doing the  best they possibly can. And I love the fact that in those hot hotels, just to get that extra little bit of  security, but also a little bit sort of understanding that the doctors need to make an earn. But the fact  that they're coming in and out of it's probably not ideal.

STEINFORT: Bill, a bit of a red flag today, this information that police who are working in the hotel  quarantine sites will still be allowed to treat other patients out in the community. I mean, isn't this the  exact way that we can see the virus then leak out to the general public?

SHORTEN: Yeah, I hadn't heard about that until I read it this morning. I think it is important that if  you're working in the hotel quarantine system, that's a priority. But, you know, people still get sick  with other things and doctors still have got to be able to treat people. I mean, doctors are experts in

infection control. So, again, something to watch. But I just get the sense that we've all learnt a lot  more than we did at the start of this. And for me, seeing a bit of tourism, if it's done carefully and  slowly, I think that's the green shoots of recovery and helping those businesses in Melbourne and  elsewhere get some people in the doors.

STEINFORT: Well, look, you touched on the green shoots of recovery there. We're going to see  another one of those really nice news days where we have those beautiful emotional reunions  coming through because the first flights from Sydney and Melbourne to Perth are in the air as we  speak. The hard border coming down in WA, I guess a really nice early Christmas present for so  many families that have been separated by COVID.

WORLAND: Yeah, look, absolutely. We thought that WA wanted to be their own country there for a  little while. But I love the fact that they're all coming back together again. And I just love that piece  from Love, Actually. You know, at the airport there, people coming and going and just the emotion  and so forth. And, you know, we've spoken about it, Bill and I, on the show for many months now.  How important it is for our own mental fitness to have these moments like this. And, yeah, it's  wonderful to see and I think it just gives us all a real thrill and all the boost that we need coming into  Chrissy.

STEINFORT: Absolutely. Now, moving on, I want to ask you both about these worrying  developments in the relationship with China, this time around we're hearing Beijing has suspended  beef imports from another Aussie supplier. And look, tensions have been stoked up even further.  There’s this cartoon in the Chinese state controlled Global Times that you can see there, the  kangaroo and the bald eagle behind, effectively accusing Australia of being a front for the United  States. Bill, it seems to be getting worse by the day. How do we turn this around?

SHORTEN: Well, I actually think this cartoon slightly less provocative than that shocking image  attacking our defence guys. What I would just say to Australians trying to make sense of all of this is  - stuff like the beef tariffs and the beef being stopped at the wharves, that is the problem. And we  appeal it to the World Trade Organisation. But we're not in this on our own. I mean, China seems to  be pursuing what they call wolf warrior diplomacy, but it's against France, they've got their  arguments with India, they’re critical of Denmark, New Zealand backed us in, so they're criticising  Denmark. I mean, it's a bit like that old relationship, it's not you, it's me. But it's the opposite here. It's  not us, it's them. And I think that a few cartoons, you know, I don't think they'll ruffle us too much  anymore. And we should just realise it's not just us. It's China's policy throughout the world to be  more assertive. And we just have to stand our ground.

STEINFORT: Gus, what do you reckon the average person thinks? I mean, do we just stand up to  China for its bullying tactics or sooner or later, do we have to accept that we do need to deal with  them on a trade level and the PM perhaps has to extend the olive branch?

WORLAND: Yeah, certainly. I agree with what Bill was saying there. But you're right there, Tom. I  mean, they are the big cheese, if you like. So we need to work out a way of having to make sure that  we don't get bullied, but at the same time still be able to deal with them because they are the biggest  player. And but the thing is that traditionally we are great supporters of the U.S, so we need to get  someone there and have that proper discussion. But I agree with Bill. I don't think we're too worried  about a few cartoons. But that image last week was obviously disgraceful. And I'm glad that the PM  stood up to them on that moment.

STEINFORT: Yeah, well said. Now, let's end on something which is a nice reminder for us all about  what's important as we head towards Christmas. This is a lovely story about a father who's broken  down in tears after seeing his son's letter to Santa. Now the boy, he only had one request and that  was to spend more time with his dad who’d been away working. The dad wrote “this letter really  opened up my eyes about what's important”. Bill, you know as much as anyone how hard it is being  away from family a lot. Getting back at Christmas will be very special, I'd imagine.

SHORTEN: Yeah, I really found that spoke to me, that note. As a Member of Parliament, I can be  away anything up to half the year. So, I've got three kids and I just want to say to them that I get that  we want for Christmas is just to be together as a family.

STEINFORT: Well said. Well said. Gus, family First.

WORLAND: Yeah, absolutely. That's beautiful, Bill. And I totally agree with you. And I've been  spending a lot of time, time in the last couple of weeks, away in country New South Wales. And  exactly what that letter has said is what most people want - material goods are one thing. But this  year, if it's taught us anything, it's all about our hearts and our minds and how much we love our  family. And we've worked out, because we've had a little bit of time to calm down and slow down,  what's really important in our life. And that that letter from that boy to that father is echoed right  around Australia. I hope that we keep that going once we get back to some sort of normal, the most  important stuff is his family and friends.

STEINFORT: Oh, I love it Gussy. I want to reach over and give you a big hug. Beautifully said, guys.  And I hope you do get lots of big hugs at Christmas. Thanks for your time with us here this morning.

WORLAND: Thanks, Tom

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM HOULIHAN 0438 366 400

