

MURRAY WATT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR NORTHERN AUSTRALIA  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DISASTER AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT  LABOR SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND

KAYLEE CAMPRADT  LABOR CANDIDATE FOR CURRUMBIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  GOLD COAST  WEDNESDAY, 25 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Gold Coast job losses; holes in Morrison’s stimulus  package; Stuart Robert’s Centrelink failures; Queensland state border  closure.

JOURNALIST: Can you tell us why we're here today?

KAYLEE CAMPRADT, CANDIDATE FOR CURRUMBIN: We're here because  there's been a massive impact obviously everywhere, but particularly in areas  like Currumbin on the Gold Coast where jobs really do rely- there's a big  hospitality, tourism, retail sector. People are doing it really tough. And it's had  an immediate impact but the system hasn't kept up with people's needs and it's  not addressing them adequately. We've been past the queues this morning. I've  seen a friend from school, she used to volunteer in our tuck shop, she's a  single mum. She knows that she has to keep up the rent payments now she  doesn't have a job. The system says that she's only going to get a part-payment. She's concerned that she's not going to have the money to pay her  rent, and pretty much the Centrelink staff said they don't want to talk to those  people because they're already in the system and for them to have confidence  in the system that it's going to support her. Well, she's been on  the websites, she's been on the phone. The website continually drops out. She  said she's got no confidence at all and she's very concerned because she has  two young children that she cares for. So they pretty much insisted that she  leaves and that the next round she'll get a full payment, she's got to put 'zero',  she'll get it. Walk down the stairs and then somebody says they've just been cut  off as of this morning, they've done their reporting, they've done everything they  should and they get a red line through their card telling them they now don't get

any payments. So I think there's a real danger here that people - lots of people  - are going fall through the very big cracks that appear to be in the system that  are not adapting and not coping with, firstly the amount of people who are using  it, but also the complexity of all the situations that people are in. So,I think we  need to see a massive injection of funds into the system for frontline people to  be giving the frontline services that we need from places like this where people  are turning up in distress and anxiety. There's enough going on in the world at  the moment. We need to be taking them out of the system as much as  possible. And giving people real confidence in the system that's supposed to be  supporting that. We know that people impacted here in Currumbin. We're  seeing the queues, we're seeing people in the community not sure about what  the next steps are. Governments need to be giving people certainty and hope in  these times and that's their job - it's our job - to do that. I will say that, you  know, it is good that there is some payments and things being put in place, it  was a good announcement yesterday from the State Government around a  massive injection of helping small, medium and large businesses in industry  and also giving people directly a $200 credit in their utility bill, which I think will  make a real difference. It's these sorts of announcements and these sorts of  initiatives that are going to help people.

JOURNALIST: So you just mentioned a little bit earlier when we were having a  bit of a chat. Living in this community, have you found that landlords are being  a little bit lenient?

CAMPRADT: I don't think we've really seen the one way or the other yet.  The  woman I was just talking to, she said that her landlord is expecting full payment.  She's contacted them, they've said that, no, there's nothing in the system that's  going to be paying anybody's rent in addition to what they normally would. Well,  that's a real distress for people because there's no money coming in...I think  these are some of the questions that we need to get answers for from the  government.

JOURNALIST: So what's the solution then. There's billions of dollars being  pumped in, is that not enough do you think?

CAMPRADT: I think it's billions of dollars. I'm just not sure that it's going to the  places it needs to go. I think if people are going to be becoming homeless as a  consequence of what's happened then we can't afford for that to happen. So  we need to find the money to ensure that people can still pay their rent, can still  feed their kids. No one's going to be lavishly running out there and spending  their money, as we know, in cafes. And they're actually bunkering down. It's just  the necessities that they need in everyday life and I don't think that that's an  unreasonable thing for government to be working through and putting money  into. Nobody wants to see anybody become homeless as a consequence of  this or other impacts as well. So yes I think they need to be putting more money

in to the things that really impact everyday people who find themselves  suddenly very vulnerable and don't know where their next meal is coming from  and where their next rent payment -.

JOURNALIST: -So just to clarify, would you like to see maybe a package  focussing just on housing and rent?

CAMPRADT: I think they're going to have to do that. Because there's so many  people, particularly in areas like Currumbin for people that pay rent, people who  live week-to-week. This idea that people that get paid casual loading have  been, you know, somehow squirreling that money away for a pandemic like this  is just a ludicrous suggestion and it's really out of touch with how people live  their lives. Lots of people in this community live their lives week-to-week, pay-to-pay and with what's happened it's causing a crisis. I think government has a  role here.

MURRAY WATT, QUEENSLAND LABOR SENATOR: It's great to join Kaylee  who I know has been campaigning really hard for this community, not just in the  election campaign, but for many years. I've obviously been in Canberra this  week, for the parliamentary sittings, to pass the stimulus package. But I thought  it was important that I get along here as quickly as possible to see with my own  eyes what people are going through at the Centrelink queues. And I have to  say, I'm horrified by what I'm seeing. We know that the Gold Coast is ground  zero when it comes to hospitality and tourism workers being laid off in their  thousands. And all you got to do is walk along any of the Centrelink queues on  the Gold Coast to see that yourself. So one part of the solution here is that the  Government has got to do more about income support for people. We have  been saying, from federal Labor's perspective, for some time now that the  Government needs to be doing more to help employers keep people in work.  The way the Government is approaching this at the moment seems to just be  shrugging their shoulders and accepting that thousands of people are going to  lose their jobs and they'll just be picked up on income support. Many other  countries around the world are providing direct wage subsidies to businesses to  help them pay their workforce and keep them on rather than throwing them on  the unemployment scrapheap. We've seen Boris Johnson do it in the UK.  We've seen Denmark do it. We've seen New Zealand do it. But Australia is  going down this different path of letting employers sack people and just leaving  people on the scrapheap of unemployment. And what you see as a result of  that is what's happening right now outside the Palm Beach Centrelink office. So  the Government's got to be doing more to keep people in work in the first place.  And for people who do lose their jobs, they've got to be doing more about  speeding up the payments of income support. We were very pleased to see the  Government add a coronavirus supplement on top of Jobseeker allowances for  people who lose their jobs. But people have to wait another four or five weeks  before they get this supplement. From the people I've been speaking to here

today, they need this money now. They haven't got any money in their bank  accounts to pay their bills. They can't afford to wait for another four or five  weeks. So there's more that needs to be done to be speeding up these  payments. And finally, the Government has got to do something about this  shambles that we're seeing at Centrelink offices. The media manager of  Services Australia was on the radio this morning admitting that they hadn't  employed any more staff in preparation for what was going to come. Blind  Freddy could have told you that Centrelink offices were going to be overloaded  the minute that the Government shut down pubs and bars and clubs, and  that people were going to need their services, but they didn't think to employ  any additional staff? So they've immediately got to be employing more staff.  What we found, in talking to people this morning, is that the good change that  the Government has made overnight - which is to allow people to apply for a  CRN, a customer reference number, which you need to then get income  support - that can now be done online. Up until yesterday, you had to come into  one of the shopfronts to apply for one of these CRNs to then qualify for income  support. So they've made a good change overnight by making that sort of thing  possible to do online, but not one person in the queue has heard that. So  understandably, they're standing there for hours on end, hoping to get to  see someone. So the Government's got to do a much better job of  communicating with people about how these services can be provided. They've  got to put a lot more resources into the system to support people who are now  on income support. And they've got to try harder to keep people in work. And I  might just conclude by saying, you know, the other reason this matters on the  Gold Coast is that the federal minister who is directly responsible for Centrelink  is Stuart Robert. One of the Gold Coast's own Members of Parliament. If he  can't use his position, as the Minister in charge of Centrelink, to make sure that  people here on the Gold Coast are getting what they need, he should just give  it away. This is the time when people are looking to their governments to step  up, to take responsibility and look out for them, not just come up with excuses  about why things can't be done.

JOURNALIST: Murray, some people are questioning why unemployed people  are getting extra benefits at this time and why people who have just lost their  jobs aren't being prioritised. What's your take on that?

WATT: Well, I think that everyone who has lost their job needs to be prioritised  at the moment. Everyone who has lost their job, whether it's this week or last  week or last month, is in a really precarious situation right now. As Kaylee  mentioned, we were talking to a woman in the queue there who has been  unemployed for some time, she has been cut off for reasons she doesn't  understand. She's rung Centrelink this morning as she's supposed to do.  They've said come in to a Centrelink office to talk about it. She's done that -  queued up for hours. Then she when she gets to the front of the queue, she's  told, 'sorry, we're not going to see you, we're only going to be talking to new

people'. That is just such a disgraceful way to be treating Australian people. So  I don't think this is a time to be distinguishing between people who've been  unemployed for a day or for a year. There's a lot of people here on the Gold  Coast who are in a desperate situation. We've spoken to some of them  ourselves this morning. They need help now.

JOURNALIST: What do you think of Queensland closing the border?

WATT: Well, I think - and Kaylee might like to add something about this as well  - it's an indication that we need to be taking really dramatic measures. This is a  very serious disease that is taking hold in our community. Every single day the  numbers grow, here on the Gold Coast and across Australia in general. And so  I think that those sort of measures are required. I know they're drastic  measures, I know they will inconvenience people, but if we're going to get on  top of this disease, we do need to see some drastic action. Kaylee, being the  local, might like to add to that.

CAMPRADT: I think the Government is just trying to send a really loud  message that people need to start taking this more seriously, because people  are not taking it seriously. They're still thinking that it's appropriate that they go  and visit family and friends across the border and that there is a social side to  this, which we just need to stop thinking like that. We really do need to start  thinking about how we go into remaining in our homes and our suburbs and not  moving around as freely as we do normally. It's also a concern about people  from interstate coming here for holidays and thinking that we're still open for  holiday season. So it's trying to send a clear message to those people down  south that, no, we're not open for business. It's a very difficult time and it's  trying to send a message to those people that they just need to stay at home.

JOURNALIST: A lot of locals are questioning how workable it's going to  be though and the chaos it's [inaudible] going to cause.

CAMPRADT: Yeah, I think there'll be some teething problems and we've seen  that already, but I think this has been, you know, things have been shifting and  moving pretty quickly. But I think it's the right decision to do it. They have said  that for essential movements of people that have legitimate, you know, work on  one side of the border, live on the other side, those people do not need to  worry. There'll be checkpoints put in place. There will be a system where they  get a permit so they can move pretty quickly once the initial roadblocks come  into place and I think there will probably be a few teething problems, but I am  confident that it is the right decision for the safety of our community, and that is  the most important thing.

ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: TALI ELEY 0448 078 456









