JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES

MEMBER FOR HUNTER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2CC

WEDNESDAY, 9 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: China trade; China relations; Labor’s Regional Australia vision;

Domestic manufacturing and self-sufficiency; Future of meat.



STEPHEN CENATIEMPO, HOST : Labor’s Shadow Minister for Agriculture and

Resources, Joel Fitzgibbon, joins us every Wednesday on the program. Good morning

Joel,



JOEL FITZGIBBON, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES:

And always happy to do so, Stephen.



CENATIEMPO: As I mentioned, two Australian journalists have now returned home from

China amid concerns for their safety. After attention - well, they say, attention from

Chinese authorities, is a nice way to put it - over supposed national security matters.

Surely, we've got to say, okay, maybe - and I know that you blame Scott Morrison and

Malcolm Turnbull for upsetting China. But isn't it a bit like you know you sticking your

fingers up at somebody and then them chasing you down bashing you and then driving a

tank through your front door, and you having to apologise for it?



FITZGIBBON: Well Stephen, this is the lowest point in our relationship since Tiananmen

Square. They are still our largest trading partner worth about $200 billion a year to us. I've

never said we should do anything but defend our national interests but we can also be

smart and juggle these strategic tensions without trading away our needs and

opportunities. That's what I've always said and as serious as that is, I don't think this

changes anything. We have to be smart about the way we deal with China because like it

or not, China is so critically important to our economy and so many jobs here in Australia.



CENATIEMPO: Joel, what does that mean though, be smart? Because as I said,

effectively we thumbed our nose at China, and that's, you know, if I take your rhetoric. But

their response to that has been to beat the crap out of us.



FITZGIBBON: And one would expect that might be the case although no one could have

predicted how serious this might become so quickly When the security of Australians living

in China comes under a cloud, then we know we've got a very serious problem on our

hands. And again, I think that if the complexities of the relationship had been handled

better by Canberra then we might not have seen this week this very, very serious

development.



CENATIEMPO: We're looking at this trade… well, in the process of negotiating a trilateral

free trade agreement with India and Japan, which will go some way to reducing our

reliance on China. Is that the answer now, to pursue more of these sorts of sorts of trade

agreements, so that China doesn't become the big gorilla anymore?



FITZGIBBON: Well further diversity in our markets is always part of the answer but it

suggests that the Government is going to do something it wasn't already doing, that is

trying to diversify our markets. Now if it wasn't putting all of its efforts and resources into

diversifying our markets already, regardless of what was happening in China, then it

should be answering the question, why not? So, of course it's part of the solution but trying

to get the relationship with China back to something closer to normal will also be critical for

the Australian economy, particularly coming out of the COVID situation, and will be

important for jobs going forward in the future. You cannot replace your largest trading

partner with other markets, overnight.



CENATIEMPO: Okay but how do we do that, though, given that China seems to have

this… it's a bit like when we talk about bipartisanship in Australian politics. It’s, you know,

we'll support you if you do it our way. I mean, that seems to be China's answer to

everything. As long as you give us 100 per cent of what we want we'll think about giving

you something in return.



FITZGIBBON: Look I don't think that's completely right, Stephen. I've been in the

Parliament for 24 years, but I've been watching politics in Australia and globally for a lot

longer than that. And I’ve seen the way in which our diplomacy has deteriorated in recent

years. For example, you know, I did the 2009 Defence White Paper, which was of course,

as you'd expect, somewhat focused on China. But we didn't actually make reference to

China. We did things more diplomatically in those days than we do now. These days it's

not unusual for us to see the Prime Minister out there in front of the cameras, basically

attacking China on a regular basis and, you know, people should expect that that's not

going to be very, very helpful.



CENATIEMPO: No, well I'm going to move on now, Joel, because I've asked you three

times, how do we fix it, and it doesn't seem to be too much, too much of a suggestion.



FITZGIBBON: Well you're asking me to fix a very complex problem which has developed

over the last five years or so, first under Malcolm Turnbull and now under Scott Morrison.

And sadly, given the way this situation has escalated it's not going to be easy to fix. But it's

going to be incumbent upon the Government to ensure that this - literally hundreds of

thousands of jobs now are not at risk in Australia, and indeed the security of Australians

living in China and working in China, - are not at risk because of the behaviour of this

Government.



CENATIEMPO: Anthony Albanese is today going to release his regional policy statement,

focusing on rail, road, communication, spending to help regional areas recover from the

recession; boost the infrastructure, education and manufacturing in regional Australia.

What sort of - I mean are there specific projects that have been earmarked here, or I mean

I know we'll, we'll get the announcement of it, but is it going to be… how specific is he

going to be?



FITZGIBBON: He'll be talking about the importance of regional Australia, and any speech

from my perspective which focuses on that is an important one. It will talk about the

existing strengths of our regions and the contribution they make to our economy, and

therefore our jobs. Areas like the resources sector, agriculture, manufacturing in particular,

and also the opportunities for the future, including renewable energy and he’ll include in

that of course the hydrogen sector, which is a big opportunity for Australia. He'll talk about

that, adding more value to some of our resource projects; you know, we've seen what can

be done with lithium and the development of batteries. So he’ll talk about all those sorts of

things. And he'll talk about the importance of government funding the enablers. I mean,

regional communities, grow off the back of the innovation of the, of their people, their

ideas. But they need the infrastructure, you know the roads, the bridges, the

communications et cetera. And it’s for government to give them the enablers and he will

talk about the importance of that.



CENATIEMPO: I go one step further than that to say, and I guess the biggest culprit here

is the New South Wales Government. With regards to things like, you know, building trains

and ferries, and the like and, I'm not - so I know that our manufacturing base is not what it

used to be. But we have governments actually buying stuff from overseas that we still

produce here in Australia. Somebody’s got to come out with a policy and say enough is

enough of that.



FITZGIBBON: Yeah, and I think COVID-19 is going to going to be a bit of a wake-up call

to, not only on the jobs front but of course on the self-sufficiency front. And I've made the

point many times, in defence we pay a premium for local content here in Australia,

because we think there is good reasons to do so. And I think there'll be some rethinking, or

at least I hope there will be, in a number of other areas. Our problem of course is that, you

know, when we build a frigate, we might build four of them. In the United States, they build

a frigate, and they'll build 100 more, and another 100 more to export, so they've got those

economies of scale that we lack here in Australia. But it can't be just about the economic

textbook, it's got to be about the Australian interest and self-sufficiency. And again, I do

believe there'll be a bit of a rethink and that will be a welcome thing,



CENATIEMPO: Yeah, I those economies of scale have been built up over many, many

years so you say you got to start somewhere. Now here's a question that sits right in your -

right in the block-hole for you as Shadow Agriculture Minister. Would you eat meat grown

in a lab?



FITZGIBBON: Yeah, I would. And I was a bit surprised by a survey suggesting young

people aren't all that keen because I've always worked with the theory that while it seems

like an abnormal thing for old blokes like me and you - sorry Stephen - to do, my grandkids

or great grandkids will not know any different, and therefore won’t challenge or question

the idea. They will have grown up with it so I think it will come and it will be a very, very

important development, globally, not just here in Australia because I'm no Greenie as you



know, Stephen, but we probably can't grow the global animal herd for slaughter, much

bigger - or maybe even sustain the current levels - in an environmentally sustainable way.

So, this will be an important means of making the way we live more sustainable

environmentally.



CENATIEMPO: I’ll take an Alexander Downs’^ steak, any day Joel. Good to talk to you

mate.



FITZGIBBON: Me too, actually.



ENDS



^ Alexander Downs meat wholesaler, Kurri Kurri, NSW



MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641



