

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s









T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T

Thursday 8th October 2020

Minister Littleproud IV 2CC



STEPHEN CENATIEMPO: The Federal Government has announced its Ag 2030 Plan to  try and help Australia's farm sector become a 100-billion-dollar industry within the next  decade. This week's Federal Budget contains more than $320 million to make exporting  simpler, $3.5 billion for dams and water infrastructure and fee reductions for agriculture  related tertiary courses. The Ag 2030 Plan also includes a focus on biosecurity, innovation  and research and stronger supply chains.

To talk to us more about it, we're joined by the Minister for Agriculture, Drought and  Emergency Management and Deputy Leader of the Nationals, David Littleproud. Minister,  good morning.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Good morning. Thanks for having me.

STEPHEN CENATIEMPO: A $100 billion industry. How big is the ag industry at the  moment?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: We're going hit $61 billion this year, and that's up a billion despite  the fires, the drought and the COVID-19 as well as floods just 18 months ago up in north  west Queensland, where we lost 500,000 head of cattle.

So AG, despite all the uppercuts is doing pretty well. And now, what we're trying to do is  make sure that if we could just get some rain at the right time and get a couple of average  seasons, we'll be up in a way. The NFF's articulated this stretch goal and this target and  we're going to back them by putting the environment infrastructure around. And that's what  the budget was about.

And we haven't just forgotten agriculture because the reality is it's the thing that's been  keeping this country going while it's been locked out. Resources and agriculture are the  things that have kept the economy going. And so we're giving our bit back in this budget.

STEPHEN CENATIEMPO: The $320 million to make exporting simpler, I don't think  anybody would argue that that's - that's a good thing. But I imagine we are really at the  mercy of what other nations are doing at the moment who are largely in the same position  we're in because this global pandemic has affected - well, I don't think there's a country in  the world that hasn't been affected, is there?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No, there hasn't. But what we're trying to make sure is that we get  the competitive advantage out of COVID-19 and we've already put $600 million into air  freight support because those passenger flights, the flights have stopped and our

T R A N S C R I P T

Transcript



T R A N S C R I P T

agricultural cargo used to go under peoples' feet. And we've tried to get- keep that going to  make sure that our markets see us not just as the best produce, but the most reliable  trading partner through tough times. And that's where a lot of our opportunities lie.  Because you've got to understand, we're a nation of 25 million people. We produce  enough food for 75 billion.

So if we don't trade with the world and we don't engage with the world, then we don't need  as many farmers we've got, we don't need regional Australia. So we've got to continue to  give free trade agreements, get rid of the tariff barriers and that's why market access is so  important. And that's what this investment is.

And it's also about regulation, about quality control. We're going to engage in technology  and the meat sectors are a really good example of this. They're going to bring in smart  glasses that are manufactured in Brisbane and there's going to be remote audits.

So we're not sending Department of Agriculture people around the country on planes and  costing taxpayer money. They can sit in an office and get one of the abattoirs workers to  walk around with these smart glasses and tick off the audit, all from the office in a quick  and timely way. So all this, we believe and we think, over the next 10 years, it could save  the industry, all agriculture, over a billion dollars.

STEPHEN CENATIEMPO: I like the idea of, you know, efficiencies like that, but I imagine  the agriculture sector's biggest wish list when it comes to Government is just to get out of  the way. The biggest problem there is state governments. And as we know, they haven't  all been that helpful in recent times.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, particularly when you look at the thing that we need most,  and that's water. Under the Constitution, our forefathers gave the responsibility and  management of resources to the states. It is illegal for myself and the Prime Minister to  pick a shovel up in any state or territory and dig a hole to start a dam for irrigation. The  states own that responsibility.

There has been 20 dams built in this country since 2003, 16 of those have been in  Tasmania. The eastern states have done three-fifths of bugger all and we are now to a  situation where, don't just think about agriculture, it's actually people in metropolitan  Australia. By 2030, there'll be a 37 per cent reduction in storage capacity per person per  megalitre of water because our population's going up but the states haven't built a water  infrastructure to support it.

So your ability to turn a tap on is going to be impinged in the future because state  governments won't take our money. We've got $3.5 billion in cold, hard cash for someone  to go and dig a hole. The only ones that are doing it is Tasmania. New South Wales have  given some sort of indication they're going to have a crack. But Queensland, we're sitting  up there - I'm a Queenslander and I can tell you in north Queensland, we can't even get  them to get on an excavator up there.

STEPHEN CENATIEMPO: So that's a refreshingly honest answer. But that's the point. So  okay, $3.5 billion is great. But really, it's really, $3.5 billion that won't get spent, isn't it?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Unless - well, it will, because Tasmania - I can tell you, Tasmania  come back for another lick. They literally plumbed the state down there. Their agricultural  industries are going because they've got a progressive state government that understands

T R A N S C R I P T

Transcript



T R A N S C R I P T

you've got to tax this stuff when it falls and you can still protect the environment while you  do it.

Let me tell you that if our forefathers hadn't built all that water storage so many years ago -  and we talk about the Murray-Darling system - during this drought, the whole system  would have been bone dry, it would have been an ecological disaster.

So for all the greenies to say dams are bad, let me tell you, it has saved all the ecology up  and down the Murray-Darling because our forefathers built these storages to catch them in  the good times, regulate them and environment got a lick out of it while this drought was  on as well and farmers got a little bit and now we're getting them filled. That's what grows  this nation. We've got to use our smarts.

STEPHEN CENATIEMPO: I don't think any right-minded person would disagree with you.  But what measures are being taken to make those structural changes so that it's not illegal  for the Federal Government to go in and say: okay, we need this infrastructure, this is  nation building infrastructure, not just state building infrastructure, we need to get on with  it?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, there's two ways. There's one, the nation has a referendum  and we hand over all those responsibilities to the Commonwealth. Or two, you get a state  government that isn't doing it, you kick them out. And in Queensland, we've got an  opportunity at the end of the month to do that, to get rid of the mob we've got and get one  in that actually wants to dig some holes and plumb the state.

But that is the nature of our democracy. The people have the power, and that is the only  way that we can take over ownership of water in this country is for the people to come  together and say: give it to the Commonwealth, let them manage it, let them dig the holes  and decide where it should go and make sure we plumb this country properly.

STEPHEN CENATIEMPO: Well can we get a commitment there'll be a referendum  question at the next federal election then?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well look, that's a big one that you need bipartisan support on.  There's no referendum that gets up unless it's got bipartisan support.

But you know what? We shouldn't have to do this in this modern age. If state governments  understood their responsibilities - and now know they don't really have to cut much of the  cheque. We're going to do it for them. Really, what is stopping them? What is stopping  them?

STEPHEN CENATIEMPO: David Littleproud, good to speak to this morning.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Any time. Thanks for having me, mate.

STEPHEN CENATIEMPO: That's David Littleproud, Minister for Agriculture, Drought and  Emergency Management, Deputy Leader of the Nationals.



Media contact:  0455 448 985

