

CATHERINE KING MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT AND  REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT  MEMBER FOR BALLARAT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  MONDAY, 2 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Road Rorts; Sports Rorts; Regional Rorts; Government’s Failure on  Climate Change; Government’s Response to Coronavirus and  Bushfires; Government’s Failure to have an Economic Plan; Foreign Intelligence.

CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT AND  REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Good morning. Well today in Senate Estimates our  Senators will be pursuing the Road Rorts, the Sports Rorts and the Regional Rorts.

Just to recap, we saw last week with Road Rorts the Morison Government allocated 83  percent of the Urban Congestion Fund to Liberal Party seats and seats targeted at the last  election, you have to ask why.

When it comes to Sports Rorts, the female facilities and swimming pools fund, we saw it  was administered out of the Department of Regional Development, supposedly, because it  was to go to regional projects. And of course last week, we saw $10 million allocated to a  swimming pool under the Sydney Harbour Bridge. You have to again ask why.

When it comes to Regional Rorts, under the Regional Jobs and Investment Program,  we've seen the Government allocate $5 million to an ineligible business that also is a  Liberal National Party donor and with the strong links to the Liberal National Party. Again,  the Deputy Prime Minister has refused to release any documents around how those  decisions were made. And again, we want to ask what has he got to hide.

Just on a slightly other matter. We did see on the weekend, the Deputy Leader of the  National Party, not in the Federal Parliament, but in the Victorian Parliament, make some  very sensible comments about climate change. Those of us who live in regional and rural  Australia know that we are bearing the costs of climate change today. We're at the front  end of where those effects occurred. When you've got the deputy leader of the National  Party in Victoria, now starting to make some very sensible comments about climate  change, it is becoming increasingly clear that the National Party, the Deputy Prime Minister  and Scott Morrison are the outliers here when it comes to climate change. And only Labor  is leading the debate on what this country needs to do to actually tackle our changing  climate.

Happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: Was it wrong for Anthony Albanese to criticise Scott Morrison for not  briefing Labor after last Thursday's National Security Committee meeting?

KING: Well, let's be clear about what happened there. The Prime Minister in a bit of  political trouble during the week and frankly during the day, did not provide a courtesy  briefing to the opposition about his decision to increase the level of preparedness that  Australia is in relation to Coronavirus. They offered a briefing the previous evening to Chris  Bowen and to Anthony Albanese's staff. None of that was mentioned at the briefing that  there was going to be a heightened level of preparedness. And then we literally saw within  the Parliament, the Prime Minister dumping a document onto the table that had in fact  been released 18 days ago and standing up, but not providing a briefing about that. I think  it is right for Anthony to criticize that.

We've been very careful during this Coronavirus, we take this incredibly seriously. We  know that Australia potentially does face circumstances where we will have a health  system and people under incredible pressure. We take this very seriously. We've been  very bipartisan about this. I think the Prime Minister was either being discourteous on  Thursday, or I don't know what he was up to. But frankly, I think there was some issues  there.

JOURNALIST: But Labor didn't send any senior Ministers to the briefing.

KING: The briefing on Thursday, Chris Bowen was there.

JOURNALIST: And on Coronavirus, should the Government be extending its travel ban to  include countries like South Korea and Italy?

KING: Well, I'll leave it for the health experts. I think what they should be doing is making  sure that they take the advice of the Chief Medical Officers and the medical officers and  health officers right the way across the country on this. As well as watching very carefully  what's happening with the spread of this disease. I think we all know that, given where we  are in relation to this, I think we've done very well to keep the Coronavirus contained to this  date.

I think it is absolutely clear that we will see more cases, that we will see more pressure on  our health services. I think we will work very happily with the Government on whatever  steps need to be taken to ensure that we contain the spread of this as best we can in this  country. If the advice is that the travel bans need to be extended to other countries, then  we certainly would support that. But let's wait until that advice comes through.

JOURNALIST: As you said, in terms of trying to be a bipartisan, as you've already pointed  to in terms of what Scott Morrison was saying what Anthony Albanese was saying, we've  also got a lot of back and forth. Could this really be purely bipartisan with the Coronavirus?  You know, no fighting about what should be done and if this is just a cover up in terms of  how bad the economy was before as Labor has been sort of attacking.

KING: I think there are two separate issues here. One is obviously Australia's  preparedness to deal with what potentially is a pandemic and how we actually make sure  we keep the health of our Australian citizens safe. And that's an important issue and that,  of course, is a bipartisan issue. What we won't let the Government get away with is trying

to pretend that somehow the bushfires and Coronavirus are the sole cause of why the  economy is in trouble. We know that the economy was in trouble well before the bushfires  and well before Coronavirus hit. Wages stagnation, we had productivity down, all of the  economic indicators were already in trouble.

I think it is incumbent on us - given just how hard this Government ran on their economic  credentials, being back in black - those back in black mugs all over the place. I think  they're as rare as hen's teeth now, you can't seem to find them anywhere.

I think that is incumbent on the Australian Labor Party to actually call that out and say this  is a Government that has not had an economic plan. And because it hasn't had an  economic plan, the economy was in trouble. Well before bushfires and Coronavirus, and  now those two things will add even further pressure.

JOURNALIST: Shouldn't the focus be on the crisis?

KING: We can walk and chew gum at the same time. I think everybody can do that.

JOURNALIST: For the economy, economists now are factoring in a recession. Coming up  in the [inaudible]. How do you think this will affect Australians?

KING: This is the problem. You saw when Labor was in office we faced the Global  Financial Crisis, we had to take very difficult decisions around the budget to keep people  employed. And that is the issue here. How do we make sure we keep people employed,  keep the economy productive, and make sure that we're able to grow it as best we possibly  can in those straitened circumstances? We know that there are sectors under pressure,  tourism was already suffering because of the bushfires. But of course, we also know that  Coronavirus is having an impact.

The underlying problem is that we already had all of those issues in the economy. So the  government is suggesting that it's going to need to bring some stimulus forward, we'll have  a look at that. But I don't think this Government had a plan, hasn't had a plan to deal with  the economy and the changing circumstances of the economy in the first place.

These two other issues are creating pressure. That of course will mean people losing their  jobs. And that's the thing that obviously everybody wants to avoid. I'm from regional  Victoria, they often lose their jobs in regional areas first. We often are the canary in the  coal mine when it comes to our economy. First we see a downturn in construction, we see  a downturn in housing, we are already seeing those factors well before bushfires and  Coronavirus.

JOURNALIST: Would you support a tax, the introduction of these tax measures coming  forward?

KING: Well, the Government hasn't told us and that's the problem. There's no economic  plan. No economic plan. We very sensibly said to them earlier this year we do think that  some of the tax stimulus needs to be brought forward to  put money in people's pockets  now, so that you can actually get that out into the economy, into the retail sector,  encouraging people into tourism. We've said that previously, the Government so far has  had absolutely no plan when it comes to the economy. We'll be willing to work with them  on anything that's a sensible plan. But of course, remembering that this is the Government  that said there would be a surplus and the surplus was the most important thing at the last



election.

JOURNALIST: There's reports today about foreign spies potentially being sent back to  Australia. Should the government be doing more to rule that out?

KING: Look I might leave the comments on that to Penny Wong, our foreign affairs  spokesperson, I'm not across the details of those issues. Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MATTHEW NESHAM 0431 010 454











