





THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP  MINISTER FOR POPULATION, CITIES AND URBAN  INFRASTRUCTURE

ANDREW HASTIE MP  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR CANNING



THE HON MARK MCGOWAN MLA  PREMIER OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA

THE HON RITA SAFFIOTI MLA  WA MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT



MEDIA RELEASE





Tuesday 24 November 2020

$100 million transformation planned for Thomas Road around Byford

The State and Commonwealth Governments are working together on a $100 million  transformation of Thomas Road in Perth’s south eastern suburbs.

The busy road, that runs through Perth’s booming south-eastern suburbs, is used by  thousands of commuters daily and more than $100 million has been allocated for upgrades  that will improve safety and efficiency.

$30 million of additional funding has been allocated to upgrades at the intersection of Thomas  Road and Kargotich Road in Oakford.

Originally, this intersection upgrade was earmarked as a single lane roundabout with $3 million  allocated through the Black Spots Program.

The additional funding means an extra $6 million has been allocated to the project, upgrading  the roundabout from a single lane to a dual lane, with work to commence next year.

The remainder of the funds will be used to undertake a range of safety improvements,  including $5 million towards the installation of street lighting as well as low cost shoulder  widening works on Thomas Road between Cumming Road and Tonkin Highway, which have  been shown to greatly reduce the chance of crashes.

Upgrades will be undertaken at the intersection of Thomas Road and Nicholson Road, with a  new two lane roundabout to be installed to improve safety and traffic efficiency for the 19,000  vehicles that pass through the intersection daily.

Early works are underway on the construction of a new bridge on Thomas Road over the  existing rail corridor. This will be the first level crossing between Armadale and Byford to be  reconfigured to accommodate the long anticipated METRONET Byford Rail Extension.

The Thomas Road over rail bridge will include two lanes in each direction and will facilitate the  extension of the Armadale Line by around 8km down to Byford.

The $52 million project is expected to be completed towards the end of 2022 and has been fast  tracked to assist with Western Australia’s economic recovery from COVID-19.

In addition, planning is also progressing to provide a dual carriageway on the one-kilometre  section of Thomas Road immediately east of Kwinana Freeway, in anticipation of a commercial  sector development that will create and support local jobs. These works will commence in late  2021.

On top of this $100 million, more than $500 million has been allocated to extend Tonkin  Highway from Thomas Road in Oakford to South Western Highway, south-east of Mundijong.

This will provide improved access to growing residential areas, industry, the airport and the  freeway. Extensive planning and development work is well underway with construction to start  in late 2021 subject to environmental and statutory approvals.

Safety improvement upgrades on a busy 4.3km section of Thomas Road, between Kwinana  Freeway and Cumming Road in Anketell were completed in the first half of the year.

Improvement works included shoulder widening and resurfacing along with the installation of  new line markings and raised road pavement markers. The upgrades significantly improved  safety for road users on this stretch of road, which has seen 114 reported crashes in the five  years to December 2019.

Road planning is also underway to help develop the potential long-term future of the Thomas  and Anketell Road freight corridor, from the proposed Kwinana Outer Harbour site to Tonkin  Highway.

Premier Mark McGowan said his Government was focused on delivering tangible benefits and  upgrades for those living in the south-eastern suburbs.

“My Government’s number one priority has always been local jobs and this transformation of  Thomas Road will provide numerous employment opportunities as well as benefits to local  businesses, supporting our economy through COVID-19.

“The population of Byford is set to boom over the coming decade and it’s important we properly  plan for that growth with the infrastructure for tomorrow.”

Federal Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure Alan Tudge said the upgrades  will improve safety and efficiency.

“The Morrison Government has prioritised critical infrastructure and that also means jobs for  hard working West Australians,” Mr Tudge said.

“Along with the Tonkin Highway Extension and Byford Rail Extension, it will also mean more  jobs and greater economic opportunity in our region.”

WA Transport Minister Rita Saffioti said these upgrades would transform Thomas Road and  change the way people in Byford and the south-eastern suburbs travel.

“These upgrades will completely transform the area and improve safety and efficiency for the  thousands of drivers who use Thomas Road every day,” she said.

“The removal of the Thomas Road level crossing is the first step in the Byford Rail Extension  which will give people in Byford better connections to work, school and fun.”

Member for Canning Andrew Hastie welcomed the upgrades, saying they would make a big  difference to road safety for the local community.

“As I’ve been saying for many years, infrastructure development in Byford over the past  decade has not kept up with the explosion in population,” Mr Hastie said.

“Our community has put up with thousands of daily commuters and heavy trucks travelling on  what are often basically country roads. This isn’t safe and it has led to many accidents.

“I’m very pleased to see this investment into our region by the Commonwealth Government  begin to enter the construction phase. The Thomas Road upgrades—particularly to the  Kargotich and Nicholson Road intersections—will make our community much safer.

[ENDS]

Media Contact:  Mr McGowan - Lannie Le-Patterson 0419 698 504  Mr Tudge - Michael Bennett 0434 782 923  Ms Saffioti - Caitlin Goddard 0437 234 249

