

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS AFTERNOON AGENDA

MONDAY, 30 NOVEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: China Tweet; Brereton Report.



KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: With me live now in the studio is the Deputy Labor Leader and

Shadow Defence Minister Richard Marles, what's your reaction to that, that message from a

Chinese official on Twitter?



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Well, the

tweet was appalling, there's no other word to describe it. It should be taken down and China

should apologise, no questions about that. It doesn't add anything to what is obviously a

difficult relationship right now. You know, I think the government’s reacted appropriately to this

and I agree with the Prime Minister that, you know, I hope that this is an incident which actually

allows the relationship to reset. But this is an appalling tweet, which should be condemned at

every quarter, China should pull it down and they should apologise.



GILBERT: This comes a week after the Prime Minister made quite a conciliatory message in a

speech trying to maybe reset the relationship then. Does that worry you that this sort of

message is sent, inflammatory message, just days after the Prime Minister was trying to cool

things down?



MARLES: Of course and I think the relationship has not been in a good place, so I agree with

you that I think there's been a couple of voices on the government side, which has tried to calm

tensions between China and Australia. We do need to be getting the relationship back into a

better place. But this tweet does nothing to help that, it's incendiary, it is appalling, and China

needs now to act in respect of it, by pulling it down, by apologising.



GILBERT: Do you think that this reflects a weakness on the Chinese part when it comes to

what's known as you know soft power? This is from their Foreign Ministry Spokesperson  -

that's hardly diplomacy at work.



MARLES: Well it was not diplomacy at work. It's hard to explain to be honest how, from a

government account, you could have a tweet of this kind. It's certainly not diplomacy at work.

We really need to get the relationship back on track. I mean, it's a critically important

relationship for Australia, our largest trading partner, but there are obviously a whole lot of

security anxieties, which exists with China as well. So at every level, you would want there to

be good communication between China and Australia. A tweet of this kind takes the

relationship in completely the wrong direction. And it's really important that China now acts and

rectifies this.



GILBERT: What it does do is embolden hawks, certainly in the debate here and in China

doesn't?



MARLES: Well, I think all of us want to see a reset in the relationship. I mean, there's a lot at

stake for both countries in having the best relationship that we can have and that's why this

tweet is really deeply unhelpful, it's obviously repugnant, and it is offensive and, you know, it

would be in Australia and China's interest to get this relationship to a very different place. This

tweet doesn't help.



GILBERT: Do you believe there are enough people of goodwill on both sides to get that

relationship back on an even keel?



MARLES: Well, I think it's a very difficult road ahead and as I say, what we've seen today with

that tweet makes the road harder. But there is enough common interest in the sense of the

geography that we share, the East Asian timezone, the trade we engage in to mean that it

should be in the interests of both countries to get the relationship to a better place. And that's

what we need to be working towards. But the starting point is amends needs to be made by

China for this tweet, it's an outrageous event to have occurred.



GILBERT: Does the government share any responsibility in where that relationship is at right

now, given the call for that inquiry? Should they have been more cautious in - in calling for

COVID inquiry out there, the first to do so? Should they have had other nations with them

before they did that?



MARLES: Look, wherever we've got to in the relationship up until this moment in time, I think

on this day, it's important to reflect how inappropriate how offensive this tweet is and it's also

appropriate for me and the Opposition to acknowledge that the way in which the government

has handled this matter today has been absolutely correct. It's really important that we speak

out against this tweet. It obviously goes to a very sensitive issue that Australia has been

handling with enormous care. It is absolutely right that the government should have called on

China to both pull the tweet down and to apologise and we support the government in their

actions today.



GILBERT: So you don't want to have any navel gazing or reflecting on government

performance to this point?



MARLES: Look, there's a whole lot of time for us to be thinking about and working out how we

get to a different relationship with China, how we reset this relationship-



GILBERT: Because most of those complaints you agree with in terms of Chinese complaints

of Australian policy, the vast bulk of them, in fact, I would say all of them, to some degree

Labor supports almost entirely, so it's a bipartisan row now with China.



MARLES: Well, the point to make today is that this tweet was deeply inappropriate. The

government has reacted exactly as it should have, in terms of calling it out and calling on

China to make amends by apologising, and pulling the tweet down. There's - there is a high

degree of bipartisanship, in the way in which we handle this relationship, about the importance

of speaking up for Australia's national interests, about the importance of speaking up for

human rights. This should be an issue about which there is bipartisanship. Now it's a

complicated issue, there's a lot at stake, there's a lot to talk about as we go forward and we've

got plenty of time to do all of that. But on this day, in the face of this act on the part of China, it

is very important that the country acts with the unanimity, and that's what's happening.



GILBERT: Should the CDF recommend to the Governor General the removal of the

meritorious group citation for the Special Forces Task Group, as the CDF said he would, in his

initial response to the Brereton report?



MARLES: Well it’s a very difficult and complex matter that has been - is being dealt with by the

Brereton report in full. I think the Brereton report is an extraordinary piece of work, actually and

again, I think it's been handled with sensitivity at the level of Defence and the level of the

government. In respect of that question specifically, the government's made clear that it's not

made a decision in respect of that and if I understood the Prime Minister correctly, in his

statement this afternoon, he said that the CDF will be clarifying the position in respect of this

later. I think we should allow that to play out.



GILBERT: Can you understand why some families of those dead soldiers who were awarded

this posthumously would be devastated to have to hand the medal back?



MARLES: Yeah, of course I can and that's why, you know, it's a very complex and sensitive

matter. I think it's important that time be taken to work through how this recommendation is

moved forward. It seems to me, that's what the government is doing in making it clear that

they've not made any decisions yet, in respect of that. From the perspective of the Opposition,

we want to give the government the space and the time to work that through because we

acknowledge how-



GILBERT: Are you uncomfortable -



MARLES: Can I just say Kieran, I totally understand the sense that people who have fought

with distinction on behalf of our nation in Afghanistan would feel in relation to this question

about the Meritorious Unit Citation. But indeed, the whole gamut of what is dealt with in the

Brereton report and in that respect, I think it's important to acknowledge the Distinguished

Service of those people, to make it clear that it would be a tragedy if our engagement with

Afghanistan was simply seen through the prism of these allegations. I mean the allegations in

respect of a few should not detract from the sacrifice of the many thousands of Australians

who have contributed in such a distinguished way, in this conflict on behalf of the nation.



GILBERT: Well, using that principle, isn't it then unfair to tarnish all of the Special Forces task



group with - tar them in the same brush with those alleged to have carried out war crimes?



MARLES: Well, there is a process that the government has articulated in relation to this. But in

relation to the other Distinguished Service medals, which go to Officers around reviewing

them, I think it's important that that process be allowed to play out. I mean, obviously, the

allegations contained in the Brereton report are themselves completely appalling and it's

important as a nation that we're facing up to this, but we are. That's what the Brereton report is

doing. It's why I said that I actually think it is a remarkable piece of work and I hope that

Australia, and I'm confident that Australia has the capacity to deal with this issue and to deal

with the mistakes that have been made. Now we've got to acknowledge that that's occurred

and there are going to be implications in relation to this. The whole question in respect of

awards and medals, you know, there is a process to go through. I understand why the report

has gone there and its recommendations but we need to put - allow the time for this to play out

and that's what we think the government's doing and that's what we want to support.



GILBERT: Richard Marles, thanks talk to you soon.



MARLES: Thanks Kieran.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363



