MEDIA RELEASE  DISABILITY SUPPORT PENSION

Centrelink puts out advice saying people on DSP shouldn’t swap to the now

higher Jobseeker payment

The Greens say Government advice released today saying that people on DSP should

not change to the now higher Jobseeker payment indicates exactly why DSP and Carer

payments need to be increased.

"People receiving the Disability Support Pension are facing additional and unforeseen

costs for transport, food deliveries, healthcare, medical supplies and personal protective

equipment during the coronavirus crisis.

"We have been very concerned that people on DSP may be tempted to change to the

Jobseeker payment because of the additional $550 a week granted for six months but

this would not be prudent given the difficulty in getting the DSP in the first place.

"By not raising DSP and Carer payments the Government is incentivising people to

make decisions for a short term gain. However, I do understand that many people on

DSP are in desperate situations at the moment.

"It is incredibly difficult to meet the requirements to be eligible for DSP and I would

imagine if people wanted to get back on it they would struggle greatly.

"Those on Jobseeker have mutual obligations requirements and I don’t want more

disabled people being subject to work for the dole, looking for jobs every fortnight or

No publication date: received by Parl Library 02/04/2020

having to volunteer to ensure their payment.



"The Disability Support Pension and Carer Payment exist in recognition of the fact that

disabled people and carers have higher everyday costs and aren’t in a position to enter

the workforce. People's costs and barriers have increased, not decreased, due to the

COVID-19 pandemic.



"Everyone on the Disability Support Pension and the Carer payment needs access to

additional resources to help them get through this crisis."



Media Contact  Lucy Cowcher-Guthrie: 0418 401

No publication date: received by Parl Library 02/04/2020

