

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS 24 AFTERNOON LIVE WITH PATRICIA KARVELAS  THURSDAY, 2 APRIL 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; childcare package.

PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST:   Chris Bowen, welcome.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks Patricia.

KARVELAS: Before we get to today’s pretty significant child care  announcement, Labor Leader Anthony Albanese has told ABC Radio  Melbourne that a Senate Committee of a Joint Select Committee should be  established to scrutinise the Government's COVID-19 response. Why do you  think that's necessary?

BOWEN: Well I think more parliamentary overnight is unquestionably a good  thing. We are talking about billions of dollars and we are talking about lives.  And with the Parliament not sitting for so long, of course we opposed that. We  are going back next week to deal with one piece of legislation. It makes  eminent sense to have more scrutiny, more accountability and more  transparency through whatever mechanisms. There's opportunities through the  Auditor-General, opportunities through parliamentary committees. The Senate  is the place where a committee is most likely to be established because it's  where the Opposition working with others has the majority of support. But  obviously whether it is the health or economic response, more oversight. More  transparency and accountability perhaps is a better way of putting it than  oversight, to be frank, of the Government's efforts the better.

KARVELAS: What sort of scrutiny do you want to apply to the Government's  different decisions? Is this economic scrutiny or over its health response?

BOWEN: I think it's both. We are talking about billions of dollars and we are

talking about people's lives. The Government has rightly, as the executive, a lot  of powers here. No problem with that. But they're also accountable to the  people through the Parliament. Obviously we'll talk to the crossbenchers in the  House and the Senate. There's already been some of those discussions.  Happy to talk to the Government as well about that. There’s a further meetings  this afternoon. I'm sure Anthony would be happy to pursue with anybody of  goodwill the appropriate mechanisms for the Government to be accountable to  the Parliament through the normal processes in what is an extraordinary time.

KARVELAS: Does this demonstrate a break from the bipartisanship? Does  Labor believe the Government is failing here?

BOWEN: No. Bipartisanship does not mean being silent. Bipartisanship does  not mean saying what more can be done. Bipartisanship doesn't mean walking  away from parliamentary accountability. Bipartisanship means giving the  Government support for everything they want to do and then appropriately as  the Opposition calling for more, calling for accountability and calling  transparency and calling for more action. That's what we've been doing. A  breakdown in bipartisanship would be refusing to cooperate on Parliament  going back, or on passing legislation or criticising actions that they're taking.  What we are doing is constructively suggesting what more could and should be  done when and also, as is appropriate for the Opposition, putting in place  mechanisms for parliamentary accountability. We think a Parliament should be  sitting and we have been very cooperative in obviously coming up with ways  where the parliament can sit more safely, with massive pairings and few staff  and all those arrangements. But that doesn't mean we think the parliament  should shut up shop and not do its job.

KARVELAS: The Government has made a very significant announcement  today, it is huge. Childcare is free and as I established there with the Minister it  is not just free for working parents, it's is free for everyone for the period of the  pandemic or this next six months at least. And the message from the  Government is crystal clear. Send your children back to childcare. Do you think  that's a good move?

BOWEN: Well, I think the important thing here is that there's support for the  childcare sector so that the centres get through to the other side of the crisis.  We don't want to see the childcare centres close and shut up shop and not be  ready when we do eventually get through this crisis, which we will. That's what  Amanda Rishworth has been so eloquently been calling for. We want childcare  workers and centres supported. Parents can make their own decisions and  their own judgements but the important thing is we have a childcare sector still  with us when we get to the other side. It was looking very likely that might not  be the case. Hence a big package, you’re right it's a huge package, a huge

package is necessary for these desperate time. We welcome the package. We  called for such a package -

KARVELAS: How about the inherent message which is send your children  back to childcare? As you know the reason that childcare centres have been  struggling is the parents have been withdrawing children and it's all in relation  to COVID-19 concerns. Should parents send their children back to childcare?

BOWEN: That's an individual matter for individual parents to make their  judgment. Everyone is in a different circumstance. In some cases you have two  healthcare workers as the parents. They're in a different circumstance to  people who can work from home. I'm not here to lecture parents. You and I had  a similar discussion about schools a few weeks ago. The same applies to  childcare centres. The important thing is the childcare centre receives support  to get through.

KARVELAS: How about consistency in message though? I put it to the Minister  that right now parents are told you can't go to play equipment and anyone who  has looked after small children - and I know many parents are watching now  who have done this - that's where you take them, maybe 10 times a day.  Playgrounds are now closed. Is it consistent to have them closed but to say  send your children back to childcare?

BOWEN: I agree with you to the extent that, we've said all the way through that  more consistency is better. That's why we were critical of some of the ad hoc  measures we thought were being put in place in a way which was leading to  confusion and inconsistency. I think we’re much closer to a more consistent set  of arrangements but we were pretty concerned at various points the way  through that, it was pretty hard to understand the messaging. Childcare  centres, I come back to my point, yes you're right about playgrounds but  parents will have to make their judgements. Some will feel they need to send  their child to childcare. Others will feel they don't need to. Parents can make  their judgement. This is a good package today. I don't think it necessarily can  be coalesced around health advice and this package. I see them as separate  matters.

KARVELAS: They’re not really separate because it's contingent on sending  their parents back?

BOWEN: Patricia, we have called for support for the childcare sector. We  welcome the support that's come today. It is in my view a separate matter to  the health advice in my view. The Prime Minister can put it in terms he's  comfortable with. I’m going to put it in terms I’m comfortable with. Parents can  make their own decisions.





KARVELAS: Ok. Fair enough. I want to talk about the overall strategy because  today we heard from the Health Minister that there is evidence now that we're  flattening the curve. Do you agree and think this strategy is working so far?

BOWEN: There are some encouraging signs but this has a long way to go and  there is absolutely no room for complacency. Let me make a couple of points.  We're still doubling on the known cases roughly every six days and that still  leads to more pressure on intensive care. When you consider that when we go  into intensive care, you may stay for around three weeks with COVID-19. That's  a long time to be in an intensive care bed if you have cases doubling every six  days. It will put enormous pressure on intensive care, even with the flattening of  the curve. The second point I’d make is that there is community transmission  which we're not detecting. We're detecting more and more of it I have to say  and that’s a good thing. We're detecting more people with no overseas links  and no direct links with COVID-19, as we needed to and as we suggested  some weeks ago. And it's a good thing it's happening more and more. It’s  happening at different rates in different states. But we are now detecting more  community transmission. Community transmission has been occurring. We  shouldn't kid ourselves. We need to be honest about that. We need to be  testing it and detecting it. The final point is modelling being released would be a  good thing and if we are going to ask the Australian people to trust  governments, governments have to trust people with the modelling. There's  various modelling out there by various think tanks and experts showing when  the pressure points come on ICU, if the Government has modelling I think it  would be good for them to release that.

KARVELAS: Chris Bowen thank you so much for joining me.

BOWEN: Good on you, Patricia.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512





