



The Hon Stuart Robert MP  Minister for the National Disability Insurance Scheme  Minister for Government Services

MEDIA RELEASE





Authorised by S. Robert MP, Canberra

Wednesday, 18 November 2020

Services Australia update for South Australia

Services Australia operations are changing for South Australia under new restrictions announced today by  the South Australian Government, with people urged to use Services Australia’s online and call service  options rather than visit service centres.

Service centres will remain open for vulnerable members of the community if they need to access immediate  support they’re unable to complete online or over the phone.

Minister for Government Services, Stuart Robert, said people can check and start applying for assistance  now and activate if they leave or have reduced employment.

‘If a person thinks there may be a change to their employment over the coming weeks, I’d encourage them to  go to www.servicesaustralia.gov.au/covid19 right now to check eligibility and start the application process,’  Minister Robert said.

‘People may be redirected to online or phone services if they visit a service centre for routine business - so  save a trip, stay home and try these options first.’

If people can’t use Services Australia’s online services, they can call their main payment line for assistance.  People can also call 131 202 to speak to Services Australia in their language.

In line with the latest health advice, there will be strict limits on the number of staff and customers who can  be in a service centre at any one time and anyone visiting must wear a face covering.

Desert Rose, one of the Agency's three Mobile Service Centres, is currently travelling through regional  South Australia. This trip has been paused to protect the safety of customers and staff.

‘The Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment is also available for people living in South Australia who can't earn  an income because they must self-isolate, quarantine or care for someone who has COVID-19,’ Minister  Robert said.

‘Eligible recipients will receive $1,500 for each 14-day period they have been told to self-isolate or  quarantine, or are caring for someone who has COVID-19.’

More information about support being provided by Services Australia is available at    http://www.servicesaustralia.gov.au/covid19.

[ENDS]  Media contact:  Minister Robert’s Office (02) 6277 7200

