



The Hon Ken Wyatt AM MP

Minister for Indigenous Australians  Member for Hasluck

MEDIA RELEASE

5 April 2020

ADDITIONAL FUNDING TO GET ACCURATE INFORMATION   TO INDIGENOUS AUSTRALIANS

Getting critical information out to all Australians through credible sources during the COVID-19  pandemic will help save lives.

First Nations Media Australia (FNMA) plays a valuable role in informing and communicating  with Indigenous communities and will receive an additional $234,500 this financial year to  support their contribution to limiting the spread of the virus.

Minister for Indigenous Australians, the Hon Ken Wyatt AM, MP, said the funding will help the  peak body of the Indigenous broadcasting and media sector to extend their production and  transmission of health and safety messages that connect and resonate with local audiences.

“First Nations Media is a critical link into both urban and remote communities and a valued  partner of Government to distribute important health information,” Minister Wyatt said.

“FNMA are addressing local issues, concerns and correcting misinformation by translating and  interpreting Government messaging so it is best understood by their audiences no matter  where they live.

“This funding will increase their capacity to continue to support the whole of Government effort  led by the Department of Health to ensure all Australians know how to protect themselves and  their community.

“It will also go towards purchasing equipment to maintain and expand essential services and  develop additional tailored media materials to be delivered across a range of platforms.

“Broadcasters will use local elders and leaders with cultural or community authority to  strengthen the important message of following Government advice, adopting the required  behaviours and taking personal responsibility to protect our mob.”

FNMA’s Chief Executive Officer, Catherine Liddle, said the First Nations media sector is  working in our cities, towns and remote communities to ensure audiences are kept informed of  the rapidly evolving situation.

“We are very pleased the Australian Government has recognised through this extra resourcing  the importance of ensuring First Nations media organisations are positioned to deliver accurate  and impactful information to vulnerable audiences during this pandemic,” Ms Liddle said.

“These extra resources will support the vital work of our industry in getting information to  communities in a way that is culturally appropriate, accessible, timely and trusted.”



Media contact: Luke Nayna, Senior Media Adviser, 0438 231 687

Authorised by Ken Wyatt AM, MP, Member for Hasluck.

