ANTHONY ALBANESE

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN



SHARON CLAYDON MP

CHAIR, STATUS OF WOMEN CAUCUS COMMITTEE

MEMBER FOR NEWCASTLE





WOMEN LEFT OUT AND LEFT BEHIND IN MORRISON’S RECESSION BUDGET



Under Scott Morrison and his Government, Australian women continue to be left out and left behind.

The 2020 Women’s Budget Statement released today by Labor shows that this year’s Morrison  Recession Budget contains no measures to address significant job losses in industries dominated by  women.

Since March, almost 200,000 have lost their jobs and 110,000 women have left the labour force  altogether. At the peak of coronavirus restrictions earlier this year, more than 1 million women had  no work whatsoever.

There is no doubt that Australian women have borne the brunt of the coronavirus pandemic and  Morrison recession.

But despite racking up more than a trillion dollars in debt, the Prime Minister’s re-hashed “women’s  economic statement” only allocated $240 million in new funding - 0.024 per cent.

In this year’s Budget, there is no new funding for frontline service providers to support women and  their children escaping domestic violence.

There is nothing new to properly drive down the gender pay gap. There is nothing to bolster  women’s superannuation or economic security in retirement.

There is no plan to lift the permanent rate of JobSeeker from $40 per day, tackle insecure work,  create opportunities for women or to improve access to childcare.

There is no plan to reduce childcare fees to support women going back to work during the deepest  recession in a hundred years.

At a time when women over the age of 55 are the fastest growing demographic facing  homelessness, there is no plan to build more social housing or repair properties unfit for tenants to  live in.

The Women’s Budget Statement was axed by Tony Abbott’s Government in 2014. Labor has  produced one from Opposition every year since.

Quotes attributable to Labor Leader Anthony Albanese:

“The lives of Australian women and girls matter. If we’re elected to lead Australia, we’ll reintroduce a  Women’s Budget Statement to stop women from being left behind, like they are under the Morrison  Government.”

“Only Labor will make sure no woman is held back, and no woman is left behind - because it’s the  right thing to do.”

Quotes attributable to Shadow Minister for Women Julie Collins:

“Women aren’t just facing many of the consequences of the coronavirus more harshly, we also know  they’re doing much more of the dangerous frontline work to combat the pandemic.”

“The truth is the Morrison Government has taken no serious action on gender equality. It’s time to  step up.”

Quotes attributable to Chair of the Status of Women Caucus Committee Sharon Claydon:

“We know the things that perpetuate gender inequality in Australia. Now is the time to re-double our  efforts to set about changing them - for the Morrison Government, that means equal representation  and restoring budgets that support women.”

THURSDAY, 8 OCTOBER 2020

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053

