

ANDREW LEIGH MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR TREASURY  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR CHARITIES  MEMBER FOR FENNER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  WEDNESDAY, 4 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Morrison’s ‘delivered’ surplus; Coronavirus; falling productivity;  manufacturing.

ANDREW LEIGH, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR TREASURY AND  CHARITIES: Good morning. My name is Andrew Leigh, the Shadow Assistant Minister for  Treasury. As Warren Buffett once put it, it’s only when the tide goes out you discover who's  been swimming naked. Labor has been warning about problems in the Australian economy  for many years now. We've been talking about the low productivity problem, the fact that  growth has slowed since the government came to office. We've been pointing out that  business investment is now at its lowest level since the early 1990s recession. We've  noted the slowdown in the rate at which new businesses are being created. Australia has  seen a motza of mergers, but a scarcity of start ups. Labor has noted the problems in  innovation in the Australian economy. We've pointed out that retail spending is in a bad  way, that construction faces significant challenges, that business confidence has taken a  whack.

Throughout their nearly seven years in office, the government has done nothing to address  these deep-seated structural problems. If anything, they've done harm. Think about the  harm that was done to Australian households by the 2014 horror budget, or Scott  Morrison's first plan when he became Treasurer of raising the GST to 15 per cent. Labor  has been pointing out the need for greater incentives for business to invest for some time  now. These were part of plans that we took to last year's election.

The fact is that economic crises are a part of economic management. The Howard  Government faced the Asian Financial Crisis. The Rudd Government faced the Global  Financial Crisis. So the government cannot simply use as an excuse the fact that it too is  facing a challenge in the world economy in the form of coronavirus. The Coalition had a  one point economic manifesto. It said it would deliver a surplus. It promised that it was  going to be able to cut taxes and still deliver that surplus. In fact, they were patting  themselves on the back before they got to the finish line, saying they had already delivered  the surplus last year. That isn't the standard that Labor set. That's the standard the  Coalition set for themselves, because they are after all the dumb step kids of Peter  Costello, whose notion of good economic management was to run razor thin surpluses and  forget about serious economic reform.



So if the government fails to meet their own surplus target, they will be on them. They've  said they have already met that target. They have set that as the standard. We in Labor  have said that there is much more that needs to be done for the economy, and if much  more had been done, we'd be in a much better place today. If the government had had  policies to raise wages rather than to cut penalty rates, then Australian households would  be better off facing down this challenge. If the government had had policies on human  capital and infrastructure to address productivity, we would be in a better place there too.  We could have a stronger growth rate than we have today. We could have an  unemployment rate that looks a whole lot more like America's, Britain's, New Zealand's or  Germany’s, where unemployment sits about a point below ours.

So Australia needs greater economic management and needs a government that will take  responsibility, rather than shirking, ducking and dodging as they’ve done on everything  from sport rorts to economic management. Happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: The government’s been citing some pretty extreme biosecurity measures  as part of the laws that have never been needed to be used before. Do you think that's too  much, given that in Australia we haven't seen the widespread outbreak of Coronavirus that  we’ve seen elsewhere?

LEIGH: Labor's taken a bipartisan approach to biosecurity. We’ll certainly respond based  on the comments that the experts have made. We've had briefings from the chief medical  officer. He briefed Labor members yesterday, and we respect the science on this, as we do  indeed on issues such as climate change. So we will continue to go with the experts on an  issue as important as biosecurity.

JOURNALIST: Andrew, we’ve had 29 years of economic growth without recession. Surely  that's not a bad result?

LEIGH: I think it's important to remember that a lot of our economic growth has been on  the back of population growth. So if you look on a per person basis, things don't look quite  so rosy. According to the HILDA survey, we've seen on a per person basis household  incomes go backwards from 2013 through to their most recent numbers. On a per person  basis, household spending didn't grow at all last year. The government likes to claim credit  for the fact that there's more people in Australia than they were. I'm a fan of population  growth as well, but it’s not a measure of living standards. What drives up living standards is  productivity growth, and we're actually seeing productivity going backwards. We haven't  had capital deepening - we've had capital shallowing. So all of these problems predated  bushfires. They predated Coronavirus and they’ve put the Australian economy in a  troubling position with which to face down these latest headwinds.

JOURNALIST: What’s the structural problem with the economy? Is it the fact we lack  manufacturing? That we don’t actually make stuff anymore, we just sell rocks and  education and can’t produce anything or value add? Is that the problem?

LEIGH: It's a great question. I gave a speech to the John Cain Foundation recently about  Australia's stagnant economy. We face a significant productivity challenge, which in my  view has to do with the fact we haven't addressed issues such as human capital through  raising teacher quality and ensuring everybody who has the smarts to go to university gets  a place. We also don't have the same calibre of management quality, according to the  surveys, as many other countries. So we do have significant productivity challenges,



innovation challenges. Our best firms are falling off the global productivity frontier. Ninety  five per cent of Australian firms according to Treasury have barely increased their  productivity since Sydney hosted the Olympics in 2000. These are problems which didn't  just turn up in the last month or two. These are problems that have been there throughout  the period of this government, and which they've just ignored.

JOURNALIST: What would you say to all the people right now that are panic buying all the  toilet paper at Woolies?

LEIGH: I'd give them the same advice the chief medical officer has been giving. I think we  need to go about our daily lives. If you're feeling unwell, obviously you should be self-isolating. Travellers should follow the advice that's available on the Department of Health  website. But at this stage, there's no cause for panic or alarm. People should go about  their daily lives, practice good hand hygiene, which will stop you getting a cold at any time  and frankly is a good way to live regardless of what the global health situation is.

JOURNALIST: But surely you can acknowledge that people are scared?

LEIGH: Absolutely. That nervousness is around, and I think it's the job of all leaders - and  Labor's look to be bipartisan on this - to be sensible and calm, methodical and measured  about the evidence that we have on the coronavirus so far. There are practical steps  people can take to reduce the risk. This is a virus which the experts tell us is extremely  contagious, but the mortality rate is lower than on some previous pandemics.

JOURNALIST: [inaudible] question - do you think that the 1974-75 Lima Agreement that  was signed by both Fraser and Whitlam was a good idea in retrospect?

LEIGH: Sorry, the ’74-75-

JOURNALIST: -Lima Agreement, which basically said we're going to send manufacturing  overseas to third world countries and buy their products. That was a, basically, a deliberate  act by the government to actually displace our manufacturing. But way back in 1974-75.

LEIGH: I'm not across every detail of the policies of the Whitlam Government, but certainly  under this Coalition government you've seen a significant hit to manufacturing. They  goaded Holden to leave the country without a plan as to where the alternative jobs would  come from. We've seen apprenticeships and training numbers absolutely crater. And you  understand why it becomes more difficult to attract overseas manufacturing firms to set up  in Australia when we don't have the apprentices and trainees. Human capital is  fundamental to industrial development, whether that's in agriculture, manufacturing or  services. And under this Government, we just haven't seen those core investments in  Australia's skills which are so critical as the automation revolution advances. Thanks very  much everyone.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHANIE ANDERSON 0431 344 056









