

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AFTERNOON AGENDA  WEDNESDAY, 16TH DECEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Australia short on vaccine deals and behind in queue; new  COVID-19 case in NSW; aged care home packages; St. Basil’s report release.

KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: Let's get some reaction from the Shadow Health  Minister Chris Bowen, joins me live now. What do you make of this blueprint for the  rollout? Does it make sense? Is it as you thought it would be?

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Afternoon KG. Well, I have  no quarrel with the rollout plans. There's a couple of things I'll make the point about  that I agree with the government and the authorities on. Of course there has to be  prioritisation. Of course the elderly and essential workers must come first.  Secondly I have absolutely no criticism of the TGA timeline. The TGA is  independent and should and must be respected by all politicians in terms of their  approvals, and when they are ready to approve. So I have no criticism of the TGA  approving the Pfizer vaccine for example in January, which is the current timeline.  What I am concerned about is a couple of things. Firstly, that even if the TGA  approves the vaccine in January, under the terms of the agreement that the  Federal Government entered into we don't get it until March and we only had 10  million doses. It's a two dose vaccine so it's 5 million Australians. So with that  prioritisation there'll be a lot of Australians missing out in the first instance. And we  now have three deals in place. Of course, the UQ vaccine hit the fence through no  fault of anybody. But we had a lot of bank, a lot of bank on that. And that was our  biggest vaccine buy that's hit the fence. So we now have three vaccine deals when  best practice around the world is five or six. We didn't have our first deal until  September when other countries had their first deal in March. So when the Prime  Minister says we're at the front of the queue, it's just not true. It's spin over reality.  We have a long way to go. We've supported every step the government's taken in  relation to vaccines, but we do call on them and we'll continue to call on them to do  more and faster.

GILBERT: So are you saying at this point, Australians will have to wait longer than  they should have to receive the jab?

BOWEN: Yeah, and through no fault of the TGA. As I stress, I support every step  the TGA takes, they are utterly independent and we respect their judgement. We  are in a different situation to the United States, the United Kingdom or even  Canada, that is true. We accept that totally. But if the TGA approves the vaccine in  January, and we're not getting access until March, and when we do get access in  March, it's 10 million doses. So it's 5 million Australians, one in five Australians  getting it. Now of course we all hope that the AstraZeneca vaccine comes through  quickly after that. Manufacturing has commenced, we support that. That could well  happen, that will be great. But it is a risk. We minimise that risk if we have more  deals. So for example, the Moderna vaccine is showing around a 95%  effectiveness rate on everything we can see. The J&J vaccine has been identified  by the TGA itself as one with great potential. We don't have direct deals for either  of those in Australia, other countries do. But under the Morison government, we  don't have direct deals for direct access to those vaccines, should they come  through faster and more effectively than say, AstraZeneca. Now we don’t know - I  very much hope for the AstraZeneca vaccine for which we do have an  arrangement in place, comes through quickly and can be distributed quickly. But I  think it is incumbent on the Government to be taking every step to minimise the  risks that Australians face. Again, as I stress we give bipartisan support to the  Government for the rollout strategy, it will be difficult in relation to the Pfizer  vaccine, it has to be distributed at minus 70 degrees. As I've previously been  pointing out for some time, that will have a high degree of difficulty, and that's even  more reason to spread our options to other vaccines wherever humanly possible.

GILBERT: In terms of minimising the risk, as you put it, one of one of the benefits  here is the fact that we can see, is it not, how it's received in the United Kingdom  and the US before we roll out the vaccine here. That's a huge advantage, isn't it?

BOWEN: Yeah, and that's entirely a matter for the TGA. They're taking their time.  They aren't making an emergency declaration because we don't need to in  Australia. I have from day dot supported that and accepted that. We are not calling  for the TGA to approve anything more quickly than they already are moving to do  so. What I am pointing out is that it would be unfortunate if once the TGA has  approved the vaccine as safe and efficacious if we're sitting around for another  month or so or more, waiting for the vaccine to come to Australia to be distributed  because that's the deal that the government has put in place.

GILBERT: We've seen another case in New South Wales. It's a driver of aircraft  crew in Sydney, a 45 year old man. What is your reaction to this? Should there be  tougher and tighter protocols around air crew when they arrive in this country?

BOWEN: Well Kieran, we need to get more information on this. I will say that,

again, this just underlines the difficulty of the task that all state governments are  undertaking. And I said to you before, and I'll say it again. We give the same  support to the New South Wales Government with the size of the challenge and  the task that they are undertaking as the engineer of the largest quarantine  programme in the country that we gave to Victoria. I mean, the Liberals, federally,  were taking potshots at Victoria when we were giving them support. Well, I'm not  going to take potshots at New South Wales. Brad Hazzard has my support for the  tough job he has to undertake. Now, if there are lessons out of this, of course  everybody will take them on. But, you know, let's let it play out. This news is only a  few hours old. Of course, it is concerning, we would have much preferred zero  community transmission to continue but we're not going to lose our heads. Let's  just continue with the strategy in place. Work together. Brad Hazzard and the New  South Wales Government  have our support for the steps that they undertake, just  as we've supported Dan Andrews and Steven Marshall and everybody else doing  their best in difficult circumstances.

GILBERT: And it does sound at this point like the man took necessary  precautions, was wearing a mask and so on according to Dr. Chant, the Chief  Health Officer, so that's encouraging.

BOWEN: I saw that, and that is encouraging. And I guess again, that just  underlines how difficult this is. People can follow all the procedures and there is  still risk. Of course this is a highly contagious disease. You know probably the  people who gave it to the man were not symptomatic at the time. You could reach  that conclusion based on what was said, but we don't really know. There’s a bit to  go there in terms of the information that's made available to the public. But again,  this is not an opportunity to second guess or to jump to conclusions or to take  potshots. Everybody is doing their best in these circumstances. It appears that this  has been identified relatively quickly. He’s been tested and has going into isolation  and the risk is being handled as best as it possibly can be on the face of it.

GILBERT: On to the aged care announcement today, a further billion dollars,  10,000 more aged care home care places. The Government says there have been  50,000 home care packages since the Royal Commission's interim report. Do you  do accept do you concede that they are making some much needed ground in this  space?

BOWEN: Tinkering, Kieran, Tinkering. I mean, by the Minister's own admission  there's a waiting list of 100,000 for home care packages. He's admitted that today.  He says just under 100,000 well let's just say 100,000. There have been 30,000  people die who'd been approved for home care but haven't yet received it in the  last three years. So they've died while they're waiting for home care. Home Care is  one of the key solutions going forward for taking pressure off residential aged care.  And you know, we see the Government constantly tinkering and saying ‘well, you  know a few more 1000 packages here and there’, when we've got a waiting list of



100,000. Now, we'll wait and see what the Royal Commission recommends, but if  the Government wants to pretend that they fixed the problem with 10,000 more  places when it's 100,000 on the waiting list well, we're going to respectfully differ.

GILBERT: And finally, on the aged care story still, apparently the Minister’s said  that the St. Basil's report into that outbreak will be released by Christmas. Do you  welcome that transparency?

BOWEN: Well yes but I hope it's not Christmas Eve. I hope it's not released, you  know this Government has a habit of a four o'clock Friday afternoon release of  anything that they don't particularly want to get much attention as you well know  Kieran, as you've had to cover. Makes your job and the job of all your colleagues  so much harder. So I would trust and expect that that report, if it's ready to be  released, should be released as soon as that is. And and if that's today or  tomorrow, so it shall be. But certainly not four o'clock or five o'clock on Christmas  Eve I would trust.

GILBERT: Shadow Health Minister Chris Bowen. Thanks. Appreciate your time  today.

BOWEN: Thanks KG. Good to talk.

ENDS

MEDIA: ELIZA MITCHELL 0413 410 931



