

JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

CANBERRA

TUESDAY, 3 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Reserve Bank decision on interest rates; Impact of

Coronavirus on the economy; Scott Morrison’s failure to provide

economic leadership or a plan; Bank pass through; National Accounts;

Stimulus; Surplus; May Budget.



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER:New record low interest rates are a

new low for the Morrison Government's economic credibility. This is the fourth

interest rate cut in the last 10 months, all since the last election. Interest rates

are now one sixth what they were during the darkest days of the Global

Financial Crisis. Interest rates were already at emergency levels before the

Coronavirus and the fires hit over this summer. Scott Morrison needs to

concede after months of economic mismanagement and underperformance of

the Australian economy that his inaction and his incompetence means that the

Reserve Bank has had to do all of the heavy lifting here. How low do interest

rates have to go in this country before Scott Morrison is shaken from his

inaction and his incompetence on the economy? It has been obvious to

everybody except the Morrison Government that the economy has been

floundering and that it desperately needs a boost. The nation is crying out for

economic leadership and an economic plan but Scott Morrison is missing in

action. This is a Prime Minister who has time to pore over colour-coded sports

rorts spreadsheets but can't be bothered coming up with a plan to protect

Australians from this floundering economy which has emerged on his watch.



Tomorrow we'll get the National Accounts data. I won't predict or pre-empt what

we'll see in those numbers. We already know that unemployment is rising,

growth has been slowing, and wages have been stagnant. There are issues in

the economy with productivity, business investment and household debt. In the

Budget, net debt has more than doubled on this Government's watch so that

most of the debt in the Budget is Liberal debt. The Prime Minister and the

Treasurer are talking about the position that we find ourselves in as we face the

significant challenges of the Coronavirus. We face these challenges from a

position of relative economic weakness, not strength, because of the inaction

and incompetence of the Morrison Government.



We are going into a difficult period where net debt has more than doubled and

where the Government has engaged in the usual clumsy and ham-fisted

expectation management about their surplus. This Government said that there

was a surplus in this Budget for this year and that that would help with

international uncertainty. They now can't make that same commitment. That's a

test that they set for themselves and it remains to be seen whether they will

meet it. But the fourth interest rate cut in the last 10 months is an indication that

the Reserve Bank has had to do all of the heavy lifting because Scott Morrison

and Josh Frydenberg couldn't be bothered coming up with a plan for an

economy which has been floundering for some time.



JOURNALIST: Doesn't the Government deserve some slack given this is a

pretty rare occurrence, such a huge pandemic outbreak like this?



CHALMERS: That might explain the fourth interest rate cut but it doesn't

explain the first three. The Coronavirus doesn't excuse or explain an economy

which was already slowing substantially or an economy where wages were

historically stagnant. It doesn't explain the underemployment or the worst

business investment in the 30 years since the [early 90s recession]. The

Government should stop pretending that weakness in the economy only just

arrived with the outbreak of the Coronavirus. The business community, credible

economists and Labor have been saying for some time that the economy needs

a boost, that it needs a plan and some kind of economic leadership from the

Government. The Prime Minister is missing in action.



JOURNALIST: With interest rates this low would you support something like

quantitative easing in the future?



CHALMERS: The Reserve Bank has had to contemplate measures that

weren't even seriously contemplated during the Global Financial Crisis because

Scott Morrison and Josh Frydenberg have been sitting on their hands. The

Reserve Bank has made it clear for some time that while they would

contemplate quantitative easing or other extreme measures their preference

would be for the Government to do something and to come to the table with

more infrastructure investment or other ways to boost consumption and

business investment. The Reserve Bank shouldn't be left to do all of the heavy

lifting. The Reserve Bank shouldn't have to contemplate these extreme

measures. They wouldn't have to if the Government knew what it was doing

and was prepared to show the required economic leadership to come up with a

plan to turn the economy around.



JOURNALIST: If the Government had gone ahead like you called for late last

year and stimulated the economy fiscally, wouldn't they now be in a less

financially secure position to stimulate the economy?



CHALMERS: I don't think that's the right way to come at this issue. I think the

right way to come at this issue is that the Government cannot guarantee a

surplus this year and the economy is weaker than it should be because of their

failure to act. The economy would be in a far stronger position to withstand and

deal with the significant challenges of the Coronavirus if the Government hadn't

sat on its hands for so long. That's not just Labor's position, that's been the

position of business organisations, big employers, the Reserve Bank, and the

IMF. As this Coronavirus fallout unfolds it will become clearer and clearer to

more and more Australians that the Government's inaction in the period before

the outbreak of the virus means that we confront these challenges from a

position of weakness, not strength. That's costly for the Australian economy, for

businesses, for workers and for families.



JOURNALIST: Do you think it's a cop out to blame Coronavirus for missing the

surplus then?



CHALMERS: The Coronavirus does not on its own explain or excuse their

failures in the Budget or weakness in the economy which has been apparent for

a long time now.



JOURNALIST: What would you have suggested that the Government do

instead?



CHALMERS: Since the middle of last year we've been calling for an incentive

for business investment because business investment is the weakest it's been

for three decades. We've said that they should contemplate other measures

like Newstart and like bringing forward some of the tax cuts. The absence of an

energy policy has been a handbrake on growth and the absence of a wages

policy has contributed to historically low wages growth in this country. There's a

menu of options for the Government to choose from. They've been unwilling to

do that. Now we're seeing some of the consequences of that as we enter a

difficult period from a position of weakness, not strength.



JOURNALIST: Are you concerned that we are heading towards a recession?



CHALMERS: Jen, I'm not prepared to speculate in that way. I don't think it's

helpful for me to do that. The economy is quite weak. It's been weak for some

time. We'll find out tomorrow what the end of last year looked like. We already

know from some of the indicators which have been released that construction

and CAPEX were extraordinarily weak. I'm worried that December wasn't

especially strong but we'll find that out tomorrow and we'll know more about it

then. The market is very worried about the March quarter partly because of the

Coronavirus but also other factors. Without speculating on what the number

might be tomorrow or what the March number might be it's been clear for some

time that we are in a period of weakness. There are a range of reasons for that

and one of the reasons is the Government's failure to act.



JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister and the Treasurer have made a show of

calling for the big four to pass on the rate cut in full but surely that's just another

display of their own clumsiness? Surely what matters is what it does cut to?

You've got Athena cutting its rate to a standard variable of 2.59 today, passing

the rate cut on in full. The big four pass it on in full, but those rates still have a

four in front of them. What should they do to lift their game?



CHALMERS: Both are important. Passing on the full impact of the rate cut is

very important. If the rate cut is to do the good it needs to do in the economy

then it needs to be passed on. You’re right to identify that there are still vastly

different interest rates available to people and they should familiarise

themselves with all of those rates before they make a decision about who they

might borrow from. Both things are important. Clearly, the first three interest

rate cuts didn't do as much good as the Reserve Bank or I would have hoped.

That is partly because they weren't passed on in full but also because monetary

policy on its own can't do all the work. We need a Government prepared to

come to the table but that hasn't happened so far and Australians are paying

the price.



JOURNALIST: Are you concerned about the hit from the interest rate cut to

retirees and others who rely on deposits?



CHALMERS: Absolutely. Savers have copped it in the neck from these last

four interest rate cuts. One of our concerns about leaving the Reserve Bank to

do all the heavy lifting has been that savers are punished every time rates are

cut. It's puffing up asset prices but it's not doing as much good as we'd all

hoped in the broader economy. That's yet another reason why we need to see

action from the Government. We need to see a plan and economic leadership

but we're not seeing either of those things.



JOURNALIST: There are no concerns about the banks’ earnings and their

profitability?



CHALMERS: The banks are still extremely profitable by anyone’s standards

and it's best for the broader Australian community and the Australian economy

if they find a way to pass on these rate cuts in full. These are challenging times

and they are more challenging than they need to be. We need people to get the

full benefit of this rate cut so that they can pay down their loans faster or take it

into shops and businesses to boost consumption. One of the big challenges

which was highlighted in the Reserve Bank statement today was that wages

have been stagnant. Wages growth has not been anywhere near what we need



it to be. The Reserve Bank is saying that they don't see that changing anytime

soon. That's a big concern for all of us who want to see more growth in the

economy. People don't have the disposable income that they need to spend

with confidence in our shops and businesses. That needs to change. Part of the

story is interest rate cuts, but there needs to be other ways looked at too.



JOURNALIST: Will you be calling for the Government to bring forward the

Budget and not wait until May?



CHALMERS: We've been calling for the Government to come up with a plan in

advance of the Budget. One of the issues that the Australian Industry Group

has rightly identified is that the Government flagging that they might do

something about business investment in the May Budget is counterproductive.

It encourages businesses to wait and see what that incentive might be down

the track. We've already got anecdotal evidence that some companies who

were about to invest have heard the Treasurer say that maybe there'll be an

investment allowance at some point down the track and have deferred their

investment, which is very troubling. The Government needs to come up with a

plan quick-smart. These challenges in the economy have not just emerged.

They've been obvious to everyone but the Government for a long time now.

They've been sitting on their hands for far too long and we don't want them to

leave things until too late. Thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949



