

JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC Drive Melbourne

TUESDAY, 3 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Impact of Coronavirus on the economy; Scott Morrison’s

failure to provide economic leadership or a plan; National Accounts;

Stimulus; Surplus; AAP journalists.



RAF EPSTEIN, ABC DRIVE MELBOURNE: Jim Chalmers, thanks for joining

us. How bad is the economy right now in your assessment?



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: We'll get a good sense of that

tomorrow when we get some new numbers from the end of last year but what's

already clear is we have rising unemployment, slowing economic growth, and

stagnant wages. We've got issues with productivity, business investment and

household debt. We've got a range of challenges in the economy. They've been

hanging around since well-before the Coronavirus and the difficult summer we

had with fires. This Coronavirus has the capacity to exacerbate those

challenges.



EPSTEIN: We'd be worse off wouldn't we, if we spent more? You've been

calling for stimulus over the last year or so, even since the election. If the

Government had followed your advice wouldn't we be less able to respond to

trouble now?



CHALMERS: I think that is completely and utterly wrong. We've always said

that Coronavirus will have a substantial impact on the economy but that we

enter this challenging time from a position of weakness rather than strength

because there hasn't been a plan for the economy. Since it became obvious in

the middle of last year that the economy was slowing we've been saying that

something needed to be done. It's a point that the Reserve Bank, international

institutions, business groups, and credible economists have all been making -



EPSTEIN: If we were more in debt, we’d be less able to fix it.



CHALMERS: If the economy was stronger coming into this this challenging

period around the virus then we'd be better off. That's not just a political barney

in Parliament House, it’s been the view of the credible economists for some

time now but the Government has been sitting on its hands. That means that

the economy is weaker than it should be going into the Coronavirus fallout.



EPSTEIN: You think it's a negative quarter of growth? Will the economy have

contracted in the first three months of this year?



CHALMERS: We haven't yet got the numbers for the last quarter of last year.

We'll get them tomorrow. We won’t get the quarter you are talking about until

June and we've got a little bit left to go -



EPSTEIN: Bushfires, Coronavirus, a lot of commentators are saying it's

inevitable the economy will contract in the first three months of this year. Do

you agree?



CHALMERS: A heap of them are saying that. It wouldn't be a surprise if it did. I

don't like to get into the prediction game. We've got this other quarter to get

through first. Obviously the quarter we're in now will be quite weak. The point

I'm making is that it wasn't especially strong before that either.



EPSTEIN: You were in Wayne Swan's office during the GFC. I know there's

always a political conversation about whether you did too much in office. That's

not a question that I want to address. The Government's considering stimulus

right now. If I can pull back on the partisan stuff, what would work? Would it be

as simple as, I've got people at home because of Coronavirus and therefore I

qualify for a bit of Government assistance? Do you think that is necessary?



CHALMERS: It's a better idea to address some of those challenges that have

been hanging around for a while which have been made worse by the

Coronavirus. Not enough people are consuming enough. That's hitting retail

and many of your listeners would be at the mall and be seeing a lot of For

Lease signs.



EPSTEIN: So you're suggesting cheques for people?



CHALMERS: You could do something in the tax system or the Newstart

system to boost consumption. Interest rates will help a little bit but probably not

enough. The other challenge is business investment. Business investment

hasn't been this weak in the 30 years since the early 90s recession so you

could have a tax break for businesses to invest.



EPSTEIN: Can I just clarify, you would suggest the Government do things

around tax like, you'd get a bit more of a discount on your tax and do that broad

brush for people? That's the way you would do it?



CHALMERS: The idea that's appealed to me for a long time is to have a look

businesses writing off some of their investments a bit quicker in the tax system.

It's called accelerated depreciation but it means if you invest onshore in

Australian kit and Australian jobs then you can get a tax break for that. That

would probably do some good. We'll wait and see what the Government comes

up with. They've finally started talking about a plan and if it's good when they

announce it then we'll support it but if it's insufficient we'll make that point too. I

know that you don't love a lot of partisan stuff on the program but it is a fact that

we've been quite constructive and said that the economy has been floundering

so let's do something about it.



EPSTEIN: Jim Chalmers, most people never run into journalists from the

Australian Associated Press when they go to work. I'm sure that you do. There

are 180 jobs there but I'm sure as Shadow Treasurer you have turned up to

something and the only journalist asking a question was from Australian

Associated Press. What difference do you think it makes if they're not there

anymore?



CHALMERS: It's going to make such a big difference and not just to the day-to-day politics of the place, but the foundations of the democracy. A lot of things

which are said might not be reported without them. I've been knocking around

politics for a long time now, I've been dealing with AAP journalists and they are

very dedicated. I’m thinking of a bloke called Colin Brinsden who is one of the

best economic correspondents that I've run into in the last decade or two. The

absence of those guys is going to make a huge difference. It's a horrible

outcome not just because they're good people but because they're excellent

journalists and they make a genuine contribution to the way the place operates.

It's a horrible day. There's no sugar-coating that, it’s very disappointing.





EPSTEIN: Really appreciate your time, thank you.



CHALMERS: Thank you, Raff.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949



