CATHERINE KING MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT AND

REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR BALLARAT





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS AM AGENDA WITH TOM CONNELL

TUESDAY, 6 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Infrastructure promises; Infrastructure underspends; Budget;

COVID-19 vaccine.



TOM CONNELL, HOST:  Thanks for your time Catherine King. Coming up

towards $10 billion in additional infrastructure projects, what do you make of the

announcements we've had so far from the government?



CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE,

TRANSPORT AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Well, of course, we

welcome any investment in infrastructure projects, particularly those projects

that are going to get the economy moving quickly and money moving through,

particularly regional economies and those that have been very hard hit by

coronavirus and also before with drought and bushfires. But you have got to

always look at the detail of these announcements, we had a $7 billion

announcement yesterday, we've got this $2 billion dollar announcement today.

The government has been underperforming when it actually comes to the

delivery of infrastructure. We see lots of big headlines, but not necessarily the

projects actually being delivered. They've underspent each and every budget in

their infrastructure funding. $1.7 billion last year, $6.8 billion across the entirety

of their budgets. We can't afford, frankly, given where the economy is for the

government to just get a headline and not actually deliver those projects. It

needs to spend the time and the effort required in actually getting those

projects done. If you look at, for example, the Urban Congestion Fund, 2018

Budget that was announced, they haven't managed to get very many of those

projects actually delivered. $200 billion promised in New South Wales yet

they've only spent $4 million. So, I think there is a real problem with this

government that it makes a lot of noise about what it's doing, but doesn't spend

a lot of time actually implementing and actually doing what you need to do to

get the projects up and the jobs out there.



CONNELL: Reaction from the states is pretty positive. The Queensland

premier says it's fantastic news, Daniel Andrews wants more, but says he's

very happy with the actual news announced there. So, what do you make of

that reaction, a couple of Labor premiers?



KING: Yeah, well, I think that as I said, any announcement of new money, and

some of this of course, is not new money, it's money that they have underspent

from previous budgets, or some projects are now actually going to cost more.

Any money is going to do good, but it's the delivery that actually matters and,

frankly, the government's been pretty underwhelming when it comes to

delivery. We need money flowing through economies now, not in five years’

time, three years’ time or two years’ time, we need it immediately. And you

know, the fact that there's car parks they haven't managed to build that they

promised two to three years ago, roundabouts, crossings, doesn't fill me with a

great deal of confidence that those big headlines are actually going to see

people in jobs in communities right the way across the country. The other thing

about their infrastructure spend is that every area isn't being treated equally.

We've seen them with the Urban Congestion Fund, we've seen them with the

Building Better Regions Fund, there are very high level of concentration of

projects in Liberal and National party seats, not necessarily in Labor Party

seats. We cannot afford as a country for them to continue to do this.

Everybody's been affected by coronavirus, whether you live in Labor seat or a

Liberal or a National Party seat or a Greens seat or that matter. If the

government uses this money as it has done in the past to pork barrel its own

seats again that will be incredibly disappointing to the people of Australia.



CONNELL: When we're talking about money for regional parts of Australia,

though, I mean, many more of those seats are in the hands of the LNP. Are you

saying disproportionate compared to how many seats the LNP actually hold?

So you have any breakdown on that?.



KING: Yeah, well certainly the Australian National Audit Office is having a look

at the Building Better Regions Fund, and it's good that it is doing that because

that in particular, I think there's been some pretty egregious things go on there.

But if you look at the Urban Congestion Fund, which is by its very nature, is just

major capital cities and suburbs, that in particular has been skewed pretty

heavily to Liberal Party seats in particular. So, again, as I said, I just don't think

the nation can afford this sort of politicking going on with infrastructure funding,

you know, it should be spread pretty evenly across the country, because we've

all been affected.



CONNELL: What about the states and their role in spending, I suppose within

infrastructure probably as well. So, if you look at what Victoria has done in

terms of additional spending on the back of COVID, $14.4 billion or 3.1% of

GSP, federal government training $314 billion or 15.8% of GDP. The federal

government's come to the party a lot more hasn't it?



KING: Well it's certainly been very good that after some pressure, the

government put in place a wage subsidy scheme with the JobKeeper program

and increased the level of JobSeeker. Of course, that's where the vast majority

of the Commonwealth spending has been and of course it is the

Commonwealth that can actually do that because of the nature of it being the

national government, it can do that consistently across states. I think that you

will see in the state budgets that are to follow the federal budget, I think you will

see a substantial increase in spending to get the economy going, particularly in

Victoria.



CONNELL: The Federal Government, even before its budget, that's five times

the spending of Victoria, which should be spending the most given it's the most

affected. I mean, those numbers are stark, aren't they?



KING: I think that what you're going to see, as I said, I think you'll see in the

Victorian budget coming up quite an investment in economic recovery. Frankly,

we've not been in recovery stage yet at all, we've seen some small, tiny signs

of that in regional Victoria. We've really been fighting the pandemic and

Victorians have done an amazing job as has the Victorian Government to get

these numbers down. We're not out of the woods yet. I think, you know, it was

a little early to start focusing on recovery when they did, we're very grateful that

there's been a wide subsidy program in place, we do think that the withdrawal

of that wage subsidy or some of that wage subsidy is probably a little early for

Victoria and for certain sectors of the economy. But certainly, I think we'll see in

the Victorian budget some big spending measures there as well.



CONNELL: We'll see if it compares. I’m just going to get you finally and briefly

on your former shadow portfolio of health. The government will have in its

predictions a vaccine next year, we'll find out the exact month, efficacy and

various assumptions. But is that fair enough? I mean, they said to get in the

best health advice. They need to work this in somewhere, there's every chance

it's not accurate, but they need some estimates do they not?





KING: Well, I think as you've seen the governments had pretty heroic

assumptions built into most of its budgets and they haven't proven to be true.

Let's hope this one is. I think we're all wanting to see that there is a vaccine, but

we have seen the Australian Medical Association, national president today,

again, say he thinks that that's a very heroic assumption to be putting into the

budget. They government, obviously, is doing that for a reason, but let's hope

it's true. If it's not the government needs to be transparent and accountable

about if it got it wrong and its numbers are wrong.



CONNELL: But it is taking health advice on when that vaccine would be

available and at what rate in the population, isn't that fair enough, is that getting

it wrong?



KING: Well, I think that may well be. As I said, I think that what they've done in

the past is put pretty heroic assumptions in the budget. I think there's quite a

few people who are very concerned about whether they will be a vaccine

available next year. It's in all of our interests that there is, we want it to be, but

wanting it to be and it actually being so are two very different things. Let's see,

it will be up to the government to explain the assumptions it's placed into the

budget and the advice on which it has based that, but as I said, today we've

had the Australian Medical Association President pretty firmly saying that that's

a very heroic assumption to put into a budget.



CONNELL: Catherine King, perhaps we'll talk about that assumption once we

know what it is. Thanks for your time.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: NICK BEAVER 0419 709 266



