

THE HON JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES

MEMBER FOR HUNTER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS

TUESDAY, 3 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: John Barilaro pretending to be in Opposition; Coronavirus;

Sports Rorts; Scott Morrison loose with the truth no Brian Houston.



CHRIS KENNY, HOST: Let's cross back to Canberra now and catch up with

Labor's Resources and Agriculture Spokesman, Joel Fitzgibbon. Thanks for

joining us Joel.



JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: Pleasure, Chris.



KENNY: Just first off, I want to get you on the Coronavirus issues, the way it's

playing out. The prospect that there could be more travel bans. We'll see what

happens there. But obviously the Reserve Bank reducing interest rates today,

clearly a direct reaction to what damage this virus might do, this pandemic

might do to the economy. Has the government got the settings right on all of

this?



FITZGIBBON: Before I go there, Chris, can you do me a favour? Next time you

have John Barilaro on - the Deputy Premier of New South Wales - can you just

remind him he's been in government for nine years and serves in the second

most senior position in the government? He can't behave like someone in

opposition all of the time. I mean, like the mob down here, he has a secret

coalition agreement with the government which gives him a big car, and a big

salary and lots of stuff, and the title of Deputy Prime Minister, yet he wants to

act like in opposition as someone, you know, on the backbench in opposition.

You can't have it both for his Chris.



KENNY: Well, no it's - look it's a good point. I mean, he's in that Cabinet. He's

the Deputy Premier, but that's why I asked him whether he'd raised these

concerns about the 2050 target in Cabinet to try and change it. It's no point, as

you say, behaving like an oppositionist. But that's like having the Otis group in

Canberra in the Labor Party, isn't it? Isn't that a little oppositionist group?



FITZGIBBON: Well, isn't it an admission to his inadequacies? He says he

keeps raising these things but nothing ever change - that nothing ever

changes. And he of course the threw David Littleproud - the minister - down

here under the bus. Littleproud is trying to blame the New South Wales

Government for the fact that people affected by the bushfires, in particular small

business, aren't getting assistance. And he tells you on your program, as a

scoop for you, that he's actually written to Littleproud saying that the guidelines

set by Littleproud are too difficult, and that's why the New South Wales

Government has been unsuccessful in getting this assistance out to people. So,

they're at war with one another. But John Barilaro is in a war with his own

government but seems totally ineffectual and unable to change government

policy.



KENNY: Well, he’s certainly at war with them. He certainly running different

lines to them, but I happen to think he's running very sensible lines. What

should happen here is they need to get John Barilaro into Canberra and start

running some of these sensible lines nationally, and you ought to go into state

politics because New South Wales Labor needs a decent leader.



FITZGIBBON: Then John will come to Canberra and do exactly the same thing

Barnaby Joyce and the other Nats do. They scream and kick and make lots of

noise. They say they're going to build dams, but they never do any of these

things. I mean, that they just take the money, Chris. I mean, Black Jack

McEwen, Doug Anthony, Tim Fischer would be, you know, rolling in their

graves if they thought they - if they saw the way the Nats of the 21st century

are bullied by the Libs in the way this mob are. I mean, it's just hopeless. They

can't just be activists. They've got to be - they've got to be politicians.



KENNY: All grist for the mill, and we'll make sure - we'll make sure John

Barilaro hears about all that. But I need to get you on some federal issues. First

up very quickly, are the government's settings on the coronavirus about right?



FITZGIBBON: Look, I think what's most important here, Chris, is bipartisanship.

We were rightly critical of Scott Morrison's failure over the summer months. I

think he's learned some lessons from that. He's picked up his game; a little bit

of the arrogance seems to have disappeared on what is a really serious issue.

We've got to have confidence and faith in the government, which of course is

behind the steering wheel, getting all the advice both nationally and

internationally. We appreciate the fact that we are being briefed on a regular

basis. Chris Bowen, in particular, Chris, is running a line of everything they do.

And I think so far, we're satisfied by the response.



KENNY: You're still going in very hard on this sports rorts caper. Yeah look,

obviously I've said many times it was an obvious boondoggle. I think most

people understand that. There's politics involved in the way the grants are

handed out. But if the Prime Minister was suggesting any preferences to the

Minister, that's hardly a problem is it? That's exactly what we expect Prime

Ministers to do.



FITZGIBBON: But why wouldn't we go hard, Chris? I mean, we have a Prime

Minister not tortured by self-doubt. He's full of arrogance when he was first

challenged. Of course, he's been absolutely caught out now in Senate

estimates at the hands of the no less than the independent Australian National

Audit Office. And all of us in our constituencies, Chris, have hardworking

volunteers in their sporting clubs, who worked overtime in addition to working

on the chook raffles and everything else they need to do, the time they spend

with their children, only to spend hours and hours and hours filling out these

forms, and then only to be duded because the merit wasn't followed. Rather,

Scott Morrison's political interests were the guiding light for how these grants

were allocated. And when they see projects like the North Sydney swimming

pool getting money out of regional drought fund, then they are entitled to be

angry and we are entitled to go after the government very hard on their behalf.



KENNY: You are indeed but you don't expect to like get the Prime Minister's

scalp here? Why are we just delving into the entrails so much; aren't there

bigger issues for Anthony Albanese and Federal Labor to concentrate on?



FITZGIBBON: What is the bigger issue then the accountability of a government

that has been caught red handed, but won't even take a debate in the

Parliament on the matter? Yeah coronavirus, the economy - which is tanking -

bushfires, all of these things are really important - what they what they are

doing to GP services in the bush. We are talking about those things for most of

the day as well.





KENNY: They did flick a minister. There's a minister that's lost a job over it.

Sorry to hurry along, but I wanted - I thought you might want to tell us what you

think about this revelation now directly from the Prime Minister after months of

avoiding the question that he did in fact put Pastor Brian Houston's name up for

a visit to the White House. Obviously, the White House rejected it.



FITZGIBBON: Well, the Prime Minister has stood down the House of

Representatives and said there's nothing to see on sports rorts. He did the

same thing at the National Press Club, he misled in terms of his Hawaiian

holiday during the bushfire season and tried to hide that from the Australian

community, and now we learned that when he looked down the barrel of the

camera, refusing to answer, describing the Houston thing is only as gossip, he

refused to answer that question at least six times, Chris. And now for some

reason, and we might still find out why in the not too distant future, he's had an

epiphany and he admitted that he was the person who recommended to the

White House that Houston be invited to that dinner.



KENNY: Joel Fitzgibbon, thanks for joining us.



FITZGIBBON: A pleasure Chris.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DAVID BULLOCK 0405 408 871





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













