SENA



TOR THE HON LINDA REYNOLDS CSC Minister for Defence Senator for Western Australia

THE HON PETER DUTTON MP Minister for Home Affairs Member for Dickson

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

AUSTRALIA CONTINUES TO COMBAT  FOREIGN CYBERCRIMINALS

The Morrison Government is continuing to strike back against offshore cybercriminals who are conducting COVID-19 related malicious activities, through an operation being led by the Australian Signals Directorate (ASD).

Minister for Defence, Senator the Hon Linda Reynolds CSC said ASD remains on the front foot when it comes to protecting Australians from malicious cyber activity.

“This operation has protected hundreds of Australians and thousands more foreigners from organised and sophisticated foreign cybercriminals,” Minister Reynolds said.

“These cybercriminals have been targeting Australians through COVID-19 themed SMS phishing campaigns that are designed to trick Australians into downloading advanced criminal malware onto their mobile phones.

“ASD is using its offensive cyber capabilities to attack the cybercriminals’ tools - disrupting their operations and interrupting their ability to exploit Australians.

“In doing so, ASD has successfully disrupted the business model of key foreign cybercrime syndicates targeting Australians and exposing potential victims to significant financial losses.”

Supported by intelligence reporting from the Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission, ASD acted after it identified the business model adopted by the sophisticated criminal syndicates.

The Australian Federal Police supported this operation by collaborating with its international law enforcement partners - demonstrating the effectiveness and importance of close working relationships among Australia’s intelligence and law enforcement agencies.

Minister for Home Affairs, Peter Dutton said the Morrison Government is committed to protecting Australians from foreign cybercrime syndicates.

“The threat and impact of foreign cybercriminals has been amplified through malware developers selling or renting out their products through the dark web, making high-end hacking tools more accessible to criminals lacking in technical sophistication,” Minister Dutton said.

Date received: 2 December 2020

“We can’t sit by while a marketplace exists for sophisticated cybercrime tools to be used against Australians.”

For information on how to protect yourself and your business from cyber threats, and for the latest and advice - visit cyber.gov.au.

Media Contacts Nicky Hamer (Minister Reynolds’ Office): +61 437 989 927 Minister Dutton’s Office: 02 6277 7860

