

MICHELLE ROWLAND MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS

MEMBER FOR GREENWAY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2SER THE WIRE

MONDAY, 3 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECT: ACCC draft mandatory news code.



HOST: The code follows recommendations following an 18 month investigation

by the ACCC which argued that digital giants should share income generated

directly or indirectly by news content providers on their websites. Tahlia Kraefft

asked Michelle Rowland, the Shadow Opposition Minister for Communications,

whether this would work.



MICHELLE ROWLAND MP, SHADOW MINISTER FOR

COMMUNICATIONS: Well, this is certainly a welcome development and the

ACCC has been working on this matter for a number of years and it’s pleasing

that Australian companies will now get a decent return on their investment in

public interest journalism from digital platforms such as Google and Facebook.

So, the code contains measures that address price and non-price terms and

this is now up for consultation for the next couple of weeks. After that time,

hopefully it will proceed to a point that will have returns for Australian media

companies.



TAHLIA KRAEFFT, JOURNALIST: Do you expect that tech giants such as

Google and Facebook will comply with the draft code outlined?



ROWLAND: Well, the interesting thing is that I’ve seen reports, even from

Google today, threatening to dump their Google news service in Australia and

that would of course have implications for them financially, but also for

Australian consumers, in particular the potential for misinformation to be

allowed to thrive on the internet basically. So, that is a concern. But, the thing

about dynamic sectors, especially in ICT, is that regulation is preferable to

having a situation where there is uncertainty about what the regulation might

be. So, in some ways, you would think that the platforms would appreciate that

there is a clear regulatory framework that has been proposed by the ACCC

which makes compliance quite clear so that the regulatory boundaries are well

known. But, as anticipated, we’re in this space where the platforms will argue

about the code and it is the right of anyone at this point because it is open for

consultation to present arguments for and against the draft and we should let

that play out over the next four weeks or so.



KRAEFFT: How does the ACCC propose that the code of conduct be policed

so that media organisations will get paid for their content?



ROWLAND: Well, that’s actually really interesting because what the ACCC has

proposed is a negotiate-arbitrate model. So, a period in which negotiations and

mediation can occur for around a three month period. If no agreement can be

reached on that. then the process is called a binding final offer arbitration where

each party submits their best and final offer and a decision is made which will

be accepted. In some respects, that is quite an efficient way of doing this, but in

another sense, this is also part of what the ACCC already does in a number of

other sectors, including in telecommunications access disputes and has done

that for many years. I guess one thing that hasn’t really come out in some of the

commentary is the resourcing that the ACCC will need to do that. There is

reference in the documentation to having arbitrators to call upon in order to

conduct this work, but they will be quite specialist people who will be required to

do that task. I mean, they will be doing something that really has not been done

on a broad scale in the world before and that is valuing news content as it is

disseminated by the platforms. So, it is actually moving into a very interesting

period in this sector.



KRAEFFT: How do you expect that this draft code will impact news

organisations and how will they be able to access these funds?



ROWLAND: This will be up to the process of negotiation and  arbitration but

the whole point of this is about having the opportunities for collective bargaining

and with this code there is strength in the collective. So, it depends on how

many organisations choose to be part of that negotiating framework - the more

the better. You would think that even from a purely theoretical basis that it

would be desirable, which in a sense is why it is disappointing and doesn’t

really make sense that the Government has excluded the public broadcasters -

the ABC and SBS - from this scheme.



KRAEFFT: Do you think that this draft code is an appropriate solution to news

companies that have experienced falls in ad revenue through COVID-19?



ROWLAND: I think it is a prudent approach and it is one that has not been

thought up overnight. The ACCC has done extensive work here. As I’ve

mentioned, the ACCC has extensive experience over many years in dealing

with disputes over regulated facilities and services, so you would think that they

do have the skills to do this. I think we do need to remember that this digital



disruption did not happen overnight. You’ve got the market power of the

platforms that has developed over some time, and the ACCC has made a

finding in relation to that. Of course, you’ve also got declining advertising

revenues over traditional media that have gone digital and added to that of

course is the pandemic. It really is a difficult period for news organisations in

Australia, but on the other hand, never before has the Fourth Estate in all its

forms been so important for holding governments to account and keeping

Australians reliably informed.



HOST: Michelle Rowland, the Shadow Minister for Communications, speaking

there with Tahlia Kraefft.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ADAM BOIDIN 0406 009 019









