Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.









The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health

Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Public Service and Cabinet

The Hon. Anne Ruston MP  Minister for Families and Social Services

The Hon. Stuart Robert MP  Minister for the National Disability Insurance Scheme   Minister for Government Services

3 April 2020



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

IMMEDIATE RESPONSE PLAN TO FOCUS ON PEOPLE WITH DISABILITY  DURING CORONAVIRUS

The Government is committed to ensuring the well-being of Australians with disability are  considered as the coronavirus pandemic unfolds.

As such, an advisory group has been established by the Morrison Government to guide  development and implementation of a response plan focusing on the unique health needs of  people with disability during the coronavirus pandemic.

The advisory group, endorsed yesterday by the Australian Health Protection Principal  Committee, will develop and implement the Management and Operational Plan for People  with Disability.

The Plan will form part of the Australian Health Sector Emergency Response Plan for the  Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) and will ensure the health care needs of people with  disability, their families and carers can be met during the pandemic, including access to  coronavirus screening, prevention and health care.

The Plan will give priority to individuals whose disability and current health status places  them at the greatest risk from coronavirus. This includes people with intellectual disability  and people who have complex support needs— behavioural, social, or physical—to  undertake the activities of daily living.





Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





Measures to ensure continuity of essential support for NDIS participants, workers and  providers through the coronavirus outbreak were announced on 21 March, following  discussions by the Council of Australian Governments’ Disability Reform Council (DRC),  with an update to be provided to the next DRC meeting scheduled for next week.

The advisory group will hold its first meeting on Friday 3 April with an aim to deliver the  Plan to the AHPCC on Thursday 9 April, for immediate action.

The advisory group is chaired by a senior official from the Department of Health and  includes experts from the disability sector, academia, clinical practice, nursing, Australian  government officials, and state and territory government representatives.

-ENDS-

