



THE HON KEN WYATT AM MP

Minister for Indigenous Australians  Member for Hasluck

TRANSCRIPT

TRIPLE J HACK  10 NOVEMBER 2020



Topics: NAIDOC Week, Indigenous voice, US Presidential Election

E&OE…

Avani Dias Yeah, let's talk to someone who has the power to create policies to deal  with some of those issues, Wongi and Noongar man Ken Wyatt is the federal  minister for Indigenous Australians. Thank you so much for coming back on hack.

Minister Wyatt It's great to be with you.

Avani Dias The theme of NAIDOC Week this year is 'Always was, always will be' it  recognises this idea that we know that First Nations people were here long before  colonisation for more than 65000 years. What does that idea mean to you?

Minister Wyatt Well, it means not only land, but continuity of our culture, our way of  life, the knowledge, the arts, the skills that prevailed, that enabled us to live to 65000  years. There were no industries around Aboriginal people. It was communities within  their cultural areas living off the land, optimising all of the seasons, but also a way of  life that ensured continuity of life over that period of time. And then that changed  when we had some visitors come to our coast.

Avani Dias Yeah, you know, we're recognising colonisation here right now and the  fact that, you know, Australia existed much before that colonisation. But we do  recognise that in our Constitution. Where is that up to?

Minister Wyatt I was on the expert panel and we had some really good discussions  around this issue. But what I want to do first was get the voice right, because Uluru  Statement talked about a Voice to Parliament. How do we best listen to people at the  community level? When I go into communities, people are frustrated that they keep  asking for the same things that all Australians have, but they don't always get them.  That is the focus of the regional voice. And they will be the major emphasis then with  a national voice that will meet with government around some very key and critical  things. I'm considering all the options in there. It'll be released and go back out for  further consultation. And then when that's done, we will draft the legislation.



Avani Dias Minister, haven't we been here before, though? You know, we've been  consulting on this for several years before the Uluru statement came out in 2017,  there were regional dialogues about this that was funded by your government as  well. Why are we still consulting on this? It's 2020.

Minister Wyatt Often the cohorts who were consulted were not significant numbers.  There was not community emphasis.

Avani Dias In fairness, the minister wasn't there consultation. There was regional  dialogues in 13 different regions across the country ahead of that Uluru statement  being published. Wasn't that exactly listening to so many people? Of course,  everyone's always going to disagree in some way over how this is done. But has this  fallen off the agenda for your government?

Minister Wyatt No, it hasn't. Look, you're missing the point of 4000 people is not  800000 indigenous Australians. It's not the 2000 Aboriginal communities that no one  ever goes to or people very rarely go to hear their voices. And the Traditional Owners  in one community, it was Katherine, who said to me, isn't it interesting? You fellows  always acknowledge Traditional Owners and Elders, but do you ask us for our  opinions? And they then said Aboriginal organisations that are created in our country  do not include us.

Avani Dias I understand that, Minister, and I definitely understand what you're  saying. But I guess we're sort of going around in circles here, though. You know, you  can have consultation for many years and you can never stop consulting with people,  but that's not going to deliver any concrete action.

Minister Wyatt Let me say consultation is not Co-design. And that's what this model  is. It's co-designing. It's designing with Aboriginal people to meet their needs. And it  doesn't matter what I do, you or I say, if we have a voice that does not connect to  community, then it is a waste of time and effort again. And we'll be doing this in ten  years time.

Avani Dias Minister, obviously all of this discussion is about, you know, ensuring that  the lives of First Nations people in Australia are improved. And, you know, speaking  on the show today, we're talking to young people who say one of their biggest  concerns is the high rate of incarceration of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander  peoples and deaths in custody. You've set this new justice target and a few of those  in the Closing the Gap report. But what are you doing in terms of actual action and  fixing this issue, not just measuring the problem?

Minister Wyatt My question to you is who runs the jails? Because that's what we  have to think about. Each state and territory run those. I have to influence state and  territory governments to look at their practices and their laws.



Avani Dias And so what are you doing to address that? Obviously it is. It is state and  territories which fund police. But doesn't this require federal leadership?

Minister Wyatt The Constitution restricts the Commonwealth to certain areas, even  the bushfires. The Prime Minister. Would not trample over the rights of the states that  by getting agreement from the premiers and first ministers of each state and territory  that were affected. We then worked in partnership to tackle those elements. It's the  same as floods and it's the same as Covid-19.

Avani Dias So, Minister, is is there any sort of federal policy in this area that you're  committing to in order to reduce deaths in custody in Australia?

Minister Wyatt Well, we can be contributing to Closing the Gap approach in which  we will ask states to achieve the targets. That's the policy. The targets have been  agreed to by state and territories and by 51 Aboriginal peak organisations and the  Commonwealth.

Avani Dias Minister, before we let you go, you know, the US election has obviously  seen, I guess, the call for for a winner now. And Joe Biden and his party have  declared victory. And it was interesting over the weekend to hear Joe Biden and his  team say that systemic racism was a problem that they wanted to fix. Is that  something that your government aligns with in terms of dealing with that issue as  well?

Minister Wyatt I certainly do. I certainly want us as a nation to have respect and to  stamp out racism. And we've seen it during Covid the racism that was also projected  against some of the Chinese community. And we see it constantly with Aboriginal  people through different behaviours. So we as a nation have got to take to a  stocktake of our attitude and the way in which we are inclusive.

Avani Dias All right, Minister, thanks so much for coming back on the show.

Minister Wyatt No you're welcome. And you have a good day.

[ENDS]

Authorised by K. Wyatt, Member for Hasluck

