



The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

The Hon. Josh Frydenberg MP  Treasurer

The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health



JOINT MEDIA STATEMENT

Monday 26 October 2020

STEPS TO VICTORIA’S REOPENING



The Commonwealth Government welcomes the announcement by the Victorian Premier to ease  restrictions from 11.59pm on Tuesday.

Victorians have worked hard and sacrificed a lot to get to this point. We thank them for their patience  and perseverance.

Today’s announcement is a reflection of the dedication and effort of Victorians - taking the next step to  reopen Victorian society and the state’s economy.

After a long winter, there is light at the end of the tunnel for Victorians.

As we said yesterday - Victorians have made great progress in reducing the rate of COVID-19 infections  from the second wave outbreak in Victoria.

The new National Framework to reopen by Christmas is a clear and transparent, three step national plan  which provides the Australian community and businesses with a way forward where Australians can live  and work in a COVID Normal Australia, ensuring that we maintain strong health protections and  minimise job losses and mental health impacts.

Under the new ‘National Framework’ released last week, Victoria is now moving towards Step 1 - an  important step on the pathway to COVID Normal.

Australia has been a world leader in fighting the virus to save lives and to save livelihoods and with  today’s announcement, we look forward to Victoria continuing to make progress on the path to  reopening and joining the rest of the country at Steps 2 and 3 in the national plan.

It will be important for the Victorian Government to provide even more clarity to Victorians in the  coming days and where restrictions do not have a health basis that they are removed quickly.

We congratulate Victorians - this was the announcement that they were expecting and one they have  worked hard to achieve.

It is important for Victoria to safely open and stay safely open.

The Prime Minister and Premiers Berejiklian, Marshall and Andrews will continue to take advice  regarding hard border restrictions.

The Commonwealth Government will continue to support Victoria through this crisis.

ENDS

Media Contacts:  Prime Minister’s office: 02 6277 7744  Treasurer’s office: Liana Fisher, 0402 542 779  Minister Hunt’s office: Matt Kelly, 0417 101 712  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

