

October 14, 2020



COVID computer skills used to give students a tuition



boost



premier.sa.gov.au



/news/media-releases/news/covid-computer-skills-used-to-give-students-a-tuition-boost



14/10/2020



| John Gardner MP



| Better Services



Up to 2000 South Australian public school students will soon have access to one-on-one



maths tutoring to take their learning further, with the launch of the



Learning+



program.



Launching next year, the $3.6 million pilot will see qualified teachers deliver tutoring to



students online for 30 minutes twice a week.



The pilot will begin with tutoring in maths, a subject often seen as particularly complex,



and will assist up to 1000 Year 6 students in Term 1 next year, as well as a further 1000



Year 8 students in Term 2.



Schools can nominate to take part in the program and students will be selected to



participate.



Students’ progress will be monitored during the 10 week tutoring period as part of an



evaluation of the pilot.



Applications for up to 250 paid tutoring positions are open from next week and will be



aimed at maths teachers.



Education Minister John Gardner said the investment was an opportunity for teachers



while also providing a boost for students who need it.



“This is an exciting new tutoring program lead by qualified teachers, and we are



confident this pilot will provide a boost for students,” said Minister Gardner.



“Every learner is different, and we want to make sure our students have every



opportunity to excel in their education and are set up for success.



“Having confidence with maths is crucial for students and we know that many jobs of



the future require a STEM focus.



“This program aims to help students build important learning skills, understand the



curriculum more deeply, accelerate learning, foster a positive attitude towards learning



and develop greater self-confidence.



“The COVID-19 pandemic has meant that many of our educators have significantly



increased their ability to teach curriculum material in an online environment, and



teachers taking part will be able to use those skills to complement this pilot.



1/2



“I am sure that many teachers will see this pilot as a great opportunity to earn more



income while supporting students who need it the most, and I encourage members of



our workforce to apply.”



2/2

