

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP

Prime Minister



TRANSCRIPT

INTERVIEW WITH LAURA JAYES AND PETER STEFANOVIC, SKY NEWS LIVE  MONDAY 16 MARCH 2020

EO&E…

LAURA JAYES: Prime Minister Scott Morrison, thank you for your time. Victoria has just declared a state  of emergency. Is that required nationwide?

PRIME MINISTER: This was discussed at the National Cabinet yesterday, as you know, that's the first time  ever that the National Cabinet has been brought together all the Premiers, Chief Ministers and myself  convened that yesterday one of the key issues they discussed was how states would move to that public  health emergency status. I mean, it has different expressions and different laws in different states and  territories, but it's effectively giving those states and territories powers to undertake certain actions and  enforce them in managing the health crisis. And they all agreed they would sort of move towards that  footing over the next few days consistent with their own laws, some have been there for a while like  Queensland, South Australia moved yesterday, Victoria has moved today so we can expect that to  continue and that is being done in a coordinated way between the states which I think is enormously  helpful.

PETER STEFANOVIC: Just on the bans that are in place now Prime Minister, self-isolation from people  arriving at our airports. How will that be enforced?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, up until now, I mean this has been in place now for many weeks for a number of  countries, and that's been working extremely well. And that wasn't mandatory at that time, I mean for  those people who were coming home from China, coming back from places like South Korea and so on.  That has worked extremely well. And we're talking about tens of thousands of people who have been  subject to those arrangements and now it moves to a much more universal imposed isolation and this will  be backed up by state and territory laws. Now obviously police resources are not going to be diverted to  stand outside peoples homes if they are self isolating that's ridiculous. But what it does mean is I think all  the community has a role to play here, as I said yesterday. If someone turns up to your workplace having  been overseas, well, obviously they're not complying. And that's just not a bad call. It's actually against  the law. And so people should cooperate with that. But I must admit, over the many weeks that these  arrangements have already been in place for many returned arrivals, that they've been doing the right  thing and people have been supporting them in the community.

LAURA JAYES: Could arrests be made, fines imposed?

PRIME MINISTER: Fines can be imposed it all depends on the state and territory laws and how they see  fit to enforce that. But that, those sort of sanctions are possible. That's right.

LAURA JAYES: Are you considering the limit on indoor gatherings, we are talking about aged care facilities  in particular, perhaps new restrictions on visitations, weddings, movie cinemas. Is all of this being  considered?

PRIME MINISTER: Yes it is and we flagged that that, I flagged that yesterday. I mean, right now the priority  for the medical experts is they will be providing this advice. The National Cabinet will meet again on  Tuesday evening and they'll be providing some advice on aged care facilities and visitation arrangements  there and restricting those and they’ll also be providing us with further advice on enclosed gatherings,  now that's something they've been working on. But these are practical sort of measures as well. And they  need to be well-thought-through through. And that's what they're doing. But I want to stress something  Laura. And that is these are not absolute measures. You cannot close off every single possible risk when  it comes to this. But when you do these on the volume level we're doing, it because it lessens the overall  level of risk that the community is placed at. And as I was explaining yesterday, with those curves which  show the peaking of the virus’ impact if we flatten that curve it reduces the stress on his hospital system  and it means we can get the support to the most vulnerable. So no one measure is going to be the  knockout blow to the coronavirus. That's just not how this works. All of the measures are relative and  when they work together, it lowers the overall risk.

PETER STEFANOVIC: Prime Minister there has been dramatic developments that Boris Johnson is moving  to employ in the UK that Nursing homes will be quarantined for up to four months. Is that an option here?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, as I said, we’re getting that advice on the measures we will take within the aged  care facilities over the next day. And we'll consider that advice and make a decision on that on Tuesday  evening. But people can expect to see a fairly significant restriction on visitation to people in  nursing  homes. Now, I understand  I mean went through the process in my own family over  summer when you  have elderly relatives who are in nursing homes then you obviously want to see them. That might be the  last time you do get to see them which was certainly the case in our family’s experience. And so that needs  to be done sensitively and it will be done sensitively. But we need to lessen the broader risk for people in  these facilities. And we also need to respect, I think, the sensitivity of families going through what is a very  difficult time for them.

LAURA JAYES: Are you considering the herd immunity approach and is that part of your thinking in keeping  schools open at the moment?

PRIME MINISTER: I’m aware of that advice that has been in the United Kingdom. And it is  true that those  who are younger actually are least at risk to the most damaging impacts of the virus. I mean, the truth is,  is that Paul Murray has been saying quite rightly 8 out of 10 people and this is what I said yesterday who  contract this virus will have a mild illness  as you know  Peter Dutton contracted it and tested positive and  he joined the National Security Committee of Cabinet yesterday.

LAURA JAYES: But isn’t that a problem Prime Minister because people,  particularly children with no  symptoms whatsoever could actually be spreading this?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, the advice and let's be clear about this. The advice of all the medical experts from  the states and territories and the Commonwealth is that at this stage that the closure of schools is not a  recommended action. And whether that changes in the future, depending on how this virus progresses,  well that that decision would be taken at a later time where there are incidences of the coronavirus is  known. And in some particular schools where this has occurred in New South Wales and in Victoria, then  those states have been responding to those specific instances with specific measures. And that's what  those states, all states will continue to do. But as the advice and as the information changes, then  obviously practices may change as well. I mean, what we have to do is just keep meeting, keep considering  information, keep making decisions to ensure that we slow the spread, because when we slow the spread,  we save lives. And that's what we're very focussed on achieving. But I’d also say this Laura, there are lots  of opinions about this. There's opinions on social media. There's opinions in the media. There’s lots of  people expressing opinions about this. What we need is facts, not opinions and the facts are what have  been advised to the public and the facts are what our medical experts are basing their decisions and their  advice on.

LAURA JAYES: Perhaps we need a Commander in Chief like you, we need to hear from you twice a day  with twice daily updates are you considering that?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I don’t think there has been a day almost that I haven't been out in recent times.  The Chief Medical Officer I think has been doing an extraordinary job in providing those daily updates. I  think the initiative of the National Cabinet Laura is a very important one. We've never done this before  ever as a country. Back in the Spanish flu this is a one hundred year event. Hundred years ago, one of the  things that went wrong was the states and territories did not work closely together on that occasion, in  fact they spent most of their time fighting with each other and blaming each other. That's not happening  on this occasion. And I'm deeply grateful to the support provided to me by the Premiers and Chief  Ministers. We're all working together incredibly well from all sides of politics with one goal. And that is to  protect the health of Australians. The economic impacts I have certainly have not forgotten about, they  are also very concerning and I know there is quite a bit of hardship that’s coming the way of many  Australians and we need to do everything we can to try and cushion that blow as well. But we are in very  unprecedented times and it's important to keep our heads, work together, look after each other. Be  respectful to each other and remembering also those basic social distancing things that can make a huge  difference. No more handshakes make sure you cough into a handkerchief or into your elbow. Make sure  you wash your hands frequently and do all those things and be very careful about your contact with the  more vulnerable members of the community particularly the elderly. I want to say good on you Woollies  who are allowing elderly people to have their own shopping time at supermarkets I mean that is just a  sensible reaction that didn’t need legislation, that didn’t need you know national meetings to decide that  some good common sense actions and decisions taken in the community. We can all do that each day, we  can all do that everyday that’s why I’ve always said that on this, we all have a role to play and let's just  play it and keep calm and be aware of the many changes that are happening and that will continue to  happen.

PETER STEFANOVIC: Prime Minister just finally have you been tested for coronavirus?

PRIME MINISTER:  No there is no need, I have no symptoms of the coronavirus. Testing resources are  scarce resources and they should be only used where the medical advice suggests that a test should be  conducted and I’m not going to break that rule, I’m going to follow the medical advice and encourage  everyone else to do the same thing.

LAURA JAYES: Prime Minister Scott Morrison thank you for your time.

PRIME MINISTER:  Thanks a lot Laura.

[END]

Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney





