

MADELEINE KING MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE  MEMBER FOR BRAND



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS   MONDAY, 30 NOVEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: China’s tariffs on Australian wine; Australia’s relationship with China.

TOM CONNELL, HOST: Joining me now is the Shadow Minister for Trade, Madeleine King,  for more on this. Thanks for your time. So the indication is we could go to the WTO over  possibly barley and wine. Do you agree with this move?

MADELEINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE: Firstly, a pleasure to be here, Tom,  and thanks for having me along. It’s important that Australia and China find common ground.  And some of the established common grounds are the international rules of the WTO that  Australia signed up to and China acceded to sometime after that, and I do support us going to  the WTO. Meanwhile, exporters themselves need help. Many of them, and not all of them,  agree with going to the WTO, because it could be taken the wrong way. It shouldn’t be, but it  could be. And it will take a long time to resolve any disputes through the WTO. So I support the  Government going there. We should return to these rules and it could be a case for a better  consultation amongst both our nations. But meanwhile, producers and exporters are hurting  and they need help now.

CONNELL: But when you say some producers are concerned it could be taken the wrong way.  I mean, this sort of gentle urging from us, and quietly trying to make our case, for example on  wine, is just not being heard, is it? I mean saying that we are dumping cheap wine when the  price is going up in terms of our export value to China, that’s the price per litre if you like, is  going up. This idea we are dumping cheap wine in China is just farcical, so hoping that they’ll  come to their senses isn’t working is it? Yes, we get why exporters have concerns, but let’s just  clarify that you have total support for the Government taking this path now the other path is not  working.

KING: I totally support them taking this path, but you do have to acknowledge that that’s a path  that’s going to take some time and in the meantime, what will the Government do to help these  exporters and these wine producers as well as all the other industries affected? So we can  return to those rules, we should, it is common ground and that’s where we should seek to work  government to government, between China and Australia. But meanwhile, producers are  hurting and they quite rightly are calling on the Government to do more to fix the underlying  issues in the relationship.

CONNELL: So that they can try to do that on China, I mean right now the wine industry is

saying China is not an option for us. What should the Government do? Are you talking about  an underwriting package I mean they’re working on what they can and on the trade deals  they’ve got. So are you saying this is cash support that’s needed?

KING: No, not necessarily, I think the Government needs to demonstrate its support more  actively for exporters. What we have seen is, and what I have experienced when I speak to  some of those wine producers, is they’re not able to get in touch with the Minister’s office. They  aren’t getting responses. I just think there needs to be a more proactive and direct consultation  with some of these producers.

CONNELL: But what does that actually mean? The Australian Government is doing everything  it can to hope these tariffs won’t go ahead. They are going to. What else can they do?

KING: Well, they can improve the relationship, can’t they? They can make solid efforts to  hammer home the point, as often as they can, that this is a mutually beneficial relationship that  ...



CONNELL: We are hearing that again and again and again from the Government.

KING: Well I don’t think we have. We have recently, but this has been going for six months.  This is a long-term problem that the Government has got itself into. This Government signed  the China-Australia Free Trade Agreement, which Labor supported, five years ago, nearly five  years ago in December. And in that time we’ve seen the relationship go from perhaps the  zenith of it, to what is nearly rock bottom. So my issue is, how has this been allowed to  happen? So it’s like this slow drip effect and then suddenly we wake up six months ago and  find there’s going to be a tariff on wine, and what’s happened in the meantime?

CONNELL: So the Minister, my understanding is, actually called the CEO of the wine makers  half an hour after the ruling and there’s been a series of crisis meetings with various producers  over the last week. That sounds like a reasonable amount of consultation, doesn’t it?

KING: Look, I’m glad the Minister’s consulting. I’m just saying I’ve had wine producers contact  me and saying they’re not getting responses. And I will let the Minister’s office know who …

CONNELL: You don’t want to say what producers have …

KING: No I’m not, because it’s up to them, they’re private conversations and I respect that …

CONNELL: It’s easy to say that there are producers and then not name them

KING: Oh look, that’s a fair point, but it’s the truth, I’m not telling porkies. And I will let the  Minister’s office know who’s been contacting me, just to make sure they are aware.

CONNELL: Wouldn’t you do that straight away? Why wait?

KING: Well, we will do it. We’ve got a few though, there’s a bit of a list. But I think what  happens often in government circles there’s a tendency to rely on all the representative  councils which is understandable too, but then individuals and individual wine producers can  get kind of lost in the mix, and I think it’s important to pay attention …

CONNELL: You said the Australian Government’s allowed this to happen in terms of our  relationship. China issued its 14-point set of issues as to why the relationship is suffering.

Does Labor disagree with any of the Australian Government’s actions on that list?

KING: No, the list is hard to describe …

CONNELL: Well, how would you describe it?

KING: Well, it's a part of China’s more aggressive stance, there's no doubt about it. It's  inflammatory clearly. Each of the issues in it, they’re not things that there can be compromises  on, other than I might say, the point about racist attacks by people but also Government MPs  and their over-blown language and anti-Chinese language. I think that’s a fair point.

CONNELL: What are you referring to there?

KING: I'm referring to Senator Abetz’s behaviour in the Senate committee in that inquiry and  also George Christensen's language.

CONNELL: Just while we have it up on the screen so we can see there. This is part of the list -  blocking foreign investment, barring Huawei from 5G, media reporting on China, you know, a  free press perish the thought - funding so-called anti-China research, pointing the finger at  ASPI there, No issue there? I mean, some exporters for example have questioned whether the  Australian Government should have been a key part of trying to lead and make sure an inquiry  into COVID-19, the origins and handling of that, should have been pursued. You're backing the  Australian Government's approach on that?

KING: We back an inquiry into the origins of COVID, that's sensible for everyone, literally the  whole world…

CONNELL: Backing the way Australian government approached that?

KING: No I'm not backing the way the Australian Government approached that.

CONNELL: What did they do wrong?

KING: Well they stepped out and the Minister made an announcement on a television  program. So there was no foundational work done in multilateral forums so that we were part  of an agreed group of nations that would call this inquiry. We just stepped out on our own. And  that's not the way you do diplomacy

CONNELL: But this was multilateral. Australia was working behind the scenes all through this  period of time.

KING: It was the first to come out and announce it on a television program.

CONNELL: The multilateral work was happening; you're saying we shouldn't have gone  public?

KING: I don't know why we went first. I just don't understand why Australia had to step out and  be the first party to do this when there was a multilateral process that was going on.

CONNELL: Perhaps no one else was going to and we had to be the lead.

KING: Why?





CONNELL: Well someone has to.

KING:  Why us though?

CONNELL: Why not?

KING: But why? This is our most important economic relationship that we have.

CONNELL: It is for a lot of countries though, China.

KING: Yeah, true. But we have more to lose than most, don’t we? As a smaller trading nation  with an extraordinarily complementary economy with China. And there are other countries that  can do it.

CONNELL: You mentioned MP’s talking out, if you like. There is a group actually known as the  Wolverines, that has members on both sides, including Labor, Is it a mistake for Labor  members to be a part of the Wolverines?

KING: I'm not going to pass judgment on my colleagues taking part in those groups. I don’t  support that group. I think it's a bit childish, but people make their choices.

CONNELL: It's childish, so the Labor MP’s being a member of this group is being a bit  childish?

KING: I think the group is, I think it’s childish.  CONNELL: Does it hurt the relationship?

KING: I’m not sure how much the Chinese government is reflecting on groups like the  Wolverines who put stickers on their windows in the Parliament.

CONNELL: They do more than that, they talk out pretty strongly against China.

KING: Well not so much recently, I think you'll find. But that's up to them. Individual members  of parliament make decisions, but I think they should be more moderate …

CONNELL: You are saying individual Members of Parliament make decisions, but you are  also criticising what individual Members of Parliaments also making decisions talking out, I  mean surely.

KING: Well, I just told you what I think about the Wolverine group, I don't support it and I don't  agree with it. I think it's childish. They have other thoughts and they can do that. But I do think  all MPs, all MPs and Senators, need to moderate their language sometimes.

CONNELL: Madeleine King, appreciate your time today.

KING: Pleasure Tom, thanks so much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT:  ANDREW BURRELL 0437 290 112



