

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY  DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW   SKY NEWS AFTERNOON AGENDA  THURSDAY, 13 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Scott Morrison’s slack aged care “plan” for COVID-19; Scott  Morrison shifting blame for aged care; Scott Morrison blocking Federal  officials from appearing at the NSW Special Inquiry into the Ruby  Princess.

KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: Let's go live now to the Shadow Home Affairs  Minister Kristina Keneally. The Ruby Princess Commission of Inquiry hands its  report to the New South Wales Premier tomorrow; I'll get to that in a moment.  But I want to start with the Aged Care Royal Commission, the counsel assisting  saying none of the problems we've seen were unforeseeable. So he's had a  crack at federal authorities over that but to be fair to the Government, they have  had a plan, have worked with the health professionals, including Brendan  Murphy and other experts, to adapt that plan, quite clearly it hasn't been  enough to stop the deaths, but it's wrong to say there wasn't a plan involved?

KRISTINA KENEALLY, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE AND  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Kieran, good afternoon to you  and to your viewers. First, can I just, again, express my absolute sympathy to  the families of those people who have died in aged care settings right across  Australia, particularly in Victoria. It's just been such a tragedy for the families,  the residents and the workers in aged care and a great deal of empathy and  sympathy to them. You know, Kieran, the Prime Minister, he stood up in the  Parliament, he waved around this plan that he said that he had. He claimed, the  Government claims, they have a plan but Kieran last week in front of the  Senate COVID Committee, Brendan Murphy and the Department of Health  gave evidence that in fact, in their view, it was unforeseeable. Nobody could  have imagined what was going to happen in aged care and particularly around  issues around workforce and they couldn't have planned for it. Well, Kieran,

that is just ridiculous. They had the Newmarch situation. They had the Dorothy  Henderson Lodge. They even had Earle Haven last year in Queensland. Now  the Government cannot have it both ways. They can't say that they had a plan,  and then they can't say it was unforeseeable and they couldn't anticipated what  was going to happen.

GILBERT: But in every country around the world where there's COVID-19,  we've seen it hit the elderly, harder. That's the reality of this virus.

KENEALLY: Kieran you're making my point! That is why the Government  should have had a better plan. We have known, we have known how  contagious this virus is. We have known how deadly it can be in an older  population. We have known how it spreads through institutions like aged care.  It is extraordinary that the Government was so slack in implementing a plan to  manage it, particularly after they saw what happened here in New South Wales  with Newmarch House and with the Dorothy Henderson lodge.

GILBERT: But Newmarch didn't lose their entire staff like St Basil's did in  Melbourne; it's a different situation.

KENEALLY: Again, entirely foreseeable though, Kieran. I know of other  institutions that have managed their staffing so that they can avoid the kind of  loss of significant parts of staff. Clearly what the Government has not done here  is what they said they would do in this plan the Prime Minister waved around.  And the Prime Minister cannot have it both ways either Kieran. I mean, those  who are following along at home, page 21 of this plan, the Prime Minister  waved around in March, it says the "Australian Government will also be  responsible for residential aged care facilities". Now, if they're responsible,  they're responsible and the Prime Minister has to stop this ducking and  weaving. He needs to front up. He needs to answer questions. He needs to  take responsibility, accountability, and, quite frankly, he needs to express his  sympathy and his apologies to the families of those who have died.

GILBERT: Well, he's definitely expressed his sympathy and condolences on it.  There's no doubt about that. Every time he's spoken about it he's expressed his  condolences and sadness about it.

KENEALLY: Has he taken responsibility? No, Kieran, he's not taking  responsibility. He's not fronting up and answering the questions. With this  Prime Minister, he ducks and weaves. Every time is a tough question he either  cuts the reporter off in the media conference, or he tries to shift blame to  another level of government. Responsibility with aged care sits with the  Commonwealth. The Commonwealth themselves acknowledge that in this, you  know, booklet they bandaged about back in March. The reality is the  Commonwealth are the ones who are failing here, they're failing the older

citizens of Australia.

GILBERT: The Ruby Princess Inquiry to be handed to Premier Berejiklian  tomorrow; the inquiry the Bret Walker SC, the Commissioner, had sought to  speak to some Federal staff- one particular staffer at Agriculture. The  Government has sent written submissions, the Federal Government have  provided written submissions, they have cooperated. But the precedent is, the  Government says, that they don't want federal staff to be summoned to appear  before state inquiries; they will cooperate through written answers. Is that  sufficient?

KENEALLY: No Kieran, it is definitely not. We are talking about the Ruby  Princess- a ship that, you know, really was the only boat that mattered and  Scott Morrison failed to stop it. Again, this plan, if I go back to it does say on  page 21 as well that the Commonwealth is responsible for our borders. We  know that it was the Australian Border Force and Federal Agriculture officials,  not New South Wales health, that were on board the Ruby Princess that  morning. We know that it was those federal officials that didn't complete the  required Traveller with Illness Checklist; that didn't complete the paperwork that  they were supposed to. They gave permission for people to leave the ship.

GILBERT: But it was New South Health that deemed the ship low risk. It was  New South Wales Health that said it was a low risk ship.

KENEALLY: These are the kinds of things that if the Prime Minister sent his  federal officials that Brett Walker could put to them. Because Kieran, in fact,  under the federal Biosecurity Act, it is the Federal Department of Agriculture  that makes that final decision. Yes, New South Wales Health has a role to play  in the days leading up to the ship's arrival, but onboard the ship, it is the  Federal Department of Agriculture officials. These are the ones that Bret  Walker wants to hear from. These are the people that the Prime Minister has  threatened to go to the High Court- to take the New South Wales Special  Commission of Inquiry to the High Court- to fight a legal summons for these  federal officials to give evidence. Now Keiran when the Prime Minister stands  up in a media conference as he did on the 21st of April, and says that he will  cooperate fully with the New South Wales Special Commission of Inquiry and  then a few months later is threatening to go to the High Court to block of legal  summons from that Commission, that's not cooperation. That is not  cooperation. I mean, come on, this is a Government, this is a Prime Minister  who's got a statue to himself in his office that he stopped the boats. He failed to  stop the one boat that mattered- the Ruby Princess- it spread coronavirus  throughout Australia. It was the cause of our biggest outbreak until we have this  wave in Victoria. And the reality is, when it comes to accountability, this Prime  Minister is nowhere to be seen. He's pointing the fingers at other people. He's  ducking the responsibility. The buck should stop with the Commonwealth when



it comes to our borders.

GILBERT: Kristina Keneally, we’ll talk to you soon, thanks for that.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110







