

CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

CANBERRA

THURSDAY, 5 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; Morrison Government’s bushfire response; Coronavirus

response in aged care facilities; panic buying.



CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks for coming this morning

everyone. Of course we have now 53 cases of COVID-19 in Australia and tragically

overnight, a second death confirmed. Of course the Opposition as do all Australians, send

out our condolences to the family of the deceased. As we do to our thoughts to those who

have been diagnosed. This remains a very significant health challenge for the country and

indeed for countries around the world. Because it's a significant health challenge, the

Opposition has engaged very constructively with the Government. We've received regular

briefings which we appreciate. And we in turn have engaged in a positive and constructive

manner. We've made constructive suggestions but we have engaged in bipartisanship and

we will continue to do so. We will continue to be a responsible Opposition.



Part of being a responsible Opposition is to point out when things should be done better.

This morning we see the New South Wales Liberal Health Minister pointing out

shortcomings to the Federal Liberal Government. Now at a time when the coronavirus,

when Covid-19 is causing such significant community angst and concern, this is not good

enough. We can't have the Federal and State Governments arguing in the front pages of

our newspapers. The Federal Government must act this morning to settle this matter with

New South Wales. As I understand the issue, the Federal Government had previously

given undertakings to New South Wales and those undertakings, the New South Wales

Government says have not been met. It is incumbent on the Federal Government to fix this

as a matter of urgency and there is great concern right through the community particularly

about the aged care sector and both the Government and the Opposition have been

honest with the aged care sector is a significant ongoing concern when it comes to COVID-19 and needs very careful management, very careful attention from the Federal

Government both the Health Minister and the Aged Care Minister. It must be their number

one priority and it must be the number one priority of the Government today to reassure

Australians that there is seamless cooperation between the Commonwealth and the State

Governments, to reassure Australians that everything is being done. And when you have a

very senior Liberal Minister saying the system isn't working, and all the rhetoric about Scott

Morrison about being ahead of the game and ahead of the curve and world beating, is

pretty hollow when you see those sorts of headlines.



Just before I ask Julie to add in relation to the aged care matters, in another extraordinary

development this morning you see the Deputy Prime Minister of Australia asking for the

sympathy of Australians because his Government has copped criticism over their pathetic

handling of the bushfires. I mean get me the world's smallest violin. I'll tell you what; here

we have the Deputy Prime Minister saying it annoys him that the States have gotten away

scot-free, blame free from the bushfires but it's fallen into his lap. Well it’s fallen into their

lap because it's their job. It's fallen into their lap because they're meant to be the Prime

Minister and Deputy Prime Minister of Australia. I mean the Prime Minister goes to Hawaii

and doesn't even have the guts to tell the Australian people he's gone and have the guts to

tell the Australian people that Michael McCormack is in charge. And now you've got

Michael McCormack the Deputy Prime Minister of Australia complaining that they’re

copping some criticism, that it's not fair. Well ask the businesses that are going broke

through bushfire affected areas who are getting not enough support whether how they're

being treated is fair. Ask the people who've lost their homes who aren't getting enough

support whether that's fair. I'll tell you what; in a contest for sympathy I'll be with them not

poor old Michael McCormack who should be doing his job. I'll tell you here's a newsflash

from Michael McCormack sport: It's your job. To take the criticism, to get it better, do a

better job. Don't come around blaming State Governments.



We know that the Morrison Government was backgrounding against the Berejiklian

Government at the height of the fires. That was their priority, to shift the blame to their

Liberal colleagues. I don't mind standing here and saying the State Governments by and

large have done a pretty good job. Liberal and Labor, Berejiklian and the Dan Andrews

Government and the Governments of South Australia and Western Australia all did their

best under difficult circumstances. Will a Royal Commission find things that could be

improved in the future? Sure. But they did a good job and for the Deputy Prime Minister of

Australia to be complaining that he's copping political criticism and it's all very unfair, just

shows he and his colleagues are not up to the jobs they have.



I’ll ask Julie to add in relation to the very significant concerns around aged care and then

we will take questions.



JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS: Thanks Chris. I

too want to express my condolences and concerns for the family and friends of the latest

victim of COVID-19, a 95 year old woman from New South Wales. We are very concerned,

as I'm sure the Government is, about this outbreak in a nursing home facility in New South

Wales. I also want to express my condolences and concerns for the workers in this facility.

There are reports in the same story about the State and Federal Governments arguing

about who's paying for the workforce in this facility. Reports that workers feel unsafe going

to work. We need assurances from the Federal Government today that people who work in

the health, and in the aged care sector, will not have any problems accessing the safety

gear they need to remain safe at work to do their jobs.



We need some clear guidance from the Federal Government today when issues happen in

residential aged care facilities around the country with COVID-19 and Coronavirus. That

the Government actually has a response. They have the workforce ready, willing and able

to assist in these facilities. And that the arguments about who pays for this work are settled

well before this. We need to ensure that services are available for people when they need

them. That is the Government's job. The Government needs to resolve its dispute with

New South Wales about who is paying for the workforce at this facility, quickly. And we

don't want to see this happen again in coming weeks if more of these outbreaks are to

occur.



BOWEN: Over to you folks.



JOURNALIST: With the shortage of masks we’re seeing, what exactly is being done about

it?



BOWEN: Well the shortage of masks you're referring to I think refers mainly to the medical

sector, to doctors and allied health care physicians. Now of course there is a national

stockpile of masks which I'm sure will be used appropriately by the Government. And of

course we call on that to be the case. This is to be fair a significant challenge because the

worldwide production of masks has slowed significantly since the COVID-19 outbreak. I’ve

engaged with a lot of doctors and health care professionals over the last few weeks. Some

say that they are getting the support necessary. Others say they are not. I think the key

thing here is for the federal Government to engage very closely with the AMA and the

Royal College of General Practice to ensure that those doctors and health care

professionals who are saying they need more support whether it be information or physical

supplies get it. And as Julie said the same applies to the aged care sector and the relevant

peak groups..



JOURNALIST: So we tucked into that supply of masks for the bushfire crisis. Are you

confident that we have enough now for this latest crisis?



BOWEN: Look it's up to the Government to explain how they intend to roll out - there are a

significant number of masks in the stockpile but this is a significant crisis and they may well

be called upon in a short period of time. It is appropriate--  I’m not calling for the immediate

release of all the masks in the national stockpile. That would be irresponsible. But where

health care professionals either in general practice of the aged care facilities or wherever

they are are saying they are not getting enough masks, that is something the Government

needs to engage very very quickly in relation to their representatives and the professionals

bodies.



JOURNALIST: As the former Shadow Treasurer, do you think the business investment

allowance and tax relief would be enough to prevent the economy falling?



BOWEN: Well it's a necessary first step. I mean we went to the election promising the

Australian Investment Guarantee, an upfront deduction 20 cent reduction for all

investments. Business is now calling for that. Business is now calling for exactly the policy

that Labor took the election. And Josh Frydenberg could do a lot worse than adopting it

immediately and implementing it immediately and of course there will be other steps

necessary. Now Josh Frydenberg will say this is all COVID-19 and bushfires. That's a

complete fallacy, we know the economy is tanking before these crisis. I don't

underestimate their significance economically. Of course they are going to have a negative

impact. But let's not pretend everything was rosy until these crises came along.



JOURNALIST: The Health Minister maintains that nursing homes are the best place for

the elderly to be in this crisis but with the people inside the centre getting infected, do you

think that’s the case?



BOWEN: I think it's appropriate that the national pandemic plan be put into place and I

think that Julie made the point that if we are going to put the onus and responsibility on

aged care facilities and it is an onerous responsibility then they need to be given every

single support and be engaged with including the workforce, including the unions, as well

as the management about what's necessary. I mean the Aged Care Unions, The Health

Services Union, the Nurses and Midwives Association: they speak with a great deal of

authority on behalf of their members and experience and the work they have done and

Greg Hunt and the Aged Care Minister Richard Colbeck could do worse than meet with the

unions as a matter of some urgency.



JOURNALIST: Have you been surprised by the panic buying that we’ve seen?



BOWEN: Look I agree with the chief medical officer that it's appropriate to be responsible

here, for those of us who hold public office to be responsible and say this is a significant

challenge. But you know panic buying masks or you know as we see rather spectacularly

on Facebook, toilet paper is not necessary at this point. Now I completely understand and

respect people's individual decisions. But you know this is a significant challenge but it's

one that we'll get through if we all work together, engage properly and panic buying is not

necessarily what's necessary at this point.



JOURNALIST: Are you concerned there’s too much misinformation out there about the

disease?



BOWEN: There's a lot of misinformation and there's a lot of misinformation on Facebook, a

lot of frankly racist information that's going around. You know, making references which

are inaccurate medically and offensive in terms of the racial overtones and you know

there's one Government Minister who could reflect on his Facebook posts in that regard. It

is appropriate that we remind people that this is a virus which affects-- can affect anyone

regardless of where they're from, regardless of their circumstances and we all will get

through this together not by division.



JOURNALIST: With aged care homes, are some of the measures that are being

considered, or possible measures down the track that people won’t be able to visit their

relatives in aged care homes?



BOWEN: Look the Government has made clear the Biodiversity Act, sorry not the

Biodiviersity Act, the Biosecurity Act gives the Chief Medical Offices who is also the

Director of Biosecurity certain powers which will be implemented when necessary. Now

they are wide ranging powers to lock down particular locations or particular facilities. I

expect he would do that only when necessary and done carefully and only when required

and in a quite specific location as necessary. Those powers are there for a reason to be

used when necessary. They can be ordered if they’re necessary, whether it be an aged

care facility or anywhere else and I would support their use, sensibly and carefully.



JOURNALIST: How are people feeling in aged care?



COLLINS: I am hearing reports that workers are concerned in aged care. They are

concerned about being able to go to work and to care for those residents. We also

obviously have an issue where we have a lot of people also doing home care and

providing these services to people in their homes. I understand the Government is having

a meeting on Friday with aged care providers, with the peak bodies, with consumer groups

and now with the unions to talk about those issues. My strong message to the Government

is resolve it and resolve it quickly about how this is going to work. We cannot afford to have

the State and Federal Governments arguing about who is paying when we've had an



agreement about what is going to happen in aged care facilities. It needs to be resolved

and resolved quickly.



JOURNALIST: Will there be any mandatory testing or anything like that in aged care

homes?



COLLINS: Well that would be a question for the Government. My understanding is that

they have done some testing in the facility where they have had an outbreak, that some

workers are in isolation, other workers have called in sick unwilling to go to work because

they don't feel safe and self-isolating. So there are clearly some issues around workforce if

this were to happen in more than one facility.



BOWEN: Anything else guys? All in, all done? Great thanks for your time.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACTS:

LIZ FITCH (BOWEN) 0424 512 512

LIAM CARSWELL (COLLINS) 0438 469 119





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











