Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health



MEDIA RELEASE



17 August 2020



‘HOW THE VIRUS SPREADS’ - NEW AD TARGETS YOUNG AUSTRALIANS IN  COVID-19 RESPONSE

The Australian Government’s latest COVID-19 ad, launched today, delivers a blunt wake-up call to  young people, that their actions can put the lives of their loved ones at risk.

The ‘How the virus spreads’ advertisement features a young man whose mother is in intensive care  with COVID-19 after catching the virus from him. He was infected by his mate who was infected by a  workmate. All three were young. None knew they were infected.

The ad clearly demonstrates how fast COVID-19 can spread, often without people knowing it, while  showing the severity of the virus, and how it can touch family and loved ones.

The ad’s message is for everyone - COVID-19 is a highly infectious disease that can quickly spread  through everyday interactions and individual behaviours. This is particularly salient for young  Australians who are catching COVID-19 more than any other age group.

The 20-29 year age group is most likely to contract the virus, with young women more so than young  men. And though symptoms are often mild, young people can still be seriously impacted. They are not  immune.

Previously cases of COVID-19 have been reported across all age groups. However there is now a shift  to younger populations.

Cumulatively, people in the 20-29 years age group have the highest rate of COVID-19 infection (77.0  cases per 100,000 population).

This is followed by the 30-39 years age group (59.8 cases per 100,000 population) and then 60-69  years (56.5 cases per 100,000 population)

The ad is a reminder to them - and the rest of the community - to keep doing the essential things -  wash your hands, keep your physical distance, get tested, stay home if you’re sick, download the  COVIDSafe app and, in areas of high community transmission or where physical distancing is  difficult, wear a mask.

The ad will start running this week across TV and radio, digital, social and out of home.

To view the TVC click here.

-ENDS-

