Media inquiries: Aaron Langmaid 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania







Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck  Minister for Aged Care and Senior Australians  Minister for Youth and Sport



6 March 2020



Morrison Government and the aged care sector working together to  tackle COVID-19 challenges

The Federal Government is ensuring age care providers across Australia are ready to implement  infection control plans as safeguards to stop the spread of coronavirus.

Minister  of  Aged  Care  and  Senior  Australians,  Richard  Colbeck,  said  a  forum  today  in  Canberra offered reassurance and practical advice to providers nationwide.

It follows a steady increase in the number of confirmed cases of COVID-19 and wider concerns  for the wellbeing of vulnerable Australians in aged care.

More than 70 representatives attended the forum including providers, peak bodies, workforce,  consumers, state and territory governments and professional bodies.

“The advice for the aged care sector is the same advice to the general community,” Minister  Colbeck said.

“Australians should practice good hygiene and go about their lives as they normally would.”

Washing hands with soap and water before and after eating, after coughing, sneezing or using  the toilet was an important practice, he said.

Minister Colbeck said, importantly, the welfare of senior Australians in residential care relied  on the availability of staff.

“There is no reason for staff at aged care centres to avoid going to work unless they are showing  symptoms, have been in contact with somebody showing symptoms or have been specifically  ordered to isolate,” he said.

Restrictions for staff who have travelled from mainland China, Iran and the Republic of  Korea also remain in place.

Anybody returning from mainland China or Iran should isolate for 14 days.

Media inquiries: Aaron Langmaid 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania



Anybody arriving from the Republic of Korea, on or after 5 March, should also isolate for   14 days.

Travellers arriving in Australia from Italy must present for health screening at the border as  directed.

People returning from Italy do not need to isolate but cannot attend work for 14 days if they  work in healthcare or in residential aged care.

Minister  Colbeck  said  the  aged  care  sector  would  continue  to  be  provided  with  the  best   available evidence on the virus and how it should be managed.

“The  health,  safety  and  welfare  of  older  Australians  in  aged  care  facilities  is  paramount,”  Minister Colbeck said.

“Providers deal with infection control in aged care centres regularly.”

Today’s forum has underlined the protocols and guidelines to reinforce local infection control,  while offering a platform to address the wider concerns of residents, staff and families.

The COVID-19 Plan, agreed to by all governments, also outlines measures being undertaken  and planned measures should risk increase.

“Activated last week by Prime Minister Morrison, the Plan puts Australia ahead of the curve  in dealing with this virus - as we have been from day one,” Minister Colbeck said.

“State  and  territory governments  have  public  health  systems  which  promote  the  safety and   security of people in aged care settings, and support outbreak investigation and management  in residential aged care facilities.

“Good hygiene is critical in our aged care sector and an important defence against this virus,”  Minister Colbeck said.

“All aged  care  providers have been  contacted  with  information  to  pass  on  to  their  staff,   residents and their families.”

Fact sheets are available  at the Department of Health’s website and will be updated as new  information becomes available.

A 24-hour Coronavirus Health Information Line, run by healthdirect, has also been set up for  public enquiries at 1800 020 080.

