JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES

MEMBER FOR HUNTER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2CC  WEDNESDAY, 12 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Australian Special Forces’ behaviour in Afghanistan; bipartisan support for gas  projects; government accountability during COVID-19.

STEPHEN CENATIEMPO, HOST: On a Wednesday is our regular political guest. He's the Shadow  Agriculture and Resources Minister, Joel Fitzgibbon - G'day Joel.

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: Great to be with you, Stephen. I've been meaning to  say, I love your theme music by the way.

CENATIEMPO: Oh, thank you. Well, you should be used to it. It's the same one I used back in the  valley, you know, all those years ago.

FITZGIBBON: Well, see it's nostalgic for me.

CENATIEMPO: There you go, there you go. Now, as a former Defence Minister, you've been joined  - kind of echoed the calls of another former Defence Minister, Brendan Nelson, talking about this  inquiry into the performance or the behavior of some of our special forces, operators in theatres of  war overseas. Now, you're saying that the senior brass need to be held to account. Do we put too  much pressure on our - particularly our SAS guys - our special forces guys?

FITZGIBBON: Certainly, Brendan and I, as Defence Ministers, had very similar experiences and  came out with very similar conclusions. I mean, we are sending our young people to fight and  potentially die on - and many did die on foreign soil - and it's my view, and I think it's Brendan's  view, that we weren't always giving them, in their mind, the best chance to win. And they were very,  very frustrated. I mean, they were, of course, asked to and expected to operate within the  international law and their own rules of engagement, but of course, they were fighting an enemy  which played to no rules whatsoever. Too often they didn't feel that they had the capability support  they needed, couldn't get close air support when it was necessary, and indeed couldn't get many  medivacs when people were hurt, wounded inaction. The release of prisoners, which they'd, you  know, risked their lives to capture I know was a point of frustration for them. So, you can understand  why a difficult culture might emerge, but in the end culture comes from further up the chain of  command. And what we are saying is that if some of our soldiers are going to be held accountable  for their actions so, too, should those more senior members of the ADF who allow that culture to  emerge.

CENATIEMPO: Is it a culture problem, or is it a fact of the matter, as you said, we're fighting against  an enemy now that they don't wear a uniform, they don't play by any, you know, they're certainly not

a signatory to the Geneva Convention or anything like that. Are we fighting on an unlevel playing  field and, therefore, even the top brass can't really put in a set of parameters that are going to allow  these guys do their job, to the best of their ability?

FITZGIBBON: I think what really underscores is the fact that we need to be very discerning about  going into these areas of operations in the first place. Obviously, not just for Australia, but for the  United States, the deployment into Iraq or the merit of that has been proven highly questionable.  Afghanistan was a good cause; the need as an international operation to stop that country becoming  a breeding ground for terrorists which can do us damage anywhere around the world. But these,  these non-state on state conflicts are very, very difficult to manage and to win, and we should be  doing them only with full consideration, careful consideration, and always very reluctantly.

CENATIEMPO: Yeah, it is a difficult situation and I don't envy anyone as Defence Minister, neither  yourself or Brendan or, you know, your successes in that role.

FITZGIBBON: Can I just say on that, Stephen, I think what in part drives Brendan and I making  commentary is our enormous respect for our Special Forces soldiers. It is true to say that they are  amongst the world's best, if not the best in the world, and, you know, we share their frustration.  People have to be held accountable for any action outside the war, but it should not undermine our  respect for our Special Forces soldiers and our ADF personnel more generally.

CENATIEMPO: I think you're 100 per cent and with you on that. And I think some of my colleagues  in the media need to heed that message as well. Tell us about these gas projects. You've offered  bipartisan support to the Morrison government for the taxpayer to get behind gas. How is your side  of politics going to look on that suggestion?

FITZGIBBON: Well, this is not yet a matter for consideration by government. We've had a report by  Nev Power's Commission and what it's saying is that if you want to be serious about a quick  recovery in the wake of the COVID crisis, then you need to look to gas where you can do things very  quickly. There's a whole list of projects which could be accelerated very quickly. Gas pipelines are  amongst those projects, and it's a very simple one. The gas demand is there. Despite being an  energy rich country, we have a bit of an energy crisis at the moment. We need to get more gas out  of the ground and more gas to market a competitive price. And it would be a simple thing for  government to do to underwrite some of these long-term gas contracts so that we can get on to the  build, get onto delivering gas not only to households, but importantly, to our manufacturing sector.  Our manufacturing sector will remain in decline if we don't get affordable gas to market and if we can  do so, then we can rejuvenate our manufacturing industry and create jobs.

CENATIEMPO: Yep, I think that's a fair call. Now, you've been critical of Opposition's at the moment  and critical of their criticisms of governments, particularly around this Coronavirus. You say that the  Ruby Princess fiasco in New South Wales and what's happening in Victoria at the moment, people  are making their judgments based on their political persuasion. But I guess the question is how do,  in a crisis situation, how do Opposition's remain relevant?

FITZGIBBON: It is difficult for Opposition, and Opposition is the toughest job in the country. The idea  of being negative is something that goes with the job because we're expected to hold the  government to account and that means attacking the government when we think it's done the wrong  thing, or it's not taking the right decision. So, it's a difficult job, it's not somewhere I want to be but it's  somewhere we are. The balance here, of course, is making sure we support on a bipartisan basis,

the government when it's getting things right and offering constructive criticism when we don't think it  is.

CENATIEMPO: I mean, I look at that Ruby Princess thing and it was very - the New South Wales  Government was reluctant to take responsibility for that. And, you know, we launched inquiries to  find out the answers that we've already got. The Victorian Government's doing the same thing. But in  both cases, Jodi McKay as Opposition Leader in New South Wales has been completely ineffective  about scoring any points on that. And as has the Liberal Opposition in Victoria, and it's almost fair to  say that Albo's had trouble doing it at a federal level, too. But, having said that, I mean, I guess the  Federal Government's hard to fault in this situation because they don't have direct control over a lot  of the leavers.

FITZGIBBON: The interesting thing, Stephen, is the big contrast or difference between the Ruby  Princess and what's happening in Victoria is that the Federal Government under Scott Morrison is  refusing to fully participate in that Sydney based inquiry, as I understand it and that's really curious -  he said he’d cooperate. Now Daniel Andrews in Melbourne is cooperating, as you can see, there's  been a delay in the inquiry as I understand it, and I don't know all the facts behind that, but Scott  Morrison needs to demonstrate that he's prepared to have his people front that inquiry in Sydney  and to explain the Commonwealth's role. It's the only way of building trust in the process.

CENATIEMPO: I don't necessarily agree with your assessment of Victoria, but the bucks got to stop  with the political masters. There's no two ways about that. But at the end of the day, can you and as  somebody that's been a Minister, can you really be held responsible for the bungles of some  bureaucrat that might be two or three steps down the line?

FITZGIBBON: Well, under the Westminster system, we are Stephen. And I've been at the wrong  end of that when things are happening outside my control as a Minister, and I've been held  accountable and rightly so. Again, we go back to culture, if you're running a good ship, a good  operation, then mistakes won't be made so much down the line. Of course, there always will be  mistakes. And sometimes that is outside the Minister's control, but that's our system and if you want  to be a Minister, you have to cop it.

CENATIEMPO: Yep, fair call, Joel. We'll catch up next week.

FITZGIBBON: A pleasure. Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641

