

AMANDA RISHWORTH MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION AND

DEVELOPMENT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR YOUTH

MEMBER FOR KINGSTON





E&EO TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

FIVEAA BREAKFAST WITH DAVID AND WILL

WEDNESDAY, 1 APRIL 2020



SUBJECTS: Potential child care sector collapse.



WILL GOODINGS, PRESENTER: We have repeatedly received texts from

listeners, who in the midst of conversations about schooling and teachers in

this pandemic, and where kids should be to be safe for them and their families,

what is the role of child care? It hasn’t been spoken about as much, and what

now are the impacts of social distancing and lockdowns on the industry? Amy is

the Director of Tiny Tots Academy in Morphett Vale, Amy good morning to you.



AMY, DIRECTOR TINY TOTS ACADEMY:Good morning.



DAVID PENBERTHY, PRESENTER: So what impact has the coronavirus had

on your business so far Amy?



AMY: It’s had a pretty significant impact so far, daily attendance and

enrolments have dropped significantly. Especially in the last week, week and a

half. We’re running at probably below 30 per cent of attendances at the

moment and we’ve got all our staff still on board to be concerned about as well.



PENBERTHY: My understanding of the way it works, principally because I’m in

this situation myself, is if you don’t send your child but they’re still enrolled you

have to keep paying. But are you saying that you, like so many other child care

centres, are in a situation where people are saying I’m actually pulling my child

out, so they’re off the books which means they’re no longer providing you with

any income?



AMY: We have had a few, but a lot of our parents have been amazingly

supportive of us. So they haven’t completely unenrolled their children yet,

they’re kind of hoping something can be done very soon to help them with the

payments. Because they don’t want us to close either, so they’re trying to

support us as much as they can but their hands are a bit tied if they don’t have

any income themselves.



GOODINGS: When we’ve spoken about schools we’ve been contacted by

teachers who have said we don’t know how we feel about being at the coalface

of this thing, being asked to go and care for large groups of kids when everyone

else is being told to stay in groups no larger than two now. Have you had any

staff raise concerns or not want to work at this time?



AMY: Not at this stage, not not wanting to work. Of course they’re concerned

not only for the children’s safety but theirs as well. They have to go out and do

grocery shopping so they don’t know who they’ve come into contact with. So

obviously there’s a bit of concern there, but none of our staff have not wanted

to come in to support the children.



PENBERTHY: It’s a story that’s replicated across so many child care centres

here and nationally. Amanda Rishworth is the Shadow Minister for Early

Childhood Education, Amanda thanks for joining us. What do you think should

be done to solve this problem or to address this problem?



AMANDA RISHWORTH, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD

EDUCATION AND DEVELOPMENT: As you’ve pointed out what you’ve got is

families that are finding financial stress and if they stay enrolled they have to

pay a gap fee. If they un-enrol they don’t pay a gap fee, but of course what the

centres then miss out on as well is the Government subsidy, and this is what’s

causing pain for so many centres. On average a child care centre relies for

about 62 per cent on Government subsidy, so that’s the money that gets paid

by the Government in addition to the gap fee parents pay.



A simple solution could well be if parents want to take their children out at this

current time when they feel they can care for them at home, to not have to

charge parents the gap fee and actually for the Government to keep paying the

subsidy the centre would otherwise get. That could potentially keep staff on

board, keep them operating for essential service workers, because I think a lot

of early educators understand they are caring for the children of essential

workers and that is a really important role they are undertaking. So that could

be a simple solution, a lot of centres have begged for that, families have

begged for that as well, so that centres still get some income but parents don’t

have to pay gap fees and they don’t have to un-enrol them, but can withdraw

them at the moment until this crisis is over.



PENBERTHY: Yes it’s concerning, I’m not sure what shape the sector is going

to be in when we emerge the other side of this. Amy from Tiny Tots Morphett

Vale and Amanda the Member for the southern suburbs seat of Kingston, thank



you both for joining us this morning.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JEMMA SLEVEC 0405 752 923





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











