





SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Deputy Leader of the Government in the  Senate Senator for South Australia



TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Interview on 2GB, Program Name, with Deborah Knight  Topics: Tourism Australia ad; ICAC; Domestic travel; Australian coal into China; Yang Hengjun;   13/10/20  12:37PM

Deborah Knight: Now we don’t have a lot of choices in terms of travel at the moment. We are limited to  our own backyard, and it’s a pretty good backyard at that. But even then, depending on which state you’re in,  a lot of Australia is out of bounds. We are, though, being encouraged to get out and about, and see our great  country. And very funny couple Hamish and Zoe Blake are front and centre of a new ad blitz, part of Tourism  Australia’s Holiday this Year campaign. Our Tourism Minister, Simon Birmingham, hopes this will help give the  struggling tourism industry the much needed boost it needs. And he joins us now. Minister, thanks so much  for joining us.

Simon Birmingham: Hello, Deb. Great to be with you.

Deborah Knight: Now first of all, congratulations on your new promotion, taking over from Mathias  Cormann as Finance Minister and Senate leader. But have you got enough jobs yet? You’re also keeping  Trade and Tourism for now.

Simon Birmingham: It’s going to be a busy run till the end of this year, but that’s fine. We will keep the  focus squarely on helping our tourism industry, who’s been doing it so tough. Exporters and trade sector,  where there’s still some gains to be had in sealing a big regional trade deal and hopefully making progress  with the UK. And yes, of course, it’s a very challenging time to take on the finance portfolio given the huge  economic challenges we face. But I inherit a very strong budget plan and economic recovery plan released  just last week. And so we’ll get it on with Josh and the PM to make sure we deliver.

Deborah Knight: You won’t be able to scratch yourself. You’ll be that busy. Look, I want to talk about  this tourism campaign in just a tick. But the news everyone’s talking about of course is the New South Wales  Premier Gladys Berejiklian. Her relationship with former disgraced MP Daryl Maguire, the subject of this  corruption investigation. Labor is calling for her, in New South Wales, to resign. Should she?

Simon Birmingham: I think the people in New South Wales more likely want Gladys to keep on focusing  on her job. And she has done an exemplary job leading New South Wales through the COVID-19 crisis.  Keeping people safe, overcoming more obstacles than probably any other leader in the country in terms of  continuously suppressing pop-ups of COVID across the state, working with the health officials, but also  reopening the New South Wales economy as much as possible and saving as many jobs as possible. And,  look, she’s acknowledged that she made a personal mistake in her private life. But I think people can see  she’s done an exceptional job in her role as Premier, keeping New South Wales safe and ensuring the safety  of jobs in New South Wales.

Deborah Knight: Well, she’s stuffed up, plain and simple. That’s how she categorised it yesterday  during a press conference, her own personal nightmare. She could’ve handled this a lot better, couldn’t she?

Simon Birmingham: I think she’s acknowledged that, but she’s also handled COVID-19 brilliantly. And  that’s saved lives of people in New South Wales and is saving their jobs. And I think most people across  Sydney and right across New South Wales would be thankful and grateful for the way she’s handled the  things that really have the impact on their lives and their circumstances.





Deborah Knight: And the work of ICAC and the corruption watchdog, in New South Wales is sparking  greater calls for a federal corruption watchdog, a federal ICAC. Is it time we had one?

Simon Birmingham: Well, we've been doing work around a National Integrity Commission and the work  that is entailed there. Christian Porter, the Attorney-General, has been consulting on different design details  there to make sure that we strike the right framework that doesn't duplicate from or take away from the work  that current enforcement agencies do.

Deborah Knight: We need one, though, don't we? Will you fund it? Will you back it?

Simon Birmingham: Well, we've got a model that the Attorney-General has been consulting on. It tries to  not duplicate other things, not take away from the many existing mechanisms that we do have already to  investigate and ensure that wrongdoing is identified and tackled where it needs to be.

Deborah Knight: Well, careful what you wish for. Imagine what a federal ICAC might be able to  uncover.

Simon Birmingham: I think it's one of those things where it is a case and this is the work that Christian has  been doing. Making sure you don't just set up a sensational star chamber, as some of them can sometimes  be. But you do make sure that all of our different aspects of investigative agencies that work to prevent  wrongdoing work and in an effective way. And if there's a gap, that gap is filled. But you know, there's a lot  done already by different federal agencies to make sure the integrity in everything that we all do.

Deborah Knight: Alright. Let's talk about this tourism campaign featuring Hamish and Zoe Blake.  They're a fantastic choice. They are both a wonderful, very funny Aussie couple, too. And I understand it's  going to cost $7 million, this campaign across print, social media, radio, outdoor advertising. I guess my  question is, do we really need a campaign, because we don't have much of a choice to travel anywhere else  but in Australia?

Simon Birmingham: This campaign, Deb, is going to push beyond just encouraging people to have a  holiday and encouraging them to think about the type of holiday and type of experiences that they undertake.  Because you’re right, there’s been enormous enthusiasm by people in Sydney; hopping in their cars, driving a  couple of hours out of Sydney and having a wonderful short break in some of the nearby regions. And that’s  great and I want to encourage people to keep doing that where they can. But we also need to support the  tourism industry, through people taking a real break and a proper holiday - something that they would usually  or potentially do overseas, which is off the cards at present. So, where they’d get on a plane, head to the  Northern Territory or South Australia, spend a week or two properly exploring, supporting jobs across airlines  and airports and hotels and tour operators and hire care operators - these are the businesses that are doing it  so incredibly tough at present. And as we ae getting some of the states opening up, and hopefully further  progress in the weeks to come with Tasmania, and ideally Queensland, then you know we really do want  people to plan good summer breaks where they can afford to do so, where it’s safe to do so, and save some  of those one in 13 Australian jobs that have historically relied upon tourism.

Deborah Knight: But, until we have those states opening up - I mean, the border lockdowns are  remaining in place, wouldn’t it be better to spend this money to give financial assistance to those tourism  businesses? That industry which is struggling so hard?

Simon Birmingham: Well, we’re spending many billions of dollars in supporting those businesses, through  JobKeeper, through small business payments of up to $100,000 per business that have been made through  the new provisions in the last budget. That means that previously profitable businesses can deduct this year’s  losses against previous year’s profits and get some money back from the tax man as a result of that, which  again, will provide many thousands of dollars of support to individual tourism businesses of all manner of  sizes - up to a $5 billion turnover threshold. So, there’s a lot of support to keep businesses afloat, but we also  want to restimulate demand, and as I say, people are showing a willingness to get out there. We now want  them to move beyond the short trips, plan a decent holiday, and that can enable them to choose to go and  experience Indigenous culture in the territory and do wine tours in South Australia. Hopefully, get to the point  where they can undertake- you know, make their own whiskey in Tasmania, or ideally, if Queensland gets  there and opening up, go and learn to surf in Queensland as Hamish jokes in the ad.

Deborah Knight: Yeah. We've got lots of options that is for sure, and the whiskey - that's pretty  appealing. Now, I want to get you to put your trade hat on now. A number of reports that Beijing has ordered  state owned steel mills and power plants to stop using Australian coal. That’s quite concerning?



Simon Birmingham: Look, these reports we take at face value in terms of at least engaging with industry  and with the Chinese authorities to try to seek assurances that this is not occurring in so far as there being  outright bans. We do know from the experience of the last few years that there is a bit of a cyclical pattern to  coal sales into China and that there have been times previously where we've seen a slowdown in processing  and almost a sort of semi quota system operating where we find a pause on sales for a period and then they  get moving again. And so, we're just trying to ascertain exactly the nature of what's happening in the market at  present, and certainly making those representations through Chinese authorities to ensure that they are  abiding by the terms of the China-Australia free trade agreement and their WTO obligations.

Deborah Knight: And as all these trade issues bubble away we've got Australian writer, Yang Hengjun,  finally having his case heard by court in Beijing, accused of espionage. Are you concerned about his welfare?

Simon Birmingham: Look, we continue to be concerned for his welfare, and that's why our government's  made very strong representations, continue to seek consular access to him and to argue that he should be  accorded appropriate natural justice and an access to legal representation.

Deborah Knight: And I know we end our chats a lot of the time with this question. But, have you had  conversations? Have you managed to speak yet with your Chinese counterpart?

Simon Birmingham: Sadly, no, Deb. The open invitation from Australia's perspective for ministerial  dialogue stands. We see this as the relationship where we should be able to sit down, even on points of  disagreement, and work through it. And that may not mean that that we come to always a point of agreement,  but at least if we can better understand the points of disagreement then we can also better focus the  relationship in the areas of mutual interest and agreement, such as areas of our trade. And our government  certainly stands ready and willing to have that dialogue whenever they're ready to.

Deborah Knight: Might have to tempt him with the offer of some of that whiskey? That might get him to  get over the line, you never know?

Simon Birmingham: Well, President Xi did visit Tasmania a few years ago, so perhaps indeed - we can  have him back when the border permits allow.

Deborah Knight: Yeah. Alright, good on you, Simon. Thank you so much for joining us.

Simon Birmingham: Thank you, Deb. Cheers.

Deborah Knight: There he is, Tourism and Trade Minister, Simon Birmingham.



Media Contacts  Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.

