TRANSCRIPT

Wednesday, 26 August 2020

Minister for Education Dan Tehan interview with Peter Stefanovic, Sky News

SUBJECTS: Job-ready Graduates legislation, Thousand Talents Plan,   COVID-19 and Victoria

Peter Stefanovic: The Federal Government has agreed to key changes to its university  funding package after pressure from the Nationals. Universities have secured a guarantee  on their funding levels, with social work and psychology subjects spared fee hikes. Joining  me now is the Education Minister Dan Tehan, live from Canberra. Minister, good morning.  Thank you for your time. So, you have made some changes to the mental health and social  work subjects, which was brought on by Andrew Gee. He was on the show yesterday. Are  you open to any more changes?

Dan Tehan: Well, Peter, there’s a process that we always go through when we introduce  legislation, and this is significant legislation. It will create 100,000 new places and, as we  know, sadly, because of COVID-19, we’re going to see a doubling of the youth  unemployment rate, and we know that that means there’ll be countercyclical demand on our  higher education system. So, we’ve put the draft bill out for consultation. We’ll now go  through the Parliament. My hope is we’ll be able to get it through the Parliament quickly, so  we can provide certainty for the higher education sector and, particularly, for regional and  rural universities, which have been a key focus of mine and the Government in making sure  that we provide them with the additional support they need. Because, we know, if you’re  born in a country area, you’re half less likely to attend a higher education provider or  university than you are if you’re born in the city. And, it’s really important that we address  that gap.

Stefanovic: But, is there still a possibility that some subjects that will see payment rises  might be wound back, just as you’ve done for mental health and social work subjects?

Tehan: Well, Peter, obviously, we’ve got to take the bill through the Parliament. We’ll consult  widely on the bill. We’ll continue to do that. I’m in very fruitful discussions with the  crossbenchers in the Senate. So, we’ll continue to listen. We’ll continue to engage. We think  the bill is a good bill. We think it delivers the places that we need. Those 100,000 extra  places that we know that we’re going to need, provides that additional support to regional  and rural universities. We think it’s a very good bill, good piece of legislation. But, obviously,  I’ll continue to have discussions with the crossbenchers, as we take the bill through the  Parliament.

Stefanovic: The $5,000 Tertiary Access Payment for regional students, which you just  pointed out. Critics argue that it should be given to the student, not the university. So,  shouldn’t it go to the university that best suits a student’s measure?

Tehan: Look, there’s been a lot of debate and a lot of discussion on this. The original  measure was that it would go to the individual student. There was a concern that’s been  raised, especially amongst smaller states, that - and the Northern Territory - that what that  can potentially lead to is that it’s used by students and by universities to poach students to

move into states. So, it can actually end up being detrimental to some of the smaller states.  So, what we think we’ve got now is a balance. We provide the $5,000 in scholarships. It  would, it will go to those students from those outer regional and remote areas, and it will be  done on a proportionate basis, depending on the level of regional and rural students  universities have. So, we think we’ve struck a good balance here. Once again, we’ve  listened. I’ve spoken to every Vice-Chancellor over the last six weeks. I’ve met with various  groups, including the social work groups, psychology groups. We’ve taken a lot of feedback  on this, and we’ve put these changes in place because we think they represent, across the  board, the feedback that’s been presented to the Government.

Stefanovic: Minister, just a couple of quick ones. The Australian’s been carrying reports for  the last couple of days that suggest that China has been paying dozens of researchers at  Australian universities and then, in turn, owning that intellectual property. I was wondering if  you were even aware of that.

Tehan: Look, we’ve been aware that we have to make sure that research is in our national  interest for some time, and that’s why, when I became Education Minister, one of the first  things I did was bring our intelligence agencies and our universities together to make sure  that when it came to cyber security, when it came to research, and when it came to other  important national security areas, that our intelligence agencies and our universities were  working closely together. We’ve put in place best practice guidelines to deal with foreign  interference in our universities. Those guidelines are now being recommended for other  Western liberal democracies to implement, as a result of what we’ve done here as best  practice. And, we’re continuing to make sure that everything that we do as a government,  everything that our university sector is doing, and everything that our intelligence agents are  doing, is protecting the national interest, particularly when it comes to research.

Stefanovic: Just finally, Minister. As a Victorian, I’m wondering what you make of the  Premier’s attempts to extend the state of emergency powers by twelve months.

Tehan: Well, I think there’s a lot of explaining to do as to why the Victorian Government  wants to do this. I think people are deeply concerned by this extension for twelve months,  and I think they need to be clearly articulated and explained, and the reason why needs to  be put clearly. Particularly when it comes to our democracy, our sitting of Parliament. Why  extend such laws which give unfettered power in this regard, without proper explanation? I  think, this really does need explaining, and I join the Treasurer and my other Victorian  colleagues in saying, you know, there needs to be a proper enunciation of why the Victorian  Government would want to put these powers in place.

Stefanovic: Education Minister Dan Tehan, appreciate your time this morning. Thanks for  joining us.

Tehan: Thanks Peter.

