

JASON CLARE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR REGIONAL SERVICES, LOCAL GOVERNMENT  AND TERRITORIES  MEMBER FOR BLAXLAND



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS  WEDNESDAY, 18 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Supermarket delivery curfews; COVID-19.

KIEREN GILBERT: Let's go live now to Labor frontbencher the Shadow  Minister for Local Government Jason Clare. Jason Clare I know you've put out  a statement this week calling on local governments to lift curfews when it  comes to trucks and supply trucks into supermarkets. Explain to us your  thinking on that.

JASON CLARE: This will make it easier for Woolies and Coles to restock.  There's a lot of people that are anxious out there. A lot of people that are  panicked. I see it in my own electorate, with the tussle over toilet paper in  Chullora last week. Or the fight that happened at Bass Hill Woolies. It got worse  yesterday when someone got stabbed in a Woolworths car park in Victoria. And  someone was punched in a Coles in Lithgow yesterday.

Politicians or chief executives of businesses telling people not to panic won't  stop people panicking. People have got to feel confident,they've got to feel like  they can go to the shops and get toilet paper or get rice or get pasta it's going  to be there. Now one way to do that is to lift the curfews that Councils put into  place for Woolies, Coles, IGA and Aldi so that they can get those big trucks into  the loading docks late at night. It'll make it easier for them to restock. The  sooner the shelves are restocked and full, the sooner we'll be able to reduce  that panic and boost a bit of confidence back in the community that you don't  have to hoard, you don't have to panic and worry that you're going to run out of  milk or toilet paper or anything else. The shops will stay open and you can get  what you need.

GILBERT: We've seen Queensland move on this Jason Clare with a directive  on this front. I think New South Wales is heading in the same direction, isn't it?

CLARE: Yes, it's a good idea. One way to quickly fix this problem is if the State  governments issue a directive to all local governments to waive these curfews,  these truck curfews, so that the trucks can get in without the risk of being fined.  Queensland did that today. I hope that other States follow their lead. It'd be a  smart and simple way to make sure that wherever you go, whatever shopping  centre you're visiting across the country, you'll be able to get all the products  that you need and not be fretting or be anxious or worried that they're going to  run out of the products that you want.

GILBERT: So how much of an obstacle has that curfew issue been for the  supermarket giants? Have they got the supplies, are they ready to go if they  were able to get in earlier?

CLARE: Well, I think Brad the CEO ofWoolies made the point that there has  been a doubling demand that's happened in a very short period of time.  Christmas is a time where people rush to the shops and buy things but big  supermarkets can prepare for that. They haven't been able to prepare for this  so the supply chain is under enormous pressure and it's going to take time to  get the stock and to be able to make sure that the shops are full.  One way to  help with that is to relieve them of these curfew problems. Most Councils have  been fantastic. They've said, ‘look, we're not going to fine you for turning up  late’. These curfews are here for a good reason, because for a lot of people  who live close to the shops, they don't want to be woken up in the middle of the  night by a beeping truck reversing into a loading dock. But given the challenge  we've got at the moment. Given the importance of tackling head on this panic  that's stricken the community and restoring confidence, this is one simple but  effective way, at least for the next couple of weeks, that will help to make sure  that the shops are restocked, and that people can be certain that they're going  to get the stocks they need.

GILBERT: Yes, indeed, I guess urging them as the Prime Minister did today.  You'd welcome that message though. It's not always one that gets through but  it's certainly the right message to send isn't it to say ‘just calm down’. The  supplies will come back.

CLARE: It's a good message and I support what the Prime Minister said. We've  got to be calm and be kind to each other. But politicians telling people to be  calm or not to panic, is not likely to stop people panicking. It might be  counterproductive. People might think, well, ‘why are they telling us not to  panic’ and then suddenly, they rush down to Woollies to get more toilet paper  and it's not there. So there's practical things that we can do. This is one of

them.

In that package you just ran it made the point that Coles are advertising for  5000 jobs at the moment, everything from stocking shelves to driving trucks to  cash register work. On an average day Coles tell me they get about 800 job  applications. Yesterday, they got 36,000. Now, that gives you a bit of an idea of  the economic challenge the country faces at the moment. As I walked from the  car park to the studio today Sydney looks like a ghost town. Lots of places  where people would normally gather for a feed or a coffee are closed.

GILBERT: So 36,000 that's extraordinary. 36,000 applications yesterday. What  does that say to you in terms of those who are expecting to be laid off, in terms  of casual workers, bar workers, gig economy workers? I mean, that's a massive  amount in one day -36,000 applications.

CLARE: I wouldn't be surprised if they’re people who work in the tourism and  hospitality sector. They're the sort of people that would ordinarily work at the  bars or the coffee shops, or the cafes that I walked past to get to this interview,  that are shut. People looking for a safe haven, looking for a place that they  know there's going to be a job tomorrow. And it points to the size and the scale  of the economic challenges that the country faces. That’s why we support the  Government’s stimulus package and why we urge them to go further and act as  quickly as they possibly can.

GILBERT: Now you touched on some of the incidents that occurred in not just  your electorate but elsewhere. Would you like to see, as sad as it is, I mean, it's  not it's not ideal. It's been ugly incidents we’ve seen and with mobile phones,  everyone's got a camera. So we've seen this in all its ugliness. Is it time though,  to have marshals and to have police at various supermarkets. How do you deal  with that?

CLARE: Well, I think the Prime Minister was asked this question at his press  conference this morning. He said words to the effect that he wouldn't like to see  that happen. You know, that's not Australia and I agree with him. If we get to  that point, it'd be a very, very sorry day. But I understand that government and  companies doing the necessary work planning for that eventuality. I would urge  the Australian public to be calm and be kind in supermarkets. But one of the  things we can do to avoid that, to avoid having someone in a uniform standing  out the front of the supermarket telling people when they can go in and when  they can't, would be to get the shelves restocked. And one very practical and  sensible way to do that is to make it easier for those big semi-trailers to get in at  night and get the products into the supermarkets. And whether it's the state  governments or the local governments acting to help that happen, that's  something they should do. Local government, state governments and federal



government all need to work together here to make sure that we restore a bit of  confidence into the Australian community.

GILBERT: Yeah and they're isolated incidents of those ugly scenes. And to be  honest, there are moments of kindness we're seeing across supermarket shops  as well as. One butcher told me how a young man, they’d run out of a certain  meat mince I think it was for a grandmother, he went, this young man offered to  get her that product from another shop and take it to her home. That's a  random act of kindness that happened in the last few days. I mean, these  things would be happening as well, we’ve got to remember that as people.

CLARE: You’re right, and we do tend to focus on the negative but there's some  fantastic stories that don't necessarily make it onto the nightly news. I heard a  story about somebody who got the last roll of toilet paper and saw an old lady  who missed out and gave it to them. You know that's a another great example  of the Australian spirit, looking after your neighbour and trying to be kind and  generous to others. The more we see of that the better.

GILBERT: Well said. Talk to you soon Jason Clare, thanks for that.

CLARE: Thanks mate.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: SCOTT DAVIES 0419 546 197









