Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania









The Hon Greg Hunt, MP  Minister for Health

Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck  Minister for Aged Care and Senior Australians  Minister for Youth and Sport



21 October 2020



Steps toward better mental health for young Australians



The Australian Government is ensuring the mental health and wellbeing of young people  remains a priority during a challenging time.

Today marks National headspace Day - an initiative aimed at helping youth take small steps  every day to improve their mental health.

Minister for Health, Greg Hunt and Minister for Youth and Sport, Richard Colbeck,  encouraged young people to take time out for themselves.

“The COVID-19 pandemic has had an unprecedented impact on the lives of young people  across Australia,” Minister Hunt said.

“Whether you are struggling to focus on study, have lost a job or finding it difficult to  connect with others - there are professional teams and services like headspace available to  offer support.”

There are currently 124 headspace services in Australia and many are planning headspace Day  events and celebrations.

Since 2006, headspace has provided more than 3.6 million services and supported more than  626,000 young Australians to strengthen their wellbeing and manage their mental health.

In 2019-20 alone, headspace supported nearly 130,000 young people.

In 2020-21, the Government is providing over $130 million to support headspace services  across Australia, and has also committed to expand the headspace network to 153 services by  2022.

Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania





Minister Colbeck said every year one in four young Australians experienced mental health  issues.

“More than ever many young people are facing family or relationship conflict, a disconnection  from study and work, financial stress and social isolation,” he said.

“During times like these, focusing on the everyday things that support a young person’s  wellbeing helping them form healthy habits, develop resilience and manage stress or anxiety.

Minister Colbeck said the Government was also committed to ensuring the mental health of  young people is maintained through provisions from the 2020-21 Budget.

“The Australian Government has invested an unprecedented $5.7 billion in mental health  support in 2020-21 alone,” Minister Colbeck said.

The support builds on the ongoing work to develop a whole-of-government National Youth  Policy Framework to inform how policies and programs support young Australians and  improve their lives.

For more information on the headspace Day and how to be involved, along with digital  wellbeing kits, visit www.headspace.org.au.

Follow headspace on social media and share your favourite tip using #headspacetips and  #headspaceday.





About headspace  Funded by the Australian Government, headspace centres and services operate across  Australia, in metro, regional and rural areas, supporting young Australians and their families  to be mentally healthy and engaged in their communities. It welcomes all people irrespective  of ethnicity, lifestyle choice, faith, sexual orientation and gender identity. For more  information, visit www.headspace.org.au.



























