

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE

MANAGER OF OPPOSITION BUSINESS IN THE SENATE

CHAIR OF THE SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON COVID-19

SENATOR FOR THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC CANBERRA BREAKFAST

FRIDAY, 7 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECT: Arrangements for parliamentary sitting on 24th August.



LISH FEJER, HOST: As you've been hearing in the news, Parliament is due to sit here in

Canberra on the 24th of August and there's borders shut all around us yet, people will

come from around the country to the Territory. It was due to be sitting right now but this

fortnight’s sitting was cancelled due to COVID and surge in Victoria. Now the Acting Chief

Medical Officer Paul Kelly has told the Prime Minister that Victorian Members and

Senators travelling to the ACT do pose a significant risk to the Canberra community and

will have to go into quarantine before coming to the Territory. Now that may be in Victoria.

But ideally as our own health officer said Dr. Karen Coleman, ideally it will be in Canberra.

Joining me now is Katy Gallagher. She's the Senator for the AC T and Chair of the Senate

Select Committee on COVID-19. Good morning, were you part of the working group

looking at if Parliament should resume sitting here in Canberra?



SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER, MANAGER OF OPPOSITION BUSINESS IN THE

SENATE: Yes I was, all the managers of opposition business and government business

were members of the working group.



FEJER: So these quarantine requirements for members, senators and staff arriving in

Canberra from a designated hotspot, are they going to be satisfactory? I'm just looking at

the length of it, it's a two week time limit. No families included in that. How's that going to

work?



GALLAGHER: Yes, look, this advice came out just a couple of days ago. So it's still being

worked through the details. I mean, people are working really hard to make sure

arrangements are in place. But certainly from our end, on the opposition side, we've had

lots of discussions with our Victorian colleagues to talk through what the Chief Medical

Officer’s advice is both in the ACT and the acting one in the Commonwealth so that they

can put arrangements in place to attend and if they can't attend we’re negotiating with the

government around the opportunity for some kind of video presence to allow them to

participate, because I think we started from a couple of points of view - one, we want the

Parliament to sit. And the second is we don't want Victorian representatives excluded from

the Parliament. So that that's the challenge we've been trying to find the right balance on.



FEJER: How will the quarantine requirements work?



GALLAGHER: Well, again, some of that detail’s been worked through other than the ACT

obviously, is the jurisdiction that manages it. They've got some information which is going

out to Victorian Members of Parliament around how quarantine is managed, and, you

know, all the information that people need to have. But I think there is - it's unfolding as we

speak, because this was a decision really taken yesterday, and people need to get these

arrangements in place by Sunday at the latest. And obviously we've got a lot of Victorians

in different situations with caring responsibilities and a whole range of things that you can

imagine like any other workplace. They need to work through these things with their

families and work out what's the right thing for them.



And then on the other side, we've got what's the right thing for Canberra to make sure that

Parliament is COVID safe and that we're not putting anyone else at risk.



FEJER: Megan in Corwell has texted in on 0467922666 saying I wonder if virtual

parliament options would break down barriers to candidates with young families coming

forward, particularly women. It seems the men with younger families are planning to isolate

in Canberra I assume they're leaving their families behind says Megan but yeah, the

women parliamentarians interviewed are staying home to quarantine so they can remote

school, care for older family members etc. How will the virtual video conferencing for

Members and Senators who can't travel work?



GALLAGHER: Yeah. So this is a position we put to the Government and I certainly as a

woman in Parliament who's had children for my career, I have raised the issue that we

can't have a situation that excludes women, particularly those with young children and

children who are requiring school at home. But I would say some of my male colleagues

are in exactly that condition as well on both sides of the chamber. And some are bringing

their families to Canberra and will cop quarantine here so the family unit can say together

but others that's not possible for. So there's a range of different circumstances but in terms

of the virtual parliament, I don't think you can do everything but it can certainly continue to

ensure that Victorian Members of Parliament who can't participate physically are able to

have represent their electorate. So I think the idea is that it wouldn't count for quorum,

you know



FEJER: so they couldn't vote



GALLAGHER: They couldn't vote, things like that, those kinds of things, that they could

participate in debates like speeches, they could take the call from the Speaker or the

President, and thereby participate even in the proceedings. And importantly, as we've had

a lot of feedback from Victorians, represent their electorate who are going through an

incredibly difficult time



FEJER: Will Parliament adapt to all of that just listening to Andrew Probyn’s Parliament

story yesterday on the ABC. Here's a little bit of it about the challenges with the

technology.



ANDREW PROBYN, RECORDING: Labor suggesting an alternative allowing federal

politicians to participate, but not vote, via video link. Parliament with fewer humans present

and much more technology. *Clips from Parliament and committee hearings with

technology issues* What could possibly go wrong? Room for improvement.



FEJER: Do you envisage that happening, Senator Katy Gallagher?



GALLAGHER: Well, can I just say we've had 26 hearings of the COVID Committee. So

well over 100 hours, probably closer to 200 hours of hearings, and we've had relatively few

issues. I mean, there has been some microphone issues.



FEJER: And everybody's nodding their heads knowing how common it is. The Parliament

is not immune.



GALLAGHER: Exactly. Right. It's like any other workplace. I don't think, it can't just be

everything and we said that, but I think it's important particularly for Victoria at the moment,

there is a link to participate. And that's what we're trying to create here.



FEJER: And just participate though they need to have a very active voice. Will it have

that?



GALLAGHER: Well, I mean, I know there's a bit of theatre in the Parliament, but there is

also a lot of working together across the chamber with lists, speaking lists, giving the call,

and whips informing the chair what's going on. So I'm sure these things can be worked

through.



FEJER: I wonder what our listeners think, with a lot of parliamentarians and, their staff

coming back, Senators coming back to Canberra in three weeks’ time for the sitting. And

from tomorrow, Queensland will be closing the border to the ACT. How will this impact

politicians from Queensland?



GALLAGHER: So at the moment, Queenslanders coming to Parliament will have to self-isolate on their return to Queensland for two weeks. Those arrangements have been in

place in different jurisdictions since March really, I think WA, South Australia and Tasmania

have had variations on that. So these are issues that parliamentarians have been dealing

with since March. I would also say Lish, just to keep Canberrans aware we have changed

a whole range of things at the Parliament to make the Parliament safe. We're very

conscious of making sure that the interests of the Canberra community are met and looked

after. You know I'm a Canberran. I've got an interest in this, we all do just to make sure.

Every parliamentarian wants to do the right thing, their second home, really they spend a

lot of time here and they're very conscious of their responsibilities.



FEJER: Will there be exemptions made, we see diplomats, for example, getting

exemptions for quarantine? Can you assure us there'll be no exemptions made in this

case?



GALLAGHER: Certainly the advice from the Chief Health Officers is that a quarantine

arrangement is required, and we've been clear that that should apply to anybody and

everybody, so the executive and non-executive. And all of the people I've spoken to just

want to want to comply. They want to do the right thing. Obviously, they've all got their own

different situation about what that means for them. But everyone is very keen to do the

right thing. And they want to represent their community. So whether it's done virtually,

whether home isolation is done in Victoria, or up here, they want to do the right thing and

follow the medical advice.



FEJER: And just to be clear Katy Gallagher is it only Victorians who have the option of

doing it virtually, does everyone else have to come into Canberra and sit physically? Or are

we still maintaining those social distancing rules that were put in place earlier in the year?



GALLAGHER: Yeah. So the social distancing rules will be in place as well. So there may

be a reduced chamber on top of the Victoria, you know, the Victorian situation. So we've

had some colleagues, many, you know, like anyone else, a community, those who might

be immunocompromised, those who might be caring for family who don't want to put them

at risk. There's a whole range of issues that affect Members of Parliament, and people

make their own decision about that. So my guess is there will be enhanced pairing

arrangements, so the Parliament will be smaller. There'll be very minimal stuff coming.

There's no visitors really, there's no meetings, functions are very reduced. So a whole you

know, all of these things remain in place on top of the issues with Victoria.



FEJER: Thanks for your time this morning.



GALLAGHER: Thanks very much Lish.



ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: PAT CRONAN 0432 758 224





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.









