Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health and Aged Care

The Hon. Mark Coulton MP

Minister for Regional Health, Regional Communications and Local Government

George Tambassis

National President, The Pharmacy Guild of Australia

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

22 December, 2020

Government boosts funding for community pharmacies to  support more rural and regional communities

The Coalition Government is providing more than $100 million for regional, rural and remote  pharmacies to better support their communities through an expansion to a critical regional  pharmacy program.

Over 400 additional pharmacies will be eligible for the Regional Pharmacy Maintenance  Allowance (RPMA) program under changes announced today, with very remote pharmacies  receiving significant additional funding to support the supply of medicines and healthcare in  their community.

These changes will help ensure all Australians can access the medicines and pharmacy  services they need, where and when they need them, and is a key outcome of the Seventh  Community Pharmacy Agreement (7CPA) signed with the Pharmacy Guild of Australia in  June 2020. The Pharmaceutical Society of Australia is also a Signatory to relevant parts of the  Agreement.

Community pharmacies play a vital role in providing access to medicines and essential health  services for the third of Australians who live in regional, rural and remote areas.

Our Government, through the RPMA, supports access to Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme  (PBS) medicines and pharmacy services for people in regional, rural and remote communities.

The Coalition is boosting its investment in the RPMA program from $16 million per year  under the previous 6CPA to $21 million per year of the 7CPA through changes agreed to by  the Pharmacy Guild of Australia.

The changes to the RPMA program will support more than 400 new pharmacies which will be  eligible for the first time to participate from areas that were previously not eligible.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



This will take the total number of pharmacies eligible for the RPMA to 1215 community  pharmacies.

In addition, higher allowances will be available for up to 960 community pharmacies in rural,  remote and very remote areas with low prescription volumes.

The RPMA program will transition to the Modified Monash Model of rural classification,  from 1 January 2021, to align with other health workforce distribution programs.

Eligible pharmacies will receive between $3,000 to $51,328 per year under this expansion,  depending on their remoteness classification and PBS prescription volumes.

The Government recognises the importance of maintaining the pharmacy network to provide  a steady and reliable supply of medicines and other pharmacy services, in particular to people  outside in the regions.

Community pharmacies stepped up to support their patients during 2020, and have kept their  doors open during this year’s bushfires, drought, floods and COVID-19 pandemic.

All Australians benefit from equitable and sustainable access to effective medicines, including  highly specialised, expensive and lifesaving medicines through the PBS.

Making sure all Australians have access to timely, safe and affordable medicines continues to  be an Australian Government priority.

The RPMA is one of a range of pharmacy programs supported by a $1.2 billion investment in  pharmacy programs under the 7CPA.

The overall investment in the 7CPA over the period 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2025 is expected  to be $18.35 billion.

The Coalition Government has made approximately 2500 new and amended medicines  listings on the PBS since 2013, at an overall investment of close to $12 billion.

Our Government's commitment to ensuring Australians can access affordable medicines,  when they need them, remains rock solid.

George Tambassis, National President, The Pharmacy Guild of Australia has welcomed the  increased support for community pharmacy.

“The Pharmacy Guild of Australia welcomes this expansion of support for the vital work that  community pharmacies in regional, rural and remote Australia perform every day.

“In many small towns across Australia, the local community pharmacy is the only health  infrastructure, and it is imperative that appropriate support is given to enable those  pharmacies to sustain their service to patients.”

“Direct contact with a health professional such as a community pharmacist is a benefit that all  Australians should be able to have access to, wherever they live.”

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



“We thank the Government for agreeing to this increase in funding for the program, and we  will support our Member pharmacies in making the transition to the new program,” Mr  Tambassis said.

-ENDS-

For background

The Modified Monash Model (MMM) classification system considers whether a location is a  city, rural, remote or very remote. It also considers how difficult it is to attract and retain  health workers by considering the population size of a town, not just its geographical  remoteness.

The model measures remoteness and population size on a scale of Modified Monash (MM)  category MM 1 to MM 7. MM 1 is a major city and MM 7 is very remote.

Understanding the MMM classifications helps us to distribute the health workforce and health  services better in rural and remote areas.

MMM classifications are based on the Australian Statistical Geography Standard -  Remoteness Areas (ASGS-RA) framework.

The MMM is reviewed and updated after each Australian Census.









