

JIM CHALMERS MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR RANKIN

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC AM   SUNDAY, 1 NOVEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Queensland state election.

SABRA LANE, HOST: Jim Chalmers, good morning. What do you put Labor's  victory down to?

JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: Good morning, Sabra. I think  overwhelmingly this is a victory for Annastacia Palaszczuk. She's the people's  champion. We saw that last night. People rallied to her in big numbers. So  overwhelmingly the victory belongs to her and her team, people like Steven  Miles and Cameron Dick and others, but the whole Queensland Labor family's  got a lot to be proud of today.

LANE: A lot of people are putting it down to her handling of the pandemic. If the  electoral power of pandemic incumbency has rewarded Labor in Queensland,  will that automatically happen at the next federal election?

CHALMERS: Not automatically, Sabra. The federal election still might be at  least 10 or 11 months away, possibly longer if the Prime Minister's to be  believed. We don't know what the circumstances will look like then.  Incumbency does matter, it is helpful at the moment, but it depends what you  actually do with that incumbency that really matters. I think  what Annastacia was able to do was to make difficult decisions, and to explain  why they were necessary. She turned out to be right and resolute, and people  rewarded her for it.

LANE: Why is it that the ALP is a vote winning machine for Queensland state  elections yet it is struggling federally?

CHALMERS: That's the big question, isn't it, Sabra? It is certainly the case,  objectively, that we've done much better at the state level than we have been

able to do federally. That demonstrates that there are Labor supporters, or  people with an open mind to supporting Labor, throughout Queensland; the  task for us at the federal level is to mount a convincing case to try and win them  over.

LANE: Labor's policy on franking credits at the last federal election was a big  issue for the ALP last year. Older voters turned away from Labor, yet it seems  that same cohort has gone to Labor right now in this state election for  protecting them in this health crisis. How do you convince those voters to stay  with you federally?

CHALMERS: It certainly looks like Annastacia Palaszczuk was able to win over  some of those voters in big numbers. That's at least what we know anecdotally.  We'll have a good case to make to all Australians, including that group that you  mentioned. We're talking about trying to make the economy better after COVID  than it was before. There was a lot of insecurity for a lot of people and our job is  to point out that things can actually be better afterwards; we don't just need to  snap back to all the financial insecurity that people felt beforehand.

LANE: The Greens have picked up South Brisbane. They've also retained  Maiwar. If the Greens numbers are transposed federally, does that mean  you've got a problem?

CHALMERS: The Greens have been a threat to some of our inner city seats  around Australia for some time now. It is concerning that we lost South  Brisbane. Jackie Trad is someone that I know well, and she'll be a big loss to  the parliament and to the party. We've had a challenge there for some time.  The most important thing for your listeners to understand Sabra, from my point  of view, is that the only reason why the Greens won South Brisbane is because  the Liberals preferenced them. There are twice as many Greens in the  Queensland Parliament, at least, today because the Liberals supported  them. Remember that when the Liberals are going around Queensland  pretending they're anti-Green, they actually just gifted them a seat.

LANE: Karen Andrews says that a lot of the old One Nation support has gone  back to Labor. What do you think?

CHALMERS: There was a bit of that but I don't think it's quite that simple. One  of the really satisfying things from the election and last night was to see the  collapse in the One Nation vote. We don't pretend that that's necessarily  permanent but it was very heartening to see that vote collapse. While we're at  it, it was very heartening to see the almost-complete humiliation of Clive Palmer  who threw millions of dollars at this campaign and barely registered in the tally  at the end of the night. That's a good thing. It might not be a permanent thing



but we're heartened by that.

LANE: Jim Chalmers, thanks for joining AM.

CHALMERS: Thank you Sabra.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949









