ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC DARWIN MORNINGS WITH JO LAVERTY & ADAM STEER

MONDAY, 2 NOVEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Climate change; gas; Northern Territory; net zero emissions by 2050;

US elections; Labor’s Rewiring the Nation policy; renewables; Queensland election;

manufacturing; environment; Aussies stranded overseas; Howard Springs facility

used for quarantine; NAIF; Laksa festival.



ADAM STEER, HOST: Speaking about the heat, it has been a heatwave again this week.

And that hasn't stopped people coming to the Northern Territory, including yourself,

Anthony Albanese, Leader of the Federal Opposition. So, let's start with the heat and

climate change. The economy is down. But here in the Top End, we're hopeful that the

Northern Territory will be a big part of that recovery. The Federal Government has said the

economy rebound will be led by gas. And they're very excited about the Beetaloo Basin.

Do you agree that the economic recovery should be led by gas?



ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Well, gas has

a role. But I think it's very short-sighted to think that you're going to just move towards a

gas-led recovery when what we need is both immediate jobs, and that's why today we'll be

looking at social housing where you could create immediate jobs in terms of fixing up

social housing, expanding social housing, as well as in the long-term, our long-term future

is in renewables. Now, gas will play a role and continue to do so. But if you look at projects

for the Territory, in that report that's out today, the potential project by Mike Cannon-Brookes, looking at the world's largest solar farm here in the Territory exporting energy to

Singapore, they have a deal that's already signed, it's an incredibly exciting project. And if

we get this right, good action on climate change will create jobs as well as lowering

emissions. We can be a renewable energy superpower. And the great beneficiaries of that

will be Northern Australia.



STEER: We just got a text in from Sophie in Katherine. We've been covering this story for

the last week or so. She said ‘last week, people were on standby to deliver bottled water to

every Katherine household. This week, we are cooking at 42 degrees. We are living

climate change here and now. Opening a new gas fuel field in this day and age is pure

negligence’. She asks, 'Will Anthony Albanese reconsider his support for gas?'



ALBANESE: Well, gas will play a role. But the markets are showing that there is a shift to

renewables. That is a global phenomenon. We had last week, Japan and Korea sign up to

zero net emissions by 2050. We've had China announced zero net emissions by 2060.

And there'll be an incredibly important event happening tomorrow, but Wednesday our

time, the US elections. The difference between Joe Biden and Donald Trump on climate is

substantial. Joe Biden, if he is successful, will bring the United States back into the global

community. And I think we'll go from the US being outside the tent, if you like, to showing

leadership on those issues. Australia has a role to play. But we also need to acknowledge

that it is a global problem and therefore requires a global solution.



JO LAVERTY, HOST: The Prime Minister has today said, and in the past as well, said that

we can achieve zero net emissions, but it's something that we should focus on later in the

century. For now, we should really make sure that energy, which is unaffordable for so

many people, that bites into a huge part of their budget, we need to make sure that it is

affordable for households and we don't drive those prices up. How do you respond to that?



ALBANESE: I respond to that by saying he's wrong. We need to join the world and have

net zero emissions by 2050. And good action on climate change will also reduce power

prices. In the Budget Reply, I had a Rewiring the Nation policy. What we know is that part

of the problem is that our national energy grid is made for last century. And so, renewables

can't fit into the grid and be transported, if you like, transmitted around where they are

needed when they're needed. So, we need to upgrade the national energy grid. We put

forward a plan to do that. The Australian Energy Market Operator has identified that as a

priority issue and have identified where the projects will be with their Integrated System

Plan. So, it's not like we're coming up with policy in abstract. The plan is all there. All it

requires is the political will to do so. And what that indicates under all of the Energy Market

Operator's scenarios, under all of them, renewables are the big growth sector. Yes, gas will

continue to play a role and coal-fired power will continue to play a role, but there won't be

any more, in my view, very strong view, any newer coal-fired power stations because the

market is saying that it's simply not affordable compared with renewables.



LAVERTY: As we've seen with so many other really large issues, sometimes it doesn't

matter what the Commonwealth is doing, the states and territories will make their own

commitments. And in the Northern Territory, we have a commitment of zero emissions by

2050. In the ACT, they just reached 100 per cent renewable electricity, I think, from this

year. So, there are states and territories that have their own benchmarks. Is it enough to

be able to let them just manage it themselves, especially given how desperate the energy

providers are across Australia?



ALBANESE: Well, I think you need national leadership. And you need a national energy

grid. Part of the problem is at the moment, each of the states and territories have their own

operator that is in charge of the grid, their monopoly providers. And what we need is better

coordination so that, for example, the vision whereby when the sun is shining up here and

in the West in particular, there's no reason why a more efficient grid can't have the peak

hour in the East Coast capitals powered from here, powered from the West if we get the

transmission right and if we have an efficient and effective national energy grid. And that's

why you need that national leadership. Every state and territory has signed up to net zero

emissions. The National Farmers Federation, the Business Council of Australia, all of

Australia's major companies have. We saw ANZ in the last week. And it is only Scott

Morrison's Government that are really behind where the rest of Australia is.



LAVERTY: How much is it going to cost to create the future that you envisage?



ALBANESE: It will actually benefit.



LAVERTY: But how much will it cost in the first place? We know that one kilometre of road

costs one million to create. How much does a kilometre of an energy grid cost?



ALBANESE: Well, the national energy grid will cost, if you could do all of the Integrated

System Plan, about $20 billion. The IEMO economic forecasting shows that would benefit

the economy by $40 billion. So, it's not a cost, it's an investment. It's an investment that

produces a return that's greater than the cost.



STEER: There are some questions locally that if we were to join that national energy grid,

that it would push up prices in the Northern Territory.



ALBANESE: No, it would lower prices. An effective national energy grid will lower prices.

And here in the Territory, the Territory has such enormous opportunity. The example of the

solar project near Tennant Creek is just one of them. You have such extraordinary

renewable energy resources. The Chief Minister is certainly onto this and has a vision for

the Territory that's about jobs, as well as lowering emissions.



STEER: You're on ABC Radio Darwin. It is 8:41. Adam Steer and Jo Laverty with you.

Anthony Albanese is the Leader of the Federal Opposition. Very briefly, I want to move to

Queensland for a second. There was an election there over the weekend. Annastacia

Palaszczuk won her third term. More importantly, Labor won key seats in regional

Queensland. Why are voters happy to vote Labor in a state election but not a Federal

election?



ALBANESE: Well, Annastacia Palaszczuk got the campaign right. She campaigned on

jobs and the future. She also campaigned very strongly on keeping Queenslanders safe.

And they responded accordingly. I don't think Queenslanders appreciated Scott Morrison

crossing into Queensland and spending a week campaigning, cancelling the National

Cabinet so that he could do more campaigning and fundraisers for the LNP. And they

simply don't like being told what to do. And that was what was going on. Annastacia

deserves all of the credit for running an extraordinary disciplined campaign. But it's been a

good Government. It's been a Government that has prioritised infrastructure, that has

prioritised jobs, that has prioritised looking after people, as well, during the pandemic and

not leaving people behind.



STEER: So, what did they do right that you failed to do last year in the Federal election?



ALBANESE: Our review showed that we had lots of policies but not enough of a narrative.

And we were punished for that. We've being very open and upfront about that. But the fact

that the votes in places from Cairns, to Rocky, to Townsville, to Bundaberg, Hervey Bay,

Maryborough, shows that people in regional Queensland will vote Labor if we present a

very clear position, if we prioritise jobs, if we acknowledge that regional economic growth is

so important. And as a former Regional Development Minister, it's something that I'm very

conscious of. One of the first things I did upon coming Leader, I came here to the Territory

twice. I also did a car trip around central and regional Queensland, going from regional

town to regional town, talking about their priorities. Somewhere like Maryborough, where

the local member, Bruce Saunders, got 54 per cent of the vote. He was the candidate just

a couple of elections ago and got 25 per cent of the vote. So, he's more than doubled it.

What's happening in Maryborough, its major economic boost has been rail manufacturing

at the Downer EDI site, something that the LNP thinks should happen overseas. But

something that the Palaszczuk Government's determined to make sure is done in

Queensland, employing Queenslanders, giving them the skills and giving Australia the

economic boost. It also has the bonus that the trains will work, unlike all the trains that are

built overseas, which don't seem to.



LAVERTY: You went to the Federal election in 2019 with a strong message about the

environment and what you were going to do. You had the ambitious emissions target of 45

per cent cut by 2030. It really was a very big push for the environment. It didn't do so well,

as you've acknowledged, the narrative wasn't there. Yet, if you have a look at the ACT

election and the Queensland election as well, Greens have made up ground in those two

state and territory elections. How are you going to go into the next Federal election? Will

you be concentrating on the environment again?



ALBANESE: Well, the Greens vote actually went backwards in Queensland on Saturday.

They actually had less votes. And it was Labor's vote that went up substantially. They did

win an additional seat because they got preferences from the Liberal National Party that

they didn't have last time. But you know, the Katter Australia Party is still bigger than the

Greens with three compared with two. We will have a strong climate change policy

because any government worth its salt needs to have it. It's not about politics, it's about

doing the right thing.



LAVERTY: So, have you got an idea of how you're going to communicate that message?



ALBANESE: Well, we already have done two primary things. One is that we set very early

on the net zero emissions by 2050, showing where we want to head. And the other thing

I've been doing is talking about becoming a renewable energy superpower. Hence, one of

the cornerstones of our Budget Reply was the Rewiring the Nation policy as part of a

Future Made in Australia, which is all about how we become more resilient, how we create

jobs, how we build a stronger economy.



LAVERTY: We've seen, again going back to the ACT and the Northern Territory elections,

both were already held by Labor, as was Queensland. These elections were also held

during a period of coronavirus. So, some might say, 'Well, it's the Labor Party and their

strength and their policies and whatever else'. Others would say that people don't like to

see change during an emergency. How do you think that will play out for you federally?



ALBANESE: Well, the governments have responded very strongly in terms of our

federated structure, our states and territories. Scott Morrison chaired the National Cabinet,

but now we can see a lot of division in terms of the attacks, which were pretty

opportunistic, against Annastacia Palaszczuk and also Daniel Andrews. And I think the

Victorian Government has done the right thing and Victorians have done the right thing.

During a pandemic, it has changed the politics, that's the truth. People have not wanted

disagreement for disagreement’s sake. They wanted people to unite. We have been

constructive. So, at the next election, we'll be saying, 'Yep, the pandemic, we were

constructive, we voted for every package and we suggested improvements'. Ideas like

wage subsidies were Labor's idea. They were opposed originally by Scott Morrison. It was

only when those queues formed outside Centrelink that the Government shifted its

position. We were concerned about superannuation and the fact that 600,000 Australians

have a zero balance in their account now. But we haven't let the perfect be the enemy of

the good. So, we have been constructive. We did vote for every package. But it will also be

about the future, who has a plan for the future, a plan for economic recovery. And one of

the things I found remarkable about the Budget is that there was $100 billion of new

spending, a trillion dollars debt, and it will rise to 1.7 trillion in 2030, and nothing to show for

it at the end of it. And that's why we're advancing childcare reform.



LAVERTY: I think the Government will argue that fewer jobs were lost, people were able to

keep their households and keep food on the table. I think that they would argue that.



ALBANESE: But this Budget didn't have any of that. This Budget had a withdrawal of

support, in terms of JobKeeper, it was reduced last month, and it'll disappear next March.

And JobSeeker, the Government won't say what the unemployment rate will be. So,

potentially, it returns to $40 a day. There's no new investment for Darwin and Palmerston,

for example. When I was the Infrastructure Minister, we did Tiger Brennan Drive, we did

big projects. And I would have thought that the Budget, with that much money in it, would

have had some economic reform. What's the big economic reform that will drive growth

into the future? Now, Labor has put forward our childcare plan that will benefit 97 per cent

of families, it will remove the cap, provide an increase in the subsidy and a levelling out of

the taper rate. That will make a substantial practical difference to the ability of women in

particular to participate in the workforce. It'll boost productivity. The Government didn't

have any initiatives in their Budget which will boost productivity.



STEER: Let's move closer to home. Last time we spoke to you, you were talking about the

need to repatriate more Australians who were stranded overseas. Howard Springs has

now been stood up as a place to do just that with about 500 people per session to

quarantine there from overseas. Would you like to see that number higher?



ALBANESE: I sure would. Last time I was here, I've been arguing for months, as has the

Chief Minister, that Northern Territory was capable of not just taking people, but it's the

best facility in Australia. I spoke to someone last night who came here from Melbourne and

quarantined at Howard Springs. They enjoyed the experience. They even spruiked the

food as being good. And they thought it was very efficiently run. And what's more, it of

course has a benefit for the Territory in terms of jobs and an economic input as well. So, to

me there are 32,000 Australians who are stranded overseas, many of them have been

overseas for more than six months. They've made multiple bookings, had them cancelled,

paid tens of thousands of dollars that they're waiting for refunds on. This is a disgrace. The

Government was completely complacent about it. This is a Government at the Federal

level that has been prepared to chair the National Cabinet, take credit for anything that it

thinks is good that the states and territories have done. But in areas of clear responsibility,

such as migration, our national borders and quarantine, they've been pretty complacent.



STEER: What do you say, though, to locals? I know over the weekend there was a lot of

anxiety on, at least on my social media feed, from people hearing that we had now

imported COVID cases into the Northern Territory, where essentially COVID, at this stage,

as far as we know, has been extinguished. What do you say to those locals that go, 'Well,

we better watch out, the COVID has now come to Howard Springs'?



ALBANESE: Because the medical care is there to make sure that it doesn't spread from

there into the community. And that's a good thing. You need to have quarantine, I do not

question that. But I think it has been a success. And it is bringing in economic activity to

the Territory at a time that it's needed.



LAVERTY: I just want to take you back quickly to your point that there was nothing in the

Budget for Darwin, for example. But in the NAIF program. You are laughing?



ALBANESE: I always a bit of a chuckle about the NAIF.



LAVERTY: In the NAIF program, there was a huge investment for the Barramundi farm at

Humpty Doo, the CDU.



ALBANESE: It is not investment, it's loans. It is loans.



LAVERTY: Okay.



ALBANESE: And they have spent, the NAIF, the Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility

was created five years ago, five years ago as a short-term plan with $5 billion taken from

other activity and put there. This wasn't new money. And as of a month ago, around about

the time the Budget was done, through Senate Estimates, three per cent of that funding,

three per cent of that $5 billion had been expended. One of the things about this

Government is it's good at announcements. I don't question that. It's not good at delivery. I

mean, Kakadu, the project that I've been speaking to this studio about for many, many

years, they haven't actually progressed it too far. And that's typical of this Government.

They've been in for eight years. They are full of announcements. The NAIF was supposed

to be something that would enliven the north over a couple of years. As I said, five years

and they've spent three per cent of the NAIF.



LAVERTY: Anthony Albanese, before we let you go, I do have a piece of laksa-inspired

cheesecake for you to try. Now, I am going to ambush you Luke Gosling style with a piece

of laksa-inspired cheesecake.



ALBANESE: It does look very yellow.



LAVERTY: Yes. Thank you.



STEER: Jo and I have had debates about eating on the radio, because I think eating next

to microphones is not so good.



ALBANESE: No, it's a bad idea. And even more so when there's a camera on.



LAVERTY: And when you are the Leader of the Opposition.



STEER: We have got a television camera in here at the moment. You're the Federal

Leader of the Opposition.



ALBANESE: What can go wrong? Here we go.



STEER: So, he's chewing it. He puts it into his mouth.



LAVERTY: Hang on, his face isn't indicating that he is enjoying it.



ALBANESE: It is interesting.



LAVERTY: Okay.



ALBANESE: No, it's good. It's good.



LAVERTY: Don't try and make me feel better, Anthony Albanese.



ALBANESE: No, it's good. I'll even eat all of it.



LAVERTY: Well, that's very kind of you. Thank you.



ALBANESE: Well done. Can I put my vote for the cheesecake ahead of the Beef

Wellington, because there is no way I'd try out laksa Beef Wellington.



STEER: So, that sounds terrible. So, is it lakos? Is that what we're doing then? Laksa

tacos?





ALBANESE: Go for the lakos.



LAVERTY: Thank you so much for making time for us this morning. That is Anthony

Albanese who is Leader of the Federal Opposition. And perhaps you'll see him around

town and you can ambush him with something laksa-inspired yourself.



ALBANESE: My pleasure, verbally and also in whatever the term is for culinary delight. Do

I have to declare that as a donation from ABC, a little bite of laksa cheesecake?



LAVERTY: Maybe you put it down as an OH&S issue rather than a donation. Thank you

so much.



ALBANESE: Fantastic. Thanks very much.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053



