



JASON CLARE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR REGIONAL SERVICES,  LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND TERRITORIES  MEMBER FOR BLAXLAND



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

EXODUS FOUNDATION, ASHFIELD

SUNDAY. 15 NOVEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Social housing, Trade, China



JASON CLARE: Thanks very much for coming along. It's great to be here with

Reverend Bill Crews at the Exodus Foundation. Bill's a hero for so many

homeless Aussies here in Sydney and right around the country. I can't think of

many people in Australia who have done more to feed and help homeless

Aussies than you Bill. Thank you for letting me come along today.



REVEREND BILL CREWS: Thank you, you're welcome. My foundation

welcomes you mate.



CLARE: Well, we've had a little bit of a look around before today's press

conference, just seeing the work that you do putting food into hungry bellies,

providing a roof for people who need it, and providing medical support and

assistance, dental care, medical care, flu shots, and just the love and support

that every Australian needs.



And in terms of talking about housing, Aussies who desperately need a roof

over their head, today, we've had a fantastic announcement by the Premier of

Victoria, Dan Andrews. He's announced just this morning a massive investment

in public housing. I think it's the biggest one off investment in public housing by

any state government in history, more than $5 billion.



I can only imagine the sort of change that that's going to mean for so many

Australians in Victoria, putting a roof over the head of people who desperately

need it. It's a win win. It'll put a roof over the head of people who need one, and

it will create jobs for tradies who desperately need work. The housing

construction industry is on the way down at the moment, fewer homes being

built and tradies needing work. And building social housing is going to create a

roof over the head of people who need it, but it'll also create work for those

tradies.



This should also hopefully be an impetus for other state governments around

the country to fund social housing as well. The NSW Government has got their

budget on Tuesday and I really hope the NSW Government puts more money

into social housing, to build more social housing, and repair social housing.



I've been campaigning for months around the country on the need to fix the

rundown social housing that we see right across the country, places that are full

of mould and leaks and rot. Places that no Aussie should be forced to live in. I

think a quarter of all the social housing around the country is full of mould and

leaks and rot, holes in the roof, holes in the wall. That's 100,000 places right

around the country that we could be fixing right now and creating work for

tradies.



And the announcement in Victoria today doesn't let the federal government off

the hook either. We need them putting more money into social housing as well.

The more money we put in, the more houses we build and fix, the more people

we help and the more tradies we'll create work for. So I'll keep fighting to get

the federal government to put their hand in their pocket and help build and

repair more social housing as well. We'll keep going right up to the next federal

budget and right to the next federal election. Bill, I'll hand over to you.



REV. CREWS: Thank you. So many people in social housing come here to

have their showers, like they can't even shower in where they're supposed to

sleep. We have to give them bedding, we find so many of them have

accommodation, you wouldn't believe. We also get over 40% of the people we

work with here at times are women escaping domestic violence, they're

sleeping in cars around there, and often the car is being repossessed next

week and we have to try and find somewhere for them to go. So that social

housing is critical. It is just critical. And if you give someone a house with

supports 90% of them will stay there and the amount of money that's spent

looking after them outside of that falls away.



If we could just provide enough social housing and the madness is that there

are so many jobs that are needed. You need plumbers, you need carpenters,

you need brickies, you need trades people, you need just ordinary people who

can carry bricks so that houses can be fixed. And this would be a wonderful

way to get two bangs for your buck. You spend the money, improve the social

housing, you get the homeless off the street, and you give jobs to people who

really need them. I cannot believe in 2020/21 in Australia we allow people to

live in mould ridden shacks, where anything can happen to them and their

children. So many of the people come here are just vulnerable, so vulnerable to

being attacked. And the social housing that they got, they need to be updated

so that they can be properly looked after. Thanks.



CLARE: Thanks, Bill. Okay, my throw it over to questions. Johno.



JOURNALIST: Thank you very much. You mentioned the Victorian

announcement on social housing which has been a significant level of funding.

The Federal Government keeps saying that this is a state government

responsibility, why should it become a federal  responsibility too?



CLARE: The federal government’s excuse is that this is the responsibility of the

state governments. This is the wrong way of looking at it. It's not about whose

job it is, whether it's the federal government or the state government's job. It's

about the jobs of those tradies - carpenters, electricians, plumbers who are

running out of work. We could be creating work for them right now. Building

social housing and repairing social housing, and putting a roof over the head of

Aussies who desperately need it.



You know, one of the great things that happened in the last few months through

COVID-19 is that a lot of the empty hotel rooms and motel rooms were used to

put a roof over their head of homeless Aussies, people who are sleeping in our

parks and our streets sleeping rough. Well as the virus ebbs away, people are

being thrown back out on the street. Now, surely, we could do better than that.

We've shown that if there's enough political will, we can provide a house and a

home for people who desperately need it. This is the way to do it: build more

social housing, build public housing.



And the key point I want to make here is we did this 10 years ago, we did it

during the global financial crisis, the Federal Government under Labor put more

than $5 billion into building and repairing social housing. We built 20,000 more

homes, and we repaired 80,000 homes. And if we do that again, it means more

homes for people who need it. More lives changed for the better, and more jobs

for tradies who are running out of work.



JOURNALIST: The Federal Government today, is going to be signing this

RCPA, Regional Comprehensive Partnership Agreement between not just

Australia, but 13 other nations, including China. Given what we've seen in the

Mekong area with China using its so called dangerous debt diplomacy to build

up and ramp up construction of dams. Why aren't problems, the issues, the

fault of the Chinese Government. Is everything the fault of the Australian

Government when it comes to this relationship Jason?



CLARE: Before the last election, we committed as a matter of priority to see

the conclusion of this trade agreement. I'm glad that it's finally been concluded

after eight years in the making. We've got to wait now to see the details and

see what's in it. The bottom line is that more trade creates more jobs. Hopefully

this is an agreement that's going to create more work for Aussie workers and

more exports for farmers, manufacturers and other businesses.



This agreement doesn't fix the problems that we've got with China. We've got

big problems with China at the moment, problems getting goods into China.

And it strikes me that it's pretty extraordinary that after being in government for

seven years, this Government can't get anyone in Beijing to answer the phone.

When Australia had the same problem with America a couple of years ago, and

Donald Trump was threatening to put tariffs on Aussie steel, the Prime Minister

picked up the phone and talked to the US President, Premiers spoke to

Governor's, Australian businesses spoke to other business leaders in the

United States and the problem was fixed. Now, when it comes to China, our

biggest trading partner, it seems like when there's a problem, no one answers

the phone. And that's pretty hopeless, given that this Government's been in

power for seven years, They know how important this relationship is and can't

find anybody to talk to in China.



JOURNALIST: But it's not the Australian Government not picking up the

phone. What has the Australian Government done that could have possibly

upset Beijing?



CLARE: Well it takes two to tango that's absolutely right. I'm not saying that the

Chinese Government aren't at fault. Seems like there's been some things that

the Chinese Government has done here, which has made it really difficult for

Aussie exporters. But the bottom line is when you've got a country, which is

your biggest trading partner, and we make one in three dollars in trade from

China, then you got to lean into it and make sure that you've got the contacts in

China to fix things when there's problem. There is obviously a big problem

here. It could cost Aussie jobs. It could cost exporters key markets. And so

there's an obligation on the government to work out how they're going to fix

this. Otherwise we lose jobs and exporters have got to find another place to sell

their goods.



JOURNALIST: Is this agreement the solution?



CLARE: We'll have to wait and see the details of this agreement. More trade

means more jobs. The fact that this agreement is being concluded is a good

thing, but we've got to see what's in it. But this on its own is not going to fix the

problems with China. There is a problem, there is a serious problem. We can't

get anybody to answer the phone in Beijing. And you'd think after seven years

in government, this Government would have a phone number that works in

Beijing.



JOURNALIST: Okay, thanks very much.



CLARE: Thank you.





ENDS









