THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP  MINISTER FOR POPULATION, CITIES AND URBAN  INFRASTRUCTURE

THE HON CHRISTIAN PORTER MP  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR PEARCE

THE HON MARK MCGOWAN MLA  PREMIER OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA

THE HON RITA SAFFIOTI MLA  WA MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT

MEDIA RELEASE

Preferred proponent named to construct METRONET Morley - Ellenbrook  line

MELconnx Consortium (Laing O’Rourke Australia Construction) has been named as the  preferred proponent to design and construct the METRONET Morley-Ellenbrook rail line.

The contract - which is the biggest of four works packages delivering the project -includes the  construction of the rail line as well as building five new stations at Morley, Noranda, Malaga,  Whiteman Park and Ellenbrook.

The other three work packages are the New Bayswater Station Project, with early works  underway, Tonkin Gap Project’s associated works, with design and planning underway and  forward works contracts.

The much-anticipated project will create thousands of local jobs and provide opportunities for  local businesses to get involved.

Premier Mark McGowan said the project was one of his government’s key election  commitments, which the Ellenbrook community had fought long and hard for and he was  pleased it was closer to being delivered as the final construction contract was only weeks  away.

“This has been talked about for decades and is a big step forward for this project, which will  transform Perth’s growing north-eastern suburbs and benefit the local and surrounding  communities,” he said.

“Now more than ever, big infrastructure projects like METRONET’s Morley-Ellenbrook Line are  imperative to WA’s COVID-19 economic recovery as it creates a pipeline of work and supports  thousands of jobs.

“This year alone we have seven METRONET projects underway and through our Building for  Tomorrow program, we are creating lasting infrastructure for generations to come while  creating thousands of local jobs and opportunities for local businesses.”

Federal Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure Alan Tudge said today’s  METRONET developments means jobs for hard-working West Australians and financial  stimulus for the WA economy.

Date received: 22 September 2020

“All along the Morrison Government have said that METRONET will re-shape Perth and that  transformation is underway,” Mr Tudge said.

“It means jobs right now and critical, targeted infrastructure for generations to come.”

Western Australian Transport Minister Rita Saffioti said the Ellenbrook community had been  waiting for the train for years and the McGowan Government is delivering on this vital piece of  infrastructure.

“Perth’s north eastern suburbs have boomed recently and the population is predicted to  increase dramatically over the next decade.

“We need to ensure our infrastructure keeps up with this growth - not only are we delivering on  the much anticipated METRONET Morley-Ellenbrook line, we have also delivered key road  upgrades including Northlink, the duplication of Reid Highway and the upgrade of Drumpellier  Drive.

“The final construction contract is only weeks away - and with early works already underway at  Bayswater Station and the Tonkin Gap project, getting works started on this project will bring  our major infrastructure transformation in this area to life.”

Federal Member for Pearce Christian Porter Federal Member for Pearce Christian Porter said  the Morley-Ellenbrook Line will improve the lives of locals.

“Like many in my electorate, I am delighted that this project is finally moving ahead and I know  it will make a significant difference to the everyday lives of those who’ve been waiting so  patiently for it,” Mr Porter said.

“Once completed the Ellenbrook Rail Line will connect communities to jobs and services and  unlock opportunities for business growth in our region.”

“This project will become a reality with a $500 million contribution from the Federal Liberal  Government - money that was allocated in the Government’s 2018 budget.”

Spurring off the Midland Line at Bayswater Station, the Morley-Ellenbrook Line will run up the  middle of Tonkin Highway, through land north of Marshall Road, along Drumpellier Drive and  finish in the Ellenbrook town centre.

Final negotiations will now take place with the contract expected to be awarded in coming  weeks.

The METRONET Morley-Ellenbrook line is jointly funded by the Australian and Western  Australian Governments.



[ENDS]

Media Contact:  Mr McGowan: Lannie Le-Patterson 0419 698 504   Mr Tudge - Michael Bennett 0434 782 923  Ms Saffioti - Caitlin Goddard 0437 234 249



