







The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology  Federal Member for McPherson

MEDIA RELEASE

BACKING CSIRO TO BACK OUR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY  FUTURE

9 October 2020

The Morrison Government is further investing in science and technology to help  businesses to grow and create jobs for Australians, with nearly $460 million in  additional funding for the CSIRO.

The extra injection of funding in the 2020-21 Budget takes the Government’s total  investment in CSIRO to $3.8 billion over the next four years - and addresses the  impacts of COVID-19 on its commercial activities to ensure it can continue its  essential scientific research.

Visiting CSIRO’s Black Mountain site today, Minister for Industry, Science and  Technology Karen Andrews said this funding was central to making science and  technology work for industry - a key pillar of the Government’s $1.5 billion Modern  Manufacturing Strategy.

“CSIRO plays a vitally important role working with businesses to create new products  and services and we want to back that crucial collaboration to turbo-charge job  creation - both now and for our future,” Minister Andrews said.

“This investment in CSIRO proves the value our Government places on the  contribution of Australia’s premier research body to the nation’s economy.

“Combined with our Modern Manufacturing Strategy, this increased funding for  CSIRO will help make our businesses more resilient and able to scale up to take on  the world - creating the jobs we need.”

CSIRO Chief Executive Dr Larry Marshall said just as science has been guiding  Australia’s health response, so too will it support the country’s economic recovery  from the COVID-19 pandemic.

“More than ever, science and technology are vital to driving Australia’s recovery and  building future resilience,” Dr Marshall said.





“Now is the time to lean in to Australian innovation - to support local businesses to  grow, create jobs and turn science into solutions. We have an opportunity to  determine the new kind of Australia we want to emerge from this crisis.”

Despite the disruption of COVID-19, CSIRO continues to deliver for the nation,  including working with global health organisations to respond to the pandemic.

The 2020-21 Budget includes billions of dollars in investment to support industry,  science and technology to lead the country’s economic recovery, including a $2  billion boost for the Research and Development Tax Incentive.

For more details visit industry.gov.au/manufacturing



Media Contact: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846 / Jen Jennings 0435 121 347

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

