

THE HON ANGUS TAYLOR MP   MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND EMISSIONS REDUCTION

SENATOR THE HON MICHAELIA CASH   MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE



Monday, 14 December 2020

HELPING SMALL BUSINESSES REDUCE THEIR POWER BILLS

Small businesses across Australia are getting support from the Morrison Government to  cut energy costs, putting more money back in the pockets of business owners as we  recover from COVID-19.

Through the Government’s Energy Efficient Communities Program, 336 small businesses  have been awarded grants of up to $20,000 to lower their energy bills by upgrading to  more energy efficient equipment, carrying out energy audits or installing energy  monitoring equipment.

Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction Angus Taylor said the Government was  focused on bringing down the cost of energy for small businesses.

“Small businesses have been hit hard by the COVID-19 pandemic and the Government is  focused on helping them through this difficult period, and beyond,” Minister Taylor  said.

“Energy bills are a significant overhead for many small businesses. These grants will help  small businesses all around Australia pay less on their energy bills, helping them keep  their doors open, expand their business and employ more Australians.”

Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business Michaelia Cash said helping  small businesses lower their energy costs is critical for them to prosper, grow and create  more jobs.

“Small businesses are the lifeblood of our local communities and the backbone of the  Australian economy. Employing over 6 million Australians, our 3.5 million small  businesses contribute over $418 billion to our national economy,” Minister Cash said.

“As we recover from the impacts of COVID-19, small businesses will play a key role in  the Government’s plan for a stronger economy”.

“Lowering energy bills for our small businesses through the Energy Efficient  Communities Program will help alleviate financial pressure and deliver the conditions  they need to succeed.”

The Energy Efficient Communities Program was announced as part of the Government’s  $3.5 billion Climate Solutions Package to deliver on Australia’s 2030 climate  commitments.

The full list of successful applicants for the small business grants is available on  business.gov.au.

ENDS

Minister Taylor’s office:                               Liam O’Neil, 0418 113 617 / John Hulin, 0466 443 917  Minister Cash’s office:                                 Guy Creighton, 0438 815 302



