UNOFFICIAL







The Hon Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

Senator the Hon Mathias Cormann  Minister for Finance and Leader of the Government in the Senate

The Hon Alan Tudge MP  Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure

The Hon Mark McGowan MLA  Premier for Western Australia

The Hon Rita Saffioti MLA  WA Minister for Transport



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

20 September 2020

WORLD-CLASS EDUCATION CAMPUS TO REVITALISE PERTH’S CBD

Perth’s city centre will receive a major boost under the Perth City Deal - a plan which will bring Edith  Cowan University’s world-class Creative Industries, Business and Technology Campus into the heart of  the city.

The $695 million project will form the centrepiece of the Perth City Deal. By 2025 the campus will draw  more than 9,200 students and staff into the CBD.

That number will grow to over 11,000 by 2034 with thousands and thousands of spectators expected to  attend more than 300 public performances in the heart of the City every year.

The development will create $1.5 billion of economic stimulus and more than 3,000 jobs during  construction, as well as over 380 ongoing jobs.

The ECU City Campus will bring together programs in technology, industry and creativity, including the  WA Academy of Performing Arts, the school of Business and Law and an advanced technology and cyber  security centre.

Prime Minister Scott Morrison said Perth would benefit for generations to come from the game-changing investment in education, culture, jobs and lifestyle.

“This is a JobMaker investment which will generate employment for thousands of hard-working West  Australians, it will boost those businesses that are already in the CBD and it will drive new businesses to  open,” the Prime Minister said.

“WA, like the rest of Australia, needs a targeted economic stimulus which will provide a boost now and  into the future, and this is what we’re delivering.”

Premier of Western Australia Mark McGowan said the investment also supports longer term recovery by  leveraging Perth’s enviable position as a pandemic safe destination.

“Our strong response to COVID-19 means there is no better place to be in the world than WA, and the  new campus will attract both domestic and international students when our borders are safe to re-open,”  Premier McGowan said.

“The Western Australian Government will be investing $150 million in grant funding and CBD land for  this transformational project which will support local jobs and encourage people back into the Perth  CBD.

“As part of the deal, the current ECU site will revert to full WA Government control and ownership and  the State Government will now embark on a masterplan for the site.

“The new university will attract thousands of people into the city, delivering a huge boost to local  businesses and building on Perth’s reputation as a vibrant cultural and entertainment district.

Finance Minister Mathias Cormann said the new campus will help support Perth’s economic recovery,  creating thousands of jobs while reinvigorating the City by bringing lots more people into the CBD on a  regular and consistent basis.

“We have committed $245 million to help make this city-shaping project a reality,” Senator Cormann  said.

“This campus will be a major catalyst for an exciting rejuvenation of Perth’s CBD, attracting locals and  visitors to live, work and play in the city while creating great opportunities for local businesses.”

“The WA Academy of Performing Arts is a world class, world renowned institution, which has produced  some of this country’s best known performers, including none other than Hugh Jackman.

“With more than 300 public performances a year, it will attract more than 100,000 unique visitors into  the city creating great excitement across Perth for generations to come.”

Federal Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure Alan Tudge said the relocation of the  ECU campus would be a transformational change for Perth with the economic flow-on to last for  decades.

“Thousands of students flooding into the city will inject more life, vibrancy and dollars into the city  centre and its local businesses,” Mr Tudge said.

“COVID-19 has had a profound impact on all our cities and this element of the City Deal is exactly what  WA needs right now because it means local jobs and a boost to the economy.”

Western Australian Minister for Transport and Planning Rita Saffioti said the campus added to other  significant commitments to support the Perth City Deal that will enrich Perth’s city centre and boost the  livability of the area.

“Every great city needs a lively CBD at its heart, and our investments will bring this in spades,” Ms  Saffioti said.

“I can’t wait to see more people riding our world quality public transport and using our state of the art  cycling infrastructure to visit and support our amazing small businesses.”

ECU Vice-Chancellor Steve Chapman praised the City Deal model for achieving great outcomes for the  university and the city.

“This is an outstanding result for ECU and for the state.  We are delighted to be working with all levels of  government to create Perth’s first comprehensive university campus in the heart of the city,” Professor  Chapman said.

“It is a transformational project which will change the face of our city and shape the future for ECU and  its students.

“This campus will be where technology, industry and creativity meet to deliver the innovative thinkers,  adaptive learners and global citizens who will be the leaders of tomorrow.”

With the announcement of these significant investments, the three levels of Government and their  private partners will now work together to finalise the Perth City Deal that will deliver our joint vision of  creating a vibrant, liveable and productive Perth city.

[END]

Media contacts:  Prime Minister’s office: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  Mr McGowan - Lannie Le-Patterson 0419 698 504   Senator Cormann - Karen Wu 0428 350 139  Mr Tudge - Michael Bennett 0434 782 923  Ms Saffioti - Caitlin Goddard 0437 234 249

Press Office of the Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Prime Minister, Canberra



