ANDREW LEIGH MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR TREASURY

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR CHARITIES

MEMBER FOR FENNER



SENATOR CATRYNA BILYK

SENATOR FOR TASMANIA





TWO YEARS TO WRITE ONE-PAGE RESPONSE AN INSULT TO

CHARITIES



Australia’s charities have been left with little more than buck passing from the Federal

Government after Scott Morrison’s handpicked minister took two years to respond to a

Senate inquiry on charity fundraising.



Chair of the Senate Select Committee on Charity Fundraising in the 21st Century, Senator

Catryna Bilyk, labelled the delay pathetic after the response was tabled in Parliament

yesterday.



“It has taken two years for the Assistant Minister, Senator Zed Seselja, to produce a one-page response to the inquiry’s report,” Senator Bilyk said.



“That is pathetic, and an insult to the charities who collectively spent hundreds of hours

writing submissions and giving spoken evidence to the inquiry.”



In August this year, the New South Wales Government released a discussion paper with a

model for cross-border recognition of charitable fundraisers.



“I welcome the release of the New South Wales Government’s discussion paper, but for

harmonisation of charity fundraising laws to be successful it needs Federal leadership,”

Senator Bilyk said.



“I have little faith that Minister Seselja can provide this leadership when for the past two

years he has been asleep at the wheel.



Senator Bilyk said that the Government was crab-walking away from the commitment

made two years ago, in response to the five-year review of the Australian Charities and

Not-for-Profits Commission, to address charity fundraising law reform.



“While many charities expected the Morrison Government to lead on this issue, their

statement in the inquiry response that they will merely ‘support the efforts of states and

territories to harmonise charitable fundraising laws’ is a backdown on their previous

commitment,” Senator Bilyk said.



Harmonising fundraising laws has also been recommended by the Royal Commission into

Natural Disaster Arrangements and the National COVID-19 Coordination Commission’s

not-for-profit working group, the latter stating that “the different fundraising requirements

are such a huge burden on charities, particularly the smaller ones”.



Shadow Assistant Minister for Charities, Andrew Leigh MP, said the Morrison Government

was passing the buck on an issue that was costing the sector more than a million dollars a

month.



“Each year that goes by without a solution to the duplication of charity fundraising laws is

costing charities $15 million,” he said,



“That’s money, generously donated by Australians, being eaten up by red tape which

should be going to the important social, economic, environmental and animal welfare

causes that charities and not-for-profits champion.”



Charities across Australia are already struggling with increasing demand and dwindling

resources as they step up to help people falling through the gaps left by the Morrison

Government. Fixing outdated fundraising laws would make a huge difference in the lives of

the more than one million people who work in the charitable sector, as well as those who

need their support.



WEDNESDAY, 11 NOVEMBER 2020





MEDIA CONTACTS:

STEPHANIE ANDERSON (LEIGH) 0431 344 056

DANIEL HULME (BILYK) 0447 000 867



