

THE HON JOSH FRYDENBERG MP  Treasurer

Media contact: Kane Silom— Office of the Hon Josh Frydenberg MP — 02 6277 7340  The Hon Josh Frydenberg MP | Treasurer | MELBOURNE

MEDIA RELEASE

15 March 2020

GOVERNMENT ESTABLISHES BUSINESS LIAISON UNIT ON  CORONAVIRUS

The Morrison Government today announced the creation of a new Coronavirus Business Liaison Unit  in Treasury to build on existing efforts to support confidence, employment and business continuity.

The role of the Unit will be to engage with peak business groups on systemic issues relating to  Coronavirus to ensure these are being addressed by Government.

It will be staffed by experienced officials drawn from agencies across the Australian Public Service and  will work closely with the private sector.

It will also be a source of information for business groups on the Australian Government’s response to  Coronavirus and the actions that agencies are taking to support business at this difficult time.  This will  allow for information to be disseminated quickly and effectively across the business community.

The Unit will supplement existing stakeholder relationships and liaison work undertaken by  Government agencies, who will continue to engage closely with business stakeholders in response to  the Coronavirus outbreak.

It will work closely with the Chief Medical Officer, the Department of Health and the National  Coordination Mechanism in the Department of Home Affairs.

The Unit will be overseen by Dr Gordon de Brouwer. Dr de Brouwer is a highly respected and  experienced former public servant having held senior roles across Treasury, the Department of Prime  Minister and Cabinet and as the Secretary of the Department of the Environment and Energy.  Gordon  played a central role in the coordinating of Australia’s hosting of the G20 in 2013 and was closely  involved in the policy actions taken during the Global Financial Crisis.

The Unit will begin operating on Monday 16 March 2020 and will be contacting peak business groups.

[Ends]

