CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

MELBOURNE

MONDAY, 23 NOVEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: NSW-VIC border reopening; Thanking Victorian healthcare workers;

Hotel quarantine; workforce casualisation.



CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Well, Melbourne has always been

one of the world's great cities, but Melbourne has proven it is the world's most resilient city.

With the opening up of the border between New South Wales and Victoria at midnight last

night, I certainly wanted the first thing that I do as Shadow Minister for Health and the

country's alternative Health Minister, is to be here in Melbourne to celebrate the

achievements of Melbourne, and most particularly to thank the health care workers of

Victoria, who are heroes.



The old saying goes, not every hero wears a cape, but heroes do tend to wear surgical

masks. And of course, we all honour our doctors and our nurses appropriately so. But so

do we honour the cleaners, the cooks, the orderlies, the beating heart of Victoria's and

Australia's hospitals or health care facilities. These people also risk their own health. With

shortages of PPE around the country they were taking a risk every time they came to work,

but come to work they did, come to work they did every day and they played their role in

Victoria's remarkable achievement.



So with Senator Kimberley Kitching, who's here with me today, with Diana Asmar, the

Secretary of the Health Workers Union, we have thanked the workers of St. Vincent's

Hospital. I want to thank St. Vincent's Hospital for their tour, and for hosting us today. This

has been a national achievement, a remarkable achievement, an achievement which

belongs to every single Melburnian, every single Victorian, and every single health worker

across Melbourne who deserve the nation's grateful thanks and in our own small way,

Kimberley, and I have given them a small token of that thanks today.



As I said to the healthcare workers, if anything good comes out of COVID-19 let it be that

the health care workers of Australia are just that little bit more appreciated, honoured and

respected by the broader population because when a country has its back against the wall,

it is them that we turn to and them that we thank today.



Happy to take questions. I think we've got Josh on the line.



JOURNALIST: I wanted to ask a question. There have been calls to reform the hotel

quarantine to put travellers in areas outside of any specialised facilities. Do you support

those calls? What do you think of that?

BOWEN: I'll deal with that Josh. But let me just first say the Federal Opposition has taken

the same approach to the outbreak in South Australia as we have to Victoria. This is not a

situation where the state Government needed to be beaten up on by their Federal

colleagues. That was the case in Victoria, certainly the approach the Labor Party took in

Victoria. It's not the approach the Federal Liberals always took in Victoria. But it is the

approach a federal Labor Party's taken to the South Australian Government. This has been

a significant outbreak in South Australia and we have given bipartisan support to the efforts

taken in South Australia as has the South Australian Opposition Leader Peter

Malinauskas. Now in relation to the specifics of hotel quarantine; of course Australians are

concerned to ensure that hotel quarantine wherever it happens across Australia is done in

a way safe for the community. The Federal Government really has two roles, two important

challenges; to get as many Australians home as safely as possible and to protect the

broader community safety. And to do that we do need rigorous hotel quarantine. Now,

there has been some use of Christmas Island and other places in the Northern Territory.

They can potentially play an ongoing role, but the most important thing as we get those

Australians home and they have a right to come home ultimately, is that we do so as safely

as possible with the most rigorous protections in hotel quarantine as is humanly possible.



JOURNALIST:  Do you think there is a case to change the way we’ve been doing it

though? I mean the Labor Leader in SA has been talking about (INAUDIBLE). Specialised

facility means specialised workers, not casual workers, that sort of thing. Is there any

(INAUDIBLE)

BOWEN: Well, I'll just deal with the casualised workforce issue directly then I'll deal with

the other question there Josh. Again, I think this has highlighted some of the risks which go

with such a highly casualised workforce across the board. When you've got people who

need to work two or three jobs just to get food on the table because of our casualised

workforce, when you get people who feel they must turn up at work, even if they're not

feeling 100 per cent because they don't get sick leave. Now we've introduced pandemic

leave across the country but I think it then begs the broader question; what about the rights

and conditions for casualised workers as we come through this pandemic because

casualised work can be poor for the individuals health it can be poor, for the health of our

country, as well, the health of our society.



In relation to hotel quarantine; I mean, there's been a national review, led by Jane Halton

of hotel quarantine, I would expect and imagine that the recommendations in that review

are implemented and that hotel quarantine is implemented as safely as possible in any city

across the country, wherever it is being administered.



JOURNALIST:  On the casualised workforce, Brendan O’Connor made a similar point on

Insiders yesterday, do you think people working in hotel quarantine should be paid enough,

given secure enough work that they don’t need to work multiple jobs, that they get paid

enough, or that sort of thing to support themselves just by working at the hotel so they

don’t have to work at other places and potentially spread the virus around?

BOWEN: Well, self-evidently, yes. And I agree with what Brendan said on the weekend.

And this is part of the broader point we've been making, I made it in a speech a few weeks

ago. We have the most casualised workforce in the OECD, we have a growing reliance on

the gig economy, people working two or three jobs. Now in relation to hotel quarantine,

whatever necessary protections need to be put in place should be put in place so that

people don't feel that they need to take the risks that inevitably go with working two or

three jobs.



But look, really I come back to my point before, there's been a review of hotel quarantine

by Jane Halton. I would expect and imagine and trust that the recommendations of that

review had been and are being implemented expeditiously across the country.



Okay, I think we're all in all done? All in all done. Thanks very much, guys.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ELIZA MITCHELL 0413 410 931



