Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Cyber Safety and the Arts, Sydney.





THE HON PAUL FLETCHER MP  Minister for Communications, Cyber Safety and the Arts

MEDIA RELEASE

6 April 2020

Critical funding for public interest journalism in COVID-19

The Morrison Government has today brought forward the release of $5 million from its Regional and Small  Publishers Innovation Fund to support public interest journalism during COVID-19.

The multi-year $48 million Innovation Fund, which began in 2018, is part of the Government’s Regional and  Small Publishers Jobs and Innovation Package, designed to boost sustainability and the ongoing production of  news in the modern media environment.

The Fund has been enhanced - with more organisations eligible to apply and a greater emphasis on  sustainability. This round will be open to regional and metropolitan publishers and content service providers  producing public interest journalism.

Minister for Communications, Cyber Safety and the Arts, the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, said:

“Following extensive consultation, I have adjusted the Fund so that money is available as quickly as possible  to help publishers keep journalists in jobs and local communities informed.

“Many media organisations, particularly those in regional areas, are facing significant financial strain due to  the community’s necessary response to COVID-19.

“As we face these unprecedented challenges together, the media’s role in producing quality news and  providing Australians with timely and accurate information is crucial. This provides critical support at a time  it’s needed most.”

Time frames will be significantly shorter than normal, in view of the urgent need facing many regional and  small publishers. The Fund is a competitive grants program independently administered by the Australian  Communications and Media Authority. More information on how to apply will be made available in coming  days on the ACMA’s website.

The Morrison Government is acting decisively in the national interest to address the significant economic  consequences of COVID-19. The Government has announced measures totalling $320 billion across the  economy, in support of individuals and businesses.

For more information about the Government’s response to COVID-19 visit: www.australia.gov.au

Media contact:  Brad Hatch | 0448 162 679 | Brad.Hatch@communications.gov.au  Rebecca Papillo | 0439 892 771 | Rebecca.Papillo@communications.gov.au

