JOSH WILSON MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT

MEMBER FOR FREMANTLE





ACTION NEEDED TO CUT WASTE



Stand on any Australian beach and pick up a handful of sand.  Unfortunately, the blue, white, or  green specks are not interesting shell fragments, they are plastic. In the guts of fish and birds this  microplastic is accumulating.  Ghost nets, plastic bags, beer-can rings are literally choking our  marine life.

In Australia there is more than 100 kgs of plastic wasted each year per person. We only recycle 12  per cent, and at least half of that was previously sent overseas. That means 90 kgs of plastic goes  into landfill at best, because in reality some of it ends up in waterways and the ocean. Globally it’s  estimated that 10 million tonnes enter the sea each year, and by 2050 there could be as much  plastic by weight in the ocean as fish.

Taking all categories of waste, Australians produce 2.7 tonnes per person, which is among the  highest in the world. At present we only recover 58 per cent. In other words, we each chuck out the  equivalent of a small car every year. While we do relatively well when it comes to building rubble, we  do very badly when it comes to plastic, which is not biodegradable.

The core issue is our predominantly linear economy. To a large extent we turn limited raw materials  into disposable products, many of which are not used for very long, and then we bury them.  This  resource depletion is not sustainable, and nor is the impact of waste on our environment.

A circular economy seeks to maximise the reuse of resources and to minimise waste. It begins with  using less in the first place, but also depends on designing products for reuse and recycling, not  disposability. It is a responsible and full-cost economy in which those who profit from and benefit  from the use of resources incorporate the corresponding costs and impacts in their productive  model.  Sustainability will then be rewarded and delivered by the market.

Fixing the existing broken model requires government to reset the market and lead change in all the  key segments of the circle. When you get a product that is both designed to be recycled and is  actually made or ‘re-made’ of recycled material, the circle is complete. A more circular economy will  result in lower resource consumption and an intrinsic aversion to disposability. Yet while the  Morrison government drops the ‘circular’ word at every opportunity, it hasn’t yet grasped the nettle of  leading change.

There is no doubt our community is ready to play its part and already expects much  better. Manufacturers want clarity, consistency, and a solution to the free-rider problem. The waste  management and recycling industry is keen to shift beyond the provision of collection, sorting, and  transport into higher level reprocessing and remanufacturing. We know from the European example  that new business opportunities and new jobs are created with every tonne diverted from landfill.



The Morrison government will seek to pass its national waste and recycling bills through the Senate  at the next opportunity. These laws formalise the fact that China and other countries in our region  will no longer take our low-quality waste. Beyond that the framework does little to directly improve  our poor recycling performance. After 7 years of watering-down Labor’s national waste policy  framework, these reforms to our product stewardship arrangements are minimal.  We know that  waiting for voluntary action from big companies is too slow and uncertain. These laws introduce a  notionally stronger ‘waggle the finger and tap the watch’ form of the current Minister’s list, but  otherwise maintain a hard-to-justify optimism in naturally occurring change.

In the House debate on the waste bills it was instructive to see the government’s usually blank  column of speakers fill up with ‘light blue’ Liberals keen to have something to say on an  environmental topic. Clearly there is genuine cross-aisle enthusiasm for reform, and even this  underwhelming set of measures appeared like an oasis for government members caught in their  self-made desert of Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act folly and climate  change inaction. Puncturing the giddiness was the Senate Estimates revelation that 18 months after  announcing the $100m Recycling Investment Fund, not a single dollar has been advanced.

Australia can and should do much better when it comes to reducing harmful waste by embracing the  innovation and local jobs that come with circularity. That should be a theme of how we emerge  stronger and more sustainably from COVID-19, but it will require leadership and action, not hollow  packaging.

First published in The West Australian on Friday, 13 November 2020.

FRIDAY, 13 NOVEMBER 2020

MEDIA CONTACT: KATHARINE LONGLEY 0419 092 979

