

BILL SHORTEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT SERVICES

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE

SCHEME

MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC NEWS - AFTERNOON BULLETIN

MONDAY, 23 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; MyGov website crash; Centrelink staffing

capacity; Employment opportunities for seniors; School closures



BILL SHORTEN, MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG: Good afternoon Patricia.



PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: The MyGov website has crashed because of

an unprecedented spike in demand in welfare support, in your view should they

have been better prepared?



SHORTEN: Yeah absolutely. What happened you’ve got the minister in charge,

Scott Morrison’s friend Stuart Robert said just after 1pm today that the reason

why no one can get through the Centrelink website MyGov is because there

has been a denial in service, he was clearly implying that there was some

nefarious actors trying to sabotage the government getting money to the

people. But by a quarter to three in question time, this same minister said no

there was no denial of service, so at 1:15pm you’ve got the government, you’ve

got the minister covering his back side, and by 2:45 it turns out this is a

government who was just was stunned by the fact people who had been laid off

were going to Centrelink looking for support that the government was promising

was there. I mean it shouldn’t be the people of Australia in the Centrelink

queue, it should be Stuart Robert in the Centrelink queue. These guys are no

matter how well intentioned, can’t be trusted to run this Centrelink system at the

moment. It’s just a debacle.



KARVELAS: But Bill Shorten have you established why the minister initially

said that it could be a cyber-attack? Was he given advice to suggest it?



SHORTEN: No doubt this Minister will come up with an excuse, but the point

about it is there were 96 thousand people, apparently, who went on to

the MyGov web site this morning because the Government said go there and it

crashed, and instead of him just fronting up and taking his medicine, he wanted

to get us believing in conspiracies. You know, that old saying, you know when

you're offered a choice of an explanation between a conspiracy and a cock

up always back the cock up. Well, this Minister went for the conspiracy, and

now he's had to say, no, there was no denial of service attack. How this affects

people in the street, though, leave aside me thinking the government's

incompetent on this matter, what this means is we saw queues at the front of

the Centrelink office that haven't been seen since the depression. We've got

people who were told to trust the government's information technology system

and it is failing. Now, it's a question of this government, they sort of act

surprised, but they say that they've been preparing for these matters for weeks

in parliament. Yet when it comes to just paying people some modest income, all

of a sudden you think this task is Herculean. So it's really frustrating. I just I just

feel for the people who are just being stuffed around.



KARVELAS: Oh, there's no doubt that it's terribly frustrating for people trying to

access government payments when they've just lost their jobs in

unprecedented times. We know more than 55,000 Australians who are trying to

access the site. What should the capacity be? Because clearly Centrelink has

operated for a long time in a very different economic setting. What kind of

scaling up should happen now? 55,000 people at once. How many should it be

able to handle?



SHORTEN: Well, first of all, before we get to the number of how many people it

should handle, we should start telling the people the truth. What I'm objecting to

isn't that Centrelink is struggling, although we should have seen that

coming, It's that when confronted with what's happened, the government's

immediately chosen to resort to a fairytale rather than just be up front with

people. The only way we're going to get through this is if the government acts

in a trustworthy manner. So, in terms of the numbers, I think the numbers have

to be much higher than fifty-five thousand. I think Australians get that this is

unfolding rapidly. But what we don't get is why is the government just making

stuff up? That's what really, I think, annoys people.



KARVELAS: Centrelink is hiring an extra 5000 workers. The Treasury is

estimated at up to a million Australians could lose their jobs, is 5000 workers

going to cut it?



SHORTEN: It sounds like a good start, but it does make me think that when the

government didn't have this crisis, why did they cut so many jobs? I think one of

the places where they're going to have to look for additional workers is there's a

lot of very trained people who've retired, taken packages. They've been made

redundant by the public service. I think the government needs to start looking at

having like an army reserve of civilians to fill civilian positions. So, get back

some of the grey brigade back into helping in Centrelink. It's the same goes for

the surge in workforce for disability carers, for example, in the health sector, so

I think that five thousand is a good start. But my problem is that every time this

government says they're going to do something; they bungle their way through

the implementation. Now, some people think that's a bit harsh - ‘oh give the

government a go’ - alright if you want to give the government a go, they've got

to start by giving the people a go and telling them the truth. This wasn't foreign

actors. It wasn't the Chinese or the Russians, it was just the system crashed,

and make up stuff when you don't have to?



KARVELAS: Let's just explore this idea, you say, for an Army Reserve, where

do you want them to work? You say the grey brigade ...



SHORTEN: Well I didn’t mean to pick hair colour I’m sorry, they could be the

bald, or the hair colour brigade ...



KARVELAS: But people who are older, people who have retired are probably

not you would think based on the health advice, the people you want in frontline

roles dealing with people given the Covid-19 threat?



SHORTEN: Let’s be clear here, Centrelink, is not just frontline, and we've got

an I.T. system which is barely struggling. What people are not getting is

accurate information. All people want to know is the answer, they want to know

if they go online can they get their customer registration number so they can

register for Newstart? There's a lot of tasks which can be performed in people's

homes. My point is that there's a lot of Australians who've got some skills who

we could call towards, of course, we're going to make sure that there's infection

control and that's done safely. But my theory doesn't just go for Centrelink, my

theory also goes into disability services. What happens if you've got a disability

service in a regional town and a key worker gets sick, then the whole service

has got to shut down? What we've got to do is start training up other people to

be the surge workforce, as more and more of our online work, you know,

frontline workforces may have to go into isolation or may not be available for

work because there's a whole lot of disabled people in this country who need to

know that they're not going to get stranded if they're full time or pre-paid

carer can't turn up. So these are the things - we should use people, to mobilise,

we've got to think in different ways, we've got to mobilise people to look after

each other.



KARVELAS: Given how unprecedented what we're saying is, you say we

haven't seen lines like these outside of Centrelink since the Great Depression.

Could Labor really have anticipated that kind of surge either? It seems that

nobody saw this coming and clearly our system isn't built for this kind of mass

unemployment.



SHORTEN: Well, to be fair to the government, you're right, a lot of this is

completely new territory, but for several weeks we've seen this coming. So why

is it when it's happened? We've all sort of got this stunned headless chook

attitude of, gee, that's surprising. And secondly, if the reason why the

Centrelink system broke down was because there's just a lot of unexpected

demand, don’t be embarrassed by that and make up false boogey men to

blame for the collapse of the Centrelink MyGov portal - just own it. What

Australians want in times of difficulty is they just want to hear the truth. If we

don't have enough masks, tell us. If we don't know if the online portals are not

going to work, just tell us. I think the other thing you're saying is, well, the

government's doing the best it can. One: tell the truth, and two: perhaps now

we're seeing some of the chickens come home to roost where we've seen the

cutback of government services. And now when we actually need them, we’ve

found that we've perhaps cut too hard in the past.



KARVELAS: How about a culture shift inside of Centrelink or any of these

welfare services? For a long time Bill Shorten it's been the role of people on the

frontline of delivering welfare to try and make welfare hard to get. All of

a sudden they have to make welfare easy to get. It's a completely different way

of running the show. Are you concerned that this is a big culture shift that

also has to be embraced?



SHORTEN: Well, I want to distinguish between people on the frontline and the

very senior echelons of government. It's a culture shift for a conservative

government and the senior echelons of government not to look at welfare as

the blame game and think everyone who is on welfare is trying to diddle the

system. For the people on the frontline, the social workers, the counter staff,

the phone staff, the people who've been working very hard, I think they've

always tried to help everyone who comes in, but if their hands are tied behind

their back because you've got government policy, well then hopefully a change

in government policy will free up these empathetic people and professionals on

the frontline to be respected. I mean give people the tools to do their job and

they'll go and do them. But if you tell people going to view every welfare person

as a potential cheat, well that makes it hard for the frontline, doesn't it? So I

agree, it's time for change, but it's got to be at the top and we're seeing some of

that. But it's you know, we've got to just tell people the truth on all occasions.



KARVELAS: Just want to talk about school closures with you for a moment. In

Victoria holidays are starting early they start tomorrow and we don't really have

a clear indication about whether schools will come back. New South Wales is

telling parents, if they can to keep their children home. If they can, schools will

continue to run. Should we have a clear and consistent national message on

this?



SHORTEN: Yeah, you'd hope so, but we clearly don't. As Labor's been saying

on a range of issues, we just need a clear message. I mean, on one hand,

we're told that we shouldn't have people going into social gatherings, yet on the

other hand the same young people should go to school. It's not clear

messaging. It seems to me that everyone’s got a medical expert to justify their

opinion. Now the government's made its decision, it's got the advice from the

chief medical officer. Other governments are now winding back from that

position. I just feel for teachers, parents and kids. People just want a clear

message. Now where you can, many parents, where they've been able to have

one of the parents, you know, work part time or look after the kids, they've

taken them out of school. Others don't have that choice. I think what we have

to do is make sure that the government's just as clear as it can be. And I think

we're heading in that direction that schools will be in some fashion, you

know, whether or not they are technically open. But there's no one there. I don't

know. One group I just want to give a shout out to who'd been particularly the

victims of mixed messages, are the teachers and parents and staff at special

schools. It's very hard at a special school if you got a kid with special needs to

easily maintain that social distancing. So, I've been getting a lot of e-mails from

teachers and parents who are completely confused about what it all means for

their kids.



KARVELAS: Bill Shorten you decided to keep your children home and we don't

know if schools will go back in Victoria and that's, of course, where your

children learn. Will you be sending them back if schools do go back?



SHORTEN: We'll wait and see. At this stage, Chloe and I made a decision that

we're in a fortunate position and sure our kids haven't been in school last week.

Now, I think the Victorian school system's catching up. I think about 30 per cent

of parents had already voted with their feet on this. Your question about

schools goes to a deeper issue, it's about mixed messages. You know, on one

hand, we're saying to people that, you know, we've got it all under control. On



another hand, we're telling people it's unprecedented. I think that the more that

you can get transparent information out there, that's what we need. That's

what Labor's been asking for. I certainly would say this, wherever we think

we're going to arrive at a policy position, if we know we're going to get there,

then why not get there quicker? This is a public health emergency. It's got

terrible consequences for the economy, but first and foremost, it's a public

health emergency that should govern our decisions. So if we know that there's

a public health solution that we're going to move to, I guess the sooner we get

there, the better we can get on and deal with the economic emergency and

everything else after that.



KARVELAS: Bill Shorten, thank you so much for joining us this afternoon.



SHORTEN: Thanks, P.K.



KARVELAS: That's the Shadow Minister for Government Services and the

NDIS, Bill Shorten.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM HOULIHAN 0438 366 400







