



MEDIA RELEASE  NEWSTART

Government should consider delaying rollout of new Jobseeker Payment  as Centrelink workload will increase with COVID-19 response roll out

The Greens are calling for the Government to consider delaying the rollout of  the March 20 changes to Newstart because of the additional pressure on  Centrelink due to the COVID-19 outbreak.

From March 20, 2020 Newstart Allowance, Sickness Allowance, Wife Pension,  Bereavement Allowance and Widow B Pension will cease and most recipients  of these payments will transition to Jobseeker Payment, Age Pension or Carer  Payment.

“I am very concerned that the Centrelink system will be under additional strain  as casual workers are forced to self-isolate and will be applying for either an  emergency payment, Newstart or the former sickness payment," Senator  Rachel Siewert said.

“I am very worried about people falling through the cracks, particularly older  Australians who have been on a Wife Pension and are not familiar with the  mutual obligation requirements of a working age payment as well as those  casual workers who will have to apply for Newstart or a sickness payment  because they can’t go to work.

“Centrelink is not fit for purpose and continued staff cuts, lack of appropriate  investment and management of the Robodebt debacle means that Centrelink is  under strain with its current caseload, let alone the added load we are going to  start seeing.

“From March 20, 2020 no new applications for the Sickness Allowance will be  approved and recipients who would have previously received a Sickness  Allowance will now receive the Jobseeker Payment which will be subject to the  activity test unless they are exempt.

“At the time this legislation went through I sought to amend the bill to ensure



that those who would have been eligible for a sickness allowance would be  automatically exempt from looking for work.

“I am very worried about sick people being subject to a complicated exemption  process at this particular time.  We already have very high numbers of sick and  disabled people who are living in poverty on Newstart and this will add to the  numbers.

“While the Government seems to think we can’t afford to increase Newstart  there seems to be plenty of money to go around to punish people on income  support. Whether it’s the Cashless Debit Card, the flawed jobactive system or  attempts to drug test people on income support this Government has millions to  spend.

“Scotty from Marketing thinks that it’s time to rebrand Newstart. We think it’s  time to raise Newstart so that everyone in our community has what they need  to live a good life.”





Media Contact  Lucy Cowcher-Guthrie: 0418 401 180



