Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health

The Hon. Mark Coulton MP  Minister for Regional Health, Regional Communications   and Local Government



MEDIA RELEASE



22 August 2020



GP-led respiratory clinics continue to serve Australians

People experiencing acute respiratory symptoms, however mild, should make an  appointment at their local respiratory clinic and see a GP free, which includes any relevant  treatment and testing for COVID-19.

All GP-led respiratory clinics, staffed by highly skilled professionals, are part of the Australian  Government’s comprehensive and rapid response to minimise the spread of COVID-19.

There are now 146 respiratory clinics open. Twenty are part of Aboriginal Community  Controlled Health Services and 82 are located in regional Australia. The clinics are serving  people from more than 2,200 postcodes nationally covering 98.5 per cent of the Australian  population.

More than half a million consultations have taken place nationally within the respiratory  clinics, with over 440,000 tests for COVID-19 conducted.

This is an incredible achievement and demonstrates the commitment of the GPs and other  health professionals to support the fight against COVID-19.

The Australian Government is providing particular support to Victoria as it combats the  COVID-19 outbreak at its 28 GP-led respiratory clinics.

The clinics in Victoria have assessed more than 153,200 people and conducted more than  138,000 tests. These clinics are seeing approximately 70 per cent more patients per day  when compared to pre-outbreak assessments in early June.

We encourage Victorians to continue to be tested so we can identify where new break-outs  of the virus are occurring and ultimate support the efforts to control its spread.

The Government acknowledges the work of all of the respiratory clinics, who have shown  great resilience and commitment to supporting their local community, including building  additional capacity when needed through staffing and opening hours.

In NSW, 51 GPRCs have assessed more than 201,600 people and conducted over 180,900  tests. Five weeks ago, the NSW Clinics increased their capacity by approximately 40 per cent.

In March, the Australian Government announced a $2.4 billion health package to protect all  Australians, including vulnerable groups such as the elderly, those with chronic conditions  and Indigenous communities, from COVID-19.

The package provides unprecedented support across primary care, aged care, hospitals,  research and the national medical stockpile including $206.7 million to establish GP  respiratory clinics.

These clinics are proving to be a vital part of the Government’s strategy to keep the health  system functioning.

The respiratory clinics provide a safe and specialised service for people who have cold and  flu symptoms while preserving hospitals for people with severe injuries and disease, and  general practices for usual care and chronic disease management.

The Government has a deep respect and gratitude for the GPs and other health  professionals on the frontline of this pandemic.

We can all help our frontline health professionals to slow the spread and stay COVIDSafe by  practising good hygiene and physical distancing, following the limits for public gatherings,  understanding how to isolate if you need to, and by downloading the COVIDSafe app.

If there are no clinics near you, contact your doctor, local community health service or local  hospital for assistance. Make sure you phone ahead and discuss your symptoms before you  visit in person.

For more information on where to find your nearest coronavirus testing clinic, please  visit health.gov.au, DHHS Victoria or your state or territory health department website.

-END-

Media contact: Steph Nicholls 0417 314 920 steph.nicholls@regional.gov.au







