







The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology

The Hon Keith Pitt MP  Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

SALT AND POTASH PROJECT A BOOST TO REGIONAL WA JOBS

25 August 2020

The Morrison Government is helping strengthen supply chains that will make  Australian industry more resilient, with Major Project Status granted to a mineral  processing facility in Western Australia that will create hundreds of jobs.

BCI Minerals’ Mardie Salt and Potash Project, located about 100km south-west of  Karratha, is expected to produce more than 4 million tonnes of high purity salt and  100,000 tonnes of potash fertiliser a year.

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said the facilities  would help secure domestic supply chains, while also creating export opportunities.

“The Morrison Government is pleased to support this project which has the potential  to expand Australia’s vital chemical and agriculture industries,” Minister Andrews  said.

“Not only will the development create about 450 jobs during construction and 200  jobs over its operating life, it will also support critical supply chains and deliver  exciting export opportunities.

“Potash, for example, is essential for many of our farmers but currently it has to be  imported, making our agriculture sector susceptible to supply chain disruptions like  we’ve experienced with COVID-19.”

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt said the Karratha,  Dampier and Onslow communities would reap significant economic benefits.

“Projects such as this are important to the economic health of regional communities  in the north and complement the Australian Government’s efforts to develop northern  Australia,” Minister Pitt said.





“The project will supply agricultural and chemical industries across Asia, bringing  valuable export income.”

BCI’s Managing Director Alwyn Vorster said he is pleased Mardie has been  recognised by the Australian Government with Major Project Status.

“Mardie is a Tier 1 project that can deliver significant stakeholder benefits to  Australia and the Pilbara region over many decades. The Australian Government’s  support will make a meaningful contribution to ensuring this can occur,” Mr Vorster  said.

A new transhipment port within the Pilbara Ports Authority controlled Cape Preston  West Port area, adjacent to the Mardie Project will enable exports from the facility.  The port will also be available to others, potentially unlocking further deposits of iron  ore and other minerals in the region.

Major Project Status is the Commonwealth Government’s recognition of the strategic  significance of a project to Australia. It provides companies with extra support from  the Major Projects Facilitation Agency, including a single entry point for  Commonwealth Government approvals, project support and coordination, and help  with state and territory approvals.



Media Contacts:

Minister Andrews’ office: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846 / Jen Jennings 0435 121 347

Minister Pitt’s office: Matt Dunstan 0411 535 072



Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

