



The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

The Hon. Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

9 November 2020

DR CATHY FOLEY TO BE AUSTRALIA’S NEXT CHIEF SCIENTIST

Renowned physicist Dr Cathy Foley AO has been appointed Australia’s next Chief Scientist.

Dr Foley, who has spent the last two years as the CSIRO’s Chief Scientist, will take over from Dr Alan  Finkel AO whose tenure comes to an end in December 2020.

Prime Minister Scott Morrison said Dr Foley had the background needed to deliver during such a pivotal  time in history.

“As we recover from COVID-19 and look to rebuild a brighter future, the role of the Chief Scientist has  never been more important,” Prime Minister Morrison said.

“Dr Foley has a big task ahead to drive collaboration between industry and the science and research  community, as we look to create jobs for the COVID-19 recovery and for the future.

“I would like to thank Dr Alan Finkel AO for his outstanding contribution as Chief Scientist over the past  five years. He has been a valued and respected voice to Government, and I know he will continue to  make a significant contribution to the Australian and international science communities.”

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews also thanked Dr Finkel for his service and  said Dr Foley would bring a unique mix of experience to the role.

“Dr Foley is highly regarded in the scientific community, has extensive experience working with  government, but most importantly understands how to drive collaboration between industry and  researchers,” Minister Andrews said.

“We know science will play a crucial role in helping to create jobs at this critical time, and Dr Foley’s  skills as a talented science communicator will help sell that important message.

“Like me, Dr Foley is also a strong advocate for women in science, technology, engineering and  mathematics and her lived experience will make her an important role model for aspiring young  scientists.”

Dr Foley is the second woman to be named Australia’s Chief Scientist, after Professor Penny Sackett,  who held the role from 2008-2011.

Dr Foley is a Fellow of both the Australian Academy of Science, and the Australian Academy of  Technology and Engineering. She is an accomplished scientist who has made significant contributions in  the area of physics relating to superconductors.

Her appointment as Australia’s Chief Scientist is for three years, starting in January 2021.

[END]

Media contact:  Prime Minister’s office: Press Office (02) 6277 7744  Minister Andrews’ office: Keegan Buzza, 0447 697 846

