

SENATOR DEBORAH O’NEILL  LABOR SENATOR FOR NSW



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS ON THE HOUR  TUESDAY, 18 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Victorian quarantine; Robodebt; aged care crisis.

DANICA DE GIORGIO, HOST: Now it's time to discuss the political issues of the day.  Joining me live is Labor Senator Deborah O'Neill. Senator, thank you so much for your  time this morning. Let's get straight into it. The extent of Victoria's hotel quarantine scheme  has been revealed. Return travellers accounting for more than 99% of the state's COVID-19 cases. At what point does someone have to come out and take responsibility for this?

SENATOR DEBORAH O'NEILL: I guess all Australians really understand right now that  truth is at a premium and they want the facts.  And they want to know that whatever the  facts are, that we're going to have the kind of leadership that will allow our response to  protect us from the problems going forward. I mean, it wouldn't take a rocket scientist.  Australians were seeing those planes coming in, having concerns about how many people  were coming into the country who were infected. So we knew that at the time, I think the  most important thing we need to take from this is that we cannot allow that to occur again.  And we need to have truth about what's going on so that proper decisions can be made. I  think the other important thing is that we need to accept that when we have to stand up  new systems at such speed and under such pressure, that we need to really get the very,  very best experts that we can in terms of systems creation, to protect us from things that  could go wrong, things that might be able to be foreseen. And I don't think that blaming is  going to get us the outcomes that we want. Australians care about their families, they care  about their communities, they care about their jobs, their businesses. They want leadership  from all government leaders of all persuasions that will tell them - You can be confident in  us to learn the lessons and make sure that we implement systems that protect you, protect  your family and give us the best chance as a nation to keep moving ahead.

DE GIORGIO: It doesn't give Victorians much confidence though, talk about leadership. Do  you think that the government in Victoria has shown leadership on the matter?

O'NEILL: Look, I think leadership is being shown in every context around the country,  leaders in communities are taking up the mantle of responsibility right now. Leadership is  vital. And I am sad to see right across the country, some failures in terms of people  accepting the responsibility that, you know, things go wrong. Australians, I think, are a  pretty good lot in terms of recognising, well, things have gone wrong. This is what we know  has gone wrong. But we're far more interested as citizens of this country, in making things  go right going forward. And I think it's important we don't get focused completely on looking



backwards when Australians are still in the middle of a declared emergency across the  entire country, indeed, around the world, where we need to pick up our game, not diminish  what leadership can offer, and make sure that we learn the lessons and implement the  changes that are necessary to protect us going forward. That would be the greatest failure  of all. Failing to see the lesson, to learn lessons and implement the changes.

DE GIORGIO: I want to talk about the Robodebt hearing. We've heard that one of the top  government officials who oversaw the Robodebt scheme. Now they haven't accepted that  this program caused people to take their own lives. It's something that you've been  involved with in terms of the hearings itself. Is there any evidence to suggest this?

O'NEILL: Yesterday, I had the privilege of reading into the record the testimony of two  amazing women. Jared lost his life. He died by suicide after receiving communications  from the department around debt that he was supposed to owe, and yesterday just to read  you one section. According to his mum Kath, “Jared left the house two and a half hours  after received a message. He sent a message stating he loved me at 7.41. This was the  last time I would say see or hear from my gorgeous boy.” Kath, wrote to me yesterday  afternoon after the hearing, and on behalf of herself and Rhys and Jenny, she said “As  mothers, we know our sons, and we know what happened.” And yesterday's statements by  the department head Kathryn Campbell absolutely did not meet the demands of those  parents for an apology.

Ms Campbell was sorry about anything that's related to mental health. Well, we're all sorry  about that, but she refused to accept any responsibility, any responsibility - for the deaths  of these two young men who were harassed by debt collectors. Dunn and Bradstreet  contacted Rhys on seven occasions with debt scaling up to $17,319. Jenny his mom said  the “above-mentioned notices, continued harassment both written and phone calls, this  continuing pressure ultimately caused my son Rhys to commit suicide on Australia Day the  26th of January 2017”. Now, even in light of those statements from the mothers of young  men, young Australians, who felt so desperately unable to respond to this government, that  they made the terrible choice to take their lives by suicide. Those mothers know what  happened. That was not enough for Miss Campbell yesterday to accept responsibility. And  that's what I was talking about before with leadership. Australians expect leaders to own up  to what's gone wrong, and make sure it doesn't happen again. And we cannot see in this  whole Robodebt mess, the government, the department leaders or the Minister responsible  taking any responsibility for what they did to Australians.

DE GIORGIO: Senator, unfortunately, we are running out of time. We have to leave it  there. Senator Deborah O'Neill, thank you so much for joining me this morning.

O'NEILL: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: GRACE FINCH 0422 859 471





