







THE HON KEITH PITT MP

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia  Member for Hinkler

MEDIA RELEASE

12 March 2020



RESOURCES SECTOR RESILIENCE ON DISPLAY AT ROUNDTABLE

Australia’s resources sector is continuing to show resilience in the face of the ongoing  impacts of the corona virus (COVID-19) outbreak and the bushfire crisis.

Key leaders from the resources sector met earlier today in Canberra at the same time the  Government announced a carefully designed and responsible stimulus package that will  offer an immediate boost to the Australian economy.

Speaking after the roundtable, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Keith  Pitt said he was greatly encouraged by the show of strength by the resources sector.

“It was very helpful to hear the on the on-the-ground view about the ongoing impacts of the  COVID-19 outbreak and the sector’s contributions to bushfire affected communities.

“It is clear resources exports are holding up with companies activating contingency plans to  ensure their supply chains are maintained.

“The key message I received is that the resources sector remains a reliable supplier to our  major trading partners and will continue to underpin the Australian economy.

“I also took the opportunity to congratulate the resources sector for its ongoing financial  and in-kind support to communities affected by the recent bushfires.

“The Australian Government is continuing to deliver whatever assistance is needed to help  states and communities recover.

Participants at the roundtable included: Ms Tania Constable, Minerals Council of Australia,  Mr Andrew McConville, Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association,  The  Hon Ian Macfarlane, Queensland Resources Council, Ms Rebecca Knol, South Australia  Chamber of Mining and Energy, Mr Paul Everingham, Chamber of Minerals and Energy  Western Australia and Mr Stephen Galilee, New South Wales Mining Council (by  teleconference).

The Minister and industry leaders agreed to reconvene later this month.







Media contacts:

Minister Pitt - Matt Dunstan 0411 535 072

