

JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

HOBART

FRIDAY, 31 JULY 2020



SUBJECTS: Victoria nursing home outbreaks; Ruby Princess; Tasmanian

border and restrictions.



JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS: The

numbers that we're seeing in Victoria particularly in relation to aged care are

really tragic. They're tragic for the older residents and they're tragic for the

families and loved ones. What we've seen today of course is the authors of two

very significant reports that the Federal Government has had, say that the

Federal Government should have been better prepared for these outbreaks in

Victoria.



We've seen Kate Carnell and the report into Earle Haven, the similar situation

on the Gold Coast where staff, one day, were not there. Similar to what we saw

in St Basil's and in other facilities in Victoria. The Government should have

responded and been ready prior to these outbreaks. It had a recommendation

before it to establish protocols in case this ever happened again. We've had

Professor Pollaers and his workforce strategy come out saying today that the

Government didn't do enough. That report the Government has had for well

over a year, almost two in fact. The Government has had a long time in terms

of some of these reports and recommendations to respond.



It is very clear that Scott Morrison and the Liberal Government are responsible

for aged care. It's also becoming clearer day by day that they weren't prepared

for the outbreak in Victoria when they should have been because they have

dozens of reports sitting on their desks with recommendations and that if

implemented it would mean that they were better prepared than they have

been. It's a tragedy for those families, for those loved ones and for older

Australians who are being moved out of their homes in Victoria today.



JOURNALIST: Should we have been better prepared for any sort of health

outbreak in nursing homes? We couldn't have predicted Coronavirus but should

we have been better prepared for any sort of flu outbreak way before this?



COLLINS: Well what we saw with the bushfires and with Earle Haven is that

the Government does need to be prepared for emergencies to happen. But we

also of course had the outbreaks in NSW which should have been learnt from,

in Dorothy Henderson Lodge and in Newmarch House. The Government has a

report on what happened in Dorothy Henderson Lodge that it has not made

public that it should. And soon as the Newmarch House report is available in

early August, the Government should release that urgently too. We need to

learn the lessons. I am very concerned that the Federal Government, Scott

Morrison and his Government, have not learned the lessons they should have

prior to the outbreaks in Victoria.



JOURNALIST: There was adequate time you think between the first round of

outbreaks and the ones we're seeing now? Adequate time for the Federal

Government to really pull up its socks when it came to getting our aged care

facilities ready?



COLLINS: I think that the Federal Government themselves admit there is more

there could have done. We had the Federal Minister for Ageing apologise to

some of the residents and their families for some of the situations in Victoria.

The Federal Government I think is starting to realise that it should have known

better and it did have some prior warnings and it should have been better

prepared. When we've still got os a situation where less than 50 per cent of

aged care staff have done training in PPE and infection control. When we're

seeing infection control being a real problem in some of these facilities, clearly

it's an issue, clearly we should have been prepared.



JOURNALIST: I can't imagine how anxious people who were living and

working in these facilities must feel at the moment if they're close to an

outbreak. What immediate support should we be providing to each and every

aged care facility?



COLLINS: I think the thing the Government could do urgently is to make sure

that all staff have had appropriate training and they have appropriate access to

protection equipment as they go about and do their day to day job. I've also

called on the Federal Government to extend its retention bonus to all workers in

aged care. Currently 40 per cent of workers have been excluded from this

retention payment. These workers are doing their very best, they are turning up

day in, day out. We've always said there aren't enough workers and they're not

paid enough. We need to acknowledge the important role that they're doing and

the Government could do that by extending the retention bonus payment.



JOURNALIST: I know there were concerns about PPE in the past, but Richard

Colbeck seemed adamant this week that there was enough, are you satisfied

that every facility has enough PPE now?



COLLINS: I think the answer to that is we don't know, it's a very good question.

I don't think we know whether people have adequate access to protection

equipment. Certainly, we're still hearing reports on the ground that as late as

two days ago, people did not have access to the personal protection equipment

they need to go about their jobs day by day.



JOURNALIST: On the Ruby Princess, do you think Tasmanians are due an

apology given the tragic consequences those decisions had on the North West

of our state?



COLLINS: Clearly the evidence that we've seen come to light in the last day in

relation to the Ruby Princess shows that the Federal Government was

responsible for what happened to those people disembarking that vessel. The

evidence is very clear, Australian Border Force officials and the Federal

Department of Agriculture officials were on board that ship. Unfortunately those

officials didn't have enough staff, enough training to be able to do the job they

were being asked to do by Scott Morrison. I think Scott Morrison really clearly

needs to look at what happened with this and take some responsibility. North

West Tasmanians were under lock down for weeks because of what happened

and it started with the Ruby Princess. What happened when it got here is of

course another matter, there's an inquiry into that. But certainly, the Prime

Minister needs to take some responsibility for the Ruby Princess and what then

happened in North West Tasmania.



JOURNALIST: And you think they are due an apology?



COLLINS: I absolutely think the Prime Minister should say to North West

Tasmanians that I'm sorry this happened, I'm sorry that our Government didn't

do better when it came to border force control which is our responsibility.



JOURNALIST: The Premier is going to make an announcement after National

Cabinet today. There's a growing call to not reopen the borders, even with a

travel bubble and to instead ease restrictions here to help the economy. What's

your position?



COLLINS: I think we should take the health advice in relation to what is best for

protecting Tasmanians. I would be very concerned if people were deviating

from the very best health advice that we were receiving about how to keep

Tasmanians and Australians safe.



JOURNALIST: But opening up the border even to states who have very low

cases, the risk of that is obvious even if it's small. Do you support opening up

the border?



COLLINS: That's a question for the health officials, it's not one that I should be

making. It's one that the health officials should be making and providing advice

to the Tasmanian Government about.



JOURNALIST: And what about relaxing the rules around the number of people

that are allowed at sporting events here and social distancing for hospitality

venues. Would you support them being relaxed or is that not possible if we

open our borders?



COLLINS: I think we need to continue to listen to the health advice. We've

been told here in Tasmania we still need to be cautious, we still need to

maintain our social distancing. I encourage all Tasmanians to listen very

carefully to that public health advice and to follow it so that we all keep safe.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











