SENATOR MALARNDIRRI MCCARTHY

DEPUTY OPPOSITION WHIP IN THE SENATE

CHAIR OF FIRST NATIONS CAUCUS COMMITTEE

SENATOR FOR THE NORTHERN TERRITORY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC DARWIN BREAKFAST  THURSDAY, 8 OCTOBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Legislating two seats in the NT; Federal Budget; Labor’s budget  reply; Jobkeeper; Cashless Debit Card.

ADAM STEER, HOST: This week, there was a window of opportunity for the Northern  Territory's federal representation to be secured for good. But, like many of you would  have been closing your windows at home due to the rain, it looks like that window might  have been closed. Senator Malarndirri McCarthy is the author of the Bill to save the  second seat. Senator, in layman's terms, what happened with the window?

MALARNDIRRI MCCARTHY, NT SENATOR:Good morning Adam and Rick and good  morning to your listeners. Well I think a door is now opened. That's what's happened. If  we're talking windows, I think I think a door is open and the Liberal Party has walked  right inside. We understand that the government will support and guarantee the two  seats and legislate for the two seats.

STEER: That's fantastic news. When did you get that news?

MCCARTHY: I know. Well two things happened this morning. I just learnt from another  radio station that I just did an interview with that the Deputy Prime Minister told them  that he guarantees that there will be two seats. And Senator Mathias Cormann, who's  the leader in the Senate here for the Liberal Party as well, and he has said that he  government will support and legislate for the two seats. So I'm, I'm kind of, as you can  hear, very breathless and obviously it's still not over. I have to keep the pressure on. But  this is just an incredible achievement to have the Liberal Party in particular now well and  truly, you know, inside talking.

RICK HIND, HOST: Senator McCarthy, you've just heard this news. Do you have any  idea about when this legislation will actually happen?

MCCARTHY: Sure. Look, we've got, obviously, the Private Senators' Bill that Don  Farrell and I introduced is well and truly in the Senate, and that still has to be debated.

It's sitting there waiting to see what the government is proposing. And we understand  that the Government will introduce its legislation in the House in over a week's time  when they sit for a fortnight. So we have to keep the pressure on. Nothing's a given as  far as I'm concerned. It's great news. But as always, I want to see, I want to see the  signatures on the table. And I want to I want to know that the Bill has well and truly gone  through.

STEER: This will be an extraordinary achievement. Do you know, Senator, the last time  a Private Opposition Member's bill was passed into law by a Federal Government?

MCCARTHY: Yeah, it was 38 years ago.

STEER: It's a long time. Do you know what the machinations behind the doors were for  them to suddenly come out with support for this bill?

MCCARTHY: Oh, look, I'm sure there were many levers being pulled. Politics is a  constant moving game at times. And there are different personalities. And I just had to  stay focussed on talking to everyone and reminding them that the people of the  Northern Territory, in amidst all the politics, need to have solid representation. And I  think, you know, there's obviously, you know, different views, different feelings. And this  is what I've had to encounter over the last - well this has been going on, when? Since  February, really.

STEER: So, and so what actually happens? Because it's still going to pass the Senate  before it goes to the House of Reps and then back to the Senate, is that right?

MCCARTHY: Yes, that's correct. So, there are a couple of options here. And this is  what we're still negotiating today so just bear with me if I can't give you the full details  while we're still trying to nut it out. But there are two options. One is that we clearly push  through and debate and vote on the Bill here in the Senate. But the Government may  also be proposing that it introduces legislation. So, at the moment, it's looking like both  options are on the table. So, I'm just I'm just pleased that we've got the government,  especially the Liberal Party, in this instance, because the Nationals were always  supporting with us. But the Liberal Party has now recognised that this is the most  sensible thing to do. The people of the Northern Territory cannot have their voices  diminished.

HIND: And will this be a guarantee of two seats in perpetuity or is this just for the next  election period?

MCCARTHY: This is what I will be pushing for. That it has to be in legislation. Full stop.

STEER: Very briefly, Budget Week. What did you make of the federal budget? Now

you're friends with the Liberal Party, it'll be interesting what you say here.

MCCARTHY: No, we all know where, we all know the boundaries of different topics. Let  me tell you. Look, I certainly am still concerned for the Northern Territory in terms of the  Northern Australia position and infrastructure. We saw that, you know, in terms of the  JobKeeper rollback, you know, we're going to see 18,000 Territorians impacted in that.  And that's a real concern. The Cashless Debit Card is also on the table, and that's still a  major concern for us. And clearly, we still needed to see more support, particularly in  the bush and for those areas of homelessness, housing and First Nations people.

STEER: The opposition budget reply is tonight, what can we expect to hear from your  leader, Anthony Albanese?

MCCARTHY: We'll certainly be focussing, in particular, on those issues that I've just  raised. But more so around the overall issue of women. We were very concerned  overall with the budget that there wasn't a particular focus on some of those areas that  we've said needed to be met, given the impact on women throughout COVID, in  particular. Childcare, childcare is a great area for us to focus on. And I know that the  leader will be looking at that as well.

MEDIA CONTACT: MARTHA TATTERSALL 0417 387 775

