SENATOR TIM AYRES

LABOR SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC SYDNEY

FRIDAY DECEMBER 11, 2020



SUBJECT: Western Sydney Airport.



HOST, SIMON MARNIE: The new Western Sydney Airport is one of Australia's

largest infrastructure projects. And when it opens in 2026, it'll have the capacity for

around 10 million passengers. In recent times, news of a dubious land deal, the so

called 'Leppington Triangle' has raised some doubts over the way the project is

being managed. And this week, Federal Labor established a Senate inquiry to look

into the project. The chair of that inquiry is Labor Senator Tim Ayres, and he joins

me from Parliament House this morning. Tim, tell us about the inquiry and why

you've established it.



SENATOR TIM AYRES: Good morning, Simon. You are right. Earlier this year,

we've seen the Senate Estimates process and the Auditor General's report really

focused on this Leppington triangle purchase, where the land valued at $3 million

is purchased for $30 million. And somehow that's worked its way through what

passes for a probity and governance system for these kinds of purchases.

Somebody has made themselves very, very wealthy. And there's been a lot of

public focus on that.



We intend to, in a forensic way, work our way through how those purchasing

decisions were made, but also have a broader look. This is a massive

infrastructure project. The interface of federal and state regulation and activity

around this has produced at least this one extraordinary purchase. But we want to

have a look at risk and governance around this whole project. We want to have a

look at waste and mismanagement.



And we want to make sure that there's proper accountability and that the lessons

are learnt from what's gone wrong in the governance and management of this very

important project for Western Sydney and for all of New South Wales.



MARNIE: To a certain extent, though, that's looking back over to the shoulder to

what has been done. We heard this week from your Labor colleague Susan

Templeman, who was pushing for the release of the flight path plans. And we also

heard from Secretary of Residents against Western Sydney Airport, Trevor Neil

who is concerned over a lack of information with the airport:



TREVOR NEIL, RESIDENTS AGAINST WESTERN SYDNEY AIRPORT: We

haven't been able to get any information from the Department of Infrastructure,

who are building this airport, nor from the forum on Western Sydney Airport, which

is the supposed public consultation body. It's just a black hole of information.



MARNIE: A black hole of information to the terms of reference for your inquiry look

to the future as well as the past?



AYRES: Well, we'll certainly be trying to learn the lessons, make sure that firstly,

that there is accountability about what has happened in the past. That's very

important. That where there's been waste, where there's been mismanagement,

where there's been improper dealings, that there is proper public accountability

about those issues. And we're going to try and make sure that we're learning the

lessons for the future, not just for this project, but for large infrastructure projects,

right around the country.



Our Terms of Reference don't extend to the kinds of issues that you've just been

dealing with. We’re the Finance and Public Administration Committee, we are

concerned with the proper expenditure of taxpayers’ money. And there are

examples of profligacy and waste around this project; this $10 million visitor centre,

that Scott Morrison, the Prime Minister opened for a big announcement late last

year, has only seen 7000 visitors. A big expenditure of public money with very little

value attached to it.



We're going to be looking at all of those projects. All of that work. It is Simon a

massive undertaking, but I think it's very important accountability work for the

parliament to do.



MARNIE: Labor Senator Tim Ayres is with us. Joining us from Parliament House is

a Senate inquiry looking into the project around the new Western Sydney Airport.

So who will be on this inquiry?



AYRES: The other Senators will be myself, James Paterson is the Deputy Chair of

this committee from the Liberal Party, but I'll be leading this inquiry. I'm absolutely

committed to making sure we get to the bottom of the story here. It is a very, it's a

very important project for all of New South Wales but it's a massive

Commonwealth and State undertaking, and we're going to make sure that the

Morrison government is held accountable for what are some very clear, some very

clear problems, not least the 'Leppington Triangle' purchase.



MARNIE: So, when will you be reporting?



AYRES: We'll be reporting in the middle of 2022. This is a very long running

inquiry. It will involve a lot of work, we're keen to hear once submissions are open,

we're keen to hear from people who've got something to tell the inquiry about what

they know. All of that will be available for people who want to make submissions on

the submission website, when it becomes available. Or you can contact my office.

We are very keen to make sure that we get to the bottom of mismanagement and

waste with this project.



MARNIE: Sounds as though you're walking into it with a preconceived idea of

mismanagement, though.



AYRES: It's pretty hard to look at the 'Leppington Triangle' purchase and not reach

a conclusion that this has been not properly handled. That's why some of these

matters have been referred to the AFP and it's not certainly not our job to

undertake those kind of investigations. It's our job to deal with the management of

public money and to make sure that there is proper accountability about that.



It is very hard to look at that Leppington Project - $30 million. I know that the

Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. McCormack said, initially, that he thought it was a good

deal, he's walked away from that. But for every ordinary Australian in Western

Sydney looking at that purchase, they know that that is red hot $30 million for a $3

million project and we intend to get to the bottom of it.



MARNIE: If there's an AFP inquiry into this, does this indicate a lack of confidence

in you and AFP in being able to look into it?



AYRES: Oh, absolutely not. The AFP will do their do their work. The Auditor

General has done excellent work here. Now, of course, the Morrison government

doesn't like accountability. The Auditor General did their report: we're now seeing a

funding cut for the Auditor General right when Commonwealth expenditure across

the board. We've seen the budget and the context of the coronavirus pandemic;

$89 billion worth of additional spending, but we're reducing the capacity of the

Auditor General to conduct scrutiny.





This government doesn't like scrutiny and accountability. And I'm determined to

use the Senate committee process to add to add to public accountability to make

sure that we're speaking up for ordinary Australians and demanding accountability

for public expenditure out of this government



MARNIE: Running right through to 2022. We'll follow this one but for the moment.

Thanks for joining us on ABC Radio Sydney.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JOE MCKENZIE 0431 377 319

