SENATOR MALARNDIRRI MCCARTHY

DEPUTY OPPOSITION WHIP IN THE SENATE

CHAIR OF FIRST NATIONS CAUCUS COMMITTEE

SENATOR FOR THE NORTHERN TERRITORY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT   RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC ALICE SPRINGS BREAKFAST  WEDNESDAY, 7 OCTOBER 2020

SUBJECT: Fighting to maintain two seats in the NT through the Commonwealth Electoral  Amendment (Ensuring Fair Representation of the Northern Territory) Bill 2020.

STUART BRASH, HOST Malarndirri McCarthy, good morning to you.

MALARNDIRRI MCCARTHY, NT SENATOR: Good morning, Stuart. And good morning to listeners.

BRASH: Now, this has been lost a little bit in the froth and bubble of the Federal budget. But what  happened yesterday?

MCCARTHY: Yes it has. Well, it's quite, quite historic, really, in one sense, a political sense, Stuart.  You know, what happens is, there is one day of the year where the Opposition can try and push  through something and that one day of the year is budget day. And so we needed to know that we  had the numbers and we were able to do it with the assistance of the Nationals and independent  members of the Lower House, basically to ask permission of the Lower House to enable the Bill  that  we've put through here in the Senate - Senator Don Farrell and I - to be able to be debated in the  Lower House. And for your listeners, just so they understand, it's near impossible for an Opposition  Member or Senator to get their Private Member's Bill into Parliament for obvious reasons - because  the Government - so it was quite historic that the Nationals agreed to join us. Or certainly, Barnaby.  And certainly, you know, Labor was there, the Greens, the independents and, you know, the House  said, yes, you know, make sure that Bill comes to the House so that we can debate it. The catch,  though, of course, is we have to do it this week.

BRASH: OK, so the Senate has passed this bill? I thought so.

MCCARTHY: No, no, no, no, it hasn't yet.

BRASH: OK, so it's got to do that.

MCCARTHY: We've introduced it and we were going to debate it in November, but we're trying to  bring it on today. Now that we know we've got the permission of the House, we're trying to bring it on  today so we can debate it and vote on it today and send it to the House tonight so they can vote on it  in the morning.

BRASH: What do the numbers look like in the Senate? You've talked about Labor, the Greens, the

crossbenchers, Nationals Senators. Let's say, Bridget McKenzie on board?

MCCARTHY: Look, Bridget was one of the five Nationals Senators in the Senate who supported the  introduction of the bill. And so what I have to make sure today is actually go around, along with  Senator Sam McMahon, to make sure that we've still got the numbers. But as you know, in politics,  people change their mind. Other things are happening. People get distracted. So I'm still working on  that, Stuart. I guess at the end of the day, though, I still call on the Prime Minister to do something  about it. He can do this. He can tick this off today. We just need him, really. And I still call on the  Prime Minister to support the people of the Northern Territory to have their voices heard by having  the two seats in the Lower House.

BRASH: Given Barnaby Joyce's support and his seat in the lower House seat, has he got the  backing of other Nationals or is this going to get fragmented in the lower house?

MCCARTHY: Look, I think you probably have to speak with Barnaby to know the ins and outs of  what's going on there. All I'm doing is taking advantage of a very important situation for the people of  the Northern Territory. So if I can get his vote, and many other Nationals and Liberals who might  want to cross the floor, I'm going to say, come on, let's do it. The people of the Territory need you to.

BRASH: There was some suggestion about the sort of majority you need in the lower house. What  is the go there?

MCCARTHY: Yeah, look, that discussion yesterday was largely around the fact that, with COVID,  you can't have 76. You know, there is a certain number you can't have in the House and you have to  go with a simple majority. So there's the COVID measures with social distancing, but also the fact  that, you know, it's only once a year that the Government moves Standing Orders because they  have to introduce a budget. So we used that opportunity and were able to be supported.

BRASH: So got to get out of the Senate tonight into the House. And why does it have to be dealt  with by the end of the week? Is there any reason why it's got to be dealt with in the coming days?

MCCARTHY: Sure. That motion that was moved in the House yesterday, only lasts this week.

BRASH: Okay. For a limited time only, this special!

MCCARTHY: I am jumping through hoops, let me tell you. You know, even trying to get Pauline  Hanson and others who usually don't vote our way to, you know, come on, please. This is our  chance. It's a really strong chance in the locker. Let's go for this.

BRASH: Have you got any sense of what Senator Hanson thinks on this matter?

MCCARTHY: Well, we do know that, you know, on the record, as she has been, over the years,  she'd rather see less politicians than more. But I think, you know, I'll keep pushing for the Territory  because we certainly don't want that. That might be all right for other States, but certainly not for our  jurisdiction.

BRASH: And if you were a betting woman, which you may be Malarndirri McCarthy, do you think -  we're in the weeks leading up to the Melbourne Cup, would you punt on success both in the Senate  and then getting it passed in the Lower House.



MCCARTHY: We'll put it this way, Stu, I always love a challenge and the people of the Territory are  good at standing up to challenges. We never say die and it's not over till it's over. And I'm giving it  every shot I can, but I am still calling on the Prime Minister, Scott Morrison, we need you. You can  change this. Allow this legislation through and give the people the two seats to the Northern  Territory.

BRASH: Malarndirri McCarthy, we'll stay in touch, thank you.

MCCARTHY: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MARTHA TATTERSALL 0417 387 775

