





SENATOR MALARNDIRRI MCCARTHY

DEPUTY OPPOSITION WHIP IN THE SENATE

CHAIR OF FIRST NATIONS CAUCUS COMMITTEE

SENATOR FOR THE NORTHERN TERRITORY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

TODAY SHOW

WEDNESDAY 9 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: COVID contact tracing in Victoria and NSW; Australian Ms Cheng Lei

charged by Chinese Government with endangering national security; TikTok and

social media regulations; fairy bread.



KARL STEFANOVIC, HOST: You are watching Today right across the country. Good to

see you. It's his first big admission that they got it wrong. Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews

sending a special public health team to Sydney to learn the lessons of contact tracing from

New South Wales and to try and fix the failures. To discuss, I'm joined by Northern

Territory Senator Malarndirri McCarthy and Anna Caldwell, political editor at The Daily

Telegraph. Ladies, good morning. Malarndirri to you first of all, the numbers, they're finally

coming down in Victoria, which is a good thing. It's good news. The only way through this,

though, seems to be testing and good contact tracing. Maybe it's something the AMA is

pushing for, nationalising this part of the pandemic with the Army, national database,

national funding. Is that something you'd support?



MALARNDIRRI MCCARTHY: Look, clearly anything that can be done to assist Victoria in

trying to get on top of this is critically important. And whatever is happening now in terms of

even the relationship with New South Wales is also important. But I'd still caution against

people's criticism of what's going on there. I mean, we only have to recall the COVID app. I

mean, I've still got on my phone. Maybe I should delete that as well, Karl. so we've just got

to be careful. There's so many things here that we're learning as we go.



STEFANOVIC: Well, that COVID app, I mean, how would you describe that?



MCCARTHY: Well, it's just useless, really, isn't it?



STEFANOVIC: Anna, Victorian authorities, they're expected to be in New South Wales by

the end of the week, we understand. I think I think Malarndirri is right in one sense that

there's no point too much in going back now, we've all done that. But if they're moving in

the right direction, this is a good thing. We've got to get to the point where we can open the

borders again. Is a national approach the best way of doing that, do you think moving

forward?



ANNA CALDWELL, DAILY TELEGRAPH: Well, look, I think there's so much merit in

working together in a national approach, learning things from each other, moving in the

right direction. You know, that's so much more important, working together, picking up tips

and tricks from other States than being too proud to do that and trying to compete with

each other. You know, New South Wales does have success in contact tracing. That's

been evident from the beginning of this pandemic. And that doesn't, that doesn't throw

shade on any other State. I just think that there's lessons to be learnt. And as you say, we

can kind of go forward together.



STEFANOVIC: Yeah. And we have to, we have to try and be unified on this eventually. I

mean, the States that continue to keep their borders up, it just doesn't it doesn't make any

sense to me economically moving forward. Let's move on though, a disturbing

development overnight from China. Australian journalist and TV presenter Cheng Lei

charged with endangering national security. It comes just a day after two Australian

journalists fled Beijing for fear of arrest. All Australia is now being warned: don't travel to

China. Malarndirri, these are disturbing developments aren't they?



MCCARTHY: Absolutely disturbing, Karl, I mean, you know, on two levels: one, of course,

free press. It's so critical in terms of journalists being able to do their work wherever they

are in Australia or around the world. But also, if we just reflect to just a couple of weeks

ago, the Deputy Head of Mission from China gave a press conference in the press gallery

or in to all journalists down in Canberra a couple of weeks ago talking about mutual

respect. So it kind of sends a very confusing message. But as you say, a very disturbing

one. And we certainly are also very, very concerned about Ms Cheng.



STEFANOVIC: We just have different ways of approaching things. I mean, are you

comfortable with Chinese journalists being in Australia?



MCCARTHY: Well, I think any journalist I mean, it's the same thing if you look at First

Nations journalists trying to cover stories about First Nations issues. That's their job. It's

the job of Chinese journalists to try and do the same. We're an open democratic country.

You know, we try to rise above any intolerance and racist issues. I mean, it's still a

challenge for us, but I think we have to hold the fundamental values of democracy.



STEFANOVIC: Anna, what are your thoughts on that?



CALDWELL: Well, look, I think the real shame here is that Australia stuck its neck out and

took a diplomatic risk, I suppose, in demanding this independent inquiry into the origins of

Coronavirus. And that upset China. Since that happened, we've seen, you know, repeated

kind of clap back at Australia. You know, there's been limitations on trade, barley, wine,

you know, the China - China saying to Chinese students: don't come to Australia. And now

this. You know, we certainly have upset China and we're seeing that play out. And that is

very concerning to me.



STEFANOVIC: I think-- who cares? I mean I mean, asking for the origins of a worldwide

pandemic is not an, is not an unusual request.



CALDWELL: Exactly. We did the right thing.



STEFANOVIC: Now to a very worrying development and the use of social media. The

Prime Minister has ordered our e-Safety Commissioner to investigate the social media

app, TikTok, after a disturbing video targeted children. We won't go into it. But, Malarndirri,

all parents being advised to monitor their children's social media feeds. TikTok's's come

under enormous pressure in the last couple of weeks. Is enough being done?



MCCARTHY: All I can say, Karl, is they've just got to move quicker. This is just incredible

to know that this kind of vision is out there. And it's scary. It's just reprehensible to think

that that kind of vision is allowed to be looked at by anyone, let alone our children. So I

would say move faster.



STEFANOVIC: And you going to ban TikTok, though. I mean, is that something you'd push

for?



MCCARTHY: Oh, look, I think there's certainly a debate that has to occur in in relation to a

lot of the social media, Karl, I think there's lots of things that happen on Facebook and

even Instagram that need to be questioned as well. And these are things that the Federal

Parliament will be looking at at some point. But I think that for now, the issue is this

particular video. And it just needs to be removed.



STEFANOVIC: Look, I hate the idea of banning things. And TikTok, the horse has bolted. I

mean, almost every kid in the country has got it, Anna. What would you do in this case?



CALDWELL: I'd prefer to see stronger regulations. I agree with you. I don't like the idea of

banning something, but I would like to see it managed better. I mean, this video was

appearing in the middle of puppy videos and kitten videos to shock people. I mean, if you

were a parent, that would be so horrifying to think your child could just stumble across

something like that. So we need that action from the tech giants.



STEFANOVIC: I agree. And also, we've got our tech expert coming in a little later to show

parents how to do that. And just quickly, it's the debate that is igniting the nation today.

How to prepare the perfect fairy bread. Take a look. Take a look at this photo on reddit.

Getting absolutely slammed. Breaking every rule of fairy bread production that I know

because the crust has been left on. And it's not even being cut into triangles. I mean, this is

a disgrace. Malarndirri, are you thinking about bringing this up in Parliament?



MCCARTHY: You mean making it in Parliament, Karl? Then I'd really get in trouble trying

to make it on the floor of the Senate. You know, that would be seen as what we call a prop,

if I try to make that.





CALDWELL: We need more props like that.



MCCARTHY: But it's a nice prop, maybe I could share it around with everyone.



STEFANOVIC: You cut the crust off don't you?



MCCARTHY: Well, otherwise, if I had crust, my hair would go really curly.



STEFANOVIC: Anna, I just can't believe it. You?



CALDWELL: Well, the real disgrace there, I think, is the spread of the sprinkles. They're

too concentrated in the middle. I expect better from my fairy bread.



STEFANOVIC: Oh, my goodness. Anyway, just before we go, because I just want to finish

this. Malarndirri you've become quite the celebrity on the Today Show. And every time

you're on our viewers, they greatly look forward to seeing your signature, which is now the

hoop earrings. And so here's a song for you this morning.



[SONG PLAYS: "Whoomp there is it"]



STEFANOVIC: That's your signature on air. There you go. Thank you ladies.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MARTHA TATTERSALL 0417 387 775







Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













