

The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

Julieanne Alroe  Chair of Infrastructure Australia



MEDIA RELEASE





The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au

11 December 2020

INFRASTRUCTURE AUSTRALIA TO FOCUS ON HIGHEST-PRIORITY  PROJECTS FOR NATION’S ECONOMIC RECOVERY

National Cabinet has agreed that Infrastructure Australia will now evaluate project proposals which require  more than $250 million in Commonwealth funding - an increase from the previous threshold of  $100 million.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the move will better focus Infrastructure Australia‘s business case evaluation process on  the key projects to help rebuild our economy and support jobs into the future.

“This change is something all States and Territories have been advocating for and will improve the  efficiency of infrastructure decision-making and delivery,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“These changes will take effect from 1 January 2021 onwards and will support our infrastructure-led  recovery from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.

“This is about making sure the national infrastructure advisory body is looking at the most nationally  significant job-creating infrastructure priorities across the country in order to lay the foundations for  economic recovery.

“October’s Federal Budget brought our pipeline of transport infrastructure investment to a record  $110 billion, with thousands of job-creating infrastructure projects large and small rolling out in every part  of Australia.

“Refocusing Infrastructure Australia’s independent advice to government toward projects receiving over  $250 million in Australian Government funding is an important step to accelerate delivery of projects  nationwide that are critical for jobs, freight efficiency and road safety.

“At the same time, the Government is committing to maintaining the transparency and quality of IA’s  advice on the biggest, most significant proposed investments.

“Projects falling under the revised assessment threshold will continue to go through all other State and  Federal approval processes.”

Infrastructure Australia Chair Julieannne Alroe said IA supports efforts to improve the efficiency of  infrastructure decision-making and delivery.

“We will focus our rigorous advice on Australia’s most nationally significant proposals with long-term  productivity and community benefits,” Ms Alroe said.

“The Infrastructure Australia Assessment Framework and our business case evaluation process will  continue to support robust, evidence-based decision-making.

“Infrastructure Australia will continue to take a leading role in streamlining and harmonising assessment  processes and work closely with national, state and territory infrastructure advisory bodies to support the  timely delivery of infrastructure projects.”

IA’s Infrastructure Priority List is available at www.infrastructureaustralia.gov.au/infrastructure-priority-list.

Ends.

Media Contacts:  Deputy Prime Minister - Jo Williamson 0418 475 668 | Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Infrastructure Australia - 0428 163 090, IAmedia@infrastructure.gov.au



