

The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure and Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

Senator the Hon Marise Payne  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women



MEDIA STATEMENT



25 March 2020

AUSTRALIANS ABROAD DURING COVID-19

COVID-19 is affecting hundreds of thousands of Australians who are travelling abroad,  disrupting their movement and in some cases making it difficult for them to return to  Australia. We acknowledge that this is an anxious time for many Australians and their  loved ones.

There have been rapid reductions in commercial flight options, including flight  cancellations with little or no notice and increased restrictions on travel and transit.  Many countries are closing their borders and restricting internal movement.

The situation is changing rapidly and will continue to do so. As well as the scale of  challenges posed by the global Covid-19 pandemic, our capacity to provide consular  services in this environment is constrained.

The Government’s assurance to all Australians abroad and their families is that the staff  of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, whether at home or at our missions  abroad, is working around the clock to provide information and assistance to those  affected by this crisis.

The Government has strongly urged, and continues to urge, Australians overseas who  want to come home to return as soon as possible. We acknowledge this is difficult for  many.

Limited commercial flights are still operating from some countries and cities but we are  aware that in many countries they are no longer an option. We urge Australians who do  have access to these opportunities to act quickly.

The Government thanks Qantas and Virgin for their willingness to engage on continued  services to key hubs for the purpose of bringing Australians home, where existing  commercial flights are exhausted.

Last night, the Government also agreed to consider, on a case-by-case basis,  supporting our airlines to operate non-scheduled services to less central locations to  bring Australians home. These will only be done where it is feasible, where all other  commercial options have been exhausted and where local authorities will permit such  flights.

We do not have plans for assisted departures, such as those conducted to the epicentre  of the COVID-19 outbreak, Wuhan in China and Japan.

As many travellers are doing, it may be necessary for some Australians to stay where  they are overseas, and as far as practicable remain safe and comfortable, including by  following the directions of local authorities. Given the unprecedented scale of the global  interruption to travel, the options outlined will not return all Australians travellers home.

For those of you who may be overseas in coming weeks, Australia’s diplomatic missions around  the globe will do whatever they can to provide you with regular advice and support. This will  include information on local restrictions, food and necessities, and other support. Please ensure  you sign up to their social media accounts, as well as Smartraveller.





Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Tess Salmon 0467 740 017  Minister Payne - David Wroe 0429 531 143; Melanie Ruiz 0427 888 392



