

The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au



6 April 2020



APPLICATIONS OPEN FOR REGIONAL AVIATION GRANTS

The $298 million of support announced for Australia’s regional airline network is a step closer to  flowing through the industry with applications opening and guidelines released for two new major  initiatives to protect the sector during COVID-19.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the grants offer vital support to regional communities which rely on air services for  urgent transport, medical supplies and personnel.

“The Federal Government has been focused on securing a regional aviation network during the  pandemic so residents can access their capital cities for essential services and medical freight  supplies,” Mr McCormack said.

“We have opened the application process as quickly as possible to ensure our aviation industry is  able to access the support it needs to operate these crucial services.

“This funding will ensure a basic level of air connectivity is maintained to regional locations during  this crisis, by funding operators for one service per week on each route for an initial period of up to  six weeks.”

Mr McCormack said there were as many as 138 regional locations serviced by regional services which  could benefit from the Government’s initiative.

“We are also providing direct financial support to smaller regional airlines, ensuring they remain  viable in this unprecedented downturn in aviation activity,” he said.

All airlines, contracted aero-medical providers and other essential industry service providers are  encouraged to review the guidelines as they may be eligible for assistance on a month-by-month  basis through to 30 September 2020.

In recent weeks the Federal Government has committed more than $1 billion to the aviation sector  in response to the pandemic and will continue to support regional aviation businesses and workers  during this difficult time.

The grant guidelines for both programs with other program documentation, are available via the  GrantConnect website: www.grants.gov.au.

Ends.

Media Contact:  Mr McCormack - Dean Shachar 0418 202 860

