

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  CANBERRA  TUESDAY, 24 MARCH 2020

SUBJECT: Stimulus package; Coronavirus; Centrelink queues; Parliamentary sitting  schedule.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH:  Last night the Parliament passed  the Government's stimulus package although we no longer talk about stimulus, we're  talking about survival for many people. It's the right thing to do to pass the package even  though we didn't agree with every element. I note that the United States Congress is still  arguing over their stimulus package, bickering about what to do whereas here in this  Parliament we provided bipartisan support to make sure that the money starts flowing as  soon as possible. We appreciate that the Government accepted some of our suggestions  that the payments will now apply to AusStudy and AbStudy which previously was not going  to occur. and there were some changes made to the taper rate as well at Labor's  suggestion. That's a good thing and it's vital now that the package be implemented and  implemented competently.

In that regard I think all Australians would be deeply saddened to see the lines outside  Centrelink offices around the country. These are scenes we haven't seen in Australia in 80  years and of course all Australians need to look out for each other in this period. I say the  Government should have seen this coming. You can't announce a big package, you can't  know that people will be laid off around the country without putting plans in place to  manage the stress on Centrelink. It's not good enough frankly for the Government to say  ‘Please don't go to Centrelink offices, please go online”. Not everybody can go online. For  many of these people it’s the first time they have had to interact with Centrelink as I  understand it you need a CRN number which you have to get in person. The Government  really needs to get a handle on this urgently this morning. We've got social distancing rules  in place which clearly aren't being applied in Centrelink queues. We've got people lining up  desperate. We've got the police being called to send people home. This isn’t Australia.  This is not how we do it. The Government needs to get a handle on this issue and to  ensure that Centrelink is properly resourced as a matter of extreme urgency. The MyGov  website crashed yesterday. The Government says go to the website, it crashed yesterday  today. Stuart Robert claimed it was a cyber attack. That was a lie. It wasn't a cyber-attack.  It crashed under the weight of demand. I understand, the Labor Party has consistently said  we understand the complexities, the challenges, the constraints. We have given the  Government bi partisan support for basically everything they've wanted to do and we've  called for them to do more. In that regard. I welcome very much the announcement

yesterday of Minister Hunt that he will extend the telehealth rebate to healthcare  professionals across the board and all patients as Labor has consistently called for. But I  acknowledge his announcement and his work. It's a good one and I welcome it very much.  I'm very glad that that suggestion has been taken up.

The Deputy Chief Medical Officer also said last night that the criteria for testing will be  changed again. Again, Labor has been calling for that but again we've recognised the  constraints on the Government. We know it's not easy. But we've said it should be the  objective of national policy that everybody with symptoms are COVID-19 be tested. People  with clear and classic symptoms who aren't being tested and as the WHO has said, ‘test,  test, test’ is the answer to this. So if the criteria are changed so that people who have  symptoms are tested, nobody who wants to be tested, not everybody who feels like it  would be a good idea. You still have got to have a doctor signed off as being valid that  you've got symptoms that are relevant but that needs to be changed and is changed as  soon as possible. So we look forward to further announcements or details about both of  those announcements and make sure that they meet the objectives that Labor has set. But  we very much welcome the moves in those directions and recognise the Government for  doing so.

Happy to take any questions.

JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen we just had Adam Bandt here talking about the closure of  Parliament and that t iis not a good idea to have it closed when the nation needs you most.  So what would you propose as a solution if you were to keep Parliament open in terms--?

BOWEN: Well I think the Parliament to be fair has worked well over the last 24 hours. It's  been very difficult circumstances. And indeed historic circumstances. But the rules that  were put in place that would have no more than 100 people in the Parliament at any one  time, minimal staff, minimal exposure to staff, have worked. We need to be very careful.  We're asking Australians to socially distance, to look out for each other, not to have  unnecessary interactions. We’re leaders, we have to set examples too. Yes, the place for  Parliamentarians is in Parliament. It's also in our communities. I'll be leaving here and  going back to my community. We've got plenty of people who've lost their job and need our  help and support. So a politician isn't just working when they're in Canberra. Politicians are  working when they're in the community as well. And I understand Adam's point. We want  to show that the Parliament will continue to work. The  arrangements that have been put in  place between Christian Porter and Tony Burke with the change to the standing orders last  night is that the Parliament can be recalled when the Government needs it to be in a  manner and form agreed between the Opposition and Government. We can do this again if  necessary. If the Government needs a third or fourth stimulus passed we can come back  urgently if necessary. If there are health measures which need to be passed we can come  back but also for the health of everyone, we all need to think about our own behaviours  and engage in activities which protect the health of the public and having thousands of  people in Parliament House at once is not that, is not that.

So there's a balance to be struck and I think with all due respect Adam, the Government  and the Opposition are striking that balance. We're happy to be, happy to be here to pass  whatever legislation is necessary. That's our job. We're also not going to unnecessarily  endanger the health of you, press gallery, staff, Parliamentary attendants, the cleaners and  everybody else by being here if it's not necessary.

JOURNALIST: Chris Bowen you're a student of economic history and I understand that we

have to do everything we can to fight this disease. But recessions and particularly  depressions kill people too. What lies ahead for Australians in terms of the health effects  that we are going to see and obviously economic effects that we'll see as the world deals  with this at the same time?

BOWEN: Well Chris we're in uncharted territory but I'll say this; the best economic  response to this crisis is a health response. No stimulus is as beneficial as beating this  disease. The disease is currently doubling in terms of numbers of Australians impacted,  diagnosed every two days, two to three days. That will put enormous pressure on our  health system. That's why we've supported every single step taken. That's why we call for  more to be done. Because if that trajectory continues we have to be honest with the  Australian people; This is a very serious situation. If that continues this will get worse  before it gets better. So that's why I don't accept some people say there's a balance the  Government got to strike between the economy and the health policy. The best economic  policy is the best health policy. I reject that somehow there's a balance to be struck. The  best policy for the Australian economy is the one which gets this disease under control as  soon as possible. The sooner we do that, not only will we save more lives, but the sooner  that happens, the easier it will be to eventually return to a more normal arrangement.

JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen I could just ask; Do you think that a line in the sand should be  drawn on the whole Centrelink website fiasco with Stuart Robert? He said this morning on  radio that he jumped the gun and that he shouldn't have done that press conference that  he did yesterday. Saying that he jumped the gun, is that fair enough?

BOWEN: Well Bill Shorten his Shadow Minister of course will examine what he said this  morning. I haven’t seen what he said this morning. And look I accept that people make  mistakes. I accept that. It's a pretty serious mistake to make, to mislead the Australian  people either deliberately or unintentionally. It's a serious mistake at a time of great  urgency. If he's accepted responsibility for that well then I understand that that's a good  thing. But we all have to be very careful. This is a fast moving situation. We all have to be  very careful to ensure—there is a responsibility on all of us to ensure that our statements  are factual.

JOURNALIST: And also this morning Tony Abbott was on with Alan Jones and he  suggested that this should be a lockdown of the Australian economy that it should be put  into a coma, they were his words, at least for a short period of time to try because he's  saying by doing that we will be able to deal with things a lot more..

BOWEN: They're not words that I would have used but the principle is; if you think  something is going to happen in a couple of weeks, do it now. Any steps we take now will  probably impact on the number of people being diagnosed in a fortnight not tomorrow not  next week in a fortnight. The figures we're seeing today the hundreds of people who've  been diagnosed over the last 24 hours, probably got the disease sometime in the last  fortnight, not yesterday, not the day before. So we need to take urgent steps. That's why  we've supported the steps that have been taken.

JOURNALIST: Does that mean a complete lockdown to the economy?

BOWEN: We haven't been overly prescriptive. We made suggestions and some of which  have been taken up, some which haven't. States and the Commonwealth need to work  together and I say this: have a consistent message. And the confusion and stress in the  community is in no small part due to the inconsistent messages that we seeing. We need



national leadership to get that consistent message.

JOURNALIST: (INAUDIBLE)

BOWEN: Well clearly people and Governments and business need to remove any non-essential activity. All of it. That's what that's what-- non-essential activity. Now we've also  got to look after the mental health of the nation and if you go for a walk , walk your dogs  and you know check on your elderly neighbor. That's pretty essential. That's pretty  essential for you and for society. So what needs to happen is that we need consistent  leadership. If there is-- if there are further steps to be taken. This is my point Johnno, tell  the Australian people what they’re likely to be. And tell the Australian people what trigger  points will lead to further decisions so that people can factored it into their conversations  and their planning. Part of the problem has been-- again we understand it is fast moving.  Part of the problem has been people don't know what's coming next. Now Jacinda Ardern  said we will close schools when we have community transition. She signalled it early. Gave  parents a chance to think about ‘Well this is coming’, what steps we're going to be putting  in place how we're going to deal with it. Clear and consistent messages. That's not what  we're having in Australia. So if the Government thinks that further steps are going to be  necessary: one, take them sooner rather than later and two, tell the Australian-- level with  the Australian people what are they and what will lead to them. What has to happen for  further restrictions to be put in place. What would be the trigger points for that to be  considered so that people can then have a bit of a little bit more certainty in their lives. It's  an uncertain period. That's inevitable. But give the Australian people as much certainty as  they can.

JOURNALIST: What's the magic number? Say three weeks and you’re tempted to put  your foot off the break and the disease breaks out again like in 1919. By the way, the  Spanish Flu came in two waves.

BOWEN: I said that in Parliament yesterday Chris, the second wave killed my great  grandmother. A tragic event for Australia. I agree with the Prime Minister on this point; any  steps being put in place don't assume that they're here for a couple of weeks. Don't  assume that they’re here for a couple of weeks. Now steps need to be taken carefully but if  in doubt do more. It is impossible to overreact to this crisis. If in doubt do more and do it  quickly. But to my point you know if you think more will be necessary signal it now and give  the Australian people an indication as to what it will be, when it's likely to happen and what  will lead to that decision.

JOURNALIST: And how long?

BOWEN: Well I understand that we don't know that. I mean the Australian people do need  to know that this, we don't know how long this will last. We have our best estimates and  our best guesses. So as I said I give the Prime Minister this; he's right when he says don't  assume that any measures that are being put in place will be here for a few weeks  because this will take time. Thanks guys.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512





