





SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Finance  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Leader of the Government in the Senate

Senator for South Australia

TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Interview on ABC News, Afternoon Briefing, with Patricia Karvelas.        Topics: trade relations with China, industrial relations reform, NZ backpackers  10/12/20  4:24PM

Patricia Karvelas: Simon Birmingham is the Minister for Finance, Trade and Tourism and Investment  and I spoke to him a short time ago.

[Excerpt]

Minister, welcome.

Simon Birmingham: Thanks, Patricia. Great to be with you.

Patricia Karvelas: We're going to get to industrial relations reform in a moment, but I want to start on  your portfolio. China has applied a new round of tariffs to Australian wines, saying tariffs of either 6.3 or 6.4  per cent would apply to Australian wine due to claims that winemakers are being subsidised. What's your  response?

Simon Birmingham: Well, we reject those claims out of hand, and the evidence just is not there to sustain  it. And the idea that Australian winemakers dump their product in China, as was originally claimed by China,  or that they are subsidised by government to some extent to export to China, is just false. The evidence is  very clear in the Australian wine industry's favour, and we will continue to defend the wine industry by using  the domestic processes available in China and, ultimately, considering the appeal rights of the independent  umpire through the World Trade Organization. This is obviously another step in what has been a  disappointing, a frustrating and a deeply concerning pattern of decisions by China over quite some period of  time. We have called out those behaviours and that pattern of behaviour. We've done so publicly. We've done  so directly with China. We are continuing to do so through the WTO, and we will keep standing up for  Australian industry.

Patricia Karvelas: Will it make it worse for Australian winemakers, or was it so bad it can't get any  worse?

Simon Birmingham: Look, a 6 per cent tariff on top of a 200 per cent tariff is obviously marginal compared  to the initial harm that was done, but, on the whole, it just shows that China's making of these decisions is not  being based properly on the evidence. Any idea that our wine is dumped in the Chinese market doesn't stand  up to scrutiny. Australian wine is the second highest price point in the Chinese market. And for Australia, it’s  basically our highest-priced market, and so our producers are sending their premium product at premium  prices into that market, and they’re doing so free of any government subsidy. Winemakers are more likely to  complain about how much tax they pay than how much subsidy they get. And so we will defend all of these  arguments and these cases back to China and through all the systems available.

But, of course, we appreciate there's a bigger picture and issue here. It's why we will also, whilst trying to  bring China to the table for dialogue, help our industries in terms of their access to all the other markets we've  struck trade agreements with, be that Japan or Korea, Canada or Mexico, Vietnam or Indonesia, the growth



opportunities in India, or the new trade agreements we're pursuing in the UK and EU. These are all about  trying to help people grow in other markets too.

Patricia Karvelas: Look, I've talked to people, not only in the wine industry, just across the board in  different industries who are facing these kinds of ramifications, and they say this push to diversify might sound  good on paper, but you just don't get the value that you get from China anywhere else. How do you answer  the value question?

Simon Birmingham: Look, China is obviously a very large market. It is not only Australia's number one  trading partner, but it's the number one trading partner for the vast majority of the countries in our region. That  is a function of, of course, our geographical proximity and the scale of the Chinese market, the scale of  population, the growth of the middle class, and with that, the propensity towards premium products. So, yes,  there are clearly impacts there. It's not easy to simply pivot away. And our businesses have made commercial  decisions over recent years in terms of where they sell their products. We recognise that some are now under  stress and pressure as a result of the decisions China has taken. That's why we want to work with them  through our trade offices and other avenues to help them grow into other markets, but we don't pretend it's  ever easy to grow a new export market. And, of course, the need to diversify for some means choosing  access points into many different markets, not just one, if they had a more singular focus on China before.

Patricia Karvelas: What's your response to the Chinese Embassy saying your concerns around Beijing's  adherence to the free trade deal are totally unfounded?

Simon Birmingham: I'm afraid that the evidence just doesn't stack up in terms of China just trying to deny  that there's nothing to see here. Our wine industry knows there's something to see here. Our live seafood  industry knows that there is. Our timber industry knows that there is. Our fresh meat industry knows that there  is. Our barley and grain sector knows that there is. The sectors that have seen the obvious, continuous  accumulation of impacts throughout the course of this year, and, indeed, in the case of the barley processors  that started a couple of years ago, clearly can see a pattern of behaviour, and that pattern of behaviour is  inconsistent with both the intent and the spirit, as well as the letter of ChAFTA or, of course, the commitments  China has made more broadly to the World Trade Organisation.

Patricia Karvelas: Is the Government considering withdrawing or changing the proposed alteration to  the BOOT Test, the Better Off Overall Test?

Simon Birmingham: No, Patricia. The Government has presented this week industrial relations reforms  that have been the subject of around 120 hours or so of consultation by Government, sitting down with unions  and businesses, hearing all of their arguments, working through the different potential changes to make our IR  system more adaptive to help with jobs growth out of the COVID-19 recession. And so, we are focused very  much on delivering the reforms. They'll go through a Senate committee process. We will listen and engage  through that process. But in terms of the Better Off Overall Test, look, Paul Keating has previously described it  as being too complicated. We are simply proposing a two-year-

Patricia Karvelas: No, no, no. The enterprise bargaining process has been criticised, but the idea that  workers would be worse off is clearly really contentious. I'll just- you're going in to the summer period not  retreating from this position. I mean, that's pretty dangerous, isn't it?

Simon Birmingham: Well, Patricia, you know what still has to be met for a change in enterprise agreement  under this test, don't you? Workers have to vote for it themselves. They have to agree, by majority vote, that  they want changes. And then it still has to pass the test of an assessment by the independent umpire, by the  Fair Work Commission. So there is a very clear standard that we are maintaining. The tests will be maintained  where workers get to vote and have the say in relation to any changes to the enterprise agreement. The idea  that Labor's trying to cook up, that there's going to be some mass reduction in terms of wages or entitlements,  is completely false. These are lies being told by the Labor Party. These are sensible reforms instead-

Patricia Karvelas: Well, it's not- they’re not entirely lies because it is possible to reduce wages or  conditions under the legislation. So it's not a lie, it is possible that workers will go backwards.

Simon Birmingham: And the test there, that workers in a workplace have to vote for a new enterprise  agreement. Can't be forced upon them. Can't be done without their consent. Needs their consent to be able to  move forward and then still has to have the ruler run over it by the independent umpire. And that ruler involves  an assessment, still, that there is a Better Off Overall Test. Nobody's getting rid of the test.

Patricia Karvelas: Okay.



Simon Birmingham: It's staying. It's staying put with that dual criteria of workers having to vote for it and  the independent umpire ensuring that, under that enterprise agreement, workers will be better off overall.

Patricia Karvelas: So, Minister, do you believe that a better definition of a pandemic-affected business  would maybe ease some of the concerns expressed by the labour and union movement?

Simon Birmingham: Well once again, you would expect that the Fair Work Commission is only going to  accept that a pandemic-induced business is one that has actually suffered as a result of COVID-19.

Patricia Karvelas: But what's suffered? You could lose a dollar and say you've suffered, I mean,  everyone's suffered. You need to define that don't you?

Simon Birmingham: I think the businesses who have run the gauntlet of the Fair Work Commission know  full well that that would never pass the assessment test or criteria there. Again, this is about building up straw  men in terms of the types of arguments that are being made. Now these reforms will go through a Senate  inquiry process. These are actually very modest reforms. They're being criticised by Labor trying to mount a  scare campaign but by others saying that government hasn't gone far enough. What we have sought to do is  walk a middle path in relation to these reforms, to create a system where enterprise agreements can be struck  in a faster way and not held up by lengthy deliberations or debates in the Fair Work Commission about  completely fanciful or hypothetical matters. And there's no point considering the impacts of a change in the  use of a chill freezer in a business that doesn't even have a chill freezer, they're the types of ridiculous  arguments that can apply at present. What we want to put in place is a system that actually has the support of  workers, which is why their vote is important. A clear test they're still better off overall. And when the Fair  Work Commission looks at it, it is looking precisely at what is happening in that workplace, not some other  hypothetical rubbish completely irrelevant to the workplace.

Patricia Karvelas: Just- let's speed through a couple of issues. Why hasn't the Prime Minister been  offered a speaking slot at the Climate Ambition Summit?

Simon Birmingham: That's a matter for organisers in that regard. We will happily go out - anywhere, any  time - to talk about Australia's overachievement in relation to our emissions reduction activities. We can stand  proudly on the world stage having achieved more than 400 million tonnes of emissions abatement in excess  of the commitments that we had made to the rest of the world. Many other countries have failed and have had  to go and purchase credits from other nations to be able to claim to meet their targets. Australia can stand tall  on the world stage that, through the first Kyoto commitment period, or the second one that ends this year in  2020, in both of these, we have been able to go out there as Australians. Australian farmers, Australian  businesses, Australian people, through their investments, alongside the Australian Government have been  able to actually achieve emissions reductions well in excess of the commitments we have made to the rest of  the world. And we will happily tell that story anywhere that wishes to hear it.

Patricia Karvelas: Do you have a target for the number of New Zealanders you'd like to attract to  Australia through the scheme that you've announced today?

Simon Birmingham: Look, the more, the merrier. We hope to see some thousands of potential New  Zealand backpackers decide to come and travel around Australia. The great thing about backpackers is that  they come here and they usually spend every dollar they earn, they spend the savings they brought with  them, they sometimes ask mum or dad to send them more money to spend, so they're very good economic  stimulus. But they also do jobs, particularly in regional areas, agricultural or seasonal work that is very  valuable in terms of filling labour gaps. We would ordinarily, at this time of year, have about 130,000  backpackers in Australia. Because of COVID, that's down to about 50,000 who were here at the start of the  year, and have stayed. If we can get a few Kiwis come across, that would be a good start for our tourism  industry to start to see some internationals return again.

Patricia Karvelas: National Cabinet's meeting tomorrow as you know, the last meeting of the year. It's  been such a big part of all of our lives, I feel. Now, all state premiers and ministers will be in attendance  except for WA Premier Mark McGowan, who says he won't attend in person because he wants to avoid  mixing with his South Australian counterpart, Steven Marshall. Is that reasonable?

Simon Birmingham: I think most people think it's a little bit ridiculous. There are zero active cases of  COVID in South Australia at present. I think it's 12 days in a row now that that's been the case, or that there  have been zero new cases. It is, of course, up to Premier McGowan whether he chooses to come or not. But  frankly, as Tourism Minister who wants to see Australians not only get out there and travel across the country  to support jobs in airlines, airports, hotels, hire cars, tour companies, et cetera, I also do want to see normal  business and corporate travel resume. And I think that Premier McGowan should be setting a more positive



example to businesses by demonstrating that Australia is in such an incredibly good place relative to the rest  of the world in managing COVID-19 that we can get back to business, get back to travelling where it's  appropriate to do so, and sit down like mature adults recognising the incredible success of every single state  and territory now in suppressing COVID-19.

Patricia Karvelas: Minister, thank you so much for your time.

Simon Birmingham: Thanks, Patricia. My pleasure.

[End of excerpt]

Patricia Karvelas: That was the Minister for Finance, Trade, Tourism and Investment, Simon  Birmingham.









Media Contacts  Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.

