MEDIA RELEASE

Greens call for Government to extend medicare funded mental health

telehealth sessions past September

The Greens warn that ending access to telehealth items for mental health care

at the end of September will have dire consequences for Australians

particularly those in Victoria, in quarantine or COVID hotspots.

Temporary MBS telehealth items for mental health care are due to expire on

30th September, but the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners and

the Australian Medical Association have called for telehealth to be made

permanent.

"Come the end of September people in our community are going to not only

lose $300 per fortnight from Jobseeker but some vital mental health supports",

Australian Greens spokesperson on Mental Health Senator Rachel Siewert

said.

Now more than ever it is essential we have a resilient and accessible mental

health care system that ensures people can seek and receive the care they

need, when they need it.

It fundamentally makes sense to have mental health supports available via

telehealth in the midst of a pandemic.

No publication date: received by Parl Library 09/09/2020





I have written to Minister Hunt about this and I am also requesting that the

Government release the final Productivity Commission report into Mental

Health and the final report of the MBS Taskforce’s recommendations regarding

Medicare-funded mental health care items.



It is important that any recommendations, for long-term, systemic change, and

the Government’s response to these recommendations, be made public and

reforms implemented.



It is unclear why the Minister is not releasing these reports.



It is imperative that we invest in long-term policy changes that ensure

Australia’s mental health care system is effective and accessible at the

community and clinical levels.



This pandemic will have long-lasting effects on the mental health of many

people in our community.



The impact of job losses, economic hardship, lock downs, daily anxiety,

reduced social connectedness and long periods of uncertainty have only added

to the challenges that our mental health system was experiencing before the

pandemic.





Media Contact:

Lucy Cowcher-Guthrie; 0418 401 180





No publication date: received by Parl Library 09/09/2020

