







SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Senator for South Australia

THE HON STEPHEN PATTERSON MP  South Australian Minister for Trade and Investment



MEDIA RELEASE

16 August 2020

Export boost for South Australian farmers and fishers

Tonnes of South Australian produce will be on its way to export markets across the Middle-East  and Europe with Qatar Airways today commencing flights out of Adelaide to the key freight hub of  Doha.

It’s expected each twice-weekly flight from Adelaide to Doha will be able to carry up to 15 tonnes of  high-quality South Australian produce including beef, lamb and chilled seafood.

Federal Trade Minister Simon Birmingham was delighted to welcome Qatar Airways back to  Adelaide with these flights providing critical market access for South Australian exporters as well  as provide another pathway home for returning Australians.

“South Australian exporters continue to face export barriers as a result of the COVID-19 crisis and  the re-commencement of these flights will reduce some of the pressures our local exporting  businesses have been feeling,” Minister Birmingham said.

“This opens up another door for South Australian farmers and fishers get their high-quality produce  onto planes and into markets across the Middle East and Europe.

“South Australia has a strong reputation for safe, reliable and premium products and more direct  freight routes means we’re keeping South Australian producers connected to their overseas  customers and the export dollars flowing into our state.

South Australian Minister for Trade and Investment Stephen Patterson said the return of Qatar  Airways flights was a great win for South Australian producers and farmers.

“Restoring freight routes is not only vital to supporting South Australian producers get their product  overseas but also helps to protect local jobs,” Minister Patterson said.

“This is a great result for South Australia and I would like to acknowledge th e Morrison  Government and Qatar Airways for supporting our incredible South Australian businesses.”

Exporters with produce on these Qatar Airways flights will be eligible to apply for grant assistance  under the Morrison Government’s $350 million International Freight Assistance Mechanism (IFAM).

IFAM continues to support freight flights from Adelaide to Singapore and Hong Kong, with 25  flights so far carrying 550 tonnes of premium South Australian produce including abalone, mussels,  lobster, tuna, meat lamb, beef, poultry, almonds, Brussel sprouts and dairy products.

For more information, please go to www.austrade.gov.au/ifam.





Media Contacts  Benn Ayre: +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs: +61 417 097 644





Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment,   South Australia.

