





SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Deputy Leader of the Government in the  Senate Senator for South Australia



TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Interview on Channel 9, Today, with Karl Stefanovic and Allison Langdon.        Topics: Coronavirus; Royals visit to Australia;   12/02/2020  07:23AM

Karl Stefanovic: Well this is very exciting folks, Australia’s tourism industry is hoping a visit from the  Duke and Duchess of Cambridge will bring a billion-dollar economic boost to communities hardest hit by the  bushfires.

Allison Langdon: For more we are joined by Tourism Minister, Simon Birmingham, in Canberra and  also royal correspondent for us this morning.  Minister, very good morning to you.

Simon Birmingham: Multi-skilling, great to be with you.

Allison Langdon: I tell you what, this is wonderful news. What a much needed boost to spirits, to  tourism and the economy this will be. Any details yet?

Simon Birmingham: Well not quite yet. But look, talks have been ongoing with Kensington Palace for a  while now and the Prime Minister’s expected within days to write proposing some locations and dates. And we  hope that that can then all be locked down with an announcement from the royals pretty soon, because it is  going to be a great opportunity to remind the rest of the world that Australia is still a fantastic place to visit, full  of rich and amazing experiences.

Karl Stefanovic: There are some political commentators saying well this- the money could be better  spent on other things. I don't agree with that; I think this is a great thing. But how do you narrow down where  they’re going to go because that's always incredibly competitive?

Simon Birmingham: Look, that will be tough and of course there’ll need to be engagement with those who  are directly fire affected. We know that the Duke and Duchess will want to do that and to speak to people  about their individual circumstances. But we also hope that we can make sure that we project back to the rest  of the world images of them [audio skip] pristine beaches and bushland where the green growth’s starting to   come back through, and cuddling recovering wildlife. These are the key images we need the rest of the world  to see, because they saw plenty of bad images of Australia over the new year period, and yet this is a country  that still has so much to offer and we know that the PR that will come with a visit like this will be immense.  From Harry and Meghan's last trip here, we saw a 120 per cent lift in terms of visits to the Tourism Australia  website; there was a 30 per cent lift in bookings that flowed through. So there are real economic benefits that  can come if we get it this right.

Allison Langdon: Yeah I think you’re right. I think the rest of the world right now thinks that Australia is  just all- is all blackened. But I mean Minister, on top of that, of the bushfires, we’ve also got- the coronavirus  has had a devastating impact on our travel and our export sectors. The budget surplus is now in very serious  doubt. How do we come back from all of this?

Simon Birmingham: Look, we’ve shown great resilience before. You’re right, the coronavirus is hurting  travel, trade, international education, and we don't know how long that impact will go on for. But that's why of  course, firstly, you build yourself to a position of budget balance and surplus. That way we are actually able to  deal with these sorts of circumstances without having to jack taxes up on Australians, which is what happened



in the Labor years when there were times of natural disaster. We plan as well for recovery, so we are  absolutely inside Tourism Australia and all of our trade agencies, working through the strategies of when  China becomes open for business again, how do we recover those markets quickly, how do we get our  exporters re-engaged so that we are ready to roll as quick as we can. And of course, we’ve already as a  government, injected some $76 million extra into Tourism Australia as part of the bushfire response. But that’s  all going to really- also going to really help in terms of super charging the coronavirus response when the time  is right.

Karl Stefanovic: Okay. I've got an idea for you this morning, Minister. Let's have a National Party  centenary celebration to mark the 100th anniversary in a five-star hotel in Melbourne and do you know what,  let's let the public pay for it, because Michael McCormack thinks that's a great idea.

Simon Birmingham: Well look, I haven't seen any details around that. But we have an independent  parliamentary expenses authority, it's their job to assess and make sure that everybody has followed the letter  of the law and the rules in that regard and that's exactly what they should do.

Allison Langdon: But I mean, but come on, Minister, in all seriousness, this is a joke, isn't it?

Simon Birmingham: Well as I say, the Independent Parliamentary Expenses Authority has a job, it's their  job to do. I expect it to be done without any political interference, without any political commentary. So that's  what they should do and make sure that every cent of all of our travel is precisely within limits.

Karl Stefanovic: Let me tell you what, there’s going to be plenty of political and public commentary on  that one. Thank you for your time today Simon, it’s a good thing with the royals coming. Appreciate it.

Simon Birmingham: Thanks guys, much appreciated.





Media Contacts  Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.









