MEDIA RELEASE

DEFENCE CONGRATULATES 2020 AUSTRALIAN WAR COLLEGE GRADUATES

The Australian War College academic program has concluded for 2020 with graduations being held this week for the College’s two year-long academic programs - the Australian Command and Staff Course (ACSC) and the Defence Strategic Studies Course (DSSC).

This year, 174 Australian Defence Force, Australian Public Service  and international students completed the ACSC, while 56 students completed the DSSC.

Commander of the Australian Defence College, Major General Mick Ryan AM congratulated the graduates on completing their academic programs.

“All of this week’s graduates have completed the ACSC or DSSC in a year like no other for the Australian War College,” Major General Ryan.

“After arriving in Canberra amidst bushfire smoke in January, the outbreak of COVID-19 saw War College students for the first time participate in remote education, with lectures and classroom discussions moved online.

“For some of our students, this move to online learning saw them having to balance their academic study with supervising their children’s schoolwork, or experiencing long separations from family.

“Despite challenges like these each of our graduates will go back to their Service or home country intellectually equipped to meet the defence challenges of the future.

“For our 23 international graduates, who hail from 18 countries, they will return home to take up senior positions within their respective militaries.

“The friendships and connections developed between Australian and international students while studying at the War College will benefit our country, as well as our international partners, for many years to come.”

The ACSC is a program for mid-career ADF, APS and international partner nation officers, with the majority of graduates being awarded a post-graduate degree in Military and Defence Studies from the Australian National University.

The DSSC is a program for personnel entering senior leadership positions in Defence, other APS agencies or international militaries. The Australian War College partners with Deakin University to deliver a range of post-graduate degrees to DSSC students.

Further information on the Australian War College can be found at: https://www.defence.gov.au/adc/awc/

No publication date : received by Parl Library  on 04/12/2020



Media Contact Defence Media: media@defence.gov.au

No publication date : received by Parl Library  on 04/12/2020

