Parliament House     ˖     Canberra ACT 2600     ˖     TEL (02) 6277 7111

Parliament of Australia

Hon Tony Smith MP          Senator the Hon Scott Ryan

Speaker of the House of Representatives   President of the Senate

COVID-19: Statement by the Presiding Officers regarding temporary and  precautionary changes to Parliament House operations

Following implementation of pandemic planning measures, ongoing consultations between  the Presiding Officers, Parliamentary Departments and relevant Commonwealth officers and  agencies including the Chief Medical Officer, the following temporary and precautionary  changes have been made regarding the operations of Parliament House.

These measures are directed at reducing the risk of transmission while enabling the  essential work of Parliament to proceed.

Parliament House will remain open to the general public to access the public areas and  Marble Foyer.

However, the galleries in each chamber for the next parliamentary sitting week commencing  Monday 23 March will be closed to the public. Parliamentary proceedings may still be  viewed on the Parliament House website.

All school group bookings and tours during the next parliamentary sitting week will be  postponed or cancelled.

A number of large events being held in the functions spaces of the building are being  postponed or cancelled.

From Monday 23 March, access restrictions will be applied to some pass-holder categories  to minimise non-essential visits to the building.

The following categories of passholder will lose automatic access to the private areas of the  building.

• Former parliamentarians;  • Elected members of other legislatures;  • Volunteers; and  • Sponsored pass holders.

No publication date: received by Parl Library 16/03/2020



Parliament House     ˖     Canberra ACT 2600     ˖     TEL (02) 6277 7111

Changes will be also made to the process for pass holders to sign-in visitors to Parliament  House. Building occupants must ensure that only those people needing to conduct essential  business in Parliament House next week are signed in.

Members of the Parliamentary Press Gallery are also asked to avoid non-essential  attendance of escorted visitors.

From today, all external departments and agencies will be asked to reduce use of  Commonwealth departmental passes to a minimum, and public servants encouraged to  avoid non-essential attendance.

Ahead of the next parliamentary sitting week, there will also be changes to the management  of staff and operations of the chambers and the wider building, including catering facilities,  to reduce the risk of transmission, consistent with advice regarding social distancing.

While it is formally a matter for each committee to consider, we recommend that scheduled  Senate, House and Joint committee hearings transition to using video or teleconference  facilities as soon as possible.

Committees should give serious consideration as to whether their business is essential.

If any committee hearings proceed in Parliament House during the next parliamentary  sitting week, they will not be open to the public. Arrangements will be made for witnesses  to appear in person only if necessary. Committee proceedings may still be viewed on the  Parliament House website.

While the most recent advice is that there is no need to restrict domestic travel, Members  and Senators are requested to only bring essential staff to Canberra and Parliament House  for the next sitting week commencing Monday 23 March.

At all times Senators, Members and staff should follow the advice of health authorities  regarding the need to seek medical advice and treatment. Up-to-date official information is  available at ACT Health.

DPS will continue to provide regular updates to building occupants regarding appropriate  health measures via Information Circulars.

These decisions have not been taking lightly and are being taken following detailed  discussion and advice from the relevant authorities.

Further details will be provided over the course of the week as the advice to Presiding  Officers evolves, and to all parties via the Whips as necessary.

[ends]

No publication date: received by Parl Library 17/03/2020

