







Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania







Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck  Minister for Aged Care and Senior Australians  Minister for Youth and Sport





23 September 2020



Sign language milestone for Senior Australians

Senior Australians who are deaf or hard of hearing will have access to sign language services  for a broader range of daily activities as part of a Federal Government funding boost.

A $13 million injection will mean sign language services will be more accessible for deaf  elders aged 65 and over.

Minister for Aged Care and Senior Australians, Richard Colbeck, said the initiative marked  an important milestone for elders who use Auslan in their everyday communication.

Today marks International Day of Sign Languages.

“Hearing limitations can have a profound impact on the daily activities of senior Australians,”  Minister Colbeck said.

“The Morrison Government is committed to ensuring anybody dealing with hearing loss can  still live life to the full.”

Certified interpreters will provide Auslan, American Sign Language and International Sign  Languages as part of the new service due to launch in November.

Signed English for deaf consumers and tactile signing and hand-over-hand for deafblind users  will also be available.

It means those in need will have access to interpreters for a range of daily activities from face-to-face appointments and online learning to community and family functions.

The service, which will also include on-demand video remote interpreting, will be offered  nationally, seven days a week and after business hours.

“I thank Australian Deaf Elders and members for advising how together we can address this  gap and develop the new service,” Minister Colbeck said.









Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania



“I know many Australians who are deaf or hard of hearing have benefited from sign language  interpreters at press briefings during the recent bushfires and the COVID-19 health  emergency,” Minister Colbeck said.

“The Government will continue to identify and remove barriers so senior Australians can live  healthy, active and socially connected lives.”

For more information about this and other sign language services available to senior  Australians visit the My Aged Care website or call 1800 200 422.

[ENDS]

