SENATOR MURRAY WATT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR NORTHERN AUSTRALIA

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DISASTER AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

LABOR SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND

E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC CAPRICORNIA

FRIDAY, 9 OCTOBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Labor’s Budget Reply speech, Anthony Albanese’s long term growth

plan for Queensland; Scott Morrison’s Recession; childcare; cheap, renewable

energy to benefit manufacturing boom; Senate Bushfire Inquiry report; $4 billion

Emergency Response Fund unspent.

PAUL CULLIVER, HOST: You may have seen Anthony Albanese, the Opposition Leader,

delivering his budget reply. A response to, of course, Josh Frydenberg's largest spending

ever Australian budget. What's different under a Labor government, if indeed they were to

win the next election, which is being touted potentially to be already by the end of next

year? Well, Murray Watt is Senator for Queensland with the Labor Party good morning to

you, Senator.

MURRAY WATT, QUEENSLAND LABOR SENATOR: G'Day Paul, how are you?

CULLIVER: Very well, indeed. First of all, fundamentally what's different here about the

vision that Anthony Albanese outlined last night? How does it differ to the approach that

the Scott Morrison Government is going with?

WATT: I think that we saw a very different approach to both the Budget and how we

recover from Scott Morrison's Recession over the next years from Labor. What we saw

from the Government was that they've announced they've racked up one trillion dollars in

debt, more debt than the country has ever had before, and it's very difficult to see what

we're getting for that.



Obviously, there are tax cuts in there that Labor supports, and in fact, we've been calling

for months for those tax cuts to be brought forward. But once you get beyond that, it

doesn't really seem to do much to actually set the country up for recovery and for the

future.



And what we did in our statement last night with Anthony Albanese was outline a real

vision for the future, that won't just take us back to where we were before COVID hit us.

You know, even before COVID, the economy wasn't performing well. People were in

insecure work, child care was too expensive, aged care isn't working. But what Anthony

Albanese outlined last night is that if we're going to be getting all this debt, let's actually

make sure that the country gets something for it, with some really big changes in areas like

child care, social housing and manufacturing.



CULLIVER: I want to pull you up on that, because the idea that we could rack up a trillion

dollars of debt, not get anything for it, clearly it's economic stimulus. We're putting money

back into the economy. We're helping out businesses through small business write-offs.

There's the continuation, although at a lower rate of JobKeeper for a few months,

JobSeeker, there's all sorts of expenditure measures that are exactly aimed at stimulating

the economy. So it's not really fair to say we're not getting anything for it?



WATT: Well, I think there's no doubt that there's a lot of money being sprayed around. And

one of the things we've got to make sure of is it doesn't get wasted and rorted like we have

seen from this Government in the past. So there is a lot of money being sprayed around

and some of that will get money in people's pockets at the moment. As you say, though,

some of the cuts that have been made to these payments are actually going to take money

out of the local economy in Central Queensland far earlier than what should be happening.



I suppose my point is that none of this spending is really setting us up for the future, and in

the long term and dealing with some of the major problems that Australia has had for years

under this Government. We've known for years that aged care has been in crisis, they

haven't fixed it. We've known for years that child care is too expensive for people and is

meaning a lot of women aren't going back to work as much as they want to. So if we're

going to be using this amount of money and borrowing so much money that will take so

long to pay back, I think it's just important that we do more than just put a bit of money in

the system, and actually create some big changes that will make our economy stronger

and make our community a lot fairer than it has been in the past.



CULLIVER: OK, you raise the fact that Australia's debt level will reach almost one trillion

dollars, that's the forecast. You raised that as an issue, and yet you also criticise the cuts

to spending when it comes to Job Keeper and JobSeeker. How do you balance those two

things off? You're criticising cuts of spending, but also a deficit and a debt.



WATT: Well, I think there are things that you can do to make sure that the money you're

spending is well-spent. And again, I don't think this Government has a good record with

that. Let's look at the NBN - they went out and purchased 50,000 kilometres worth of

copper, enough to run copper right around the whole planet. And it's not going to be used

now because they're going to pursue a different path for the NBN, which is what they

should have done in the first place. You know, recently we saw the revelations about the

new land that they bought for the new airport at Western Sydney, where they've paid $30

million for a block of land that was only valued at $3 million. So there's all sorts of ways

that the Government currently is wasting taxpayers money, and we're saying that that

money could be much better used, either keeping people with the payments that are

needed to keep the economy going in the short term, or using that funding for investments

that will actually take the country forward in the long term.



CULLIVER: At the start of the interview, you used the phrase 'Morrison's Recession'. Do

you really expect that to stick?



WATT: I do. I do think that people will regard it that way. Typically, when we've had

recessions in the past, people end up labelling them by the name of the Prime Minister of

the day. I remember-



CULLIVER: -wouldn't it be the cause of the recession, like 'COVID-19 Recession', 'The

Pandemic Recession'?



WATT: Well, there's no doubt that COVID has had a major impact on the economy, I'm not

going to deny that. But the fact also is that our economy wasn't performing well under this

Government even before COVID come along. We were having very low growth, wages

have barely risen in this country for years, business investment was falling through the

floor. Our economy just wasn't performing well. And the Government was ignoring all sorts

of calls, whether it be from Labor, the Reserve Bank or other industry groups to make the

investments needed to get the economy going. So we entered COVID in much worse

shape than we should have been.



And again, some of the decisions that Scott Morrison and his Government have made are

actually making things worse. By cutting JobKeeper and JobSeeker, if we're talking just in

Central Queensland, there's about 54,000 people who have had money taken out of their

pockets by this Government over the last few days through those cuts to JobKeeper,

JoSeeker and the coronavirus supplement. That's going to mean they've got less money to

spend in local shops and businesses and will hurt the economy.



So I think the point is that under Scott Morrison's leadership, we entered COVID worse

than we should have done, and he and his Government are now making decisions that are

going to make the recession deeper and longer than it needs to be. So in that situation, I

don't think it's unfair at all to describe it as the Morrison Recession.



CULLIVER: It's ABC Capricornia, 17 minutes past 7, your guest this morning, Senator for

Queensland with Labor, Murray Watt. We're raking through some of what was in the

Anthony Albanese Opposition reply to the budget last night. Let's go to some of the

measures that Anthony Albanese did announce; an increase in the annual cap on

childcare subsidies from July 1, 2022. Of course, this would be if Labor was to win the

election, which we expect to happen before that...ah the election, that is, not the win. How

would that benefit parents in Central Queensland?



WATT: Look, that's probably the biggest announcement that Anthony Albanese made last

night. And I know myself, having gone through the child care system with my own kids, it's

a very complicated and very expensive system at the moment. And what we're finding, in

Central Queensland and other parts of the state, is that women in particular who tend to

stay home with their kids after they give birth, there's a massive disincentive for them to

return to the workforce because of the way the child care subsidy works at the moment.



What we've said is that if we're elected, we would scrap the cap on the subsidy, which cuts

out at $10,560 per year. Because the way that subsidy works at the moment, is that

women lose money if they decide to take an extra day's work. Typically, that's enough to

cover about three days’ child care a week. But if a woman wants to work the fourth day or

the fifth day as a way of getting her career back on track, as a way of bringing more

income into her family, she actually loses money from making that choice. That's obviously

very bad for her on a financial level, but that disincentive means that we're not harnessing

the talents of women in Central Queensland and the rest of the state to get them back into

the workforce, where they can generate income and pay taxes that can benefit all of us. So

we don't sort of see this as a welfare measure, we actually see this massive economic

measure that would fix one of the biggest economic barriers that our country and that

women face at the moment.



CULLIVER: Obviously renewable energy - growth area in Central Queensland - however,

there is an element, there is an impediment, I should say, that AEMO - the Australian

Energy Market Operator - has identified in this region when it comes to the strength of the

grid, literally the wires. What do you want to do here?



WATT: Yeah, one of the other big announcements last night is what we've called Rewiring

the Economy. The Government's own energy regulator has identified that one of the major

problems with our energy system at the moment is the transmission system. So that's the

big poles and wires that take the electricity from where it's generated to where it actually

needs to be supplied. The grid that we've got at the moment is old. It's basically built for

the 20th century. And in Queensland, as you say, right across Central Queensland, there's

all sorts of renewable energy developments being built and being proposed. But they're not

connected to the electricity grid. And that means that we're not able to make use of that

cheap, clean electricity that Central Queensland is becoming renowned for.



If we can actually connect that renewable energy into the grid, that will massively drive

down the price of power both for individuals and households, but importantly also for

business. And that's one of the keys to getting our manufacturing industry in Central

Queensland really humming again. If we can get electricity prices way down from what

they've been under this Government, that'll give our manufacturers in Central Queensland

an incredible competitive advantage over other countries, and will generate huge amounts

of extra employment in something Central Queensland's really well known for, which is

manufacturing.



CULLIVER: Why is it the job of Federal Government to build these wires?



WATT: Well, we just haven't seen anyone else step up and do it, and I think it's one of

those things when you've got that sort of market failure and no one else is stepping in to do

it. And that's where governments can step in. And while this would involve a big investment

at the front end, what it will actually deliver is much lower energy costs, more jobs. And

that way we can actually get more money coming in through the economy and more

money back to government.



CULLIVER: If I could just ask you on another issue - you're hearing from Murray Watt,

Labor Senator for Queensland - of course, the Senate's interim report into the bushfire

season has been released. In terms of the recommendations there, and there's 13 of them,

I suppose, what do you think is going to be the most impactful for Central Queensland if

implemented?



WATT: Yeah, I think that's a really important report that was issued this week, especially

for Central Queensland. And I heard, before we were talking, that you're facing a high fire

risk today across Central Queensland when we're only in October. So it's a reminder that

these sorts of fires are becoming more frequent and more intense.



So the report that the Senate inquiry into bushfires handed down this week, for starters, it

found that the Government just wasn't adequately prepared for last year's bushfires and

then ignored all sorts of warnings that they were provided that things were going to be bad.

But we've designed this report in a way that has provided some recommendations to the

Government that they can pick up and implement urgently. One of them that could be dealt

with straight away today and would help in Central Queensland is that the Government

actually created a new $4 billion Emergency Response Fund. They actually announced it

in last year's budget about 18 months ago. A $4 billion fund to help with disaster recovery

and mitigation measures, 18 months on they haven't spent a single cent from it. So what

this report has said is that the Government needs to urgently invest in prevention

measures, mitigation measures, the sorts of things that can reduce the damage of fires in



Central Queensland. It might be firebreaks, it might be evacuation centres, it might be

better communication technology to help our firies. There's all sorts of things that the

Government could be investing in right now that would reduce the danger of fire, and

they've actually got the funds to do it. It's not going to cost any more money, they don't

need to go looking for the money. They've made the announcement. It's about time they

actually follow through and deliver.



CULLIVER: All right, Senator thanks for your time.



WATT: Good to talk to you Paul.



CULLIVER: Senator Murray Watt, Labor Senator for Queensland. Also the Shadow

Minister for Disaster and Emergency Management, and for Northern Australia.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: TALI ELEY 0448 078 456





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











