Press Conference - Australian Parliament House, ACT pm.gov.au/media/press-conference-australian-parliament-house-act-30jul20

PRIME MINISTER: Good afternoon. I’m joined today by the Minister for Indigenous Australians Ken Wyatt and the convener, leader, chair of the Coalition of Indigenous Peak Groups, Pat Turner. And I want to come to the important reason that we're gathered together today, to speak about the finalisation of the Closing the Gap Agreements that have been historically reached between the group of Coalition Peaks, the Commonwealth and the states and territories. This is a very significant day, and I know one that both Ken and Pat have been working together on now for some time and I'm so pleased that we've come to this day. I think it's going to have a very meaningful impact on how we progress to ensure that young Indigenous boys and girls can grow up in this country with the same expectations as non-Indigenous boys and girls in this country. That's what we want to see. That's what it's all about. That, as Australians right across the country, we can have the same hopes, the same aspirations, the same goals, ultimately. It's not an easy road and there's still a long road ahead of us to achieve that.

But what we're announcing today, I think, will make a very meaningful impact on achieving that journey together.

But before I do that and I know, with the indulgence of both Pat and Ken, I must start by saying that the numbers that we've seen today in Victoria are obviously very concerning and I share the Premier's concern about those. I also support the actions that he's taken on the advice that I've received also about the rate of transmission that is occurring in Victoria and we will be sharing with the Victorian Government any further advice that we have, drawing together the work of the expert medical panel, the AHPPC, who are meeting now, I understand, and any further advice that would come forward from that collective group as to what may assist in Victoria, we will certainly be sharing that with the Premier. And the instance of cases throughout the community, and particularly extending out on the Melbourne metro area into the Geelong region and surrounding areas, is of great concern. And we have now been in this lockdown now for some weeks and we are not getting the results we would hope for and as a result, the further measures that are taken are certainly necessary. They will come at an impact to the economy. We understand that. But, equally, not containing these outbreaks will

1/20

30 July 2020



have that effect also. And so it's important that we continue to work together to get on



top of this and to take whatever actions are necessary. The decisions are being driven by



the data and by the evidence, as the Premier said, and the actions that are being taken



specifically to reduce mobility in the affected outbreak areas are very important and I



would just continue to encourage people to comply and work cooperatively with the



requests that are being made right across Victoria and elsewhere around the country.



The most concerning part of the information released today was that there were a



further 13 deaths. That brings to some 189 deaths now in Australia as a result of



COVID-19 and some 105 that have occurred in Victoria. 10 out of those 13 deaths



occurred in aged care and I will speak further after I have addressed the issues with



Minister Wyatt and Pat Turner on the announcements that we're making today. But



there's been a series of further measures that we've been taking there which have been



making some progress. Aged care cases, including staff, account for just under about or



around about 10 per cent of the total cases announced today. Specifically in aged care,



there were 16 cases of residents. The balance, 74 in total, 58 were staff. And staff



contracting the virus, my advice is predominantly from community transmission.



So, with that let me turn, with your agreement, to the important reason that we've



gathered today, as serious as the pandemic is. The issue of achieving those aspirations



for Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians together are of great significance to our



country, not just now but into the future. It is a national aspiration, a national goal, a



national task. The process that we began around about two years ago, when we came



together, began with listening as to why we were being unsuccessful in closing the gap.



Any good process starts with listening and that's what we did as a Government. We



listened carefully. And there were many discussions and there were many very



unprecedented discussions, including here, in this very Cabinet room, as I sat early this



year in January together with Indigenous leaders from peak groups, with Ken, and that



was quite an extraordinary discussion. And it charged us up to keep going with the work



that was being done to form the Agreement which we've reached today.



As we have been dealing with the pandemic, there have been two phrases, two concepts,



that have come up in almost all the briefings that I've had. They talk about lines of effort



and they talk about unity of effort. And as I was reflecting on this Agreement last night,



I believe that's what this does. It sets out very clear lines of effort, which has been



important. But, more importantly, it sets out the process of having a unity of effort. And



when we do those two things together, that's where we make progress. Whether it's



attacking a pandemic or attacking the very serious issues of Indigenous disadvantage for



Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders in this country. And the other thing we did as we



listened and we identified these things, and we looked at how we had not been making



the progress all of us wanted on closing the gap, we reflected on the fact that Closing the



Gap and the initiative taken by Kevin Rudd was an entirely worthy initiative and an



initiative deserving of credit. But, innocently, there were elements of how that was done



which was misguided. That's not a criticism, that is a learning. A learning of these many



years that have passed since then, as we've sought to live up to those worthy aspirations



at that time. And one of the mistakes that have been made is, as we've looked at this as a



2/20



Federal Government, we've decided what the gap is. We didn't look at the gap through



the eyes of Indigenous Australians. We told Indigenous Australians what the gap was



that we were going to close and somehow thought they should be thankful for that. That



was wrong-headed. That wasn't the way to do it. We needed to understand what the gap



was, looking through the lens and the eyes of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander



people. They needed to tell us what the gap was that needed to be closed and that's what



this task has been about. It has also been about understanding that this is not the task or



role or responsibility of any one organisation, level of government, or nation of peoples



across the country. This is the task of us all. And for that to be successful, we need a



partnership between all of these groups. Understanding what these lines of effort are to



achieve this unity of effort.



And so we set about achieving a partnership and setting out these 16, as I understand,



particular areas of activity. Underpinned by four key things we're seeking to do to make



them possible. And the first of those is partnership - a partnership of states and



territories who have significant roles to play in achieving the outcomes that are set out



here in this Agreement. This is not something the Commonwealth can even pretend to



think it can do alone. It must be done together with the service delivery and policy arms



of state and territory governments. But also with the delivery agencies of Indigenous



organisations, which are on the ground, making a difference. Secondly, it's about



building the capabilities of those on-the-ground, community-based organisations in



Indigenous communities to deliver those services as best as they possibly can. It is



about transforming mainstream government agencies and institutions and how they



conceive these challenges and how they go about engaging and delivering their services



and broader policies that impact on Indigenous Australians, whether they're directed to



them specifically or not. And it's about getting the right data, the right evidence, and the



right reporting that creates the transparency to drive the actions we're seeking to get



progress from. The data then, as it's set out in each of these 16 areas, is incredibly well-



presented in terms of what we need. It sets out the goal and those goals haven't changed



drastically. But what it has done is identified the things that make that goal achievable



and the signs you need to look for along the way to know you're going to meet that goal



and how we're progressing against those key data points. And it gets granular. It says,



"We're not just going to look up here, we're going to go down the community level, we're



going to go and break this up by different groupings to understand where the real



challenges are and where our progress is doing well." As Ken has often said, this process



has to acknowledge the gains to drive the confidence that other areas can see



achievement. But it's also about separating out where the accountabilities lie to get the



action. And then there is the further data that is needed to drive the whole process and



there are some serious weaknesses when it comes to the intelligence and information



that we need to inform plans to eliminate Indigenous disadvantage in this country as



much as we possibly can.



And so I find it a very practical document, Pat and Ken. I commend you on the work that



it's done. It's realistic, it's shared, it's evidence-based and led, it's transparent, it's



practical, it's ambitious. And from this point, the real work starts. And the plans that are



3/20



needed from the Federal Government, from the state governments, the plans that need



to find their way into budgets. But I tell you where we start - we start with what we have



to do, and then we apply the resources to achieve that. This isn't about buckets of



money, this is about changing the way we do things and ensuring that we apply the



resources most effectively to achieve that. And with that I'll pass you on to Ken, and



then to Pat.



THE HON. KEN WYATT MP, MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS



AUSTRALIANS:



Prime Minister, thank you very much. I want to acknowledge the



Ngunnawal and Ngambri people, on whose land we are today, their elders past and



present. The concept of Closing the Gap was an idea that arose from the Human Rights



Commissioner of the day, Tom Calma. Tom put forward a series of propositions and the



first signing of a Closing the Gap Agreement was done by a former Prime Minister,



Kevin Rudd. The intentions were honourable. The outcomes were never achieved in the



way that we had aspired to reach in the way of improving the lives of Indigenous



Australians. And this particular Agreement is historic. Because it goes to the very thing



that I said right at the beginning when I first came into this role - that we need to



develop approaches to address the issues of inequality and inequity by having



Indigenous Australians sitting and jointly designing, planning and developing a



direction that is based on how we wrap around people, their life expectancy, their life



expectations, and their aspirations from the community level through to the peak



organisations. It's been an incredible privilege working with Pat and the 51 peak



organisations. When we first started, it was 21. And then it grew. But the more people



that were involved, the greater the depth of discussion around what do these targets



mean? How will they change the lives of people? And how will we bring governments



with us? And that was a critical part of the conversation, as to how do we then take it to



the next stage? Because, primarily, it was the Prime Minister who tabled the Closing the



Gap Report. There was no requirement for states and territories to do that.



This Agreement through the state and territory cabinet processes has endorsed a new



approach. An approach that will involve Aboriginal people as partners in the design of



the work of government agencies. It will involve transforming the way in which



government agencies at every level, including local government, work with Indigenous



Australians. It also commits, through the cabinet process, ministers in all portfolios to



work towards achieving closure in the targets and the gap that is associated with the



targets. But I think more importantly is the way in which the spirit of intent for the



outcome we've achieved today in this Agreement was reached through the passion and



commitment of so many people. I want to acknowledge Pat's leadership. If you work



with Indigenous organisations, as she has done, she has certainly brought 51 significant



leaders to the table, to agree on the targets that we have within the Agreement,



including incarceration rates, including family safety and the safety of women, and



expanding those targets to focus in key and critical areas. But I also want to



acknowledge every state and territory Aboriginal Affairs Minister, because their officials



and the officers from the National Indigenous Agency and the officers who worked with



4/20



Pat in the National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation worked



paragraph by paragraph through the Agreement until all parties were satisfied. But the



thing that is different this time is the enthusiasm of all to address these targets.



Prime Minister, I want to acknowledge you, because you've done something that no



other Prime Minister has done, and that is to put faith in the Indigenous community to



develop targets for us all to achieve. But for all of us to take responsibility for, and for all



of us to be accountable for. And by all of us focusing on those three tranches, I am



extremely optimistic that we will see closures in areas to a greater extent than what



we've seen historically in the past. And the amount of goodwill means that the reforms



that we seek to achieve will now be done in a way that is very different. It means a



person living in Ampilatwatja or living in Balgo WA, or in Arrente country will have



avenues in which to influence government policy and direction, and to have a say on



those things that impact on them through our peaks, and through the other structures



that exist within states and territories. So, I compliment all who are involved. And



whilst I have been Minister, I've enjoyed the immense journey of the very meaty



debates, but the way in which we have come together to produce a blueprint for



improving the lives of our people across this nation, with flow-on effects for all



Australians. It is part of the Morrison Government's commitment to having a change of



direction that is going to make a difference on the ground with state and territory



Premiers and Chief Ministers who, through National Cabinet, have signed up to this



Agreement, along with the President of the Australian Local Government Association,



so it means that local government equally will be involved in achieving the outcomes.



I'd now like to ask Pat to come forward and make her comments.



PAT TURNER AM:



Thank you very much, Minister, and thank you, Prime Minister.



Today truly is an historic occasion. This is the first time a National Agreement designed



to improve outcomes for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people has been



developed and negotiated between Australian governments, local government, and the



Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander representatives. We have come a long way as



partners since the partnership Agreement on Closing the Gap came into effect in March



last year and I want to thank each government for the spirit in which they have



approached the partnership. I particularly want to thank you, Prime Minister, for your



leadership in taking the first step in agreeing to establish a formal partnership between



the Coalition of Peaks and governments on Closing the Gap. The Prime Minister



probably didn't fully realise what he was committing to, and possibly no government



did, but maybe that was a good thing at the time. Today we now have a comprehensive



set of commitments from governments that places Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander



community-controlled organisations at the centre of Closing the Gap. Aboriginal and



Torres Strait Islander people know what is best for our communities, not governments,



and this National Agreement means that decisions of Government on Closing the Gap



need to be negotiated and agreed with us.



But I have to say, the Prime Minister and Ken will know it hasn't always been easy, and



some of our negotiations have been very hard-fought. For the Coalition of Peaks, the



5/20



National Agreement is not just words. They represent actions that can make a real



difference to the lives of our people, our families, and our communities. We have also



had the voices of more than 4,000 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people who



participated in our engagements on what should be included in the new National



Agreement, guiding us in our negotiations. The Coalition of Peaks is confident that the



National Agreement, if fully implemented, has the potential to establish a strong policy



foundation to give effect to what our people have been saying for a long time is needed



to make a difference. The National Agreement may not include everything our people



want or need to make lasting change to our lives, but this is a huge step forward. I also



want to thank all the members of the Coalition of Peaks. This is the first time our



community-controlled leadership have come together in this way to bring our collective



experiences and expertise to the task of Closing the Gap, and it has been a real privilege



to work with my colleagues in the Peaks.



It is important that we celebrate today's achievements. We are marking a turning point



in Indigenous Affairs and the relationship between governments and Aboriginal and



Torres Strait Islander representatives and we have all played our parts. But the real hard



work starts tomorrow, as we begin the implementation of the National Agreement in



full partnership between governments and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander



communities, organisations and representatives. Thank you.



PRIME MINISTER:



Thank you, Pat. Let's take questions on this matter and then we



can return to the pandemic issues afterwards.



JOURNALIST:



We've heard many moving and passionate speeches by Prime



Ministers and Ministers over the last 12 years about this subject and every year moving



speeches by Prime Ministers and Ministers lamenting the fact that governments have



fallen woefully short of meeting the targets. What commitment can you give that these



new targets will actually be met?



PRIME MINISTER:



Well, it has the full backing of our entire Government. I said



when Ken was appointed as the first Minister for Indigenous Australians, as an



Indigenous Australian, that every Minister in my Cabinet is a Minister for Indigenous



Australians. Because that's the change, that's the shift that needs to have effect to



actually make more progress. I think you're right, Mark, there's never been any lack of



passion or commitment or dedication from this podium, no matter who stood behind it.



Every Prime Minister that I know has shared this passion and this dedication but also



the frustration that goes along with the lack of progress in this area. What I think is



different about this process is there has been some humble learnings that has led to its



development and its execution. There has been a recognition that in sometimes we have



been too ambitious without understanding the detail of what you actually have to do to



get there. And what I particularly like about this Agreement is how, as I explained



before, it gets very granular about how you get there, and how you know when you're



not getting there, and that's very important. This evidence-led process which has an



accountability to it, which I think is very important. Now, I'd love to give you a



6/20



guarantee, like every one of my predecessors would have and endeavoured, tried to, as I



am today. But I am tempered by that bitter experience of my predecessors and my own.



And so I take comfort in the fact that we've got a partnership now that we haven't had



before. It's not because others didn't want it. I think the partnership is the product of the



learnings, the humble learnings that have been necessary. So, I do hope, Mark, that we



can live up to this. We owe it to everybody Indigenous boy and girl in the country today,



and every Indigenous person in the country today.



JOURNALIST:



Prime Minister, and Minister Wyatt, there's been some criticism of



the fact that the domestic violence target is not being announced today and it's going to



continue to be worked on. Can you explain why, given what we know about the over-



representation of First Nations women as victims of domestic violence, why that is still



being worked on and is not being announced today?



PRIME MINISTER:



Sure, I'm happy to, and I'll let Ken and Pat speak to that because



they've been directly involved in those decisions.



THE HON. KEN WYATT MP, MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS



AUSTRALIANS:



In dealing with this issue we want zero tolerance of any domestic



violence, of violence against women. I know that when the working group was going



through this, the focus on just physical violence against women was seen as not



sufficient. That hasn't lowered our bar for absolute extinction of domestic violence



against any woman, and this fits within the Fourth National Plan that our Government



has in place as well. But our senior women have asked that we do more work on that



and I respect the request that they have made, and we will come back with further work.



But the target is still zero tolerance of domestic violence against our women.



Pat?



PAT TURNER AM:



Yes, thank you. So we do have some more work to do in our



negotiations with all of the governments. It is a national priority and one that we take



very seriously, and we hope to have that nutted out as we go through in the next few



months and we start our work on the implementation plans to get some real nutty



figures in there. Let me say on the National Agreement, it's very important that you read



it in detail and you understand it because there are funding provisions that are already



committed to in the National Agreement and they will come on board as we progress



the important work now on the implementation plans and the important work that we



have to do to make sure that we have the right people at the right table, at the right time,



in the right place.



PRIME MINISTER:



I think fundamentally, I mean, what I drew from all of that, was



that because that further work is required is a statement of how serious that goal is



taken, and the other contributing causes to how we achieve that goal. Not just the



physical violence, which is deplorable, whether it is in Indigenous communities or non-



Indigenous communities, as we know, and there are separate plans to deal with that



issue more broadly in the country. But the many other non-physical ways that abuse



7/20



occurs and the link between that and physical abuse and to ensure that we're getting



that right. So I think it’s a statement of just how seriously the Agreement does take it



and the partners do take it.



Yes, Chris?



JOURNALIST:



Prime Minister through you to Pat, can you tell us because of all the



plans we've had in the past, why you think, in simple terms, there is reason to hope this



time that young Indigenous children can have the future the Prime Minister hopes?



PAT TURNER AM:



Yes. I think it's because we've been at the table and we'll continue



to stay at the negotiating table to make sure that governments do change the way they



do business with us, that their program and policy responses are informed by our



experience and expertise and, as much as possible, that our own organisations,



community-controlled organisations, are resourced to do the service delivery. We get



much better outcomes when we deliver the services to our people ourselves. We're just



as happy, we've always been accountable for what we've done. And we are certainly



accountable to our communities the way we work and we're more accountable in terms



of the scrutiny placed on our organisations. I'd like that to be all of that red tape to be



reduced, of course, to enable us to get on with the job. But I believe because we're



involved in all of those decisions from now on, that we will actually get better results.



Now, everyone has got to work in the true spirit of the partnership and, you know, the



resources have to be available when they're needed to ensure that the right areas are



being but you have to understand that in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander



communities, there's been a long history of under-investment by governments and



we're dealing with that legacy and we will deal with that legacy. But the issues are so



interrelated. Just take the social determinants of health which are impacted by where



you're born, how you're born, how you grow and how you live your life. Sir Michael



Marmot is the world expert on this and he has spoken many times about this needing to



be addressed in Australia. The World Health Organization wants it addressed. We want



it addressed. So that will take a coordinated across-government effort and inter-



government efforts and we'll be making sure that they do their very best. Because you



have to improve where people live, how they live, their opportunities for engagement in



the workforce in a real way to have jobs. We create more jobs if our organisations do the



service delivery and are funded properly. We employ more Aboriginal and Torres Strait



Islander people in our organisations and we want that to happen because we want our



people off of welfare dependency.



JOURNALIST:



Prime Minister, is it fair to ask Indigenous organisations to close a gap



that governments over the past 10 years have been unable to narrow in key areas,



despite all the resources at their disposal? And how will these community-led



organisations be funded to reach these important targets?



PRIME MINISTER:



I think what Pat just outlined was a very good summary of the



conclusions that have been drawn by this process. There have been significant resources



directed to these tasks over many years but the way those resources have been applied



8/20



have not always got the results. I've seen some of the most extraordinary responses and



outcomes from some of the most modest elements of funding to community-based



organisations and Clontarf is one that I often talked to you, I have a personal



association with it, so I have a massive, declared bias, but how I've seen that change the



lives of young Indigenous boys and men has just been extraordinary. That hasn't been



the result of massive investments by governments. It's been the result of an



extraordinary program and local community leadership and participation. So Pat's



point is, and I agree with it, is that this process actually seeks to empower and better



resource and support local-led delivery of services. This is where the Coalition of the



Peaks comes into it. This is why we're talking to the Coalition of Peaks because they're



the Indigenous organisations that deliver services in the communities. You don't get any



more closer to the ground than that. Now that just, in the first instance, involves



ensuring the balance of how funding is delivered and the channels through which



funding is delivered is done properly and that's why Pat rightly says that the hard work



starts tomorrow because that is one of the key areas that we're looking to adjust, and



Ken and Pat will have a bit more to say about that in the near future. But you're right to



note it as a key issue we've had to learn. That's why I hope this process then drives. And



not just by the Commonwealth Government, by the way. What this process has



recognised is it's fine for a Prime Minister to stand at a dispatch box once every year and



talk about what the gaps are and how they're failing, but the Commonwealth is one part



in a much bigger team of governments that actually deliver services to Indigenous



people and fund those services.



JOURNALIST:



Ms Turner, Just in achieving these goals, how important is it to make



progress on tangential issues like remaining vigilant against things like institutionalised



racism, and pursuing matters like constitutional recognition, Voices to Parliament, and



so forth.



PAT TURNER AM:



All those processes in relation to the Voice to Parliament,



constitutional recognition, are complementary and should continue and will continue



and the Minister, of course, is overseeing that. In relation to why we will get a tangible



difference now is because our voices have been heard and will continue to be heard, but



our influence, our expertise, our experience and our know-how, and the relationships



that we have at the community level. So my day job is CEO of NACCHO, which is 143



Aboriginal community-controlled health services around Australia. We stepped in very



early this year in our preparations for COVID-19. January we started and we worked in



full partnership with every level of government, from the shires through to the state



governments, and the Federal Government of course, and we were able to keep our



communities pretty safe. Less than one per cent of our population, Australia wide, or



out of the COVID numbers today, have tested positive. Overall, we had 59 cases



confirmed. There's been a further 45 in Victoria as of 28th of July, and three, that I



know of, in Western Sydney. Fortunately, we've had no deaths. Now, the Aboriginal



community-controlled health sector has played a critical role in working in full



partnership with governments to ensure that our people are protected and are safe and



thank God we've had no deaths. And I want to say to all Victorians today, our hearts go



9/20



out to you and we are with you every step of the way. To those who have lost family



members in recent weeks to COVID, you know, please accept our deepest condolences.



We don't want any more people in Australia to suffer the consequences of this dreadful



virus, and every Australian must pull their weight to keep our people safe.



PRIME MINISTER:



Well said, Pat. One of the most significant achievements



Australia has had during the COVID pandemic is the extraordinary result in Indigenous



communities, amongst Indigenous peoples. It was, I’ve got to say, around the National



Cabinet table, together with our elderly, our highest concern as to how the pandemic



might affect Australia, particularly in remote communities. Whether it is in the



Northern Territory, Northern Queensland, Western Australia, South Australia, it doesn't



matter where it was and the way the services have worked together to get that outcome,



Pat, I think is extraordinary. It's good working with people who know how to get things



done.



Yes? Time for a couple more.



JOURNALIST:



Prime Minister, you speak about the implementation plans you're



going to get from the states and territories and the historic work you're going to be



doing with community-controlled organisations. If we fast-forward a year or two and



you are seeing failures, what reassurance can you give that the onus of responsibility for



that is still going to be with the Commonwealth?



PRIME MINISTER:



Well, it is going to be with everyone who signed up to this



Agreement. That's the Commonwealth, that's the states and territories, that's the



Coalition of Peaks. That's the whole point of this. That this is about accountability for



what we each do and recognising the role we have to play. See, when we entered into



this, I learnt and understood that if you want to make progress here, then you've got to



get everybody to go together and this is the advice that Pat gave us, this is the learnings



that Ken brought to the table. And so that's what we're doing. We're bringing people



together, and applying ourselves in a unified effort to these lines of effort, defined by the



voices of Indigenous people, coming back through the Coalition of Peaks. So, look, I



hope in two years the story is better. But I can tell you what, if it is not, there'll be an



accountability chain, there will be a set of data that will tell us why and there should be



an ability that enables us to acknowledge that and make changes.



JOURNALIST:



Prime Minister, given how entrenched some of these



intergenerational issues are, specifically around incarceration rates, are you confident,



given the over-representation of young people, in particular, in detention young



Indigenous people, that these targets, these benefits, will reach to that generation now,



or will this take almost a whole generation for them, for their children, say, to not to be



facing those same rates?



PRIME MINISTER:



There are gains to be made now, but Ken, you may want to



comment on this as well. But there are gains that can be made now but there is an



honesty in this Agreement which understands that other gains are generational. And I



10/20



have been hearing that for generations too. That's a key issue of disappointment that



generations have come and gone and the generational changes haven't been made.



That's not to fail to acknowledge, though, the generational achievements that have been



put in place. Of course, there have been some, and many, but our hope is higher.



THE HON. KEN WYATT MP, MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS



AUSTRALIANS:



Just adding to that, in the discussions I've had with states and



territories, the understanding of the intergenerational impact is now very conscious in



the minds of state and territory systems. WA, for example, has repealed its legislation in



respect to being incarcerated for fine defaults. That's a major shift because you're



releasing, and it's predominantly women, you’re releasing mothers back to their



families. That example is important. I know a couple of other jurisdictions are looking at



issues as well. But what we have to focus on is setting the foundation in the first 15 years



of life so that children are successful and will not end up in the pathways that take them



into conflict with systems that see them incarcerated. We also are looking at what are



the programs we need to put in place for people coming out of imprisonment that will



allow them to take opportunities. I want to acknowledge one of your organisations, Pat,



in Kalgoorlie, the Aboriginal community-controlled Health Service now recruits people



who've come out of jail. They look at the issue of recency of a crime but they also look at



the way in which they can skill young people or people who've come out, and what



they've said to me is that their workforce is completely loyal, they've been given a great



opportunity and they're continuing to professionally develop into other leadership roles



in the organisation. So we'll be looking at those elements as well as part of the



implementation plans, but listening to Aboriginal families and communities on the



ground as well. This is all part of the historic reform. It is now doing things with our



people, not to them.



PRIME MINISTER:



Just two more because then we have to move on. Here and here.



You can ask the other the one later, Kath if you like.



JOURNALIST:



Prime Minister, three weeks ago in Victoria when they went into



lockdown, there was something like 680 cases, today there is more...



PRIME MINISTER:



Hang on, we’re talking about Indigenous issues.



JOURNALIST:



Prime Minister, Pat mentioned that some of these negotiations had



been pretty hard-fought. What were some of the sticking points, and Pat, can I ask of



you, what are the areas you would like to see further action beyond what’s been



announced today?



PAT TURNER AM:



Well, there are the key priority areas that are identified in the



Agreement. Let me say that this Agreement has, probably, the most transparency, the



most monitoring and the most accountable mechanisms that have ever been included in



an agreement, and this is the first time that there has been an agreement with the



former COAG, now National Cabinet, and Local Government Association with an



outside party. First time ever. And I'm glad it's First Nations people that have got that.



11/20



But you will see, here, that every year, every level has to account for what it's done and



we will be reviewing continuously and we have national targets. Even the priority



reforms have targets that have to be reported upon. Targets are just a measure of how



well they are doing, governments are doing, and the level of ambition that they've been



prepared to commit to. The priority reforms, as I said, are the game changers here. They



will change the way government works with our people and governments, you know,



we've made it very clear, we want parity across the board and that's what we'll be



aiming for.



PRIME MINISTER:



We'll go here, then we’ll go to Kath. Then we have to draw that



part of the press conference to a close. Then I'll move to the pandemic.



JOURNALIST:



I have a question on Victoria as well.



PRIME MINISTER:



Well, it can wait. Katharine.



JOURNALIST:



One on this and then the pandemic question, if I can, Prime Minister.



PRIME MINISTER:



We'll come back to the pandemic one.



JOURNALIST:



No worries, just…



PRIME MINISTER:



We’ll have to deal with those later.



JOURNALIST:



A closing the gap question.



PRIME MINISTER:



Please.



JOURNALIST:



You've all during this press conference narrated a highly successful



process of co-design in terms of policy. Obviously there's been bumps and difficulties



and all that sort of stuff, but you've got there. That's the principle at the heart of the



voice, that Indigenous people be involved in government decision-making. So, doesn't



the success of this project that you've all embarked upon make the case to accelerate the



voice?



PRIME MINISTER:



Well, there's never been a view from the Government that has in



any way sought to not engage, and not listen, and not have Indigenous voices as part of



the way we're making decisions, and I think that's what we've demonstrated. You know



me, Katharine, I'm a very practical person about these issues. And I think what we're



practically demonstrating is that model is already working, it is already occurring, and I



will continue to operate in that way. And that's the process that, you know, Ken is also



tracking down on the other matters that you've referred to.



MINISTER WYATT:



Katharine, just very quickly, the work is continuing. The three



groups are reaching a point at which they are considering models for Government to



consider. The Coalition of Peaks is a very distinct group that will lead in many fronts in



12/20



the closing the gap, but this is about giving all Indigenous people across this nation a



chance to exercise their views on issues that impact directly on them at the community



level as well.



PRIME MINISTER:



So Pat, if I could say thank you.



PAT TURNER AM:



Thank you very much, Prime Minister. And thank you, Minister.



Thank you.



PRIME MINISTER:



Ken, thank you. Thanks very much. And as they go, I particularly



want to acknowledge Tony Abbott. He has had an enormous impact on my



understanding and appreciation of these issues when I worked with Tony many years



ago, when we were in opposition, actually, and then in Government as Prime Minister.



And I just want to acknowledge the impact that he has had in how we've been



approaching these issues here today.



Let me turn to the issues of Victoria. I've already made a statement in relation to



supporting the initiatives that the Victorian Premier has announced today and what



were a very alarming level of figures that were revealed today. There has been somewhat



of a sore tooth in terms of what we've seen in those numbers but, certainly, while some



days have been lower, at that, elevated levels, that is a real cause for concern. Within



those numbers, when you look at the broader trend that is occurring since the lockdown,



I'm advised that we're still seeing around about, give or take, about 50 cases per day



with no known source and that is the primary cause for concern. I mean, in New South



Wales there are no known cases, with no known source, cases with no known source I



should say. So that is actually at the heart of the concern about where this goes from



here. That's why that tracing, and testing, that why the door-knocking that has been



expanded with what the ADF are doing, and it is a very good program. ADF has also



been enabled to increase their ability to participate in the actual conduct of the testing



and they've been given accreditation to do that. So that's boosted those testing



capabilities in a lot of those large centres and that's very welcome.



So as it has moved into other communities, that is obviously of great concern and we



can’t rule out further restrictions or limitations to stem this outbreak. We'll be sharing



our views again, with the Victorian Government about that, based on what the AHPPC



is considering today and the advice that we're receiving directly. But I want to make it



very clear that we support the moves taken because they’ve been very evidence-based by



the Victorian Premier today.



Specifically in relation to aged care, just a couple of quick updates there, the situation in



Epping Gardens I wouldn't say at this point is fully stable but there's been significant



progress from yesterday. There's been further transfers from those facilities. There has



been a significant change in the management of those facilities. Working together with



the local health authorities there to ensure the workforce needs are being met, and the



ADF have continued to play a role. As I said yesterday, it was our goal yesterday,



through Services Australia, and the other communications mechanisms, to reach out,



13/20



proactively, to every single family contact of those who were involved in that facility. I



was advised last night and this morning, again, by the Minister that that - that attempt



to contact every single one of those contacts was done yesterday. The work that is being



done on communications is a combination of the facilities, themselves, where they can



stand up that ability to make those regular contacts with the family, contacts of



residents, they are doing that. If they have a problem in the ability to achieve that, then



Minister Colbeck is working with them to put Services Australia teams in to make those



calls and to ensure families can be kept in contact. So that is welcome.



A focus of the Victorian aged care response centre now is not only getting that further



PPE out across Victoria and the facilities, and they were again packing those last night



and getting them distributed, but it is also to be enforcing the training and enforcing the



use of that PPE equipment in aged care facilities. There's been far too much anecdotal



evidence that we've been receiving of PPE, despite the training, despite the PPE being



there, not being used the way it should. And in discussions with the Minister, again this



morning, we agreed, and that will be communicated through to centres, that failure to



comply with those requirements of using PPE will lead to marking down on people's



accreditation. That will occur. And so they need to ensure they follow those practices.



They need to do that to ensure the protection, obviously, of their residents, but also to



protect the staff at these facilities. I want staff to feel very confident going to work each



day in aged care facilities. The PPE is there. The training has been there. And we are



confirming that again with visits by teams to bring and refresh that training, wherever it



is needed, and we're focusing obviously on those facilities that are in the areas of highest



outbreaks and at greater risk, and where there are already cases.



But I can confirm to you to again that it is only a small number of facilities that I would



still say were in the acute stage of the critical list that we have of just over a dozen



centres. Stabilisation in many of those other centres has been established. But we are



keeping on them on a close watching brief. And so it is really is now about ensuring that



even where we haven’t quite a number of facilities, where there are cases, our advice is



that they are being managed well within those facilities. But the AUSMAT teams, the



first of those arrived today. Teams of South Australian nurses arrived the night before



last. There is also the opportunity potentially to bring in some nurses from Western



Australia - that was identified last night. So the resourcing of the staff needs is being



worked on very well by the Aged Care Response Centre, and the integration of the work



being done by the local hospitals, the public health unit of Victoria, together with the



aged care regulators has stood up quite strongly in the last few days. Their task is to



make sure that we don't see any further repeat of some of the more critical scenes that



we’ve seen in places like Epping Gardens or St Basil's or facilities that have been in that



category.



Happy to take questions.



JOURNALIST:



The Treasury Secretary this morning has indicated that the



deteriorating virus situation in Victoria and also the tougher border restriction in



Queensland are likely to weigh on the economic outcomes more than the Budget



14/20



envisaged last week?



PRIME MINISTER:



True.



JOURNALIST:



Does that concern you? Is there anything more you need to do to



counteract that economic downturn?



PRIME MINISTER:



It doesn't surprise me, and we actually flagged that would be the



case from these very podiums when we made that point. These economic numbers



quickly outdate, based on the way that the pandemic impacts on the country. The



Victorian wave is certainly having that impact. Decisions that are taken by other states



can also impact that result as well. That's why we've been so cautious not rushing to



longer-term scenarios. We'll put forward the four-year estimates in the normal way in



the Budget, but as the Treasury Secretary, I think, demonstrated this morning, those



estimates over a longer-term would have been quickly overtaken by the events that



we’ve had. So it is a constant challenge and they are constantly re-working those



numbers. But the supports we have, are designed to move with those circumstances. So



if there, will certainly be more businesses in Victoria, as the Secretary, I think, indicated



today, who will be relying on JobKeeper post-September than would have been



anticipated otherwise. And you, it may well be the case. Decisions about borders in



Queensland could lead to that outcome as well. I think that's a little too early to say at



this point. Those changes could be made just as easily in a week or so, and that could be



reversed, and that economic impact, hopefully, therefore would be avoided.



Yeah Phil, and then Katharine, and then I’ll come back over that way.



JOURNALIST:



Premier Andrews mentioned again today one of the problems is sick



people still going to work in Victoria. How serious are you about post pandemic leave?



Are you thinking something economy-wide like the unions are asking for or is your



focus more sector-specific where it's evidence-based?



PRIME MINISTER:



Well I'm not going to be drawn on those questions at this point



because we're still working those discussions through as part of the process that the



Minister for Industrial Relations is engaged in. So I think it is best that those discussions



are held there. We're conscious of the issues and we’re seriously pursuing them.



Katharine?



JOURNALIST:



PM you flagged a second ago that there may be more restrictions after



the AH... the acronym I always get wrong...



PRIME MINISTER:



The medical expert panel, I think I find this is the, I find a little



easier to say.



JOURNALIST:



Thank you, sorry, there might be more restrictions, do you mean just



in Victoria or do you mean more broadly? And also another if I may, Richard Colbeck



yesterday afternoon sent a signal that the Commonwealth was looking at perhaps some



15/20



additional support for people who want or need to withdraw their elderly residents



from nursing homes in Victoria, there might be some support to bring them home.



There wasn't a lot of detail. Can you expand on what might be?



PRIME MINISTER:



No, I can't say any more than he said yesterday and I'd refer you



to him as to how he's progressing with that. No, the AHPPC, which Professor Kelly is



bringing it together today, is really focused on the Victorian situation. No, I don't



anticipate there being a need based on the advice I have for other restrictions elsewhere



in the country. I’m, while - I spoke to Premier Berejiklian this morning, to Gladys, and



she is, rightly, constantly anxious but that's exactly where, I think, we should all be



when it comes to those who are responsible for managing these situations. But the



outbreaks are very well chronicled and the sources of those in New South Wales all



defined. And so, I think that still gives us reason for, I think, encouragement in New



South Wales. But not reason for complacency. I've never seen Gladys have a complacent



day in her life. So I'm sure she's going to continue to apply that usual level of focus.



Just one at a time.



JOURNALIST:



Prime Minister, Ken Wyatt said this morning, that WA, the closed



borders has meant we have had not had outbreaks of coronavirus which we have seen in



other states like Victoria and New South Wales. Do you agree with that? Are there other



WA Ministers who also do see the merit of this closed border or as that seemed to



suggest this morning?



PRIME MINISTER:



Let me be very clear what I would like to achieve in Western



Australia. I would like to achieve a cooperative situation in Western Australia. My



primary concern for Western Australians is the health and wellbeing of Australians



living in Western Australia, and that's why we have put in place all the measures that we



have. The constitution doesn't provide for unilateral decisions to close borders without



there being a proper basis for those decisions. That is our understanding, that is my



understanding of it. And so I am very keen to work with the Western Australian Premier



to ensure that the, all the appropriate protections are in place for Western Australia. I



mean I think the argument that was being had, is that there is a border between



Western Australia and South Australia and the incidence of cases in South Australia is



lower than it is in Western Australia and so I just think when these decisions are made,



there needs to be the clear, transparent process of medical evidence to support those



decisions and they should be done in concert. In the New South Wales - Victorian



border, I engaged with the New South Wales Premier, the Victorian Premier, we agreed



that was the right response and then we not only did that but then we worked together



to ensure we were putting in place cooperatively, the arrangements of how the border



was going to be managed and what the medical advice was that led us to that decision



and then we supported those arrangements through the application of ADF resources,



particularly in border towns, to work through any issues that followed. That is the



process that I think should work in a Federation and I'm very happy and would love to



engage with Premier McGowan along those lines and the Attorney General and the



Minister for Finance, both very senior Western Australians in my Government, are



16/20



seeking to do that even as we speak.



JOURNALIST:



[inaudible] the border with New South Wales and Victoria, that would



be OK, it’s just this indiscriminate border closure, that is the main clincher here for the



Federal Government?



PRIME MINISTER:



There is a constitutional issue here that goes well beyond the



current circumstances. And I believe we can get an arrangement in place for Western



Australia which completely addresses all of the Premier's public health concerns. And



that can involve restrictions, it can involve restrictions on movements between states



and from particular places and outbreak areas and resources to support that. At the very



same time, it is the Commonwealth government that in response to the request from the



West Australian Premier, is providing ADF resources to bolster their hotel quarantine.



The biggest risk to Western Australia is the hotel quarantine, as we have seen in



Victoria, and we are working hand in glove with the Premier there and look I enjoy a



very good relationship with Mark McGowan. I have no truck with the, what has led to



this case in terms of that process. But the fact is, there is a case that's going on. I warned



the Premiers that this was likely to occur. I fear that it will result, based on the advice I



have from the Attorney General, that it could leave Western Australia in a weaker



position, so I would like to work with the Premier to ensure we leave Western



Australians in a stronger position. That is what I want for Western Australians.



Yep? Here, and then I’ll keep coming around, then I’ll come over here.



JOURNALIST:



[Inaudible] coronavirus in Australia since this pandemic started,



particularly in Victoria where the number of active cases have exploded by about



around about 9,000 in 3 weeks since the lockdown. What's not going right there to



suppress the virus?



PRIME MINISTER:



Look, I would suggest to you a different way to look at this. The



reason that we're having problems is because there is a coronavirus and sometimes I



think we lose sight of this. The coronavirus finds its way into the nooks and crannies of



our community and once it gets there, it takes hold. I mean, this is not unique to



Australia. I was on a call last night, again, with Bibi Netanyahu. They have 1,900 cases a



day. And there’s around, and the number of cases in Austria has doubled to 100 a day



and there are many countries now experiencing further waves, Australia is with this



Victorian wave. I have highlighted, I think, on so many occasions now, that the way we



get on top of it, is ensuring that our testing and our tracing and our outbreak



containment works effectively. Now, on some days, the virus wins. On other days, we



beat it. But I think we've got to be careful not to slip into some idea that there is some



golden immunity that Australia has in relation to this virus. This virus will be around for



some time and we will direct every effort and every resource we have to stop its impact



across our community and where there are lessons that need to be learned, they are



getting learned. Where there is information that needs to be shared, then it is being



shared. And where there are responsibilities and accountabilities that are needed, they



are being addressed. But I don't want to give Australians, and I would urge in the



17/20



reporting, that we don't create some false impression that somehow Australia has got a



golden ticket in this. We don't. And I can tell you, speaking to many of these other



leaders, I was talking to the Irish Prime Minister this morning, every country is dealing



with this the best they can. That is what we're doing in Australia and I can tell you, we're



doing better than most and many.



JOURNALIST:



Prime Minister, on Queensland, you’ve been pretty strong in your



praise about the way New South Wales has handled this. Do you think the Premier's



decision to shut off millions of Sydneysiders from being able to enter is sensible or is it



an overreaction?



PRIME MINISTER:



Look, I will leave others to commentate on this. All I say is the



decisions, when it comes to these matters, should be based on the best possible medical



advice and I note the decisions that were taken today by the Victorian Premier were on



that basis and I'm aware of that advice and I'm aware of that evidence that supports



those decisions and I think whatever decisions premiers are taking, they have to explain



them and they have to outline to the public about what the medical evidence is to



support those decisions. So I think that's the standard that all political leaders should be



held to, I am happy to be, and I am sure other premiers are when you put those



questions to them.



JOURNALIST:



Prime Minister, overnight there was a very tense stand-off at Epping



Gardens and you have just talked about some of the issues there. Health workers were



allegedly blocked from separating residents who had tested positive to COVID-19 from



others, and federal intervention was requested. How angry are you with that operator



and why were families left in the dark? You say communication has improved but just



this week a man was called 11 hours after his mother had died to be informed that she



was dead by being told that her body was deteriorating unrefrigerated in her room.



PRIME MINISTER:



These are the distressing situations that I was referring to earlier



in the week and they are incredibly distressing. They are the product of a very severe



crisis that occurred in a number of these centres and we have been fairly upfront about



that and the reasons as to how that took place and why there has been the need to



transfer many patients, as they become patients, into hospitals, both private and public,



and we have had great cooperation in recent days to ensure that has been taking place



so there have been some significant failings in those areas and that's what the team has



been working to address and to ensure that we don't get a repeat of that, when there are



outbreaks. Remembering that when you get an outbreak in the community, that does



affect workforce, whether it is an aged care facility or in any other type of workplace.



And one of the challenges, to go to one of the earlier questions, that we are facing in



Victoria at the moment is we are still seeing too much transmission in workplaces.



People, if you have got those symptoms, do not go to work. The Premier's been very



clear about that in his impassioned pleas and I support them. But equally it is true, the



restrictions that are put in place about going into people's homes and things like that



more broadly, people can let their guard down in those environments and that is where



the virus can find its way. So when it gets into a facility, it can have a significant impact.



18/20



And that’s what the processes we have put in place over the course of the last week and



even before that, but particularly over the last few days, are designed to ensure that the



sort of very distressing things that have occurred don’t occur again.



Chris?



JOURNALIST:



I am just wondering how you envisage that the economy recovers,



given that the uncertainty of this virus means we’re making assumptions on a recovery



which we just can't make. I mean, how can you ever really, as a state premier, open the



border again, if you know that a virus case might get across?



PRIME MINISTER:



Well, the goal of the suppression strategy is zero community



transmission. That is the goal. And in seven states and territories, we're pretty much at



that goal, with a few notable but very small exceptions. I am quite confident that the



measures that are in place in New South Wales and also in Queensland will address



those cases that we have been reading about in these last 24-48 hours. In Victoria, the



challenge is far greater. But all you can do, Chris, is do what we are doing and that is



keep people in jobs, provide businesses with the support they need which either buys



them time or buys them new opportunities. And I have referred to those on many



occasions about the incredible innovation we have seen from businesses. The types of



supports we put in place in Australia for businesses, employees, and welfare support is



commensurate and in a very similar vein to pretty much all the other leaders I talk to.



Many of them look at what we have done and they are replicating it. What we have done



replicates some of the things they have done. There has been an enormous amount of



collaboration and we are all dealing with the same problems and the uncertainty is one



of those problems. So what you do is you just keep people in jobs, you look for every



opportunity to build a COVID safe economy every opportunity you can to do that. And



you put every other effort you can into finding a vaccine and making sure that when



that vaccine is found, there is a global commitment that as soon as it is found it is



shared and that is a critical issue I have been raising in many of my calls recently with



other leaders and that has been well supported. Whoever finds it, wherever they are, I



think there is a global responsibility to share that far and wide.



JOURNALIST:



About $12 billion more has or is expected to be taken out of



superannuation by the end of the year. Are you concerned that effectively that money is



being taken for purposes that it is not intended for? That you will potentially have



situations where people are less able to support themselves later on in life when they are



in retirement? And what is the Government doing to step in and ensure that that money



is not being inappropriately used?



PRIME MINISTER:



Well, it's not my money. It’s not the Government's money. It is



their money. The intent for which it is used is decided by the person whose money it is.



The Government doesn't give people lectures about how they should spend their money,



that is not the sort of Government we are. It is their money and if they believe they need



it because they are facing hardship, because the rules are there to only be making this



available in cases of that hardship, just as there has always been rules to support people



19/20



to access their superannuation because of a particular hardship. That is not a new



concept. It is a much bigger concept now given the hardship that people are facing. But



the overwhelming majority of cases that my advice is that people are using it actually to



restructure their own personal balance sheets. They are putting it against their debts



and they are putting it against to support their mortgages and that strikes me as a very



good opportunity for them to reduce their risk, to increase their financial resilience with



their own resources and in many respects, you will find that by taking those decisions,



they may be, I would argue, potentially much more financially advantageous decisions



they are making by redeploying their own resources to those uses right now and put



them even in a stronger position in the future. So no, I don't have those concerns, but I



think it is very important to note, we are not a Government that tells people how they



should spend their own money. Superannuation doesn't belong to the superannuation



fund managers. It belongs to the superannuation fund members. It is their money and



there are legitimate and I think very appropriate rules to enable people in this time of



hardship to access their own money, to do with it what they believe is best for them. I



will back them as to how they spend their money every day of the week. Thank you very



much.



20/20

