



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina



MEDIA STATEMENT



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au

27 November 2020

HELPING AUSTRALIANS RETURN HOME

The Australian Government continues to work tirelessly to ensure we get as many Australians home  by Christmas as possible.

Almost 426,600 Australian citizens and Permanent Residents have travelled into Australia since the  Government recommended that people reconsider the need to travel abroad on 13 March 2020.

The process to help re-book passengers travelling to Sydney from San Francisco began last night with  the Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Communications working  speedily with the airline to facilitate exactly that.

This process was well under way by this morning and contrary to claims made by Labor today, had  nothing to do with their Tweets. Because this plane did not take off or arrive, the caps allocated for  that flight have rolled over so those passengers will be able quarantine without issue.

What Australians expect as we navigate our nation’s response to this global pandemic is constructive  engagement by all politicians - not opportunistic political point-scoring.

Australians will rightfully be disappointed by the Labor Party’s willingness to exploit difficult  circumstances being faced by Australians overseas - circumstances the Government has been  working to assist with since the start of the pandemic earlier this year.

At the request of State and Territory Governments, to help shore up the integrity of hotel-quarantine  systems in those jurisdictions, the National Cabinet implemented flight caps earlier this year. That  measure has been necessary and has played a substantial role in Australia’s successful response to  the COVID-19 pandemic.

At many meetings of the National Cabinet, the Australian Government has sought to safely increase  those cap numbers to help get more Australians home and we continue to partner with all States and  Territories to that end. Following Jane Halton’s review and recommendations on quarantine  arrangements, the Commonwealth has established the Howard Springs facility to boost quarantine  spaces and is looking to double its capacity.

We will keep working to bring as many Australians home by Christmas as possible, building on the  successful return of more than 400,000 Australians since March.

Ends.

Media Contact: Deputy Prime Minister - Jo Williamson 0418 475 668 | Dean Shachar 0418 202 860

