

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES  MEMBER FOR HUNTER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2SM  MONDAY, 23 MARCH 2020

SUBJECT: Coronavirus.

MARCUS PAUL, 2SM HOST: right now I want to go to one of our federal politicians,  Shadow Minister for Agriculture and Resources, Joel Fitzgibbon. Good morning Joel.

JOEL FITZGIBBON, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND  RESOURCES: Great to be with you, Marcus.

PAUL: All right mate I know you don’t have a lot of time, because you’re off to meetings -  it’s a very busy day in Canberra. What’s the latest you can tell us? What did you make of  the stimulus package? What’s happening there?

FITZGIBBON: Well it’s an historic meeting of the Parliament today. It’s never happened  before and hopefully will never happen again. A reduced number of MPs and Senators will  meet to pass this stimulus package, I hope, through the Parliament as quickly as possible.  Look the second stimulus I thought was good. It ticked all the boxes it’s now picked up, in  particular, on casual workers, for example; plenty of support for small business. I’m pretty  happy about all of that. Of course bipartisanship is really, really important here, but it  shouldn’t deter us from offering constructive criticism, and you know this stuff has all been  too slow. Not one cent of the first stimulus package is yet to reach the bank accounts of  small business or family members - members of the community. So we’re behind the eight  ball in that respect and last night’s press conference with the Prime Minister was  completely chaotic and raised more questions than it delivered answers, and the Prime  Minister really does have to tidy that up. People are ringing me this morning, texting me,  emailing me, using my social media, to ask me questions. We have a very confused  electorate.

PAUL: What are the main question they’re asking, Joel? What are they confused most  about, in your opinion?

FITZGIBBON: Most of it’s coming from small business people. They don’t what they’re  supposed to be doing, whether they’re open - not open; if they’re open, what they’re  allowed to do, what they’re not allowed to do. A lot of it’s coming from parents, they’re  distressed about their children. They want to do the right thing but they’re getting mixed  messages.





PAUL: Sorry to interrupt you Joel. There is a mixed message going out this morning. We  know the New South Wales Premier, Gladys Berejiklian, is fronting the media at eight  o’clock but there are reports going out everywhere that she’s about to tell New South  Wales parents to not send their kids to school. I mean that’s - it is very confusing. That’s  conflicting with what the Prime Minister said last night.

FITZGIBBON: Yes, I think what’s happening here, Marcus, is that the Prime Minister has  lost control of the National Cabinet. He did the right thing and he brought the premiers into  the tent and it’s been working pretty well I have to say, up until now. But obviously they’re  tired of his attitude and his approach to the situation and they’re now off doing their own  thing. And I think that’s a problem for all of us. I’ve got an open mind about the school  thing. I believe that parents should have a choice but they won’t want to hold their children  back from school if they think they’re going to be missing important lessons, so a very  difficult one for parents. They need a definitive decision one way or the other.

PAUL: We do know that if we close all schools down, effectively, you know, thirty per cent  of the workforce are in essential services. Our police officers, fire officers, the Ambos,  those who work in public and private hospitals. So they need to go to work. We need,  obviously, for them to send their kids to school. So maybe there’s a model we can follow  that’s been set-up overseas where school is provided for those who want to, as you’ve  suggested, and in particular for parents who work in these essential services.

FITZGIBBON: And I’ve been supporting the Prime Minister on the school front. I’ve been  saying and I continue to say here, that he appears to be acting on the very best advice. We  don’t want parents having to stay at home, missing work. We don’t want kids going off to  vulnerable grandparents, so I’ve been with the Prime Minister on this one but we need a  definitive answer one way of the other and maybe it’s not binary. Maybe it’s a matter of the  Government hurriedly getting the technology into the schools that they need to teach all of  their children at home, so you don’t have parents making the heartbreaking decision about  whether they send their kids to school and risk the virus, or hold them at home and miss  important lessons. So it’s a very difficult one for parents and that’s why they’re calling and  emailing me.

PAUL: I’ve got a son who’s sitting his HSC this year and I’m worried that the whole thing’s  going to be distracted. It’s a worry. Joel I know you’re busy, mate. Thank you as always for  your time. I appreciate it.

FITZGIBBON: A great pleasure, Marcus.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY  0438 986 641







