

Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment   Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate  Senator for South Australia

ADELAIDE







SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Deputy Leader of the Government in the  Senate Senator for South Australia



TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Interview on 4BC Drive with Scott Emerson   Topics: Lifting of the cap on Australians returning home, Qantas headquarters bidding  16/09/20  15:34PM

Scott Emerson:  Now we've had some good news today about this issue about Australians stranded  overseas because of COVID. Obviously we've been hearing about the cases of thousands of Australians still  over there trying to get back. Well today, we saw that the Federal Government has made an announcement,  and I'm pleased to say that the Federal Minister for Tourism and Trade and Investment Simon Birmingham is  joining us now on 4BC Drive. Minister, thanks for being on the show.

Simon Birmingham: G’day, Scott, great to be with you.

Scott Emerson:   Now you've increased the cap on Australians returning home from 4000 to 6000.  What does that mean in practical terms?

Simon Birmingham: Well practically that means that more Australians should be able to come back into  the country, 2000 in fact, essentially on every two weeks, if you think about the rotation of people through the  14 days quarantine. So that really does get as close to where we were before the Victorian second wave  happened. We had nearly 8000 people coming into the country each week at that stage, and states like  Queensland were managing quarantine facilities in excess of 1100 people that they were processing each  week at that stage. Now of course, we've seen that cut right back to 4000. Victoria is not taking any, the states  have put caps in place. Queensland put a cap of 500, which is less than half what they were handling  previously. So, we’re now going back to the states, asking them to increase those numbers in a sensible, safe  way. Nobody wants a repeat of Victoria anywhere else around the country. But I'm pleased there seems to be  some positive reaction from the states and territories and hopefully we can settle this at National Cabinet on  Friday.

Scott Emerson:   Well it seems to be a bit of a battle over here between the feds and the states over  this, because each blaming each other about this. But it was good to hear the Queensland Premier  Annastacia Palaszczuk today saying, yes, look, welcoming this and saying they'll look at increasing the  numbers they're taking, because that seems to have been the problem.

Simon Birmingham:  That is encouraging. Look, we've put the caps in place at the request of states and  territories after the Victorian second wave happened, and of course it occurred because of the failure of  quarantine management in that state. Understandably, the other states and territories have all: hang on a  minute, we better pullback a little bit and make sure that we are all getting this right and that we don't have  any leakage out of quarantine. So, we've worked with them on that. We've implemented the cap at their  request, but a consequence is it is really hard for thousands of Australians to get back into the country at  present under those caps, and that is causing distress and heartache for many individuals. So, we want to  work with the states and territories to safely increase that cap. We will make Defence Force personnel  available where necessary to help them on that journey. We've got more than 3000 already deployed as part  of the COVID response, working with states and territories. We'll continue that, and to get a sensible outcome  that protects the community that also doesn't leave Australians stranded overseas.



Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment   Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate  Senator for South Australia

ADELAIDE



Scott Emerson:   Now, I'm talking Minister Simon Birmingham. Minister, you also bought into these this  announcement yesterday about that Qantas might be looking to move its headquarters from Mascot in  Sydney, possibly to other states as well. Now Queensland put the cue in Qantas, so we're one of the states  that have least flagged the possibility of trying to bid for this. But are you concerned about a bidding war  breaking out amongst the states of Qantas's headquarters?

Simon Birmingham: It does worry me to a degree, Scott. Qantas is doing it incredibly tough at present,  and that's why we have given hundreds of millions, probably billions of dollars of support across the aviation  sector, and much of it to Qantas in terms of JobKeeper payments, Aviation Industry Relief, and the like. And  we want to see them do well. But I'm concerned about states being encouraged into a bidding war for any  corporation, whether it's Virgin as has happened previously, or Qantas, where all they’re doing is transferring  taxpayers’ money to shuffle jobs around Australia, not creating one extra job for Australians. It's just shifting  them potentially from one city to another. Now, Qantas has got some tough commercial decisions to make  when they're looking to consolidate parts of their business in different parts of the country. And I fully  understand that and respect what they're trying to do to maximise their viability. But I think states and  territories need to show caution at not using state taxpayers’ dollars in bidding wars that ultimately sort of  drive towards a form of corporate welfare for the bigger businesses around the country. And if they respond  like this to Qantas, then there's a risk that companies in far less tough times than Qantas are might try it on as  well.

Scott Emerson:   Now we have the heavy maintenance facility here in Brisbane currently with Qantas.  Do you suspect that part of this plan from Qantas to go out there and talk about moving things around, maybe  also a way of getting a bit of money out of the Queensland Government to try to force them to say, well, hand  over this money to keep those facilities here still in Brisbane?

Simon Birmingham: There may be some expectations in that regard that is as much about sustaining jobs  and positions than it is potentially transferring them around the country. As I say, Qantas is in an incredibly  difficult position right now. I do understand the commercial reality of those place and why they may be looking  at consolidating parts of their operations and considering what they can do to streamline their costs and  potentially to get some extra cash out of state and territory governments. But good luck to Qantas if they can.  That’s their commercial right, it's a free country to do so. My message is more to the states and territories that  they ought to be investing in the scarce taxpayer dollars, that it's stretched a long way at present, in creating  new jobs, in driving new investment, in making sure that we grow the overall economy. That's what the  Morrison Government's doing now through our investment in skills, through our investment in terms of  attracting new talent to the country, and it's all about making sure that across the board, whether it's driving  energy prices down or any of our other policy settings, we're saving jobs, we're trying to create new jobs.  We're not simply trying to shuffle them around.

Scott Emerson:   Alright. Simon Birmingham, thank you for joining 4BC Drive this afternoon. That was  the Federal Minister for Tourism and Trade and Investment on the program. Good news regarding increasing  that cap, more Aussies back. Looks like the states will play ball on that one as well. We’ll see our national  cabinet meeting on Friday, but also interesting to hear the Minister there warning against this bidding war  between the states for Qantas's headquarters.





Media Contacts  Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.





















Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment   Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate  Senator for South Australia

ADELAIDE

































































