





The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology  Federal Member for McPherson



TRANSCRIPT

Doorstop - Coronavirus Industry Roundtable

11 March 2020

Topics: Impact of coronavirus on supply chains and industry

Speakers: Minister Andrews, Russel Zimmerman - Executive Director of Australian  Retailers Association and Elizabeth de Somer - CEO of Medicines Australia

E&OE:



Karen Andrews: Well good morning. We have just had a very positive and constructive  meeting with many of our peak bodies about supply chains and any impacts that they are  currently experiencing here in Australia. And the very positive news coming out of that, is  that to the people of Australia, I give this message - that there is no need for them to go out  and to panic buy. So to Australians, remain calm. There's no need to panic buy. Australia  has good - more than adequate supplies of food, of medicines, and we are in an  exceptionally good position at this point in time. So there is no need to go out and panic  buy.

There are some issues with restocking our shelves at the supermarkets, but understand  that we do have good supplies in our distribution centres and we are now working to make  sure that we can stock those shelves, so that when Australians walk into a supermarket,  they will be able to see the products that they need to buy. But rest assured, those products  are available and we are working to get them on to the shelves. Similarly, many of the  medicines are available and we will be working very closely with manufacturers and  suppliers to make sure that we are stocking the shelves as soon as we possibly can.

Now I'll invite Russell for you to say a few words about what you are hearing from your  members in relation to supplies.

Russell Zimmerman: Thank you, Minister. As the minister has pointed out, there are lots of  supplies in the DCs - the distribution centres - and in the factories. The biggest problem the  retailers have at the moment is there are curfews within each individual town and area, and  this is not a Federal Government problem. What we need is the curfews to be lifted so that  the supplies can be got into the retailers so that there is plenty of stock for everybody. And I  have got an assurance today from the Minister that she will work actively to try and resolve  that issue. Thank you, Minister.

Karen Andrews: Thank you. Liz?





Elizabeth de Somer: Just to concur with that message, there is plenty of medicines in the  supply chain. Medicines manufacturers keep at least three to six months of medicine  supplies available in country, and they’re already ramping up production of other medicines.  There is no need to stockpile and stock up your ordinary usual daily medicines. Just buy  your usual monthly supply of scripts. Plenty of medicines in supply chain.

Karen Andrews: Thank you. Happy to take questions.

Question: Will you be looking to defer business activity statement lodgements, and  payments for businesses affected by issues in the supply chain?

Karen Andrews: Look, that's a matter for the Prime Minister and for the Treasurer to deal  with. The focus of today's discussion has been on supply chains. Looking at our  manufacturers, making sure that we have adequate supply of the raw materials that they  need to be able to keep producing the products that Australians are looking for. And I am  absolutely assured that there are sufficient supplies here in Australia at this point in time,  and that there is no need for there to be any panic buying, that there will be stocked on the  supermarket shelves and we are working to get it there as quickly as we can, and that we  have good supplies of the medicines that are needed. So today was all about supply  chains, and of course, reassuring the Australian people that there is no need for them to  panic buy at all.

Question: And can you give us a sense of how many Australian businesses roughly are  affected by supply chain issues at the moment? Like is there are a rough percentage there?

Karen Andrews: Look, we don't have a breakdown nationally of businesses that have been  affected. We do know that small businesses in some cases are getting the fourth hit, that  they have been affected by drought, by floods, by bushfires, and now are seeing some  impact from coronavirus. That goes especially to our tourism industry and our education  sector. So we know that the impact is broad at the moment, but we are in a good position  because many of our manufacturers and our suppliers here in Australia have got good  inventory levels to make sure the stock demand needs are going to be met. So that is a  very good reassurance to Australians.

Question: Russel, you mentioned there was plenty of stock in distribution centres. Are  there any measures you'd like to see that might help that reach shelves?

Russell Zimmerman: Well look, as I stated earlier, there are lots of stock in the distribution  centres. To the Minister's point, firstly, can I reassure you and every Australian that there is  absolutely no need to panic buy. However, the more important issue that we're facing at the  moment is there are curfews. And this is not a Federal Government issue, but I know the  Federal Government is going to try and assist and work on it. But the issue is that there are  curfews when deliveries can be made to stores.

So for example, it may cut off at 10 o'clock at night time and you can't deliver before, say  7:00 in the morning. If we could get those trucks into those retail stores at other times  beyond the curfew times, there is a huge opportunity to get the stocks into the shelves so  that people would then realise that the stock is there. Nothing breeds a problem more than  what we're seeing on the shelves at the moment, but the sad part is the stock is there, so  there's no need to panic buy. I cannot emphasise that enough. There is lots of stocks in the  DCs and in the factories, and many factories in Australia are ramping up to ensure there is  even more supply.





Question: Is the curfew the biggest issue that you guys discussed today? Or was there  some other key concerns that you have?

Russell Zimmerman: I’ll refer that to the Minister, thank you.

Karen Andrews: Certainly one of the issues that was raised today was the impact of  curfews, because yes, it is potentially very concerning if you walk into the supermarket and  there are some items that are not there. But it is important to note that at any time of the  year, you could walk into a supermarket and there could be a supply issue with a couple of  products that you are needing to purchase. What we are reassured about is that we do  have good stocks of those, but we have an issue with getting that stock from the distribution  centres into the supermarkets and onto the shelves. We are going to do everything that we  possibly can to expedite that so that when people walk into the supermarkets, they are  actually seeing the shelves stocked. So that was a key part of our discussions today. We  also very broadly spoke about general supply chain issues, and we have been reassured  across a number of industry sectors that yes, there may have been some minor supply  chain issues that have been experienced, but manufacturers have been able to source  product from different regions outside of China. So they're looking at where else they can  get their supplies from. That is very positive news, and we actually came out of there with a  very strong view that the message that we need to get across to Australians is that there is  no need to panic buy. We have good stocks.

Now what we have also committed to is that we will meet again next week and we will again  discuss what the current situation is, but we will actually start to look at what the next steps  are going to be. Because we know that we are going to come through this. So we need to  prepare for when we've come through this particular issue. Where are the areas that we  can look to ramp up manufacturing in Australia to meet some of the critical needs that  we’ve experienced in this current set of circumstances? What are the opportunities? Now  we know that already some of our manufacturers are looking at how they can scale up their  operations, there may well be new players that come into the market. But our next meeting  will certainly be dealing with issues that we need to in terms of immediate concerns with  supply chain, what further issues may emerge with supply chains, and how do we recover  from this and what are the opportunities. So it was a very constructive and positive meeting.

Question: So you’re saying that there is quite a lot of stock and our supply chain aren't  anything to worry about, but are there any items that people should be concerned about  that we just cannot get at the moment?

Karen Andrews: Look, what we heard at the roundtable this morning is that we do have  adequate supplies, particularly of things that are important to people. So our food goods  such as rice, pasta, cornflakes, plenty of supply of all of that. We understand that there are  some issues with people being able to access hands sanitiser, there’s wipes, there's good  old soap. So let's just start washing our hands properly with soap. So we are a very  innovative nation, and people will always look for alternatives. So if you can't buy the hand  sanitiser that you're used to buying, your option is to use good old soap.

Question: Outside of China, are there any particular countries or regions the businesses  are struggling to, I guess, get supplies from in Australia?

Karen Andrews: Well there are potentially some demand issues. What we did hear about  is that there are some delays in getting manufactured white goods into Australia. That will  be coped with. We're obviously looking at what the other options may be for getting those



finished goods into Australia. And so there might be some delays. We did hear news that  parts of manufacturing were ramping up overseas. That is great news for us here because  that will deal with potentially some emerging issues, but we're also looking at what other  countries manufacture white goods and how we can access that as and when required.

Question: I might just quickly, are there any differences between obviously metropolitan  areas in accessing things and regional areas?

Russell Zimmerman: Well I'm pleased you asked that question because in actual fact, I  saw a photograph and I'm going to say it was in Coonabarabran, but I'm not absolutely  certain of the place, and there where bucket loads of stock everywhere in that store. So  yes, obviously regional areas in many cases haven't been affected as much. But to answer  your question fully, yes there are pockets that are worse than others, and it depends upon  individual states and suburban areas.

Elizabeth de Somer: Can I answer that? From the perspective of medicines, there is the  community service obligation government supported that requires medicines to be  restocked within 24 hours for all PBS medicines. So there are no shortages of medicines.

Karen Andrews: Great, thank you very much.





Media Contact: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

