JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN



SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE

SENATOR FOR THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  THURSDAY, 17 DECEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Update.

JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: Any improvement in the budget and in the  economy is welcome but we need some perspective here. The economy is a bit  stronger than many had feared but it's still quite a lot weaker than we need it to be.  Much of the improvement today is a function of the reopening of state economies and  the higher than expected iron ore prices than in the budget. Despite some slightly better  figures today, the defining features of this budget update are still record deficits, a  record trillion dollars of debt, weaker wages growth, almost a million unemployed,  another 90,000 Australians still expected to join the unemployment queues by March,  and unacceptably high unemployment for some years yet. The economy is recovering  but it isn't rebounding strongly enough or quickly enough for the 2.2 million Australians  who still don't have a job or can't find the hours that they need to support their loved  ones.

In the Treasurer's flurry of slogans and self-congratulation, he seems to have forgotten  those Australians who still don't have enough work. Scott Morrison's quiet Australians  have become millions of invisible Australians. This Government seems incapable of  understanding what life is like for those 2.2 million Australians who are unemployed or  underemployed in the economy today. Without a plan for unemployment and  underemployment, today's mid-year budget update is yet another marketing exercise  which doesn't do enough to ensure that people can get ahead in the recovery and that  people aren't left behind.

Instead of a proper jobs plan we have a festival of waste, rorts, and favours, and a

Government which is using this pandemic as an excuse to cut wages, cut super, and  wind back important consumer protections. You have to be pretty messed up  ideologically to see the even weaker wages growth in this mid-year update and think  that the solution is more pay cuts, but that's what this Government is embarking on as  we speak.

This is especially damaging when you consider that despite the welcome improvement  in the budget and the economy, there is still a lot of uncertainty that Australians will  have to deal with into 2021. Obviously, being able to limit the spread of the virus is  crucial, as is the deployment of the vaccine, but also the withdrawal of important  government support will be a big factor, as will be people's willingness to spend down  some of the savings that they've accumulated over the course of this year. There's a lot  of uncertainty around China, and the broader global scene is very difficult and will  remain so for some time. This mid-year budget update doesn't give Australians a sense  of the costs and consequences of what we're seeing in the relationship with China in  particular.

This recovery will only be worth the sacrifices that Australians have made over the  course of the last year if more Australians can actually participate in that recovery. Our  defining purpose here needs to be to make sure that as the recovery in the economy  continues, that more and more Australians have a slice of the action, that more and  more Australians can get back to work, that they can find the hours that they need to  support their families and put food on the table. This is what a recovery should really be  about. It's not about just numbers on a page. It's about millions of Australians who can't  get ahead and who are at risk of being left behind if the Government continues down  this path that they're on of pay cuts, super cuts and the weakening of consumer  protections.

It is crucially important that as we contemplate this recovery from the worst recession  since the Great Depression, it can't be another missed opportunity to deal with issues  which have been in the economy for so long like insecure work, stagnant wages, and  weak business investment, all of these issues which were slowing the economy even  before COVID-19. We will just go back to that if the Government continues down their  ideological path. The people of Australia deserve better. We need them to play a more  meaningful role in the recovery of this economy.

I'll throw to Katy and then we'll take your questions.

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE: Thanks, Jim.  I'll just make a few additional comments to what Jim said. It's been quite a year.

This time last year, I don't think we could have imagined we'd be coming in and listening  to a Government saying that a deficit in the order of $197 billion is a good outcome. I

think it shows the magnitude of the job ahead. But there's still combined deficits in the  order of $456 billion across the forward estimates. We are going to see debt exceed a  trillion dollars. The deficit next year is going to be twice as big as last year. I think with  the books in in that sort of shape it becomes even more important that the quality of the  government spend is top notch, and I guess that's the thing we'll be focusing on.  Whether the dollars spent actually delivers an outcome for people. Whether it's creating  jobs, helping people to put food on the table, looking after businesses that are doing it  tough. And I don't think based on this Government's record we convinced of that.

This update has, of course, accounted for Robodebt, which I think is probably the single  biggest policy failure of any government ever. Where they essentially ran a scam and  they hounded vulnerable Australians into paying back money that many of them,  thousands of them, did not owe to the Government. And not only they did this they did  this year after year despite knowing that that policy had questions raised about it  through the AAT and things like that. $1.2 billion on Robodebt, including in this budget  update the damages component for that. We've seen hundreds of millions of dollars  spent on government advertising. This year will be probably the biggest year on  government advertising. That's hundreds of thousands of dollars a day. Some of that  flowing to a Liberal Party aligned firms who have done pretty well out of the COVID-19  period.

Consultant and contractor spend, going through the roof completely out of control if you  look at it. Go and have a look at AusTender. Every day, millions of dollars flying out by  agencies, you know, in seemingly unlimited spend. We've seen billions of dollars that  are going to be spent fixing the second-rate NBN. We've got about $8 billion in specially  established funds to pork-barrel Scott Morrison all the way to the next election, making  SportsRorts seem almost insignificant. We could go on - the COVID Commission - $5  million. The money is going flying out the door. I think it's fair to say the splash of cash  for friends of Scott Morrison, for mates, or to win seats is, it's pretty clear. But I think  there is, what's not in this document for the rest of us and that speaks volumes about  this Government. So, look at the issue with aged care. This is not a failure of a system  brought on by COVID-19, the failure of the system in aged care was highlighted by  COVID-19 but it's seven years of neglect from this Government. They know what they  have to do in terms of trying to fix this system, and they offer 10,000 new home care  places. 100,000 on the waiting list, 30,000 people who have died waiting for care. That  speaks volumes that there isn't a proper plan in place to fix this, to fix what is a clearly  broken system. JobSeeker, I guess that's the other big glaring omission in this. This  Government has had time after time, update after update, to fix the problem of  adequacy of JobSeeker. There is 1.5 million Australians relying on that payment. This  Government is happy to kick the can down the road. Probably into next year sometime,  it will be next year sometime, before you can give people certainty on that. $40 a day for  a million and a half Australians that's what they're being told for Christmas this year  from Scott Morrison.



The Finance Minister spoke in his comments about how they're working to keep  Australians safe and secure.

Well, I'd say those millions of Australians, those who are unemployed, underemployed,  those who are relying on income support, those who are relying on JobKeeper, millions  of Australians who aren't going to feel safe and secure in the lead up to Christmas. This  Government had the opportunity to fix some of these major problems. And they've  squibbed it in this Budget update, and they've kicked the can down the road. They've  left vulnerable Australians millions of them, worried about what next few means for  them.

CHALMERS: Over to you.

JOURNALIST: You've criticised the size of the deficits, and so forth, yet the only thing  that has made any real impact on the deficit today is the faster-than-anticipated drop off  in JobKeeper. At the same time you're talking about how cruel it is to wind up  JobKeeper and JobSeeker. Should we have higher deficits to continue these  payments? Which one is it?

CHALMERS: No, we've been consistent throughout. What matters here is not just the  level of spending, or the level level of debt and deficit, but the quality of it. The quality of  that spending matters most. As Katy ran through more eloquently than I a moment ago,  this is a Government which has engaged in a festival of waste, rorts, and favours which  has seen a billion dollar Robodebt settlement, paying 10 times the ticket price for land  owned by a Liberal Party donor, the list goes on and on. All of this waste and all of  these rorts has meant that the quality of spending has not been what it should be.  They've racked up a trillion dollars in debt and they don't have enough jobs to show for  it. The better quality the spending, the more likely that is to lead to employment, and  that's been our central focus since day one of this crisis. We welcome the fact that  hundreds of thousands of people have maintained the connection with their employer  because of JobKeeper. That's the entire reason we suggested it in the first place. It's  why we didn't rub the Government's nose in it when they initially said that it was a bad  idea and then came around to our view. We thought that was a good outcome for the  country. When our counterparts talk about those people who have been helped by  JobKeeper we think that's a good thing. That's why we wanted those wage subsidies in  the first place. It doesn't mean we can't say that there have been people slip through the  cracks. There are people who've been left behind. There have been casuals not catered  for, as you know, and other workers needlessly excluded from what has otherwise been  a good step. It comes down to the quality of the spend. We measure that quality and  effectiveness by what it means for jobs. The Government has racked up a trillion dollars  of debt but still almost a million people are unemployed, and more than two million  unemployed or underemployed.



JOURNALIST: Labor is working through its policy agenda for the next election. This  may be the last MYEFO before that election. How does close to $300 billion in deficits  affect how you put together your policy agenda together?

CHALMERS: We need to look for bang for buck. The defining feature of the work that  Katy and I do together is how we can ensure that every dollar we commit to makes a  meaningful difference to the key challenges we have in our society and in our economy.  We measure that effectiveness and bang for buck by what it means for employment,  getting people back into work, making sure that people can find the hours that they  need to provide for the people they care for. There has always been a responsibility on  both of the parties in the parliament to get value for money. Our argument is that the  Government has failed on that front in recent times because of all that waste, rorts, and  favours for mates. If every cent the Government had proposed had gone towards our  key economic challenges, then that would be a good thing. Our job is to demonstrate  that we can do a better job with public money, spend it more effectively, and invest it  more effectively in the future so that we can create good, well paid, secure jobs in the  future. That's our mission. We are really focused on that, on jobs, wages, and living  standards. That's core business for the Labor Party. It will be in all of our policies  between now and the election.

JOURNALIST: Your colleague talked about the adequacy of JobSeeker. I'm taking it,  Senator, that you think it should remain where it is with the Coronavirus supplement.  Would that be an unfair conclusion?

GALLAGHER: What we've been saying and we've been saying for some months that  the Government has to deal with the issue of adequacy through permanent increase.  We have not put dollar figure on that yet ...

JOURNALIST: Your colleague talked about the adequacy of JobSeeker. I'm taking it,  Senator, that you think it should remain where it is with the Coronavirus supplement.  Would that be an unfair conclusion?

GALLAGHER: Well, no, because we've given the Government the room, with access to  the treasury and all the information that they have. We've given them the space to come  up with what a permanent figure should be. If they choose not to do so, we'll go through  our processes in the lead up to the election. And I think we'll certainly have a view on it  as part of that. But, you know, this is the Government that has kicked the can down the  road for over a year on this issue. They are determined not to deal with the adequacy  issue for people on NewStart. And it says everything about this Prime Minister that he  can find money for a whole range of other things. But for the most vulnerable, for those  living on the lowest income, he's decided he has to keep monitoring the situation before  he comes up with something and has only given them three months from now until they

revert back to forty dollars a day and there is no other budget update for which to  increase. The next opportunity is through the budget. People on NewStart deserve  better than that from this Prime Minister and they haven't been given it and we've given  him the room to come back, do the proper job and come back with what an adequate  figure for a permanent increase should be

JOURNALIST: Jim, do you think the Government's relying too heavily on iron ore  prices?

CHALMERS: It's a big part of the story today. True to form, the Treasurer wants you to  believe that the higher than expected prices for iron ore, or the reopening of the  Victorian economy, is somehow his doing. He shouldn't take credit for that. We want to  see strong prices for commodities. It is really important for our budget. It has been for as  long as I've been around. We welcome the fact that our iron ore is fetching a higher than  expected price in global markets. That's a good thing and it's helped the budget out on  this occasion. It shows how important it is to get behind our exporters who employ a lot  of people and generate a lot of wealth for this country. Iron ore is just one example of  that. But the budget has improved slightly because of some of those changes in  commodity prices and also the reopening of state economies again. That's a welcome  thing but we need a bit of perspective. As Katy said a moment ago, it's hard to describe  a deficit of a couple of hundred billion as a good outcome for the country. There's a lot  of work to do in the budget and in the economy. I'm concerned that the Treasurer is  engaged in his usual sloganeering and self-congratulation rather than coming clean with  the Australian people about what he plans to do about our economic and budget  challenges.

JOURNALIST: What do you make of the assumptions that there will outbreaks but that  there'll be contained, a vaccine in March and fully implemented by the end of next year,  no state border restrictions? Do you think they're overly optimistic?

CHALMERS: It remains to be seen. Those were the assumptions that they printed a  couple of months ago as well. In relation to the health outcomes, we're on Team  Australia in that we want the vaccine deployed as quickly as possible. We want to make  sure that we can limit the spread of this pandemic. Ideally we'd get that done as soon as  possible. It remains to be seen whether those assumptions are too optimistic. Ideally  we'd get that happening as soon as possible. It does need to be pointed out that most  countries have half a dozen options when it comes to vaccines; we have were left a little  short of that, and we're not exactly at the front of the queue when it comes to the  deployment of the vaccine. That's a bit troubling as well. We're worried that the  Government was a bit slow off the mark in securing some of these deals. Having said all  that, we want as many people as possible vaccinated as soon as possible. If we do that,  that will have an economic dividend too.

JOURNALIST: Jim and Katy, do you think it's reasonable for the Government, once  unemployment's comfortably below 6 per cent, which we got a bit more information on  today, to then start to focus on stabilising the debt? Is that a reasonable course that  they're charging or is it too slow or-?

CHALMERS: A couple of things about that John, and Katy might want to add to it. We  don't think they're ambitious enough when it comes to unemployment. We think that  having an unemployment target just under 6 per cent means that a lot of people are left  out and left behind. Unemployment, even at that level, would be substantially higher  than what we would consider to be acceptable. We share the Governor of the Reserve  Bank's view that full employment is much lower than that, and we think that  governments should be doing what they can to work towards full employment. The  Government's been insufficiently ambitious on that front. We note that the new  unemployment forecasts now do have unemployment lower than their target where they  said they would start budget repair. If that's the case, then the Government needs to  start identifying for people what those cuts are going to be. If that's their fiscal strategy,  and they're forecasting that before the end of the forward estimates, they owe it to the  Australian people before the election to tell people what they're going to cut. From our  point of view, the Government will need support for some time. That's a point made by  the Reserve Bank, the OECD and others. The Government will need ongoing support  because the labour market is weaker than we want it to be. I'm not sure the Government  understands that.

Thanks very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACTS:  MEGAN LANE (CHALMERS) 0424 437 949  PATRICK CRONAN (GALLAGHER) 0432 758 224

