UNOFFICIAL





The Hon Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Development

Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment

The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

Friday 11 September 2020

RESTARTING AUSTRALIA’S BUSINESS EVENTS SECTOR

Thousands of jobs across the tourism and hospitality industry will be backed through a $50  million injection to help restart Australia’s vital business events sector.

Businesses will be encouraged to attend events, trade shows and conferences within Australia  through grants to help cover the costs associated with exhibiting such as the hire of exhibition  spaces, the design and manufacture of displays, travel and accommodation.

Prime Minister Scott Morrison said Australia’s lucrative $36 billion business events sector had  virtually ground to a halt during the COVID-19 crisis.

“Getting business events up and running again will be a critical part of the recovery of our  tourism industry, but will also have huge flow-on effects through the entire economy,” Prime  Minister Morrison said.

“This is not only about supporting events companies and venues, but will also be a shot in the  arm for a broad range of businesses and the people they employ - whether it’s accommodation  providers, those who build exhibitions, caterers, cleaners or those offering audio-visual  services.”



Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Michael McCormack said the program would provide opportunities and encourage businesses  from regional Australia to attend events in their own backyard.

“With many international trade shows out of reach for the time being, making it less expensive  and easier for regional businesses to attend events in Australia will also present new  opportunities to connect with and secure new customers,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“Business events encourage domestic travel and the more events we can lock in, the more  people we can get flowing through our airports, on planes and staying in hotels around the  country.”

Federal Tourism Minister Simon Birmingham said the sector had been hit hard during the  COVID-19 pandemic with around 95 per cent of business events for 2020 either cancelled or  postponed.

“Our business events sector is doing it incredibly tough at present and getting events put back  into the calendar will help this key part of our tourism industry which supports around 230 000  jobs turn the corner,” Minister Birmingham said.

“By incentivising attendance by exhibitors this should give event companies and organisers  across Australia the confidence they need to move ahead with the planning of business  events.”

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said the investment would also  make businesses more resilient.

“Many Australian businesses are looking to each other to strengthen their supply chains, to  prevent the shocks they experienced at the start of the COVID-19 pandemic,” Minister Andrews  said.

“Connecting businesses through trade shows and conferences will help unlock widespread  collaboration and boost domestic capability by creating and expanding local supply chains.”

Under the Business Events Exhibitor Grants program, Australian businesses exhibiting at an  approved business meeting, convention, conference and incentives event in 2021 will be able  to apply for upfront grants to cover up to 50 per cent of their costs ($10,000 - $250,000).

This initiative is part of the Morrison-McCormack Government’s $1 billion COVID-19 Relief and  Recovery Fund, which is supporting regions, communities and industry sectors severely affected  by the COVID-19 pandemic.

For more information, go to: www.austrade.gov.au/australian/tourism/tourism-and-business/grants.



Media Contacts  Prime Minister’s office: 02 6277 7744  Deputy Prime Minister’s office: Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Minister Birmingham’s office: Benn Ayre 0428 342 325  Minister Andrews’ office: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846

