





8 October 2020

MEDIA RELEASE

Government’s commitment to agriculture's   $100 billion goal must deliver

The National Farmers’ Federation says the Government’s release of a plan to guide  agriculture’s growth is a major boost for the industry’s goal to tally $100 billion by 2030.

"It is very pleasing that this week the Government has reiterated its commitment to a  longstanding ask from the farm sector to deliver a plan that maps the Government’s role  in ensuring agriculture reaches its potential," NFF President Fiona Simson said.

The Ag2030 plan identifies priorities across seven key areas of action, which are integral  to agriculture’s accelerated prosperity and which complement the NFF’s 2030 Roadmap.

"The NFF's target of $100 billion in farm gate value by 2030 is a bold but an achievable  one if industry and government and other stakeholders like the RDC sector work  together.

"It incredibly important that this support is demonstrated and properly resourced by the  relevant Government portfolios," Ms Simson said.

"There’s no doubt that $100 billion won’t come easily and it will need a Team Agriculture  effort from farmers, the supply chain, the corporate sector, the research fraternity and  Government."

Ms Simson said supercharging agriculture’s growth had gained a new urgency with the  economic fall out of the COVID-19 pandemic.

"Farmers are poised to put their foot down and power Australia’s COVID-19 recovery.

"They must have the policy settings, investment regime and innovation framework to  accelerate growth and that’s where the Government commitment and the active  participation in the Roadmap comes in."

"The NFF looks forward to working with Minister Littleproud and the Department of  Agriculture, Water and the Environment on ensuring the Ag2030 plan’s KPIs are





delivered on.

"We acknowledge the resources in the Department already dedicated to the $100 billion  target and expect that these resources will increase as the implementation of the plan  gains momentum.

"Each year, the NFF reports on the progress towards $100 billion, against the targets set  out in the 2030 Roadmap.  It’s essential that there is similar reporting against the  identified deliverables within the Government’s plan. We must all be accountable for our  part in the task to achieve $100 billion by 2030," Ms Simson said.







Laureta Wallace

GM, Media & Communications  0408 448 250  lwallace@nff.org.au

































VISIT OUR MEDIA  CENTRE

