







COTA Australia is the peak policy development, advocacy and representation organisation for older Australians,

representing COTAs in every State and Territory and through them over 500,000 older Australians.

MEDIA RELEASE                   19 March 2020

COVID-19 Fact Sheet for Older Australians provides authoritative advice

to promote clarity and avoid confusion for those at risk

Council on the Ageing (COTA) Australia and the Australian Government today released an information

resource to give specific information to older Australians and a clear place to find practical information

and strategies for mitigating the impact of COVID-19 on vulnerable populations.



COTA Australia Chief Executive, Ian Yates, said many older people are understandably anxious about

COVID-19 (Coronavirus) and need clear, simple information about the risks and precautions they

should take, while at the same time continuing to live their lives as normally as possible.



“People over 60 years, or Indigenous populations over 50 years, are at a higher risk of serious illness

caused by COVID-19. Indeed, the highest rate of fatalities are amongst older people, especially people

who already have an underlying serious health condition, such as heart or lung diseases, or those who

may have a weakened immune system.”



“However, that does not mean life should stop or people should panic. For example, the best medical

advice is that you should continue to safely walk your dog outside, ensuring you remain at least 1.5m

away from others, and not touching surfaces that others may have touched, and cleaning your hands

properly when you get home. Indeed, keeping up physical fitness is important to maintaining health

and wellbeing.”



COTA Australia has launched cota.org.au/covid19 as a portal of information that will provide links to

trusted sources of information from various official Government resources. In addition, COTA will try

to provide relevant information about day-to-day living such as updates on initiatives by local

supermarkets as they become known.



“We thank the Government for codesigning a clear fact sheet for older Australians with COTA

Australia. We hope our web page’s additional information will help older Australians to get additional

accurate information relevant to them.”



“One area the Fact Sheet includes thanks to the work of ScamWatch.gov.au is to remind older

Australians that sadly there are scams occurring. COTA will also provide as up to date information as

we can about the initiatives of supermarkets to ensure older Australians have access to basic

necessities and relevant reminders on consumer laws for people who have been forced to cancel

tickets and holidays.”



Mr Yates said the website information would be continually updated as new information becomes

available.



Go to URL: www.cota.org.au/covid19



Media contact: Ian Yates 0418 835 439; Hannah Craft 0423 377 965



