

THE HON SUSSAN LEY MP  MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT

SENATOR DR SAM McMAHON   SENATOR FOR THE NORTHERN TERRITORY

MEDIA RELEASE



21 December 2020  KAKADU TOURISM FACELIFT UNDERWAY

As the Top End heads in to the wet season, Kakadu National Park is gearing up for the rejuvenation of  the park.   As soon as the rains allow, work will commence on raising the Jim Jim Creek Crossing by 0.75 metres to  enable safe access to Twin Falls.

The build, estimated to take four to six weeks has received formal consent by the relevant Traditional  Owners as nominated by the Northern Land Council, along with formal approval from the Kakadu Board  of Management, and certification received from the NT Aboriginal Areas Protection Authority.

“The Morrison Government is investing $276 million in the future of Kakadu and this is one of many  projects that will help rejuvenate the Park for generations to come,” Minister Ley said.

“We are working with Traditional Owners, Tourism organisations and the NT Government to ensure that  Kakadu remains both a moving cultural experience and one of the world’s most stunning tourism  destinations.

“At the same time we are creating local jobs and helping the local economy.”

Kakadu National Park is also exploring options to enable a period of limited access for visitors to the  Twin Falls escarpment walk during 2021 as part of the initiative to support the tourism industry’s  recovery from the impacts of COVID-19.

Parks Australia will also be working with Traditional Owners and contractors to design and construct an  access solution that enables safe and culturally appropriate long-term access into the gorge. The gorge  will remain closed to visitors during this period.

Senator for the Northern Territory, Dr Sam McMahon, said that the Morrison Government was getting  on with the job of working with stakeholders and delivering outcomes.

“The future of Kakadu will play a vital role in the future of Australia’s tourism economy as it emerges  from COVID 19 in the years ahead,” Senator McMahon said.

“The Morrison Government is getting on with the job of investing in that future and investing in  Northern Territory jobs.”

With plenty more updates to come in the new year, the implementation of the Growing Tourism in  Kakadu Masterplan will be welcome support for the region’s economy and local communities.

For more information visit www.parksaustralia.gov.au/kakadu/growing-tourism-in-kakadu/

ENDS   Environment Minister’s office:                   John Brady 0427 867 638                                                                            Ben Flores  0448 463 094



Senator McMahon’s office:                       Kris Civitarese 0418 220 411

