

JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC BRISBANE DRIVE

MONDAY, 23 NOVEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Superannuation Guarantee; Wages; Robodebt; JobKeeper.



STEVE AUSTIN, HOST: Let's go to Labor's Jim Chalmers. He's the Shadow

Treasury spokesperson. Jim Chalmers, good afternoon.



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: Good afternoon Steve.



AUSTIN: Have you read the report?



CHALMERS: I've been through it. There's 600-and-something pages, about

125 of those are technical appendices. I've been through it. I've read the

important bits.



AUSTIN: Read the important bits, alright. According to the report the weight of

evidence suggests an increase in the superannuation guarantee rate will result

in lower wages growth, impacting standards of living. So does this mean the

Federal Government can now legitimately say we're not going to do the

planned increase in the superannuation guarantee next year?



CHALMERS: I think that's certainly what they want to do. They want to cut the

legislated increases. There's legislation at the moment that says it goes up by

half a percentage point five times, up from 9.5 per cent to 12 per cent. We've

said, for some time, including for the four months that they've been sitting on

this report before they released it, that our worry is that it's a bit of a stalking

horse to cut people's super. Unfortunately when you listen to what the

Government has said about it since it's been released, I think that's probably

the case.



AUSTIN: Now that you've read the report, what's Labor's position on it?



CHALMERS: First of all, the report is much broader than this issue. I wouldn't

mind saying that there are useful elements of the report. The report says that

compulsory super is a very important part of the system; there are other useful

facts and figures when it comes to the Aged Pension. I want to make it clear to

your listeners that it's not like every word on every page is rubbish. I want to

thank the reviewers, including someone who is known to me, Mike Callaghan,

who led the report's efforts. The key conclusion that you introduced this

conversation with, we think that they've got that wrong. What the Government

claims and what others who want to cut super claim is that if you freeze

superannuation, you'll get this much stronger wages growth and that the money

that was going to go into super will go into wages instead. The problem with

that argument is the last time that this Government froze superannuation, the

six years since then have seen some of the lowest wages growth we've ever

had on record. Compared to the six years before that super freeze, wages were

growing 3.3 per cent before the super freeze, and 2.1 per cent after the super

freeze. Take all the ideology out of it; take all the politics out of it; and just look

for a moment at what actually happened after the last time this Liberal

Government cut the superannuation guarantee. What happened was wages

growth actually weakened rather than strengthened. We think we're within our

rights to point that out. That's one of the reasons why we think that this

argument is wrong, and why we support superannuation going to 12 per cent

as it's legislated to do.



AUSTIN: You are within your rights to point it out, but this time it's different, isn't

it, because of the pandemic which has occurred all year. Small and medium

businesses will be the ones particularly who have to pay the increased rate to

their employees, to the superannuation guarantee? You've also been asking, I

think, for continued support for small business into the new year. Is it

reasonable to do both? I mean, it seems that because the pandemic has

changed the parameters, Jim Chalmers, that that money which businesses

need to survive will now be compulsorily going to employee superannuation?



CHALMERS: We have demonstrated in many conversations I've had with you,

Steve, and over the last 18 months or so in particular, that we are big

supporters of small business. In many cases we've been front-running the

Government when it comes to small business support. Where this argument

falls over is the Government wants people to believe that the very same

business that can't possibly afford a half a percentage point increase in the

super guarantee, can afford to pay strong wage increases. They can't have it

both ways. They can't make that argument simultaneously -



AUSTIN: It seems to me, Jim Chalmers, that the question isn't answered yet.

We won't actually know the answer to that until March/April next year when

we'll see how many zombie companies are being artificially sustained?



CHALMERS: Nobody's disputing that there's lots of uncertainty in the

economy. Times are difficult for many businesses and we will see businesses

fall over, particularly when some of the Government's support is withdrawn, in

my view, prematurely. Nobody is quibbling with that. The issue is this: the main

reason the Government says that they want to cut superannuation is because

they say that that will lead to stronger wage outcomes. We're pointing out that

last time when they made the exact same claim, when they froze

superannuation six years ago, we got instead some of the lowest wages growth

on record. During that period, and this is what really bells the cat - and I think,

ends the argument in this regard at least - is that the Finance Minister at the

time admitted on TV that weak wages growth was a “deliberate design feature”

of their economic policy. We have here a policy that they won't tell us about yet

to cut people's super, but there's nowhere near any kind of policy to boost

people's wages. It's wages growth that has been a problem in the economy,

even before COVID-19.



AUSTIN: They just saved 700,000 jobs. I've just been reading the RBA's report

on how JobKeeper did that today. They say at a national level, JobKeeper

prevented at least 700,000 additional employment relationships being lost in

the short term, quote unquote. I mean they just saved 700,000 jobs. Because of

COVID-19 the parameters of everything, the traditional market behaviours and

consumer behaviours, Jim Chalmers, have changed. Small business relies on

consumer behaviour, and it's very difficult now for small businesses as I

understand it. They're really looking to that March/April time next year saying,

I'm not sure if I'm going to survive.



CHALMERS: Two things about that. First of all, we celebrate the 700,000 jobs

that were saved by JobKeeper if that number turns out to be right -



AUSTIN: That's the RBA's figure, it's not the Federal Government's figure. It's

the RBA's figure -



CHALMERS: Correct, and I read that earlier on as well. We probably had the

same lunchtime reading by the sounds of it, as you picked through a salad and

I picked through something less healthy -



AUSTIN: A tuna sandwich in my case.



CHALMERS: you’ve stopped putting those photos up! Anyway, we celebrate

that Steve. That is precisely the reason we proposed those wage subsidies,

and why we didn't rub the Government's nose in it when they came around to

our view, having initially resisted it. That's a good thing. We want those

hundreds of thousands of jobs saved. We wanted more saved, and we were

disappointed that more weren't saved. On the issue of small business, yes, as

I've already said, things are difficult for small business but we are talking about

a very important legislated increase to the superannuation guarantee. It's pretty

modest but will make a big difference to people's retirement, take pressure off

the Aged Pension, and frankly this is not about the report's authors and

certainly not about small business people’s motives; it's about the

Government's motives. They've been trying to come after super for the full

seven-plus years of this Government and they're now using this pandemic as

an excuse to do so.



AUSTIN: Alright, you've made that point but the Government doesn't pay it;

employers pay it. Let me give you a message from someone who's listening:

"It's very likely, we've already discussed how we'll handle it at my workplace.

Our intention is to offset the super increase against what we forecasted for

remuneration reviews next year. There's only a limited budget. If budgeting 2

per cent for wage increases, 1.5 per cent will go to wages and 0.5 to the

superannuation increase." Employers have to pay this. The Federal

Government doesn't pay this. It's employers that pay it, Jim Chalmers.



CHALMERS: First of all, there is a cost for the Federal Government but I do

accept your point that it is primarily something that businesses do. There will be

businesses in different situations and there will quite probably be a wide

variance of how people will deal with it. I'm not quibbling with that small

business person, but the point that I'm making is the experience that we

actually lived through before COVID showed up and during COVID, is that the

claims that after the super guarantee was frozen that all of a sudden they would

pay the same amount in wages or a similar amount in wages, that didn't turn

out to be true. It would be unusual in the extreme for people to fall for the

Government's argument that all of a sudden something that hasn't happened

for the last six years would miraculously happen after they froze the SG this

time.



AUSTIN: COVID-19 is the trigger for that unusual and extreme scenario?



CHALMERS: But it's the Government that's saying things are going to go back

to normal next year. Again you can't have it both ways. This is a partisan point

that you expect me to make Steve, but my view is they've been thinking about

doing this for a long time, well I actually know that they've been thinking about

doing this for a long time, then along comes COVID and here’s the excuse.

They will come after it in the May budget. I think your listeners and the

Australian community more broadly needs to know that the difference between

what the Government wants to do and what Labor wants to do will make tens of

thousands of dollars difference to their retirement.



AUSTIN: My guest is Jim Chalmers, Labor's Shadow Treasury spokesperson.

Also the federal Member for Rankin here in Brisbane. Before I let you go, Jim

Chalmers, I just want to harken back to the Robodebt debacle of last week as it

reached its zenith, or possibly final stage. Who should be held responsible for

that Robodebt debacle and the payout that has to be now made, once again



coming from the taxpayers' pocket to innocent people who were pursued

wrongly and illegally as it turns out by the Federal Government? Who should be

held responsible for that?



CHALMERS: There's a handful of ministers, but I think principally the Prime

Minister.



AUSTIN: Why?



CHALMERS: I read to you here the last time we had a conversation that he

was the one who put out the press release in the first half of 2015, saying that

he'd come up with a new way to recover these debts and it would mean billions

of dollars not paid out to people. He was crowing about being the architect of it

then. The reason no minister has hit the fence Steve is because the main

person responsible here is the Prime Minister himself. He's not going to sack

himself. It makes it harder for him to sack anyone else, whether it's Stuart

Robert, or Alan Tudge, Christian Porter or all the other ministers that have been

involved in what is the biggest social security scandal in our lifetime.



AUSTIN: Jim Chalmers thanks for your time.



CHALMERS: Thanks so much, Steve.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.









