

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING  MEMBER FOR SYDNEY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS ALAN JONES SHOW  THURSDAY, 17 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Border closures; Support for farmers; COVID-19.

ALAN JONES, HOST: Well, let's go to the female panel. Tanya Plibersek, the former  Deputy Leader of the Labor Party and Amanda Stoker, a rising star in the Liberal Party.  Look before we get started we've got a little picture, Tanya if you don't mind and Amanda.  Amanda was sort of doing her Parliamentary work from home today and someone has  sent us a little picture, Have a look at this. This is the way you work from home. Have we  got this picture? I think we have somewhere, I hope. It's coming up somewhere here, there  we are. Here we are. Here we are. So the kids, the kids are giving mum a bit of a  massage. That's the way to do it. That's the way to do it. Well, let's go back to Tanya and  Amanda. Tanya, you saw Dr Cerutti. What do you make of all that stuff?

TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Oh look,  on face value Alan, it looks very silly really. He's obviously a doctor that is much in demand  both in Queensland and New South Wales. I can't explain -

JONES: No you can't explain.

PLIBERSEK: - can't explain why those difficulties were thrown in his way, but I do, you  know you and I don't agree on this. I do believe that the Premiers who have got these hard  borders are doing it for the best reasons. They want to keep their people safe and it really  is important when we've got anomalies like this that we use common sense.

JONES: Tanya can I just repeat to you, international experts, Nobel Prize winners say  there is no justification for lockdowns. But we're not going to waste our time debating that  tonight, you and I disagree, but Amanda, quick word on Dr. Cerutti before we go to other  things.

SENATOR AMANDA STOKER: Look this just exposes the impracticality, the callousness,  the heartlessness and the craven fear-driven politics that lie behind the Queensland border  closures. There is no sensible medical evidence to justify the closure of Queensland's  borders in this way and it exposes what it's all about. And it's all about making  Queenslanders scared enough that they stay with -

JONES: That's correct.



STOKER: - Queensland Labor at the next election and it is just so wrong. The only way to  fix it is the change the government.

JONES: That is, that is true. Let me just say what I believe the -

PLIBERSEK: Can I ask Alan, does Amanda think it's wrong for the South Australian and  the Tasmanian borders to be closed as well?

JONES: Well I do.

PLIBERSEK: Or is it just the Labor states?

JONES: No no no, it's not just the Labor states. See what's happening -

PLIBERSEK: I'm asking Amanda.

JONES: No.

PLIBERSEK: I'm asking Amanda.

JONES: Amanda?

STOKER: Look I think it is wrong to get a disproportionate arrangement between the  economic and the social and the physical cost. There is no evidence to suggest that in the  Queensland scenario, I don't speak for other states, but in the Queensland scenario, all the  evidence says that the awy to deal with this -

JONES: I'm tired of it.

STOKER: - the way to deal with this is containment, testing and tracing. That is the recipe.

JONES: Amanda and Tanya, I'm tired of citing international experts who say that  lockdowns have no justification, but I will just make one point, my point here. I think the  agenda here is both Liberal and Labor, there's no difference, frighten the hell out of people,  make them believe that this thing is going to kill you, and then when you live you think "My  God, aren’t I lucky I've got a premier like this. They've kept me alive". Can I go to  something which is really important because amidst this mess, to both of you I say and  Tanya you first, there are farmers in a bumper season who may not be able to take off their  crops because of the border closures. They can't get work. Tanya, should HSC students  be given a discount on the HECS if they go out and work for a farmer?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I'm happy to consider anything that would help our farmers at a time  like this Alan. They are desperate for labour and I think all options should be on the table. I  am a bit worried about the sort of HECS debts that kids have started to accrue.

JONES: Absolutely.

PLIBERSEK: The legislation that's before the parliament at the moment - an ordinary Arts  degree would cost you $58,000 and you think about those kids who are graduating, they're  trying to save money for a deposit for a home. It's terrible. We're going down the American  path with huge student debt and we should avoid that.



JONES: Well, I agree with that. The unpaid HECS debt in Australia today is approaching  70 billion. Amanda to you. The number of available overseas workers has plunged from  140,000 to 70,000 for obvious reasons. There are 7,000 jobs available in WA alone. Now if  this goes on, they won't be able to get food on the table at Christmas, or whatever stuff is  left in the supermarkets will escalate in price which puts further pressure on the cost of  living. Can't a decision be made immediately rather than have another committee, a  migration committee, to look at this. Amanda?

STOKER: All of this still comes down to borders, doesn't it? I mean, we have Australians  who are out of work, we have Australians who need jobs, and we have Australian growers  who need help to pick their produce. Let's get serious here. There's Australians who need  work, let's get them to the work.

JONES: I mean, I just don't, I can't understand it. See, what I argue is the prisoners, white  collar criminals in jail, why don't we give them a discount on their sentences if they go out  and help with the harvest? I would have thought, it certainly makes sense one way or  another. Just one quick one to both of you who are mothers and wives and parents and so  on. What do you make of this business now in Melbourne. There's going to be a hard  border around Melbourne, five million people, and they've made it quite clear that they're  going to go to parks and caravan parks and boat ramps and pubs and clubs and  restaurants to really catch anyone who goes through this border. Does this sound like  Australia, Tanya Plibersek?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I think regional communities have very mixed feelings Alan because  they want the economic activity that comes from visitors, but they're also worried that if  they're COVID free and life is back to normal and they can go out and they can enjoy  themselves and they can socialise, that if they get one person who visits town and  suddenly you've got a hotspot or a cluster that really, that really throws a spanner in the  works.

JONES: But in 99 per cent of these cases, as I say to you Tanya, are mild and 99.7  recover. Amanda, you're a lawyer. You're a lawyer. You heard that lawyer from Victoria  say that the curfew may have no legal validity. Why doesn't the Commonwealth  government, the federal government test some of these things in the High Court?

STOKER: Look I think there is a real question about whether or not the Commonwealth  would have standing in relation to those curfews, but there is a real political problem here  that needs to be addressed. Victorians are paying the price of having a government that's  good at politics, but not very good at governing. That's why they botched hotel quarantine.  The entire state is paying the price right down to not being able to walk their dog of a  nighttime because you know, the virus only comes out during the day not in the night time.  That's just bizarre.

JONES: Let me just amplify that point. Michael Wyles is the QC. He says the curfew has  been imposed for purpose that was never authorised under state law because public  health legislation permits directions to be made by Health officials to protect public health.  The Chief Health Officer, Professor Sutton said, he did not seek a curfew. Andrews said  the measure had been about quote "enforcement". So the Wyles QC opinion says  assisting law enforcement is not a permissible basis for emergency health orders and  Wyles says there is no legal basis for the curfew. It is invalid and everyone could ignore it  because the direction is not, according to what Sutton said yesterday, for the purpose of

eliminating or reducing the risk of COVID. Tanya Plibersek, shouldn't these things be  tested in a court? Shouldn't the evidence go down that justifies doing what they're doing?

PLIBERSEK: Well Alan, if people want to take something to court they can but I think you'll  find that many, many Victorians are very grateful to their Premier for the fact that the  numbers have gone down. The approach that he's taken has worked and if you look  around the country the states that have done best economically are the ones that instituted  these controls at the beginning and the countries internationally that have done best  economically are the ones that tackled the virus early on because you can't -

STOKER: This is utter nonsense Tanya.

PLIBERSEK: You can't get a strong economy without tackling the health problem.

STOKER: It is New South Wales is the standout here. New South Wales has had testing,  tracing and outbreak containment. It hasn't had draconian curfews. It hasn't shut down the  economy. It has allowed everything to be open. There is an enormous difference in the  way that they -

PLIBERSEK: There are a lot of people working from home, Amanda. You might not have  noticed. There's a lot of people working from home. A lot of people wearing masks on  public transport.

JONES: Can I just repeat one thing to you both and I plead with you. Why has no politician  in this country sought to disarm this fear by saying 99 per cent of all cases are mild and  99.75 per cent recover. Why aren't the people told that so they're not living in this  paroxysm of fear?

PLIBERSEK: Alan, because this disease spreads very easily and we don't want to end up  like America with close to 200,000 deaths.

JONES: Oh cut it out. That is 0.004 per cent of the population.

PLIBERSEK: We don't want to be Brazil. We don't want to be Italy. We don't want to be  Spain. We don't want to be a country where

JONES: Tanya, stop adding to the alarmism.

PLIBERSEK:  - where this gets into the community and spreads like wildfire which is  what's happened overseas.

JONES: Oh rubbish. Rubbish.

STOKER: Oh Alan, it's so easy for Tanya to feed this fear.

PLIBERSEK: It has Alan. It has Alan.

JONES: The deaths in America - a point. There are more people have died from suicide  and drug overdoses in America. More people have died from suicide and drug overdoses -

PLIBERSEK: This is something that we -



JONES: - and the deaths in America 0.004 percent of the population. Tanya, we can't be in  the business of propagating untruths, but we'll come back next week and have another go  anyway. Go on.

STOKER: Alan, can we finish by putting it in perspective this way. We will lose more  people at the Queensland border from inability to access cancer care, inability to access  maternity care, inability to access medical care when they need it, than we will have lost in  COVID deaths.

JONES: Absolutely.

STOKER: Less than ten people since April.

PLIBERSEK: We have controlled the number of deaths from COVID because we've  controlled the spread of the disease. If this disease spreads the number of deaths will  increase.

JONES: Good stuff.

STOKER: There's a lot of fear over less than ten people.

PLIBERSEK: We have stopped the spread of the disease so we have fewer deaths. We  should be proud of that.

JONES: If I could quote Tanya Plibersek and she says and I agree with her entirely, if you  can't have an argument life's pretty boring. So thank you. Thank you both for being with us  and we'll talk again next week.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DANIEL DORAN 0427 464 350





