

THE HON JOSH FRYDENBERG MP  Treasurer

MEDIA RELEASE

Media contact: Annabel Clunies-Ross — Office of the Hon Josh Frydenberg MP — 02 6277 7340  The Hon Josh Frydenberg MP | Treasurer | MELBOURNE

17 December 2020

APPOINTMENTS TO THE RESERVE BANK OF AUSTRALIA  BOARD

The Morrison Government has appointed Ms Alison Watkins and Ms Carolyn Hewson AO as  members of the Reserve Bank of Australia Board (RBA Board) each for a five-year period.

Ms Watkins has held a range of senior roles in the agriculture and banking sectors and has been the  Group Managing Director of Coca-Cola Amatil since 2014. She is also a Business Council of Australia  Board member and a Non-Executive Director of The Centre for Independent Studies. She has  previously served as a member of the Takeovers Panel. Ms Watkin’s term commences following the  conclusion of Mr Allan Moss AO’s term on 1 December 2020.

Ms Hewson is a former investment banker with over 35 years’ experience in the finance and energy  sectors. She is currently a Director of CSL Limited and Infrastructure SA, and a former Director of  BHP Ltd, BT Investment Management and Westpac Banking Corporation. She has also served as a  panel member of the Financial System Inquiry and is a member of the Growth Centres Advisory  Committee. Ms Hewson’s commencement will follow the conclusion of Ms Catherine Tanna’s term on  29 March 2021.

Mr Moss and Ms Tanna have made valuable and significant contributions to Reserve Bank Board  deliberations and the Government thanks them for their outstanding service and contributions to the  Board throughout their terms.

The appointments of Ms Watkins and Ms Hewson will help ensure that monetary policy continues to  support Australia’s economic resilience and prosperity through the recovery phase of the COVID-19  pandemic and beyond.

These appointments have been made in accordance with section 14 of the Reserve Bank Act 1959. Both  appointees are part time, non-executive members of the Board.

Ends

