

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AFTERNOON AGENDA  TUESDAY, 28 JULY 2020

SUBJECTS: Aged Care facilities in Victoria tackling COVID-19; AUSMIN;  US Presidential election; Climate change policy.

KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: Labor’s Deputy Leader and Shadow Defence  Minister, Richard Marles. Thanks for your time. A lot to talk about today with  AUSMIN, the ministerial meetings in Washington. But first, I want to start with  the crisis in your own backyard, in Victoria. And you’re very critical of the  Federal Government’s handling of the aged care crisis that we are seeing right  now. More deaths overnight, another six deaths. It is a tragedy. What do you  want to see the federal government do?

RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR  PARTY: Whatever it takes, Kieran, is the answer to that question. I mean we've  got 769 cases now within our aged care system in Victoria across more than 60  facilities. That is a system which is in crisis. It's a heartbreaking situation for  people who find themselves, really not being able to say goodbye to their loved  ones properly, as they're placed in ICUs around Melbourne. For those of us  who have loved ones and parents who are in the aged care system right now, I  think this is the most single most terrifying moment since the pandemic has  begun. And a lot of the issues which are in aged care are issues which we've  known about for a long time, that's a chronically underfunded sector,  casualisation of the workforce is very significant. But here's the point; this is the  responsibility of the Commonwealth Government. This is a moment where  Scott Morrison actually needs to make clear what he intends to do, what he  seeks to do as Prime Minister as the head of the responsible government for  this section. And I think you know, there is a sense in which you've got the  federal government keeping a low profile while this crisis unfolds in Victoria  more generally. Well this is an area where we actually need to hear from our  Prime Minister today about what he intends to do, to make sure that we start

bringing into control what is an unfolding crisis across this sector.

GILBERT: But, the vulnerability in that sector, we have known for some time.  This is the ‘at risk’ cohort. It really has only been exposed by the catastrophic  failure of the quarantining by the Victorian Government. Isn’t that where the  accountability lies in totality?

MARLES: No, I don't think that's right. I think, you know, we had a few months  ago an outbreak in Newmarch in New South Wales. And so, in that sense the  sorts of issues that were particular to the aged care sector were completely  made clear to the Government. We've got real problems in terms of the way in  which information is being communicated to the families of those who are in the  aged care sector, communication about the status of outbreaks in various  facilities. But we've also got you know, a failure of communication to the  facilities themselves around really important programs such as making sure  that people are not able to work in more than one aged care sector. But quite  apart from the other issues that are playing out in Victoria, we know that this is  a sector which has been in crisis. That's why we've got a Royal Commission  into aged care right now and the sorts of issues that that is bringing to light are  actually being put into stark relief by the COVID-19 crisis and this is for the  Commonwealth Government to solve. And it's not enough to be having kind of  glib press conferences, we actually need to hear from the Prime Minister about  what he is going to do to try and put into some form of control what is an  unfolding tragedy in the Victorian aged care sector right now. And this is most  certainly the space in which the coronavirus is playing out in obviously the most  deadly way within Victoria.

GILBERT: And we have seen that tragedy more broadly than just in  Melbourne, we are now seeing it spread through the regions and Colac, not far  from your home in Geelong, we are seeing outbreaks there and we have  received correspondence via Richard Riordan, the local member at the state  level and one individual, 18 year old- I should say 20 year old, from Geelong  wrote to him saying he has waited ten days for the test results that he had  undertaken in Colac because that is where his girlfriend was. But this young  man from Geelong, waiting ten days for test results, we are seeing email after  email of people saying that they are waiting nine-ten days for results. That is  not good enough, is it?

MARLES: Well I think it is right to say that it's important that results are  processed quickly. That's obviously the case when what we're seeking from  people is to isolate whilst they are waiting for their results. And obviously when  you're talking about the scale of contact tracing which is required of Victoria, it's  of a different order of magnitude to anything that we've so far seen anywhere  else in the country. But having said that there are other parts of the world which  have had much bigger outbreaks than what we're seeing in Victoria now where

contact tracing remains a really critical tool in trying to make sure that the  transmission rate is brought below one. I mean, this is a very difficult situation  that the State Government finds itself in. I know that it's doing everything it can  to try and make sure that it gets that transmission rate below one. That's where  we need to get to if we're going to start seeing the numbers decline and both  quick processing of testing and contact tracing is going to be central to that.

GILBERT: Now, the AUSMIN talks, if we turn our attention to foreign policy and  defence policy. The Defence Minister and Foreign Minister are in Washington  for this Summit which comes at a very tense time both in US-China relations  but Australia-China relations. And we have confirmed with the Government that  they are not going to accede to any US request for freedom of navigation  exercises within 12 nautical miles of reclaimed Chinese territory. Is that  something that you welcome?

MARLES: Well I think the specifics of freedom of navigation operations  ultimately are a matter for the government to determine. When it comes to the  sort of specifics of an operational request; the how, the when, the why- you  really need to be in the chair of government to properly answer that question. I  would say that we have said as a matter of principle which I think you can say  from Opposition, we've been saying consistently for a number of years that  freedom of navigation operations should be on the table and that's simply to  make the point that as an island trading nation the UN Convention on the Law  of the Sea is very central to our national interests, on the high seas around the  world but particularly in the South China Sea where most of our trade traverses.  And that's where our national interest lies in terms of the issues around the  South China Sea, and so I think it's very important that Australia asserts its  national interests there. But these AUSMIN talks are as important as any that  have happened in recent years because I think what COVID-19 has done is act  as something of an accelerant around a whole range of trends that were going  on in the global sphere which were making Australia's strategic circumstances  increasingly complex. And so it's important that these are happening. And I  think it's important that they're happening in person.

GILBERT: Should Australia, should the Morrison Government and those  Ministers, relevant Ministers in Washington be cautious about hardening any  view of China in the context of the US mantra, really, in the lead up to this  Presidential Election that Donald Trump and his Administration is very much  anti-China, the tit-for-tat shutting down of consulates and so on. Does Australia  have to be cautious in that context?

MARLES: Yeah, I think I think we do need to be cautious. I actually think it's an  important feature of this AUSMIN that it's happening in the context of the US  election for this reason; that really the relationship between Australia and the  United States transcends the politics of both Australia and the United States. It

has endured through governments of both persuasions, on both sides of the  Pacific. And AUSMIN has had a pretty good record of continuing even during  periods of election in the US and periods of election here in Australia. And so I  think it sends an important message of continuity and calm really that we're  able to have AUSMIN at this moment. But you're also right that you know it  would obviously be a mistake for Australia to find itself getting caught up in the  immediate politics of the US election. We have our own national interest, it's not  determined by whatever the politics are in any given moment in the United  States, it's determined by what our national interest is and we need to have  consistent positions about that and make sure that we are articulating our  national voice very clearly, in relation to that- both in terms of the way in which  we express that to a country like China but also in terms of the way in which we  express it in conversations with the United States during AUSMIN. And so it's  very important that we're doing that and that should obviously have nothing to  do with the particular politics of the moment leading - in the United States  leading up to their election.

GILBERT: And a couple of other matters before we wrap up; Joel Fitzgibbon,  your Shadow Cabinet colleague has told my colleague, Andrew Clennell that he  has knocked back an invitation to speak at the Labor Environment Action  Network tomorrow. He believes that there are those trying to infiltrate the Labor  Party with extreme ideologies that belong to the Greens, hence his rejection of  this invitation. Do you think that there is a group like that? Of basically Greens,  seeking to infiltrate your Party?

MARLES: Oh look, I mean I think there is within the branches of the Labor  Party a healthy debate around a range of issues including this. But you know  what's important is that in terms of the parliamentary party our view is unified  and very clear. And Joel has been a fantastic advocate on the part of the  resources sector within this country. And that sector has been and will remain  critically important to our economy going forward and Joel makes that point  very clearly and his views around that, you know, don't need any further  amplification. And I think that's the point that he was making in not participating  in that particular forum and I can understand that. At the same time, obviously  we see that this country enjoys a very unique really renewable energy  opportunity in terms of our exposure to the Roaring Forties with wind, in terms  of the quality of our solar radiation and so you know we see the renewable  energy sector as a critical part of our future. But ultimately what the country  needs in relation to all of this- and this is the point we've been making for some  time- is a settled energy policy. And that's where if you want to see division  within the Parliament you see it on the side of the Government, who have been  unable to land a settled energy policy, not because of any inability to negotiate  with us but because of their ability to actually land their internals on this issue  and bring some form of coherent energy policy to the floor of the Parliament.  And that's actually what the country needs to see right now.





GILBERT: Just quickly and finally, if I can there has been a lot of flack heading  in the way of the Treasurer for making- for daring to mention two conservative  icons of the eighties in Thatcher and Reagan. But isn’t he simply saying that the  government is going to provide more support for business, that is as simple as  it gets?

MARLES: While I’m not sure what he's saying by virtue of that reference. I  mean I don't mind going back to the period of the eighties. But when you go  back to the period of the eighties the great example you have is the Hawke-Keating Government which really was the modern - the architects of modern  Australia and have underpinned the open trading economy that we have today;  an economy that experienced the longest run of uninterrupted growth, up until  this year that we had seen. You know that's where we should be drawing  inspiration. And even back then when those examples of the Thatcher  Government and Reaganomics were going on right next to them, Hawke and  Keating plotted their own path. They determined what was right for Australia  and that's really where we should be drawing our inspiration and certainly they  didn't take this country down that path. I mean, I think we do need an economic  strategy beyond the provision of relief for this economy coming out of the  COVID crisis. We are going to come out of this with high unemployment but  that massive debt. I mean debt at a level which is the same as that that was  proportionately generated by this country in fighting the First World War. I mean  that that is a staggering number. And I don't think you get that strategy by  adopting the old formula of industrial relations policy which seek to attack the  contribution that working people make in their workplace. So you know, I  actually think if we want to go to the eighties, let's look at Hawke-Keating  because that's really the inspiration which should guide us going forward.

GILBERT: Richard Marles, as always appreciate it. Thanks.

MARLES: Thanks Kieran.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363









