

SENATOR THE HON PENNY WONG  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA



STRANDED AUSTRALIANS NEED URGENT HELP FROM SCOTT  MORRISON

Australians stranded overseas need urgent direct help from the Morrison  Government, with Qantas and Virgin international services ending tomorrow.

The week-long delay by the Morrison Government between changing travel  advice and finally deciding it would facilitate charters on a “case by case basis”,  has meant some of those charters may no longer be viable.

That’s because countries where Australians are stranded appear to have  imposed further lockdowns, meaning even government-sanctioned charter  flights can’t leave.

Decisive action sooner would have kept more Australians safer.

The Government must act without further delay to get Australians out of unsafe  situations and help facilitate urgent shelter and medical supplies for those in  need.

Large numbers of Australians are desperate for help in countries including (but  not limited to) Nepal, Guatemala, Ecuador and Peru.

While Germany has facilitated at least 70 charter flights for its stranded citizens,  Australia has managed just two since the initial assisted departures at the  beginning of this crisis - one of which was actually first initiated by stranded  Australians themselves.

Not only have there been too few seats available for stranded Australians, they  have been far too expensive. Those leaving Peru were charged $5,000 per  person for one-way economy flights - leaving many Australians priced out of a  ticket to safety.



By contrast, the UK charged its citizens Â£250 per person for evacuation from  Peru.

The lack of urgency in the Australian Government response has meant that  Australians stranded abroad, trying to get home, have been more likely to be  exposed to coronavirus.

One hostel housing Australians had confirmed cases - and now the entire  hostel is in quarantine for three months. Australians there have not been able to  get medical supplies, whereas Swiss citizens have had supplies from their  government.

An open letter from stranded Australians in Peru reads:

One (Australian is) running out of anti-rejection meds for his kidney transplant,  he contacted the embassy a week ago and had had no response yet yesterday,  so we were able to get him in touch with a clinic in Lima to assist with  replacement meds, as his are stuck with customs in Lima. There are at least 4  other medical conditions that need actioning.

The fewer Australians the Morrison Government helps get home, means the  more Australians will be stranded in precarious health and safety situations.



SUNDAY, 29 MARCH 2020  MEDIA CONTACT:  JOHN OLENICH - 0447 270 785











