Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.







The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health

Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Public Service and Cabinet

TRANSCRIPT

20 March 2020



INTERVIEW WITH KARL STEFANOVIC & ALLISON LANGDON  CHANNEL 9 TODAY SHOW  E&OE…

Topics: Update on Government’s coronavirus measures; measures to prevent medicine hoarding;  border closure; social distancing

KARL STEFANOVIC:  Pharmacies across the country are facing serious shortages this morning as panic shoppers stock up  on vital medicines like paracetamol and Ventolin.

ALLISON LANGDON:  The madness is prompting the Government to impose restrictions on the amount of medicine we  can buy at any one time and Federal Health Minister Greg Hunt joins us now.

Minister, thanks for your time this morning.

GREG HUNT:  Good morning.

ALLISON LANGDON:  Asthmatics can't get Ventolin right now. I mean this is not only crazy, but this is dangerous.

GREG HUNT:  That’s exactly right. And that’s why with the pharmacies yesterday we’ve imposed new rules. And  this is about making sure that Ventolin and children's paracetamol are now moved what's called  behind the counter. One unit provided by the pharmacist, where the pharmacist is making sure that  there's genuine need.

And this is about protecting people who are vulnerable. And there have been some small number of  people that have done the wrong thing, the vast majority of Australians are doing the right but we  have to protect those with genuine need. So we have taken those decisions clearly and absolutely to  provide those protections.

KARL STEFANOVIC:  How are you going to enforce it? Is that difficult to do given that, I guess, someone can go into one  pharmacist and go to another and try and stockpile that way?

And look, these are just parents - most of the people are just parents trying to look after their kids.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





GREG HUNT:  Yeah, we do know that there are some people that are trying to hoard and stockpile and sell  overseas. Peter Dutton has put Border Force on to tracking and chasing them down and prosecuting.  There will be no quarter given for those people that are doing that, trying to profiteer.

But also, the pharmacists are exercising their judgment - they’ve come right in behind it. The  important thing though, is that the supply lines are good. You know, in all of these medicines, the  supply lines are good and that is a very important point of reassurance.

So now it's managing the actual stocking and it's the pharmacists that have said - can you help us?  And we have moved immediately in conjunction with them to put in place these new rules.

I think that is a very important reassurance for families. It may take a few days for the restocking to  occur but the deep supplies in Australia of children's paracetamol, of Ventolin, and other forms of  inhalers, they are strong and I think that’s just important for Australians to understand.

ALLISON LANGDON:  Minister, we had a doctor from the United States on the show earlier and he is on the front-line of  this - they're obviously a couple of weeks ahead of us - but they have just seen a 40 per cent  increase of in the last 24 hours.

Can you just explain to us what is happening to the graph here and the number of cases being  reported in Australia?

GREG HUNT:  So we're at just over 700 cases in Australia and we are about a month behind many other countries  in the best sense because we put in place the closure of the borders with China on the first of  February.

I know it was criticised at the time of being heavy handed but it was one of the most important  decisions we've made, along with the early border closures with Iran and South Korea and Italy and  all of these countries.

Now, we now have as of tonight a global ban on foreign nationals entering Australia. So these are  the things that are doing what's called flattening the curve, reducing the number of infections,  spreading it over time, making sure that we can protect our elderly, our vulnerable and those with  respiratory conditions.

KARL STEFANOVIC:  Our curve won't flatten right now though - it will be a couple of weeks before that happens.

I am really interested seeing what happens out of China. They took those drastic measures. They  took those measures that we haven't yet - and that is really locking down neighbourhoods and large  cities and tens of millions of people locked down - and we’ve seen their curve flatten right out - if it  can be believed.

Do you look at China now and go: okay, we can be making even more decisions now. Seeing what  is happening in China, if we lock down now we’re going to see a definite flattening out of that  curve. How do you weigh all that up?





Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





GREG HUNT:  Well, we have locked down the borders and we’ve done that very, very clearly and that is making  use of Australia's natural advantage as an island - something that’s unprecedented, something that’s  once in a century type activity - and then taking all of the measures with regards to mass gatherings,  of over 500 publicly, 100 internally.

You can see it in the shops and the cafes, they’ve already taken those steps. I dropped into a cafe  yesterday for a moment of normality to pick up a coffee - they’d put out the tables, they had spread  them out. They sort of gave me a thumbs up to say, you know, we're all in this together.

And so these are the decisions that we are taking. I'm heartened by what we see from China. I am  not sure if all of the, if they've been able to gather up all of the actual cases. They're doing their best  but it's an important step. And what we did is we stepped in a lot earlier than a lot of other countries  which is why it's been a lot slower to take off here.

It will increase - no question, that the numbers will increase - but it's where we get to ultimately  where we have flattened that curve to be within the capacity of our hospital system which itself,  we're working on a massive increase in the capacity with regards to ventilators, intensive care units,  and the ability to take care of the vulnerable.

ALLISON LANGDON:  Well our borders will close entirely in just over 12 hours' time. But knowing that the majority of  cases have come from abroad - 80 per cent - should we have done this earlier? Days ago?

GREG HUNT:  Well, I think what we have done is, as I say, one of the first countries in the world to put in place  the China ban.

ALLISON LANGDON:  I know that and you've gone through that, with due respect. But you know, just in regards to this,  should we have shut our border - entirely shut our borders - a few days ago?

GREG HUNT:  What we've done is - when you think of where the disease is with other countries - we have done  this at a far earlier time than virtually anybody else through their disease progression.

So we’re doing this while we're in the hundreds. Others have done these things while they're in the  high multiple thousands. And so we have to compare country by country and what we are doing is  taking these steps at a far earlier time in the disease progression.

And that is what’s helping in Australia, that's what's allowed us to delay significantly the onset.  We’ve always said nobody is immune but we have been fortunate to plan early, to call early, to act  early and we’ll continue to take steps without fear.

KARL STEFANOVIC:  By the way, it is okay for you to say, yes, we should have shut the borders earlier.

This is a moving feast and it's very difficult to get on top of, but it's okay if you would just say it  would’ve been helpful if we did this a week ago.





Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



GREG HUNT:  Well one of the things that we have to do is of course both bring Australians home and at the same  time make sure that we- have others leave the country.

So you know in my view, what we have done is actually taken these decisions on mass gatherings  and borders earlier than we might have - it's the opposite of what you're saying, with respect -  earlier than we might have because we wanted to keep being on the front foot.

And I know other people are entitled to have their views and what we are doing is following the  medical advice, working with the medical advisers.

And we said to them from the outset, from January: you be fearless, we’ll implement and that’s the  relationship that we've got with the Chief Medical Officer and all of the Chief Heath Officers.

KARL STEFANOVIC:  Greg, you would have had modelling - and this is the final question because I know you’ve got such  a busy day ahead - you would have done modelling on this and where the curve reaches in the next  couple of days and weeks because we haven't hit the peak yet.

What sort of numbers are we looking at here? And how will communities be even further  implicated?

GREG HUNT:  So we are looking at increases. I don't have final numbers at the moment because we're expecting  new modelling in the coming weeks. I'd rather wait until I get that. Look, I'd rather wait until I get  that.

One thing that I did agree with Brendon Murphy was for me not to speculate on medical items.  He’ll provide the medical advice. But where we have it, we share it.

And then the important thing now is what each of us can do in our own lives. One is helping to slow  the spread with the social distancing. Those that are in isolation, to continue the isolation.

But also supporting the vulnerable. Helping the elderly, getting them the meals, helping them in the  shopping aisles, making sure that we are doing the things that, as a community, are our absolute  best selves.

And people are doing that, there are a few people doing the wrong thing but the overwhelming  majority of Australians, they’re doing the right thing and that is how we're going to get through this.

KARL STEFANOVIC:  Geez - it's hard to do, isn’t it, with it the social distancing as well? I mean that’s the message.

But Greg, thank you so much for your time today. There's a lot on your plate and there’s a lot of big  decisions being made. We appreciate your time, so does our audience.

GREG HUNT:  Thanks for that, thanks Karl.

-ENDS-



