

SUSAN TEMPLEMAN MP  MEMBER FOR MACQUARIE



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  MONDAY, 2 MARCH 2020

SUSAN TEMPLEMAN, MEMBER FOR MACQUARIE: I’m Susan Templeman the Member  for Macquarie. There’s two bushfire recovery issues I want to raise today.

One is the slow pace at which funding is coming through for small businesses in the Blue  Mountains and the Hawkesbury. I spent the weekend talking to small businesses, they are  hanging on by a thread making sure their staff have work. They’re employing their staff  ahead of themselves and the struggle is real. None of the grants apply for the majority of  my businesses; they didn’t burn to the ground, they fought off fire for weeks but they didn’t  actually burn, so they miss out completely. They’ve had smoke damage, they’ve had no  customers, and even now the recovery process is so slow that they are probably in a  worse position now than they were a month ago. I raised these issues with the Minister  and with the Head of Recovery back on the 13th of January, and nothing has happened to  help our businesses to make a tangible difference.

The other issue that is infuriating businesses is the government’s decision to take money  away from bushfire recovery to give to Queensland to tackle Coronavirus tourism. So,  we’ve learnt that of the $76 million that was given to Tourism Australia to help raise the  profile and encourage people to visit bushfire areas has actually had $25 million diverted to  Cairns.

Now, there is no doubt that tourist operators in Cairns will need help but that is no reason  to take it away from bushfire affected areas when the recovery has not even kicked in. I’m  just appalled that the government would make a big announcement with lots of fanfare and  then quietly take away a third of the funding that they promised for bushfire affected  communities.

JOUNALIST: Have you spoken to the Minister about that?

TEMPLEMAN: I will absolutely be raising how appalled I am with the Minister. I had a  briefing through the Minister’s office about the tourism money to find out how it would get  down to my local communities. There’s very little of it that’s being seen on the ground, and  I’ve got to tell you when I was in the Blue Mountains over the weekend talking to  businesses they’re starting to see a trickle of tourists come back but there’s certainly not  the wave that they need.

JOURNALIST: The bushfire tourism money that was promised first, you believe it should

be delivered first?

TEMPLEMAN: Absolutely. These are places that were on fire before Christmas. We’re  talking about fires that go back, really, to the middle of the year. Yet the money was very  slow, the government was very slow to respond to the needs of local businesses, to  accommodation places, to restaurants, to cafes. When they finally did respond way too  late, it only lasted a couple of weeks before it’s been taken away from them. There has  been so little benefit that’s hit the ground, it’s an outrage that the government’s whipped  away a third of it to battle yet another big crisis, which it absolutely has to address.

JOURNALIST: But this is a global, potentially, pandemic, does it not make sense in this  instance for it to be diverted to them in an extraordinary circumstance that needs to be  addressed potentially as quickly as the fallout from the bushfires?

TEMPLEMAN: I think people are forgetting that our bushfires were unprecedented. They  needed an extraordinary response as well. On top of that we have another issue, and  absolutely the government should be addressing that. This is not a time to be worrying  about how good your surplus looks on paper or otherwise, it’s a time to be responding fast  to the needs of small businesses. My small businesses want to keep people employed,  that’s their prime objective, they want to keep their doors open. They can’t do that if  bushfire funding is not flowing through to them, nor can they do that without a good  response to the Coronavirus.

JOURNALIST: Do you think because of the way the Federal Government was criticised for  not jumping onto the bushfire crisis straight away they now might be jumping onto the  Coronavirus to essentially redeem themselves?

TEMPLEMAN: They should be responding promptly to things that people are saying on  the ground. Our small businesses are the litmus test for the economy. If they’re saying  things are tough, then the government should be listening to them and not holding its fire  or waiting to see what happens. These are things that need to be responded to fast. They  translate directly to jobs, and we see ourselves going down in a spiral if there isn’t  appropriate response, so that my small businesses can keep people employed.

JOURNALIST: Do you think small businesses should be (inaudible) tax relief by State  Governments? Do you think State Governments should step up (inaudible) payroll tax  relief?

TEMPLEMAN: I think there’s a whole range of things that government can do, State and  Federal Governments, and councils are doing things too. But it has to happen now and it’s  no good just blaming each other for it. I note that the NSW Government is blaming the  Federal Government for a poor criteria for money flowing through to small businesses.  Basically we’ve got a situation where government criteria is too tight, it doesn’t cover  smoke damage, it only covers businesses that burnt to the ground. We’ve also got not  enough of it being done in grants. Small business are not what small businesses need right  now; remember, this is coming off an economy that was really soft, they didn’t have a good  buffer to keep them going. So they need a fast response but this Government, the loan  criteria and the grant criteria is too constrained, the pace has been too slow, basically the  response has been plain mean.

ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: KRYSTYNA POLLARD 0406 693 735







