

The Hon David Littleproud MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE NATIONAL PARTY  MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, DROUGHT AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT  MEMBER FOR MARANOA



Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA

The Hon Alan Tudge MP

MINISTER FOR POPULATION, CITIES AND URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE  ACTING MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP, MIGRANT SERVICES AND MULTICULTURAL  AFFAIRS

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

OFFICIAL

Friday 9th October 2020

VITAL LABOUR SUPPORT FOR AUSTRALIAN FARMERS

The Australian Government is committed to ensuring Australia’s agriculture sector  has access to the labour force it needs.

To support Australia’s agriculture sector, the Government is making changes to the  existing Relocation Assistance to Take Up a Job program with $17.4 million to be  provided in relocation support to attract workers to our farms and regions.

Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management, the Hon David  Littleproud MP, said this funding will provide financial support to job seekers who  temporarily relocate to take up agricultural work of at least six weeks.

“Our agriculture sector is facing unprecedented pressure on labour supply as a result  of COVID-19,” Minister Littleproud said.

“These changes will support critical food production in Australia so that farm produce  does not go to waste and will help ensure the agricultural sector continues to play a  key role in Australia's economic recovery.”

From 1 November 2020, relocation assistance will be available to people who  relocate to harvest and regional areas to take up agricultural work, including  Australians who are not receiving income support and those with the right to work in  Australia.

Those relocating to take up short-term agricultural work may be eligible to receive up  to $6,000 if they are an Australian worker; or $2,000 if they are a visa holder with  general work rights, not restricted to an employer or a type of work, to work in  Australia.





OFFICIAL

OFFICIAL

The Morrison Government is also investing a further $9 million in the Seasonal  Worker Programme to ensure employers can meet critical seasonal labour needs.

Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business, Senator the Hon  Michaelia Cash said, the Morrison Government’s Seasonal Worker Programme  (SWP) plays a vital role in assisting employers in the agriculture sectors.

“It is important to note that filling these positions will not come at the expense of  getting Australians into jobs,” Minister Cash said.

“Approved employers can only recruit through the Seasonal Worker Programme  (SWP) if they can demonstrate they cannot find suitable Australian workers.

“The funding will help ensure that the SWP has the resources to accommodate the  significant growth of the program and ensure there is appropriate oversight in place  to protect the welfare of workers.”

Acting Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural  Affairs, Alan Tudge, said the SWP has a dual purpose - it provides direct and  tangible benefits to our farming sector and also to our Pacific family by providing  income, skills and valuable remittances to support the economic development of  participating countries.

“Australians will always get priority for jobs under this Government, but we’re  listening to farmers who have been clear that they need many more workers, and  they need them now

We don’t want crops going unpicked and food rotting on farms, which will be  devastating for farmers and regional communities, and will see increased prices of  produce in our supermarkets.”

The funding will support up to 19 Pacific Labour Mobility Officers across Australia to  support the welfare of seasonal workers and to establish direct links with  participating employers.

These officers will provide an on-ground presence to identify issues early and  resolve them quickly.

Funding will also be provided, through a tender process, to the not-for-profit sector to  strengthen their role in connecting workers with local community groups in worker  locations.

Stronger connections with the community are important to worker satisfaction,  reduce homesickness, and have shown to increase productivity and reduce issues  and misunderstandings.

More information on the additional support being provided can be found at:  https://www.dese.gov.au/budget-2020-21



MEDIA CONTACTS  Minister Littleproud - Brett Chant - Brett.Chant@awe.gov.au - 0477 744 614   Minister Cash - Guy Creighton - Guy.Creighton@dese.gov.au - 0438 815 302  Minister Tudge - Whitney Harris - Whitney.harris@homeaffairs.gov.au - 0466 462 511

