

JIM CHALMERS MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR RANKIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  CANBERRA  TUESDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2020

SUBJECTS: Impact of Coronavirus on the economy; Scott Morrison’s failure to  provide economic leadership or a plan; Ben Wyatt’s retirement.

JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: The economic impact of the Coronavirus will  be substantial; just how substantial it will be remains to be seen. Labor stands ready to be  as constructive as possible in proposing ways to deal with the economic fallout from this  substantial economic challenge.

Scott Morrison shouldn't pretend that the weakness in the economy is wholly and solely the  product of the Coronavirus. Scott Morrison desperately wants Australians to forget that the  economy was already floundering badly on his watch before most of us had even heard of  Coronavirus and before the fires hit. Scott Morrison desperately wants Australians to forget  that growth was slowing, consumption was weak, wages were stagnant, public debt had  more than doubled, household debt was at record highs and that productivity and business  investment were going backwards.

We cannot have a Prime Minister who uses this substantial economic challenge as another  reason and excuse to not have a plan to address the longstanding challenges that we have  in this economy. Coronavirus on its own doesn't excuse or explain economic weakness  which has persisted on Scott Morrison's watch. Since Scott Morrison took over economic  growth has almost halved, wages have been stagnant, business investment has been  weak and public debt and household debt has been at record highs. Scott Morrison should  acknowledge that because of his economic mismanagement we approach the substantial  challenge of the Coronavirus from a position of relative economic weakness and not  strength.

The nation is crying out for economic leadership and an economic plan but Scott Morrison  is giving people neither. We desperately need the Government to come to the table with a  plan to deal with longstanding weakness in the economy and a plan to deal with the fallout  from this Coronavirus and the summer of fires. We cannot have a Prime Minister who  behaves more like a salesman than a leader at times when the nation needs economic  leadership from Canberra. We call on the Prime Minister to come up with a plan to deal  with longstanding weakness in the economy to deal with the challenge of the Coronavirus  and the fires. It's well past time that he provided that leadership.



Just before I take your questions, I want to say something briefly about Ben Wyatt who is a  friend of mine and a friend to many of us here in this building. Ben Wyatt was a big reason  why the West has been so well governed in the last three years. He has been an  extraordinary Treasurer for the West. While he's been such a good Treasurer he's also  been a humble, warm and engaging friend to many of us in politics right around Australia. I  think Ben Wyatt will be sorely missed from the political scene in the West. We understand  his reasons and we wish him well but we'll also miss him from the political scene. Ben is all  class from top to toe. Ben Wyatt is a class act and an extraordinarily successful Treasurer.  We wish Ben and his family all the very best for whatever comes next.

JOURNALIST: There's been a huge economic impact on global supply chains as a result  of the Coronavirus. Is it reasonable to expect that that would have impacted the Australian  economy somewhat?

CHALMERS: The impact of the Coronavirus will be substantial on our economy and the  global economy; just how substantial it will be remains to be seen. We'll learn that in the  coming months and years. The Coronavirus is not the only reason why the economy is  weaker than it should be. The economy has been weak in Australia for some time now.  We've got a Liberal-National Government in its third term and its seventh year which still  doesn't have a plan to deal with that economic weakness.

I wrote to Treasurer Josh Frydenberg twice in recent weeks on behalf of local businesses  in Australia who had relayed to me their concerns that they weren't getting the advice and  support that they need in these difficult and challenging times. Disappointingly but not  surprisingly the response I got from Josh Frydenberg was inadequate. It was long on  rhetoric but it was short of a plan. What the country, employers and employees of this  country desperately need is economic leadership and an economic plan from the Prime  Minister but he's providing neither of those things. It's one thing to acknowledge the  substantial impact of the Coronavirus on our economy as he does and as I do. It's another  thing entirely to come up with a plan to do something about it and to support Australians  through these difficult times. Australians are looking to Scott Morrison for leadership and  he has been incapable of providing it when it comes to the economy.

JOURNALIST: What are the specifics of what you want the Government to do for  businesses during Coronavirus?

CHALMERS: We've been very constructive for some time now. We've not just pointed out  where the economy is floundering under the Liberals and Nationals. We've also said here  are some ideas that you could pick up and run with which would support the economy at a  difficult time. In the broader economy, the absence of a settled energy policy is making it  harder for business to invest. That can be fixed. There's room and a need for a tax  incentive for business to invest. Business investment hasn't been this low since the  recession of the early 1990s. We've put some of those solutions on the table. I went to  North Queensland and Far North Queensland with Senator Nita Green last week and  spoke to businesses there about what their concerns, needs and hopes were from the  Federal Government. Local councils have proposed and come up with solutions around  rate relief and there's a lot of State Government effort being put into making life easier for  business. Absent from that conversation is the Federal Government. The first step would  be for them to engage with governments from other levels and engage with the business  community. I engaged with tourism and agriculture in North and Far North Queensland to

talk to them about the opportunities from Austrade to provide more advice and support,  what can be done in the tax system, what can be done elsewhere with the substantial  levers that are available to the Federal Government. It's one thing to point to the issues in  the economy but Scott Morrison and Josh Frydenberg have a responsibility to lead and  plan, and they're failing Australians on both counts.

JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister has given his strongest indication yet that there won't  be a surplus in the next Budget. What's your response to that?

CHALMERS: The surplus is a test that they set for themselves and it remains to be seen  whether they will meet that test. We won't know until the end of September whether there  has been a surplus for the year that we're in now. The Government promised a surplus in  its first year and every year after that. So far they've only delivered six deficits. They are  yet to deliver that first surplus they promised all those years ago. The priority should be  supporting bushfire affected communities, businesses and workers and families. We've  said for some weeks now that that should be the highest priority. The surplus is a test that  they set for themselves and it remains to be seen whether they will meet it. I listened  carefully to what the Treasurer and Prime Minister said today about the Budget. I think  what we're seeing is the usual predictable, clumsy, ham-fisted expectation management  from the Treasurer who seems to wander around expecting a pat on the back for an  outcome that has not yet been realized. We will see if it's realised in September.

JOURNALIST: Jim, does the Coronavirus bolster the case for fiscal response from the  Government?

CHALMERS: The challenges of Coronavirus and the bushfires which preceded it call for a  proper economic plan from the Government. In all of these difficult times and difficult days  in Australia over the summer the nation has been crying out for leadership and crying out  for a plan and getting neither. The Government should come to the table and say the  economy has weakened substantially since Morrison and Frydenberg took over and since  the Budget. Since the election growth has slowed. There are substantial risks and  challenges posed by the difficulties of this summer. It's long past time for the Government  to recognise the economy is much weaker than they promised it would be. They went to  the election saying they'd make the economy even stronger and instead it's gotten even  weaker, and not just because of Coronavirus and the fires but for all the other reasons that  I've identified. The Government needs to come up with a plan. They need to show some  economic leadership. Australians are crying out for that. They need and deserve some  action from their Government.

JOURNALIST: Given the economic slowdown last year and the multi-hazard environment  you're describing are you offering bipartisan support for giving up on the dream of a  surplus?

CHALMERS: We think the priority should be supporting communities who have been so  badly affected over the summer. Anthony Albanese, myself and other colleagues have all  made that pretty clear. The Government committed to a $5 billion surplus in December. It  remains to be seen how much of that remains when we get the final outcome in  September. The surplus is a test that they set for themselves. We don't know yet how  close they'll get to meeting it. They have made a lot of political hay out of something that  they've not yet achieved.



JOURNALIST: Don't you accept that while you can make a promise and when situations  change that dramatically that outcomes can also change dramatically?

CHALMERS: The economy has deteriorated substantially. The Government downgraded  its own forecasts for growth, for wages and for unemployment before the fires hit and  before most of us had heard of the Coronavirus. The Government has conceded that the  economy was much weaker than they thought before this difficult summer. That should  force a rethink from the Government about their policies. We have been as constructive as  we possibly could be. We've put ideas on the table. We have said if the Government pick  up and run with those ideas then we'll support them. The role of the Opposition is to help  where we can and to point out where there are challenges which aren't being addressed.

JOURNALIST: Just to be clear are you advocating for a discretionary fiscal boost from the  Government as opposed to just letting the automatic stabilisers work through the Budget?

CHALMERS: Since August last year we've been saying that the Government should  deploy the Budget to arrest what was a very concerning slowing of growth which  eventuated because the Government didn't have a plan to respond. If you go all the way  back to August and you check our statements you will see that we have been arguing for  the Government to do more. The Government's left all the heavy lifting to the Reserve  Bank. They've got interest rates at record lows. That's had consequences for asset prices  but it hasn't substantially boosted the real economy. There's a role for Government there.  The Government is abrogating their responsibility to Australian workers who have faced  stagnant wages, slowing growth and record household debt. The Government needs a  plan. They need to show leadership. They're doing neither. Thanks.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949







