





TRANSCRIPT

Senator James Paterson

Liberal Senator for Victoria

Tuesday 10 March 2020

Sky News: The Bolt Report

Subjects: Coronavirus, Scott Cam, Megxit



Andrew Bolt: Joining me is the panel, Liberal Senator James Paterson and Labor Senator Kimberley  Kitching. $350,000 for Scott Cam. Good value for taxpayers?



Senator Kimberley Kitching: Honestly, I listened to that interview today. I thought Annelise was  handled herself beautiful.



Bolt: She's a star.



Kitching: She was great. But I did. He said at one point, you know, my business is my brand. And I  thought, your brand has now taken a little bit of a hit, I would say. I thought that he was it was quite  condescending, some of it. And also, I think unfortunately, given he's such promoting such an  important sector in vocational education and training, that he's actually doing harm to a sector from  which he himself has greatly benefited.



Bolt: But it's not his fault the government wants to pour our splundoons down his pocket. It takes a  tough man to say no to that money.



Kitching: I take your point Andrew and I think the government shouldn't have been spending three  hundred and fifty thousand dollars.



Bolt: Should it be spending 350?







Senator James Paterson: Andrew, I'm not opposed in principle to the idea of hiring media  spokesmen and spokeswomen because they can reach audiences that other people can't and they  have authority with those audiences that others don't. And in principle, I think that's a good idea.  But if you are going to take taxpayers money, then I think you have to accept that what comes with  that is public scrutiny and you have to front up. And if it's a lot of money, then you have to justify it.



Bolt: He did front up, give him that credit I guess. But maybe with a bit more humility. But $350000,  look, I guess they are borrowing his brand, but he says, I didn't go into all the you know, it's only now  I can go into schools and all that teach tell the kids, what was he doing in all the, schools been back

for a month?



Kitching:  Four media posts.



Bolt: I'll write four media posts a day for that money if you want.



Paterson: Okay, I'll let them know Andrew.



Bolt: Look, I don't get this. Someone's got to watch the pennies a little bit more carefully. I would  have thought. I want to talk about the Coronavirus. You've both been rightly critical of China's  communist regime. Right. But it's so fascinating because I reckon China's probably handled the virus  better than capitalist countries, particularly Italy. China was savaged for being too slow in reacting to  a virus that was new on its watch. No one knew anything about it, but it shut down lockdown  Wuhan, a city of 11 million people on January twenty three, a month and a half ago. Yesterday it  reported just nineteen new cases in the whole country, 19. Contrast that with Italy. It had did have  warning through China about the virus, yet locked down Lombardy in 11 provinces only last week.  And the rest of Italy only on Sunday. Too late. It had yesterday, one thousand eight hundred new  cases. And of course, by then, travellers from Italy had brought the virus more than 60 different  countries. Communism is working better than capitalism in locking down. Well, they've got it. I guess  they've got expertise in locking up people.



Paterson: You'll be unsurprised, Andrew, to hear me say I don't agree with you at all. I think the virus  on the evidence was not well handled by the Chinese, particularly in the early stages. And the only  reason it is in Italy today is because it left China and it only left China because in the early stages, the  whistleblowers, doctors, and scientists who were saying we have a problem here were being  arrested and intimidated by the Chinese Communist Party.







Bolt: I've documented that. I'm talking about the lockdown of cities. Because, Italy had warning and  it took another month and a half before lockdown. And since then, dozens of travellers from Italy  have affected, infected dozens of other countries.



Kitching: Look, I think when you can move the apparatus of a state the way an authoritarian regime  can, you can do all sorts of things. And that includes things we would never, ever condone. But I  think in this instance, I don't agree that locking down, I think I'm still a fervent believer in a Western  liberal democratic system. And I think what China has done in locking down provinces and people, I  think that's their way of responding. Our way of responding is to actually appeal to civic society, to  our better natures, which we have and which we are able to express.



Bolt: I haven't been seeing that in some of the supermarkets. But speaking of that, I agree with what  you've said, to be honest. But but I wonder whether our free societies need to contemplate more  serious action. Well, maybe it's an overreaction. You mentioned lockdowns. We have the federal

health minister, Greg Hunt, trying to tell people, calm, calm, calm. Meanwhile, today, we had the  Victorian Labor Premier, Daniel Andrews, saying we've got to get used to school closures, major  event cancellations, working from home to avoid what an expert right next to him was saying is the  pandemic that is coming. What message are we supposed to be heeding here?



Paterson: I think it's important as far as possible that we do sing from the same song sheet, Andrew.  But within that there are a range of possibilities. It's both true that we need to be calm right now  because we don't have a big outbreak yet in Australia. But we also have to be prepared for the  possibility that we might have one in the future and that it might be disruptive. So people need to  understand that, yes, things are okay now, but that might not be the case in a month's time or even  in a few weeks time. And so we need to plan ahead for that.



Bolt: Okay. Harry and Megan Markle, just switch. I'm Coronavirused out. I'm just so Coronavirused  out. They joined their last ceremony as royals, official royals very carefully handled was to avoid  personal clashes, particularly with Prince William and Kate. They were ushered separately to their  seats in the big function in the church, with Harry and Megan behind the rest of the family. And it  was all very frosty. This does not bode well. I fear a tell all account to come one day.



Kitching: I really hope not. Look,.



Bolt: They've got to make money.



Kitching: I hope they all live happily ever after. I hope that Archie gets to play with his cousins  because I think that would be a shame. And I don't think it matters what family it is. It's always nice  to be able to play with your cousins and see your relatives. So I really hope that they're able to get  over whatever.







Bolt: Nicely put. I like the cousins thing. That actually reminds me I wasn't I hadn't thought of asking  you, but. Just reminded me. Penny Wong, your boss in the Senate, was reported to have said to you  you wouldn't understand because you didn't have a family about an issue involving whatever. Is that  true?



Kitching: I'm not going to comment. It was a private meeting. There are many, many. There are  many private meetings, obviously, in parliament. I'm not going to start commenting.



Bolt:  I tell you what, if a liberal had said that if Tony Abbott had said that, the media would be on  fire about it. But this one seems to have gone silent...anyway. What did you make of Harry and  Meghan?



Paterson: Andrew, the day that I become a commentator on the royal family, let alone...



Bolt: Is today!



Paterson: Let alone the seating arrangements at royal family functions is the day I will hang up my  boots as a politician and as someone who appears in the media. So, you can hold me to account for  that. If you ever see me doing that in the future, please let me know: James, time is up.



Bolt: It happens to be your head of state's family.



Paterson: Well, and I still have no interest in it, and I still have no intention of commentating on it in  any way, shape or form. Sorry.



Bolt: I thought it was interesting media manipulation so the world could see that things are pretty  poor rather than say you just stay home in Canada. Hey, listen, I said that was it for coronavirus, but  actually a little bit of good news. We've seen adult squabbling over toilet paper in the supermarkets.  But in Mareeba, we're told that youngsters Addison and Lucy use their pocket money to stock up on  toilet paper. And we're asking at knocking on the doors of local pensioner cottages to see the people  inside needed some. I hope that shames a lot of people. This is the Australia that you recognise.  Which one? The one in the supermarket or this?



Kitching: That. Not the one in the supermarket. That is, you always get aberrations, but it's actually,.







Bolt: Thousands of aberrations?



Kitching: Actually, Australians, I think are truly people who would give someone the shirt off their  back if they needed it. I think we're a great nation.



Paterson: I agree. I think there's a real sense of camaraderie and comradeship in this time and as  there should be. And it only takes a fairly small number of people exhibiting a fairly extreme  behavior in relation to toilet rolls.



Bolt: I could run several clips in the shops.



Paterson: That would let me clear it out. Yeah, but I really don't think the majority people are doing  that, Andrew. I think it's a small minority people who are doing it in an extreme way and that's  leading to the shortages.



Bolt: So that's why shop after shop after shop is out of toilet paper.



Paterson: I mean, it's a bulky item. It doesn't take many people to clear those shelves, Andrew.



Bolt: What a country. What a country. Kimberley Kitching, James Paterson, lovely to catch up with  you both.

ENDS





