



The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  TOWNSVILLE, QLD  FRIDAY 7 FEBRUARY 2020



EO&E…

PHILLIP THOMPSON OAM MP, MEMBER FOR HERBERT: Thanks, everyone, for coming. I’d like to welcome  the Prime Minister back to Townsville. It's always good to have the PM come visit and I'd also like to  welcome Jenny Morrison and my beautiful wife, Janet Thompson. And I think it's important to  acknowledge both our partners, because people often say that behind every strong man, there's an even  stronger woman. That may be the case, but I know in speaking on behalf of them as well, that our wives  don't stand behind us. They stand beside us and everything that we do, we do as a team. And I just think  it's important to acknowledge how strong our spouses are for the difficult job of being in Parliament we’re  always being away.

So we've had some good announcements in the veteran community, which you would have seen around  announcing a commissioner as well as a family advocate. We're also announcing something that's very  important in the veteran space and that's looking at how people transition and how people transition  successfully and transition into employment, but also having that one on contact whilst people are leaving  the Defence Force. Now, we’ve heard today out at Warfighter Cafe, we had a big group of veterans there  with a range of different needs, injuries, illnesses. Just different people. We heard some of the stories  about how they've transitioned out, what they think some touch points were and one of those was linking  to people and not feeling like a number. To be able to speak directly to a case manager or having that kind  of soft fall from the outside where you go into employment. Because when you're in defence, you're in  your tribe and you're a part of your family. And when you leave defence, sometimes you feel like you lose  a bit of your tribe or your family. So having case workers and case managers and targeting our at risk  veterans to have that support, to have that view and guidance into meaningful engagement, more  meaningful employment is something that I know from firsthand experience is not just an idea. It's a  brilliant package and it's something that I'm fully behind and all the veterans that were there today are  fully behind.

Now, it's also important to note that this time last year, we were flooded. This, where you’re standing  today, had been flooded and we've just been inside talking to people who have been flood victims, people  who have helped out business communities and having a conversation with me and the PM about where  we were and now where we are and where we’re going. And I think it's extremely important that the PM

is up here listening to people and not just having those conversations, but having the dialogue of where  we are and who we are as a resilient community. Because our community, it didn't matter what colour  political shirt you were wearing, no matter who you were in the street, the doors were opening and people  were helping one another. The military was out in their vehicles, on boats, so were the police, the SES,  Team Rubicon and the Fire Service and everyone pitched in together to help each other. We are a resilient  community and I’d like to thank the PM for coming up and welcome him back into Townsville.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks Phil and it is great to be with you and Jenna, mate, congratulations for the new  addition on the way. It’s tremendous news always, a great message of hope. A couple of things I wanted  to talk about today. Obviously, it’s very important to be back here in Townsville today. But before I do  that, as you know, it has been our Government's total focus in relation to the Coronavirus to ensure that  we are doing everything we can to ensure Australians are kept safe. We're doing everything on the best  medical advice to protect their health and well-being, whether here in Australia, most importantly, and  where we're able to assist those who have found themselves in difficulty overseas. Yesterday afternoon,  the Chief Medical Officer reported to the National Security Committee of Cabinet, which I convened  yesterday afternoon and provided us with advice in relation to the second flight that we are putting into  Wuhan. That at Christmas Island the configuration and the composition of the accommodation at the  Phosphate Hill and construction camp sites does not suit the purposes of quarantine because of the  inability to properly segregate and manage the population in that facility. So it is simply a configuration  issue. And so with that advice, we will be moving to the contingency plans for overflow that we've been  working on at the same time to ensure that we're prepared for things such as this when they present and  I've spoken to the Chief Minister Michael Gunner this morning and we're in contact with him through the  Home Affairs Minister yesterday after we came that decision we’d be using a mining camp facility in the  Northern Territory near Darwin and we are now working through the consultation phase with local  community and others about the implementation of those arrangements. That has been assessed by the  Chief Medical Officer, it is also being assessed by the Australian Border Force to be able to stand up those  facilities. My advice is that that is progressing extremely well and we will be able to continue to go down  the path of our planning for the second assisted departure flight. And again, I want to thank Qantas for  their great assistance in pulling that together, as well as the Chinese government for the arrangements  they have been able to support us to put in place. I would also stress this to all of those who are still in  mainland China, in particular, the travel ban is in place, but obviously not for Australian residents,  Australians and immediate family members. And if you are there, then there are still commercial flights  coming out of China to mainland China, to Australia. And I strongly suggest you avail yourself of those  because the government cannot guarantee that similar types of assisted departure arrangements would  be able to be put in place in the future, either into mainland China or again to Wuhan. I thank all the  consular officials who have been doing such an amazing job in Wuhan, in Hubei Province, to ensure the  successful undertaking of these assisted departure flights.

But here we are today, here we are in Townsville. The reason I'm here today, apart from making an  important announcement regarding support for veterans, is a year ago we were standing in floodwaters  here, those who were here at this facility a year ago. I was here around this time and I was here with Phil  and we saw the devastation on the ground and we saw the amazing response that came from the  community here in Townsville. The tremendous support that came from the ADF, particularly out of  Lavarack Barracks. And at the same time, across the range, I saw the complete devastation that we saw  across North Queensland, out to Cloncurry, Julia Creek through the Hughenden and all of those places.  And the reason I'm standing here today is to say it's been a year and I get it, that when a natural disaster  hits and the cameras move on, that we're still here and we're still rebuilding and the rebuilding work is  still taking place here in Townsville, as it continues to be taking place right across the Northern

Queensland. And the response effort that has been delivered by Commonwealth, state and local  governments, by community organizations has been extraordinary. And it carries an important message  for all of those communities who have been so devastated by bushfire most recently, but also by the  ongoing drought, that where these disasters hit we provide the immediate response and recovery  operations and then we know that this goes on for years and years and years. Well over $100 million in  disaster recovery payments were paid right here in Northern Queensland and in particular, an incredible  direct cash support that was coming through this community and the many other small business grants  and all these sorts of programs that were put in place that are now being put in place in other parts of the  country as a result of these terrible bushfires and the assistance that has been provided for drought. This  has been a comprehensive effort and we know you've got to stick in there for the long haul. I'm so  encouraged that I’ve come back here today and I've listened to people and their stories. They know  they’ve still got a long way to go, but they’re as committed today as they were a year ago and there's a  message of hope in that that when the community comes together, stays together, works together, then  it is able to create that future for their community. And that's very much what we're seeing here in  Townsville. I particularly want to thank Shane Stone, and his recovery flood agency, which has now  extended to drought that we launched right here in Townsville and the work that they've done not only  to support the community here, but right across Northern Queensland and in the affected areas and the  graziers and farmers and those who are affected so terribly by those floods a year ago. It has never left  my mind, never left my mind, as nor will the bushfires and the drought.

I'm also here today to announce something very important. As Phil said, early this week, we stood  together and we announced the National Commissioner for Veterans Suicide Prevention and we  announced the family advocate. And it was pleasing today to meet with so many of Phil’s, in some cases,  former veterans he served together with, his former Defence Force colleagues, but also many others. And  just to share and hear their stories and to receive their very positive feedback on this announcement and  get some good feedback on how that can be established and that the cases that it's going to need to look  into originally- initially, I should say, and that's around 400 or so cases they are planning to look at and  that will cover a broad range of these horrible circumstances to ensure we learn the lessons. But  importantly, it's about the future and ensuring that we know that this is a future problem. It's not a  problem in our past. It very much continues to be an issue that we need to address in the future and these  arrangements will help that. One of the things we've been doing now for some time is to be supporting  veterans as they've come out of the defence forces. And we know  they exit the defence forces in a broad  variety of circumstances. The vast majority go on to make amazing contributions. Our veterans aren’t  broken, they are the strongest amongst us and they have the biggest contributions to make, as Phil himself  has demonstrated in his own life. And the program we've announced today is to recognise that in just  over $10 million worth of funding, we're supporting two important programs. One is a transitional support  for employment, which will provide that assistance to veterans up to the age of 30. It was previously  provided to younger veterans as they come out and we're extending that program up to the age of 30,  which will provide them that support to help them get and find their career and move on into the next  period of service. Maybe not in uniform, but certainly a great service to the community. The other is to  recognise that there are more vulnerable individuals who come out of the defence forces and need  intensive case management support. And working with Veterans Affairs, we're able to identify those who  need that support and the funding we've announced today, around $5 million, is going to ensure that  every single one of those who identified gets that intensive case management support.

So when it comes to honouring our veterans, those for whom their eternal vigilance has been our dividend  of peace, then we need to show that same eternal vigilance for their health and their welfare and their  wellbeing and this is what these programs do. I'm pleased to be announcing them here in Townsville, in

this defence community, in this veterans community and then a veterans community that demonstrated  its value when they were in uniform, but also have continued to do that each and every day. Thank you.  Happy to take questions on these matters or on others. Actually why don’t we start with veterans and  Coronavirus of course before we go to politics.

JOURNALIST: Coronavirus first?

PRIME MINISTER: Yep.

JOURNALIST: So how quickly will that facility in Northern Territory take to come online?

PRIME MINISTER: We have a plan for that return flight to be returning to Australia in a matter of days.  The advice I have is that we will be able to stand that facility up within that time.

JOURNALIST: This is the Inpex Facility that houses 3,500 people, is there any plans to bring any more  facilities online or should that be enough?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, at this stage that my advice is that that will deal with the immediate requirements,  but we'll continue to identify other contingency options, if indeed that becomes necessary.

JOURNALIST: Adjacent to that facility there's a school, are you guys confident there's going to be no  chance of the virus escaping?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, that's my advice. And that's why the Chief Medical Officer is up there today and  he and the Health Minister will be making further announcements confirming these arrangements in more  detail today. And that is the consultation for implementation that's going on at the moment. I want to  thank Chief Minister Gunner and his Health Minister for the close work they're doing with the Federal  Government as we work through those details. But it's very cooperative that it is absolutely possible to  put those sorts of assurances in place in the way that these facilities are managed.

JOURNALIST: A Qantas flight today that was coming back from Wuhan originally is now back in  commercial use and passengers have already taken that particular jet. Is it safe for that jet to be back in  operation?

PRIME MINISTER: It wouldn’t be back in operation, Qantas wouldn’t have it back in operation unless it  was meeting all those standards and requirements.

JOURNALIST: So the passengers aboard that jet can feel totally safe.

PRIME MINISTER: That's what Qantas has assured.

JOURNALIST: Given what’s happened on the Diamond Princess in Japan, are you considering stopping  cruise ships coming into Australia?

PRIME MINISTER: No, that is not under advice at the moment. No one has recommended that, that those  Australians who are on board that vessel a number of additional cases have been confirmed of Australians  on that vessel, which is up in Japan, they're getting consular support, they're being transferred to medical

facilities in Japan, as the other two were, and there are quite a number of other Australians on board that  ship who are in quarantine on that vessel.

JOURNALIST: How many people will be on that flight next evacuated to Darwin?

PRIME MINISTER: I cannot confirm those numbers for you at the moment. Those issues and the  confirmation of the manifest and the process for embarkation is one that is also jointly managed by the  Chinese government and there are checks that are also done at that stage but the Department of Foreign  Affairs and Trade and consular officials have been working through that manifest and those who will be  getting on board that plane.

JOURNALIST: So no timeline at this stage?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, at this point on, I'm not confirming those arrangements because we are still  looking to confirm the arrangements for the quarantine and where they go when they disembark. But I'm  confident, based on the advice I've received, that we’re going to be able to stay with the original timetable  and we're working through those final details today.

JOURNALIST: On the Commissioner, a lot of veterans would still prefer a Royal Commission purely because  of the transparency, because it would be public, rather than, as you said, that the commissioner role  would be more private. Do you understand the veterans concerns that it won't be as public and  transparent, given it's not going to be a royal commission?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, it's better than a royal commission. That's why we're doing it. A royal commission  looks back into the past and what we're establishing is a national commissioner with the powers of a royal  commission to compel witnesses and that's a very important power, independent of the Defence Force,  of the Department of Veteran Affairs, with an ability to look into every single case and not only to work  with the coroner on that in terms to be able to identify what has occurred, but also to make  recommendations in relation to policy more broadly. But that commissioner will also be able to look into  cases more broadly of attempted suicides and be able to learn from those to better inform government  policy to ensure that we're saving lives. I believe this will be far more effective in saving lives. I’m about  saving lives when it comes to preventing suicide.

There will be an annual report at the very least from this commissioner and there will be close workings  with the families and others who have been directly impacted and the hard questions are going to be  asked and I've make sure of that the commissioner asking the questions will have that legal authority to  ask them and compel the answers. We need to get the answers here so we can act on the truth of what  has occurred. And I have no doubt the commission will be given the teeth to do just that. There's a lot of  different views on this topic. There are veterans who are very opposed to a royal commission. There are  veterans who are supportive of it. But I must say that since we've announced this, and Phil you may want  to comment,  particularly on who you’ve been talking to up here, there's been a widespread support for  the direction the government is taking and we appreciate that. And we will be listening very carefully  about its implementation as well. We've got to where we are, which is better than a royal commission,  because it has the powers of a royal commission. It goes into the future permanently. I mean, this is a  legacy for generations into the future of veterans. And that's much better than a point in time inquiry  which goes for 18 months. There's been lots of royal commissions and lots of things and they have their  place. But this is an ongoing issue and I want something in place that is ongoing. Phil, did you want to  comment on that?



PHILLIP THOMPSON OAM MP, MEMBER FOR HERBERT: Yeah, thanks PM. I stood up with Prime Minister,  Minister for Defence and Minister for Veterans Affairs for this announcement. And there is no way I would  have stood up if I didn't believe in my heart this is going to be something that is far better than a  standalone royal commission that will be finished in 18 months, two years, and then carry over at a later  time, get a report and everything's done. This is something that'll be ongoing and working closely with the  veteran community. I've put it on, you know, my social media , I’ve put it out there to everyone. I've been  taking calls since the announcement from people that aren’t my way in politics whatsoever, and that's a  good thing. And one thing that I want to stress to everyone is your job, the public's job, is to keep me  accountable and to keep what I've said truthful and the ministers and the PM. So it doesn't matter what  colour shirt you wear, and we have support from crossbenchers as well as people in the Labor Party and  this is great. Because this isn't about politics. It isn't about political point scoring. It's about saving lives.  It's about understanding where touch points were and what's the things that have happened in the past  to better put in solutions and preventative measures into the future. The veterans we spoke with today,  the majority were very positive and they have tough questions. Good. That's good. You should have tough  questions and you should ask the tough questions to myself and to the Minister and to the Prime Minister  because that's your job as a community is to keep us accountable and make sure that we're doing what  you, what the people want. And in the veteran community, the majority of the people that I've spoken to  and that contacted me are very supportive. And I look forward to working closely with the commissioner,  the family advocate, and of course, the Minister who is now in Cabinet, which is great for the veteran  community. And, you know, the PM's door's always been open to his members of parliament and to pretty  much everyone. So we'll be speaking a lot about this and doing what's right for the community.

JOURNALIST: PM, do we know, do we have a timeframe of when the commissioners get on the ground?  We have a short list of people that could the commissioner?

PRIME MINISTER: We’re working through those details and we’re going through a proper selection  process to do that.

JOURNALIST: How do you plan to deal with Barnaby Joyce if he or any of his supporters threaten to cross  the floor?

PRIME MINISTER: When a member makes a decision on how they would vote in the parliament along the  lines you’ve mentioned, they do so on the basis of a long-held conviction or position or as it was a matter  of principle of policy. That's something that's afforded to every Coalition member of Parliament, and I  have no doubt that that sort of decision would never be exercised in a way that would be anything other  than based on a very important point of principle or policy, so, you know, I have that same respect for  every single member of the Government team. I'm sure government members would only ever act in that  way.

JOURNALIST: How can the Government have a sports grants program designed at promoting women in  sport that doesn’t have a public tender process, an application process, rules or guidelines?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, the applications for the program you’re referring to were four times  oversubscribed were made, the Minister made the final decision and that was set out in the guidelines  that she would and it’s been able to deliver important facilities all across the country and those who have  received that support I know have been very appreciative of it.

JOURNALIST: In Western Australia $57 million was spent on swimming and there are, you know, why was  there money not spent on ensuring women had appropriate change room facilities?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, there were 60 projects making sure that women had appropriate change room  facilities. That's 60 projects across the country. That's fantastic.

JOURNALIST: Any in Western Australia?

PRIME MINISTER: I can't give you the precise details across every single state and territory. But I know  across the whole country there was 60. That's fantastic.

JOURNALIST: Some councils also found out they’d been given money through local newspapers. How is  that an appropriate use of taxpayer money?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, you'd have to tell me those instances and I’d be happy to look at those for you.  Because I don’t necessarily accept that’s what happened.

JOURNALIST: In the Australian this afternoon there were comments from moderate Liberals that said  Senate… sorry, you know, Barnaby Joyce and Matt Canavan could rip Mr Pitt to shreds. Do you think that  Mr Pitt is up to the job and do you expect your backbenchers to give him a hard time?

PRIME MINISTER: I expect Mr Pitt to do an outstanding job. He'll be Pitt the performer up here for North  Queensland in particular, as we talked about yesterday. I mean, this is a bloke who was a sugar cane  farmer and he was a tradie and he's an electrical engineer and even better than that, he's a Queenslander  and even better than that, he's a North Queenslander. So how could he do anything other than an amazing  job? And it's great to have him in the team. I've known Keith for many years and he's helped me address  many difficult problems as a backbencher, as an assistant minister. He's got great capabilities and I think  he's going to add some real experience, one, and some real intellectual horsepower and expertise to the  tasks that I have given him obviously on the recommendation of the leader of the Nationals, as that is the  nature of the Coalition agreement. I think he was a great pick. I think he was a fantastic pick.

JOURNALIST: He’s a big supporter of coal and he’ll be working in North Queensland which has the Great  Barrier Reef. Do you expect him to fight just as hard for protection of the Reef as he does for fossil fuels?

PRIME MINISTER: I expect him to do his job. And I know like I do, I'm interested in ensuring that  communities up here in Northern Queensland have the industries that support their livelihoods, their  jobs, their wellbeing, their futures, their hopes, so they can pay the mortgage, so they can send their kids  to school, that they can see themselves living here long-term. And I know that's how Keith feels about all  of these things. And, you know, the pristine nature of the wonderful environment people live in North  Queensland would be as dear to his heart as it would be to any other North Queenslander. So, you know,  I don't see these things as working contrary to those interests.

JOURNALIST: The bushfire affected towns on the south coast are facing a lot of red tape and forcing places  to close. What are your [inaudible]?

PRIME MINISTER: Our involvement in that program is to pay for it. The rollout of the program, the  assessment process, the handling of the applications, that is done by the New South Wales state

government. And I'd be urging them to move those things as quickly as they possibly can, both for the  loans and the grants. The guidelines for those went out earlier this week and there were hundreds of  expressions of interest that had come in for those grants. And as I said, in the House of Representatives,  this week when I went through all of that, you know, I would be urging the New South Wales government  to be able to move on that as quickly as possible. And if there are things that we can do to assist them to  make that happen, then I have no doubt that they'd be raising that through, particularly Andrew Colvin  as the head of the National Bushfire Recovery Agency to ensure if there is any obstacles there that need  to be moved from a federal point of view, they would be. But I'm not aware of any federal obstacles to  that. We're paying for it overwhelmingly as we should and as I promised we would and as we saw here up  in Queensland and North Queensland when the floods hit, it was the same process. We supported by  funding the $75,000 grants to primary producers, matching grants with zero interest loans for restocking  right across the western part of North Queensland. But it was the Queensland government that did the  assessments and I think they did a great job, too, by the way. I thought [inaudible] did a fantastic job and  they've been a great partner in delivering the support that the Commonwealth Government put the  resources up to pay for. And that partnership delivered a great result, I think, as difficult as that still  remains for many of these producers and small businesses. So that's the model which has worked in  Queensland and I'm sure in New South Wales they'll be up to the job of what the Queensland Government  were able to do there and rolling out that support that the federal government has made available  through the state government. Thanks very much, everyone.

[END]

Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

