

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  NATIONAL PRESS CLUB Q&A  CANBERRA  THURSDAY, 27 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Aged care crisis; neglect from the Government on aged care;  superannuation; Aged Care Royal Commission; Belt and Road Initiative; state  border closures; Labor Party’s policies; next federal election; coronavirus  pandemic; JobKeeper and JobSeeker issues; Government’s response to COVID-19.

SABRA LANE: Thank you, Mr Albanese. There is a piece from the Royal Commission last  year that I'd like to talk to you about, it's called ‘The History of Aged Care Reviews’. It was  a background paper prepared for the commission. And it found something like 40 reviews  over the last 40 years, about half done in the last 20 years. And while the questions haven't  changed about aged care, the underlying concern still is the system hasn't been  performing as it should. It found that it's often difficult to determine the Australian  Government responses to all of these reviews because they come years after the reviews  are actually handed down. The responses are often opaque. The changes often too slow  to eventuate or actually fall away over time. And that governments, plural, have responded  with ad hoc reforms that have not fixed the underlying problems. Isn't the sad truth that  both the major political parties have failed aged care?

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: The truth is  that we need to do better. That's the truth. The entire political system. But it's also the truth  that the interim report came down on 31 October last year. I responded with my fourth  vision statement, which was on respecting and valuing older Australians, given in  Brisbane, before the pandemic, before this issue. I was talking about workforce issues. I  was talking about what we needed to do to address this issue. The Government says that  it responded to the interim report, tick done. Quite clearly, if this is post-response to the  interim report, it's simply not good enough.

LANE: Reminder to everyone; your name, the organisation you work with, one question  per person and we're going to wrap it hard on 1:30. Thank you. Katharine Murphy?

KATHARINE MURPHY: I'm afraid of Sabra, so I'll be very good. Katharine Murphy from  The Guardian Australia. You were critical in your speech about for-profit aged care. The  Victorian Liberal MP Russell Broadbent, in a critique this week, said for-profit aged care  had basically turned the Australian system into a disaster waiting to happen. So, my  question to you is would Labor, post-Royal Commission, contemplate a restructuring of the

Australian aged care system that would end for-profit aged care?

ALBANESE: What we will do is wait for the final report of the Royal Commission. But  what's very clear is that once you moved from, essentially, a public system into the  privatisation of a whole section of the sector, that needed to be accompanied by very  strong regulation. By strong inspection processes. By making sure that there was  transparency, the sort of transparency that I have spoken about today that the Royal  Commissioners have spoken about. So, we will come up with a more comprehensive long-term plan for aged care after the Royal Commission finalises its report at the beginning of  next year. But what is very clear is that the problems that have arisen, if you look at where  they are, they are almost exclusively in the for-profit system at the moment. And that  should tell the story about a failure to properly regulate the system, which is the  Commonwealth's responsibility.

LANE: Tamsin Rose.

TAMSIN ROSE: Thanks. Tamsin Rose from The Herald Sun. Thanks for the speech. I was  just wondering, you've previously stated that you wouldn't support a Belt and Road  Initiative if you led the country. With the announcement made today about this new  legislation, does that mean you'd be supportive of this scheme? And have you expressed  your views on Belt and Road to the Victorian Premier?

ALBANESE: I have expressed it publicly that the Government I lead would not participate  in the scheme. And we haven't seen the legislation yet at all. We'll examine the legislation.  But the idea that the national interests should be looked after by the Federal Government  when it comes to foreign policy is something that we're very supportive of. I would regard it  as completely unremarkable. What I do find remarkable for the Government to answer is  why Simon Birmingham indeed welcomed the Victorian decision over BRI and why it is that  the Federal Government sat by and allowed the Port of Darwin to be sold off to a company  that is connected with a non-Australian government. And at the time, not in retrospect, at  the time, as the infrastructure spokesperson, I was very critical of that decision.

LANE: Tom McIlroy.

TOM MCILROY: Thanks, Albo. Tom McIlroy from the Financial Review. The Royal  Commission released research today that said as much as $3.2 billion would be needed to  bring all of Australia's aged care sector up to the best practice, best standard of care. Is  that about the right price? And will Labor be looking at that kind of funding if you win next  year?

ALBANESE: I have Jim Chalmers here, Katy Gallagher is our Finance spokesperson. But  I'm not about to put dollar attachments. We'll do that in the lead-up to the election of any  commitments we make. But the Royal Commission has clearly identified the shortfall that's  there. It's a shortfall of money. But it's also a shortfall of structure.

Some of these problems aren't just about dollars, some of the problems I have identified  and solutions. I sat down with Susan Templeman and relatives last Thursday in Richmond  in the Hawkesbury. They told stories about a nursing home that's failed accreditation  where the relatives of many of these residents were, and notice being given. They still  failed, but notice of a week being given, ‘We're going to come and do an inspection in a  week's time’. Bit like me giving a week's notice about what questions are coming at 2

o’clock in the Parliament. It's bad practice. And a whole range of these things, some of  them, will be about dollars, but many of them aren't.

LANE: Is there a danger in promising more money? Given I have spoken to experts this  week. They say about one in four homes, aged care homes, is actually doing quite well  and if the Government funds more, there's a risk of that going to shareholders.

ALBANESE: That's one of the things that we need to look at. The examples that I gave of,  at the same time as you have these massive problems some of the very companies that  are failing accreditation are doing very well, doing very well. What I want to see is the  residents doing well. What we have at the moment is some of the investors doing very well  and appearing on the BRW Rich List. I think we've got our priorities wrong as a nation  when that's the case. And we need to address it.

LANE: David Crowe.

DAVID CROWE: Thanks. David Crowe from the Sydney Morning Herald and the Age.  Thanks for your speech. In recent days you seem a bit reluctant to criticise any of the state  premiers for their border controls. Yet we've seen that people can't get across the border to  go to hospital, can't get across a border to go to work. We have seen Nationals speak up  about this. We saw the Business Council of Australia and 28 groups say that there needs  to be an end to this patch work and national principles. Do you fault any of the premiers for  the way they're using these or imposing these state border controls? Do you support a  stronger national regime for how these border closures are actually managed?

ALBANESE: Well, I make two points and you quite rightly identified that I haven't singled  out premiers. I've been consistent. And I have said that two issues apply here. One is that  the state leaders, in the absence of national leadership, need to listen to their respective  state medical advisors, the Chief Medical Officer, they have different titles in different  states. I certainly think that when you look at Western Australia, for example, I've been  very critical of the Federal Government joining in with Clive Palmer on an appeal. I was  with Mark McGowan. I was against Clive Palmer and Scott Morrison on that issue. In  Queensland, they were singled out by the Government as well, Annastacia Palaszczuk. I  think people look back at when that criticism was made and probably think that it served  Queensland well. So, that's the first point. And the same as Tasmania and South Australia  have, of course, had closed borders. But the Federal Government has ignored them. I  think that in terms of the National Cabinet, what is very obvious now is that it isn't a  National Cabinet. I call it the ‘so-called National Cabinet’ because that was always the  case. From the Sunday when Gladys Berejiklian and Daniel Andrews essentially stood  Scott Morrison up on school closures, what happens now at so-called National Cabinet is  state premiers all tell each other what they're doing, and Scott Morrison goes out and  announces it and pretends it is a national decision and then spends the time in between  the National Cabinet meetings criticising the decision that he's been a part of. That's not a  cabinet. And I do think that it's up to Scott Morrison to explain why it is that there isn't a  national approach to these issues including borders. It's up to him to explain. He made the  decision to have a so-called National Cabinet that excluded the Federal Opposition. And I  haven't complained about that, that's a decision for him. But he has a responsibility for it.  It's up to him to explain the contradiction that's there between pretending there's a cabinet  when there's clearly nothing like cabinet-based decision making.

LANE: Greg Brown.



GREG BROWN: Greg Brown from The Australian. Mr Albanese, since you became Labor  Leader you said you want to hasten slowly in announcing policies, but you have made  some commitments. Before COVID you committed to increasing Newstart, the welfare  measure, and also to net zero emissions. And post-COVID, during the by-election, you  committed to more money for the ABC. But we've heard no policies about the biggest  cohort that turned its back on Labor, aspirational workers and small business owners. So,  what is the evidence that you've shifted the Party's focus and appeal away from a narrow  progressive base to a broader constituency with a message that can win over the middle?

ALBANESE: Greg, you've got to go back and have a look at the speeches that we have  laid out.

BROWN: No, policy commitments. So, you've made policy commitments in the areas.

ALBANESE: What's our commitment on Newstart?

BROWN: You've committed to increase Newstart.

ALBANESE: Yes, we've said it should be higher, something that the Government's  conceded. We're saying $40 a day isn't enough and something in terms of when they've  got the supplement through JobSeeker, something that they have conceded. The fact is  that we will outline all of our policies. But we have also put in place a range of measures  including saying that we should be concerned about jobs and the future of work. We have  created Jobs and Skills Australia, is what we have committed to. That was the first  commitment that we have made. A core commitment about assisting small business to  grow into medium-sized businesses. And medium-sized businesses to grow into large  business. A core commitment that's about aspiration. That's about identifying what  Australia's future work patterns look like and giving Australians the skills and the training to  deliver it. Good for them. But also good for the business community. That was the first  commitment that I made as Labor Leader. Something that's fundamental to our economy.  Something that's been ignored by the current Government. Something that's about  aspiration. Something that's about creating opportunity.

I see myself as the embodiment of aspiration. You know, a kid who grew up in a council  house with a single mum, and who has risen to be Leader of the Labor Party, the first  person in my family to finish school but who got the opportunity to go to university because  we believed in the power of education to change people's lives. I want to translate that into  support, in terms of growth in the economy, about aspiration, not just for individuals, but  aspiration for the sort of country we can be. A fairer country. A country that grows. But a  country that recognises that growing the economy isn't the end in itself. I want an economy  that works for people not the other way around.

LANE: Michelle Grattan.

MICHELLE GRATTAN: Michelle Grattan from the Conversation. Mr Albanese, can I take  you back to Katharine Murphy's question where I think you were fairly generalised, but  you've been around these issues a long time in Government and in Opposition and  obviously delved greatly into them in the current situation. In general, do you believe that  reform of the aged care sector is basically a matter of changing and improving regulation of  the present structure or do you think there needs to be some shift in the funding model

which moves it somewhat away from the for-profit sector towards the not-for-profit  sector/government funding/government-run homes and so on, which on the evidence out  this week seemed to perform better?

ALBANESE: I think, undoubtedly, and I was a former Shadow Minister for Aged Care, I  was Shadow Minister for Ageing and Seniors under Simon Crean's leadership, and I  believe that the changes that will be required will include structural changes, to the  structure of the industry. Quite clearly, we have to be very open to that. And I think that will  be undoubtedly a part of the Royal Commission's recommendations and something that  should be a part of the Royal Commission's recommendations.

GRATTAN: Thank you.

LANE: Andrew Clennell.

ANDREW CLENNELL: Mr Albanese, Andrew Clennell, Sky News. Do you expect the next  election to be next year? And do you accept it will be difficult to win because Scott  Morrison's happy to go to the centre, and even the left, in terms of things like the $200  billion stimulus, any ground you can campaign on he seems to take.

ALBANESE: I expect the election will be sometime between August 2021 and May 2022.  And I'll be ready each and every one of those days, as will my entire team. One of the  things that we've done during this period is develop a draft platform for the party, is to  develop a whole range of policies that we've used the time that we have through a range of  Shadow Cabinet subcommittees that we have to be able to go forward whenever the  button is pressed. We will have a smaller agenda than Labor took to the last election. That  doesn't mean it's a less ambitious agenda. It just means that when you've got 284 things to  talk about, that's a very long doorknock if you want to go through the list. And what I want  as Labor Leader is to have a series of commitments that are clearly understood, that are  able to be articulated in a clear way. And I believe we're well-positioned. I think that by the  time we get to the next election, the Government will be shooting for more than a decade  in office, longer than the Howard Government is what they'll be asking for. Say what you  like about John Howard, I was critical of a range of measures that he had, but you knew  what he stood for. Speak about Scott Morrison, you know, shifting to the centre, I don't  think it's a matter of that. I think it's just a matter of Scott Morrison being shifty.

And the fact is that at the time of the next election, people will be asking themselves, ‘Am I  better off than I was in 2013? What are the economic, social or environmental reforms that  the Coalition Government of eight or nine years standing, shooting for more than a decade,  will be remembered for?’ I know what our legacy is from our short time in office. In terms of  the Rudd and Gillard Governments. And it's Labor Governments that change things. It's  Labor Governments that do the big reforms. It's Labor Governments that will be required,  the values that will be required to take us into the economic recovery. And I believe we will  be successful at the next election. But that will be a matter for the Australian people. But  we will have a strong, coherent narrative about growing the economy, about supporting  jobs as the core principle but also about good social policy including looking after  vulnerable Australians, not leaving people behind, as well as acting on environmental  challenges such as climate change.

LANE: Andrew Probyn.

ADNREW PROBYN: Mr Albanese, Andrew Probyn from the ABC. The Labor Party's been  on a bit of a journey when it comes to the Belt and Road Initiative. Back in September  2017, Chris Bowen said that Labor would have an open-mind on collaborating with China  on BRI. And Penny Wong said that Labor wouldn't be reflexively negative to the BRI. At  what point of time and why did you have a rethink about the Belt and Road Initiative?

LANE: No, sorry, mate, no second questions.

PROBYN: Port of Darwin, should that be reconsidered?

ALBANESE: Well, it would be interesting to see the legislation, won't it, to see how fair  dinkum the Government is. Whether it's about a headline today or whether it's about  actually changes. That'll be interesting for the Government to determine. With regard to  BRI, in terms of the response, without going into a long answer about the changes that  have occurred in international politics, I think it's fair to say that the stance of the People's  Republic of China has changed under Xi in recent times. They are far  more interventionist than was the case under previous regimes. And that, of course, has to  be taken into account when we're talking about Australia's national interests.

LANE: Tegan George.

TEGAN GEORGE: Mr Albanese, Tegan George from Network 10. Earlier today we heard  Minister Colbeck talking about the aged care COVID response in the Senate. He conceded  there have been missteps. In your opinion what was the first misstep, the first crucial thing  the Government missed specifically during this pandemic and when do you believe it  happened?

ALBANESE: It happened when Scott Morrison went to the courtyard on the Thursday  afternoon after Question Time had finished. He went there and stood up with a document  and said, ‘Here is the outline of our plan to deal with COVID’. And in it, it said, ‘We're  responsible for aged care’, and there was no plan. No specific aged care plan from the  Government in spite of the fact that they had the interim report in October, they had the  overseas experience in January and February that showed in places like Italy and Spain  and others that had major outbreaks during this pandemic first. They failed to learn any of  the experience which had already taken place overseas, the older people were particularly  vulnerable and the aged care sector. So, for example, overseas one of the things that they  did was very quickly move people into hospitals. And to separate out, once there was an  infection. That was something they learnt. We didn't learn from anything. What we had,  and Minister Colbeck today in Parliament, I forget the exact term that he used, but I'm sure  it will appear on 2, 7, 9, 10 and SBS tonight saying, ‘Everything's hunky dory and we did  well’. The boast that I quoted from Greg Hunt in the speech, I think it traces back to then,  to that document. Again, they had the marketing document done, they just didn't do the  follow-up.

LANE: Pablo Vinales.

PABLO VINALES: Pablo Vinales, SBS news. Mr Albanese, since the last election we  have seen a lot of anxiety from some in the party about winning back the more  conservative regional voters. And there are some parallels with that when you look at  multicultural voters, the same-sex marriage plebiscite, Labor electorates had a very high  ‘No’ turn-out in Sydney. And even the vaccine that's come out, some religious leaders are

expressing concerns about that. How is Labor going to balance its more progressive views  and try and win over multicultural voters towards the next election?

ALBANESE: We had a test recently in a regional seat. Whether you go north, south, east  or west from here, Kristy McBain is the local member. From Yass to Batlow, across to the  coast, down to Cooma, Kristy McBain is the local member. A real test, not a fantasy, a real  test whereby for those of you who live in Canberra you will know that the Liberal Party  outspent us massively during that by-election campaign. Because you couldn't turn on a  TV without getting book-ended ads during every ad break. So, we've had a test. The fact is  that there's nothing new about Labor as a party of government which seeks to represent all  Australians but seeks to get the support of a majority of Australians. And that means that  we have to appeal very broadly. I see my own seat as a bit of a microcosm of that. A seat  that, yes, has some wealthier people with gentrification, but also has the highest number of  boarding houses of any electorate in Australia, that also has a significant multicultural  population. Whether it's the Portuguese in Petersham, the Chinese in Ashfield, the Greeks  in Marrickville, the Lebanese in the southern part of the electorate, the Italians in Leichardt  and Haberfield. I've been forced each and every day that I've been in Parliament, and I  wouldn't have got here were I not able to appeal to people of different backgrounds,  different faiths, and to give respect to those views. I'm working very strongly with  multicultural communities. I'll continue to do so. And what we've seen this week from the  Liberal Party is Michael Sukkar, the Assistant Treasurer, involved with people in Victoria  who used a derogatory term to people of background from, not Mr Sukkar, but the group  involved, of people from subcontinent backgrounds using people in a way that is entirely  inappropriate. Michael Sukkar's still sitting in the Parliament as the Assistant Treasurer in  spite of the fact that each day Nine newspapers have had new revelations. Compare that  with the action that I took when I saw inappropriate behaviour in my Party.

LANE: Chris Uhlmann.

CHRIS UHLMANN: Mr Albanese, Chris Uhlmann, Nine News. You said that JobKeeper  should taper but not at the end of the September, you said the borders should open but not  now. So, if not a date then a marker as to when JobKeeper should start to taper and what  would you be looking for, for borders to reopen?

ALBANESE: Well, JobKeeper, we're concerned at the moment, for example, we're  concerned with the legislation that's before the Parliament. And we moved amendments  yesterday that were defeated. Under JobKeeper at the moment, the way that it's designed,  this legislation, a company that has lost 10 per cent of its revenue can remove 40 per cent  of the work available to an individual worker. So, essentially move from five days to three  days’ work. That worker, if you're a retail worker, unless changes are made, could be  earning less money than someone working for a less successful company who's eligible for  the entire JobKeeper payment. So, that's the concern that we had with the design of the  system. We are concerned also that an early removal will result in a longer and a deeper  recession. And indeed, changed the legislation last time Parliament sat to give Minister  Frydenberg the opportunity to change without going back to Parliament. We gave them  that flexibility because we were concerned that people were missing out. So, it needs to be  based upon the circumstances at the time. We know now that we certainly aren't through  this. And the Government, bear in mind, with its snap-back policy, the reason why we've  got to have legislation at all is that it was all going to end in September. It was all going to  be back to normal and all government support withdrawn. That clearly was premature. Our  call was right. The Government was wrong. We'll continue to push the Government to



make sure that we're defended. On borders, I don't want restrictions of any sort to be there  for one day more than is necessary, be very clear. That's my position. But at the same  time, I do think that we need to listen to the medical advice. And we do need, I think, for  the Government, when it comes to the so-called National Cabinet, to actually have  something that looks like a national process coming out of it.

LANE: We are close to time. Mr Albanese, thank you very much. Everybody, please join  me in thanking Anthony Albanese.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053





