

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT

INTERVIEW WITH SABRA LANE, ABC AM  FRIDAY 28 FEBRUARY 2020



EO&E…

SABRA LANE: Scott Morrison, good morning and welcome to the program.

PRIME MINISTER: Good morning, Sabra.

LANE: Prime Minister, how can people stay calm when there are headlines like Plague Alert?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, people, I think, can feel assured that Australia got ahead of this early and we're  staying ahead of this, as in the report that just went to air there are only 8 Australians currently recovering  from coronavirus, all 15 previously who would come here from Wuhan they've all cleared now and they've  overcome the virus. I mean, so right now, there is no community transmission, human to human  transmission that is occurring in Australia. But with the spread of the virus into many more countries, over  40, then that means it's getting to a level now where we have to be prepared to deal with any, of the virus  coming to Australia. And as it was also when that report that the plan is about slowing that down, making  sure that the system is able to cope with that, no country is better prepared than Australia.

LANE: Sure but,

PRIME MINISTER: And that’s why people can feel assured.

LANE: A Coronavirus outbreak could hit in tandem with the normal flu season. State health ministers are  meeting today, and the New South Wales Health Minister Brad Hazzard wants the federal government to  give the states more money to help with this. Will the federal government oblige?

PRIME MINISTER: Well the health ministers are meeting today and this is all states and territories and the  Commonwealth working together to address this, we’ll consider any of those issues on their merits. But  equally, the states, I'm sure, would be stumping up as well. I mean, we're all in this. We've all got to deal  with it. And I'm sure that the states wouldn't be looking to try anything on here. They'd just be looking to  work together to make sure we can do the best thing by our population and we'll work with everybody to  achieve that.

LANE: The federal government's emphasizing the need to be well-prepared, one Australian virologist has  encouraged people to make sure they've got enough medication and canned food for a fortnight. Some  supermarkets have already run out of hand sanitizer, for example. What's your message to people about  stockpiling foods? Is that panicky or being prepared?

PRIME MINISTER: I think people should remain calm. And I mean, the government is going around, some  essential issues, particularly when it comes to masks and things of that nature that that personal  protective equipment for key workers in areas. And that's what the plan is all about. I think it's very  important that people should feel assured about where we are. There's no need for them to take drastic  or extreme measures or anything like that, they should go about their business. That's the best thing they  can do also for the economy Sabra, they should continue to go out. They should continue to participate.  They should enjoy life. I mean it's a beautiful day here in Sydney. I'm sure it is in many places also around  the country, weekends coming up. People should go about their normal business and have assurance that  the government is working with states and territories to ensure that we're well prepared.  We've got  ahead of this. We're staying ahead of this and we'll get through it.

LANE: You’re flagging targeted stimulus, potentially, to badly affected sectors like tourism and universities  after downplaying that for weeks. Those sectors and companies, what should they expect on how much  stimulus the Federal Government is prepared to offer?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I don't agree with your assertion we’ve downplayed it at all, Sabra. We’ve been  very clear.

LANE: Well, on Tuesday, you said the Government wasn’t into extreme fiscal responses when asked about  whether you were considering fiscal stimulus.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I'm not interested in extreme fiscal responses and never have been. I don't think  extreme fiscal responses are the right answer, and neither does Treasury, and that's what I said yesterday.  What Treasury has advised is that we should have a targeted, modest and scalable response to this. The  target is essential because different parts of the economy are affected in different ways. It's not just  tourism, has obviously already been impacted, not just by the coronavirus, but in parts of the country and  more broadly, by the bushfires. And we already have some pretty significant measures on promoting  domestic tourism in and working right now. But there are other parts of the fishing industry, the marine  industry, the broader second round effects of the students as well, going to restaurants, being in the  economy. And so the effects are quite broad, but we're considering how we can make a difference in  those areas. We can't make it like the coronavirus doesn't exist. Of course we can't do that. But nor are  we being advised to or nor would it be responsible to go around borrowing lots of money to splash it  around. That is not what the Government is considering.

LANE: Sure. But the hit to the economy could be quite significant. This week alone, we've seen $100 billion  off the ASX. The tourism sector, as you've mentioned, has been badly affected. Companies are struggling  because their supply chains to China have stopped.

PRIME MINISTER: I know that and that's why the Government is considering the measures which are  Treasury and the Treasurer are pulling together right now and they'll build on the measures that we've  already got in place to respond to the bushfires as well, particularly in the tourism sector. And so we  believe that that is necessary and that's certainly the advice we're getting. But the advice we're also  getting is that it should be targeted, it should be modest and it should be scalable to be able to take it to

another level, if that's what's necessary. I mean, the challenge of this virus and this is the economic advice  we're getting, Sabra, is had this event, this virus was being seen like a SARS/MERS type economic impact.  In very recent days, the Treasury has now said no, this is turning into a very different type of event and  that's why we will need to now take a different approach. And so we're responding to that advice, just  like we respond to the expert advice we're getting from the health professionals, which has kept us ahead  of this now for many, many weeks.

LANE: All right. If schools and day care centres are forced to shut in the weeks ahead and more parents  are looking after kids at home that could be, combined, quite a shock for the Australian economy. What  should Australians be braced for?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, right now, there is no suggestion that that will be necessary. And the Education  Minister I tasked yesterday to work with the states and territories around issues like childcare centres as  well as schools. Now, Australia is not in the position… I mean, today Japan has made a decision about  keeping kids out of schools for some months now going forward. Now, that is not a decision we need to  take in Australia. There's no need for that. And there is also not the medical advice currently which  suggests children particularly been more vulnerable to the virus. Those who are more vulnerable are those  of the elderly. And so the bigger impact would be in things like aged care facilities, the ability to lock those  down and to have the right care and support to those who are working in those places. And that's what  the emergency response plan actually does. So I think it's important that people don't get too far ahead  of themselves and they can go about their business today and have the assurance that the Government  is planning for the various scenarios that could present tomorrow and in the weeks and months ahead.

LANE: On another matter, the sports grant Senate inquiry yesterday heard that the final round of funding  for the scheme wasn't approved by Senator McKenzie's office until after Parliament had been prorogued  for the election.

PRIME MINISTER: That's not true, Sabra.

LANE: How can that not be a breach of caretaker conventions?

PRIME MINISTER: But that's not true, Sabra. That's actually not true.

LANE: Isn’t that what the Committee heard yesterday?

PRIME MINISTER: They heard that it was authorised on the 4th of April, 2019. That's what the testimony  from Sports Australia was. It was signed on the 4th of April, 2019. That was the authorization of the brief  that went on that matter. So the suggestion that it was signed at some time later, well, there's no basis  for that.

LANE: The Sports Commission officials also say that it formally warned your Government in several emails  about politicising this grants process. Why were those warnings ignored?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I'm not sure what you're referring to. The Government made decisions through  the Sports Minister to award grants to a range of projects around the country and then the Government  announced those.

LANE: You've previously said that all sports grants were eligible. Given the evidence that we've heard from  this inquiry, do you now concede that by the time the funding agreements were signed, that many of  them, around 40 per cent, were not eligible for various reasons?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, the issue here is, Sabra, when the Minister made the decision and authorized the  projects and this is what the Auditor General's report found at that time and it says it clearly in the report  that there weren't any ineligible projects. If projects subsequently became ineligible for the simple reason  that project works may have commenced… so let's just understand what that ineligibility that the Auditor  General is referring to is. It meant that communities, sports clubs, got on with building the facilities. That  is the great offence, apparently, that has been committed here. That people actually got on and started  building the community facilities. Now, I understand the technicality of that, but to suggest that was  something that was very damaging to the community, I find that quite, quite interesting.

LANE: Prime Minister, we'll have to leave it there. Thanks for talking to AM this morning.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks a lot, Sabra, good to be with you.

[END]

Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

