

SENATOR THE HON ANNE RUSTON

Minister for Families and Social Services

Manager of Government Business in the Senate



Doorstop Transcript

Doorstop: 4 August 2020

E&OE…



MINISTER RUSTON:

Today I just wanted to provide a little bit more information on the pandemic leave disaster  payment that was announced yesterday by the Prime Minister. This particular payment has  been put in place for Victorian workers who find themselves in a situation where they have  been required to isolate either because they've tested positive or because they've come into  contact with somebody who's tested positive and are required to spend 14 days in isolation  and this includes those people who may have the primary care of somebody under the age  of 16 who finds themselves in a similar situation. The payment is a $1500 dollar payment to  those people for the 14 days or fortnight that they will be required not to attend work. The  eligibility for this will require those people must be over the age of 17, they must live in  Victoria and work in Victoria. They need to have been likely to have worked during the period  of the 14 day quarantine. They must have exhausted all of their sick leave entitlements and  any other entitlements including pandemic and leave entitlements that may be made  available through their employer. They must not be on JobKeeper or any other payment from  the Australian Government. However people do need to be eligible for Australian  Government payments to be able to get access to this particular leave payment. For people  who think that they're eligible we would suggest that you test your eligibility by contacting  1802266 which is the emergency disaster hotline at Services Australia. There will be people  manning these phones from 8am tomorrow morning and when you ring up you will need to  provide some information. For those people who have not interacted with Centrelink before  you will need to provide a 100 point check. It is the same sort of thing when you go to a bank  and you want to set up a bank account, your driver's license, passport, et cetera but if you  want more information about what you need to provide you can go on to the  www.servicesaustralia.gov.au website and all information will be available. For those of you  who have a CRN you do not need to provide this, all you need to do is to provide the  information to identify yourself by providing that number. You will also be required to provide  information that indicates who and when you were required to isolate. You will also be  required to advise or declare that you do not have any leave entitlements or other payments

that you may be able to be relying on at the time. But as I said for further information contact  the Australian Government website but the number once again is 1802266. I'd also  mentioned that this suite of measures that were put in place by the federal government in  March, which included the JobKeeper payment and the supplement to the JobSeeker  payment, reduced eligibility criteria et cetera still remains in place for all Australians. So this  is a payment that is being made in recognition of the significant impact that the lockdowns  that have occurred in the last couple of days in Victoria are likely to have on Victorian  workers and we will continue to work very closely and cooperatively with the Victorian  Government to make sure that we are agile and able to respond to the needs of Victoria as  we all work together so that we can come through this accelerated spread in Victoria and  make sure that it doesn't happen in other states around Australia.

QUESTION:

Given the lock down in Victoria has put so many people out of work, how can the  Commonwealth justify lowering the JobSeeker payment from September?

MINISTER RUSTON:

Well the period of which Dan Andrews, the Premier of Victoria, has said that this lockdown in  Victoria is to occur is for the next six weeks. The full rate of payment for both the JobKeeper  payment and the Coronavirus supplement that goes on to the JobSeeker payment will  remain at elevated levels through the whole period of that six weeks. Clearly this is a very  fast moving pandemic and so we want to remain agile to respond as the events unfold.

QUESTION:

Are you open to extending the benefit at its current rate beyond September?

MINISTER RUSTON:

Look we don't want to get ahead of ourselves at the moment I mean clearly our absolute  focus at the moment is on the medical and the health response to make sure that we keep  Victorians safe and we don't see the spread of the virus and obviously the tragic subsequent  deaths that have occurred because of that. But you know clearly this is a moving situation  and the Federal Government in conjunction with all of the state governments through the  National Cabinet or on one-on-one remains prepared to have discussions and cooperatively  with any state and territory to make sure that we minimise the impact of this virus on  Australians.

QUESTION:

Paul Keating says the early withdrawal of super will exceed the support provided through the  Commonwealth through JobKeeper. Is the government using the most vulnerable  Australians to prop up the economy right now?

MINISTER RUSTON:

Well not at all. We're all in this together. I mean all Australians need to play their part and  what we wanted to do as a government is to make sure that we gain access to Australians to  the resources that they may need to be able to get them through this once in a lifetime

pandemic. So we're very focused on listening to all suggestions about things that we can do  to reduce the extraordinarily heavy burden that's been placed on Australians from this and  none more so than the people in Victoria. I mean I think everybody else in Australia looks at  Victoria and our sympathies go to those people for the hardship that they've injuring at the  moment. But we equally need to make sure that we put everything in place all supports in  place to all Australians to make sure that other Australians don't find themselves in the  situation that we're seeing in Victoria.



ENDS



Media Contact

Sheradyn Holderhead 0418 514 271

Tom Edwards 0438 791 913



