

JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RADIO NATIONAL BREAKFAST

THURSDAY, 5 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Impact of Coronavirus on the economy; National Accounts; Stimulus.



FRAN KELLY, HOST: Jim Chalmers is the Shadow Treasurer; he joins us in our

Parliament House studios. Jim Chalmers, welcome back to Breakfast.



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: Thanks very much, Fran.



KELLY: Treasury will update Parliament today on the economic impact of the spread of

the COVID19 virus, likely to be half a percentage point hit to growth. Is that going to push

the economy into negative territory? Is a recession looming?



CHALMERS: The impact of the Coronavirus on the economy will be substantial, Fran,

we've said that for some time. Most economists expect the March quarter will be extremely

weak, likely negative. That's the expectation certainly in the markets. The big unknown is

how long this thing will drag out for, and whether or not there'll be negative quarters after

that remains to be seen. What we do know is growth will be weak this quarter. It wasn't

strong enough last quarter either and we'll hear more from the Treasury about all this later

today.



KELLY: Okay. How weak are you hearing it is expected to get? The Reserve Bank's also

expecting growth to be down half a percent in the three months to March but that forecast

is based only on the impact of the Coronavirus on tourism and education. Other sectors

are vulnerable. Do you think the impact on GDP in the March quarter could even be higher

than that? What are you hearing?



CHALMERS: I saw the forecast that the Reserve Bank put out last night and we'll see

what the Treasury does later on today. It will be difficult to predict all of the damage done

by this Coronavirus and by the fires before it. I've done a lot of engagement with business

in Far North Queensland and North Queensland and they are expecting the impact to be

horrific - on tourism, education, aquaculture and retail. There's going to be a lot of

weakness in the March quarter. I don't like getting into the prediction game. I don't like

talking about or predicting whether or not we're in recession, I don't think that's helpful, but

certainly the expectation from the Reserve Bank, Treasury, and all the credible economists

is that this quarter is weak and we don't yet know how long that weakness will endure.



KELLY: It turns out the December quarter wasn't as bad or weak as thought. GDP figures

yesterday showed a lift in the December quarter by half a per cent. That brings it to 2.2 per

cent growth over the year. Doesn't that show that the interest rate cut and the tax cuts the

Government put in are working and have done their job?



CHALMERS: The interest rate cuts and the tax cuts are helping, but not enough. I don't

agree with your characterisation of the last quarter. Economic growth actually slowed in the

December quarter compared to the quarter before it.



KELLY: But it was forecast to slow even further and 2.2 per cent over the year is better

than the 1.8 per cent that we were heading to.



CHALMERS: But what matters is the outcome. The outcome was still relatively weak. It

slowed from the quarter before. If you want to use the annual number then that was well

below average, well below trend, and well below what Scott Morrison and Josh Frydenberg

inherited when they became Prime Minister and Treasurer. What matters isn't how it

compares to the expectations. Some economists were expecting it to be a little bit

stronger, many economists were expecting it to be a little bit weaker. And it's not just the

headline number; wages were weak, business investment went backwards for the third

consecutive quarter, and consumption was weak. Right across the board there were a

number of troubling indicators in those National Accounts which mean that we enter this

difficult period from a position of relative weakness, not strength.



KELLY: Confidence is vital at a time like this. The Treasurer says the economy is resilient

and “it's defying all those who seek to talk it down”. Presumably he's referring to you. I

mean you are talking the economy down. Are you conscious of confidence?



CHALMERS: Of course I'm not doing that. Of course we're conscious of confidence but I

completely reject this lazy accusation that says we're not allowed to acknowledge the

challenges in the economy which have been hanging around for a long time now. The

problems that we have in the economy didn't just show up the day that the Coronavirus

showed up and they won't disappear when the Coronavirus does either. This denial of our

problems with business investment, growth, wages, and household debt has been a recipe

for an economy which has been weaker than it should be because the Government hasn't

acknowledged those difficulties and hasn't come up with a plan to deal with them not just in

the last few months but in the last few years.



KELLY: We're going to get a stimulus package from the Government over the next few

days. Labor has been in lock-step with the Government over the broader response to

Coronavirus. Will that bipartisanship extend to the stimulus package?



CHALMERS: We would like to find a way to support what the Government does but we

can't do that without seeing what the contents of the package are. We'll look to see if it's

sufficient and if it's the right magnitude.



KELLY: What would be sufficient? The treasurer said it'll start with a 'b'. How many billions

do you think? $4 billion? $5 billion?



CHALMERS: Let's see what they announce and then we’ll respond to it. We all want the

economy to grow because when the economy grows it creates jobs and opportunities for

people in our communities. That's the overarching goal. We want to support the

Government where we can. If it turns out that it's insufficient or poorly designed then we

have a responsibility to point that out too. Our default position is to do what we can and to

work with the Government to get Australia through a difficult period.



KELLY: There's one element you're likely to support is a tax deduction for business

investment. That's an idea very similar to the one Labor took to the last election. Is the

Government right to keep the focus on the supply part of the economy rather than the

demand side, and rather than handing out $10 billion of cash as Labor did post GFC?



CHALMERS: There are all kinds of ways that you can support consumption in the

economy. We've talked about this before, Fran. You can do something about Newstart.

You can do something about the timing of the tax cuts -



KELLY: Do you think the Government should lift Newstart now? You've been proposing

that for many months now. That's going to cost around $3 billion. Do you think that should

be part of a stimulus package?



CHALMERS: There's a very good case to do that because it would be good from a social

justice point of view and very good for the economy because every dollar would find its

way into the economy. You began by talking about the business tax investment. You're

right that we've been calling for that for some time. The problem is that Josh Frydenberg

flagged this in September but we're now into March and still nothing. One of the reasons

we've had three consecutive quarters of negative growth in business investment is

because businesses have heard what the Treasurer said in September and they've

decided to put their hands in their pockets and wait to see what that investment incentive

looks like. It's actually been a counterproductive, ham-fisted marketing effort rather than a

real attempt to boost business investment and that's been costly.



KELLY: So just if you were making up the stimulus package now it would include that

offset, it would include a Newstart increase? What else would include?



CHALMERS: We've said for some time that Newstart's an option. Infrastructure is an

option and it's a bit disappointing that the Deputy Prime Minister is just now writing to the

States and asking them for projects. Business tax incentives should be on the table.

There's an issue around the timing of the tax cuts that they could look at. We need to settle

an energy policy because having 19 energy policies in seven years has been a handbrake

on growth. All of these things would help. We put them on the table in the middle of last

year. They're obviously more urgent now because the Coronavirus is exacerbating some of

those challenges we've had for some time. The Government needs to come to the table.

We'll look at what they propose. If it's good we will back it but if it's insufficient or poorly

designed then we will make those points as well.



KELLY: Does Labor have any thoughts about whether it was wrong to block the company

tax cuts when they came up two years ago in order to help business, given how things are

playing out?



CHALMERS: No that was a good decision because you can target help for business in a

much more cost effective way. Those company tax cuts were mostly going to spray around

overseas in the form of share buybacks, dividends and executive pay and that wouldn't

have been an effective way to boost the Australian economy. We had a better idea which

was the business tax incentive that Josh Frydenberg is now looking at after criticizing it

when we proposed it. That's a far more effective way to support businesses.



KELLY: It's 7:45. Our guest is the Shadow Treasurer, Jim Chalmers. It's almost certain

there won't be a Budget surplus this year as promised. In fact, PricewaterhouseCoopers is

predicting a deficit of around $25 billion. We'll see. But people have much bigger things on

their mind at the moment including their health and their jobs than 'Back in Black' promises

and 'Back in Black' coffee mugs. I'm guessing this is personal for you. You were an advisor

to the then Treasurer, Wayne Swan, when his promised surplus got wiped out by the GFC.

The Coalition never let Wayne Swan forget that. Do you intend to hound Josh Frydenberg

for the rest of his days for that promise if they can't deliver the surplus?



CHALMERS: I intend to be far more responsible about it than the Liberals and Nationals

were. The highest priority is to support the economy through a difficult period. At the same

time we do need to make sure that they are held to the same standard that they held Labor

to. Josh Frydenberg got mugs printed that said ‘back in the black’. He said the economy

was ‘back on track’. We now know that both of those things were unlikely to be true. All

we're asking for is that they be held to the standard that they set for themselves. They

asked the Australian public to judge them on whether or not they could hit a surplus and on

whether or not they could keep the economy growing. Both of those things are in jeopardy

-



KELLY: Yeah but they couldn't foresee the COVID19 virus.





CHALMERS: But the point that cannot be lost when we talk about this is that we enter this

period from a position of weakness because for some years now we've had a problem with

growth, wages, underemployment, business investment, productivity and consumption. In

the Budget net debt has more than doubled on their watch so that most of the debt is

actually Liberal National debt. The Government's got to acknowledge that they have

mishandled and mismanaged the economy. We need them to do a better job. Every

Australian has an interest in getting through this period. We'll do what we can to be

constructive but we'll also point out where they have fallen short of the standards that they

asked to be judged on.



KELLY: Jim Chalmers thanks very much for joining us.



CHALMERS: Thank you, Fran.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











