

JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN



REGIONS AND THE RECOVERY

Address to the Warwick Chamber Of Commerce



WARWICK

THURSDAY, 20 AUGUST 2020



*** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY ***



Thanks for that introduction Julia [Keogh, Vice-President of the Warwick

Chamber of Commerce]. I’d like to pay tribute to the work you do as a business

owner, but also as President of the Warwick Collective, and co-founder of both

the Business Network Warwick and Community Network of Warwick, and as an

active member of the Women of Warwick group.



I pay my respects to the Githabul people as the traditional custodians of these

lands and to their elders past and present.



To the producers in this room and across the country can I acknowledge the

work you are doing keeping our supermarkets stocked and our people fed

throughout this crisis.



From the committee, can I thank Kevin Reynolds [Secretary], Jane Pollard

[Treasurer] and all the members here, and in doing so acknowledge the

dedicated work of the Warwick Chamber since it was formed almost a century

ago, in 1922.





The great staff here at the Criterion Hotel would know that this pub is only a

little bit older than the Chamber itself.



When the Allman family laid the cornerstone for this building in 1917, Australia

was on the cusp of what could be described as our first nationwide domestic

disaster; within two years between one-quarter and a third of all Australians

would contract the Spanish flu and around 15,000 died. In today’s terms this

would translate to around 7.5 million COVID-19 cases and almost 75,000

deaths.



Of course, the Spanish flu followed fast behind the trauma and loss the First

World War had inflicted on every community in Australia. The Warwick Amateur

Rugby League honour roll pays tribute to the 19 local footballers who served

and never saw home again.



This was the hard, sad tale across the country.



The twin disasters of a world war and the Spanish flu, combined with the failed

economic policies of the Federal Government, saw unemployment fluctuate

between 6 and 11 per cent throughout the 1920s and left the Australian

economy dangerously exposed to international economic shocks. This proved

disastrous following the 1929 Wall Street Crash and the ensuing Great

Depression where unemployment peaked at around 30 per cent, one of the

highest rates in the world.



Now we face a combination of challenges just as confronting and I want to talk

about some of those today.



The last time I was here in Warwick was in November, also at Joel Richters’

invitation. Since then I’m really pleased to see he’s been endorsed as Labor’s

candidate for the Southern Downs for the upcoming state election. Joel’s

already an outstanding public servant to the people of this community at Darling

Downs Health. And more broadly as Board Chair of the local disability and

community support organisation Care Goondiwindi, an active member of

Inglewood and Texas Landcare, and this Chamber of Commerce.



When I was driving here in November, it was towards the end of the fires which

had affected parts of this region, but before the horrific fires engulfed large

swathes of south-eastern Australia later that summer. I remember stopping for

a pie at Aratula just on the other side of Cunningham’s Gap, the sky dark and

the air thick with smoke from the Glen Rock and Main Range fires.



It’s pretty confronting to think of what’s happened since then and the impacts

on you and surrounding communities.



Drought. Fires. Pandemic. Now recession.



We’re told time and again that the virus doesn’t discriminate but that doesn’t

mean different people in different areas aren’t impacted very differently.



I’m here with Senator Anthony Chisholm and since I took on the role as

Shadow Treasurer last July, we’ve organised several road trips and listening

tours through regional and rural Queensland. It’s been worth it, despite having

to endure his taste in music!



The reason we’ve spent so much time up north and out west, driven thousands

of kilometres and visited so many towns and industries is not just to understand

what you’ve been through and are going through, which is very important, but

to understand what you need and where government fits in, for your community

and for primary industries in particular.



***



My main point today is that if the Australian economy is to recover strongly from

this recession then regional Australia, regional Queensland, and regional

industries need to be a bigger part of the economic story.



That story needs to say very loudly and very clearly, our rural and regional

areas aren’t just great places to visit, though they are, they’re great places to

live and they are a foundation of Australia’s prosperity.



Our regions provide most of our energy, most of our food and fibre, and most of

our exports. While most of us live in our capital cities, and a large proportion of

our economic capacity is in the capitals, that capacity is built in part on the

economic prosperity of our rural and regional areas.



You have so many strengths; clean air, uncongested roads, beautiful

attractions, an abundance of resources - but above all, resilient and resourceful

people.



In its 2014 Regional Cities case study, the Regional Australia Institute (a Labor

initiative) focused on people; the relative confidence, innovation and leadership

shown by our rural communities and their leaders. It said that the starting point

for stronger and more successful regions is to build upon local human capital.



That’s a pretty dry and official-sounding way of saying the most important thing

for the health, strength and future of regional communities is you. Whether

you’re from a family that has farmed this land for 100 years or a First Nations

Person whose ancestors have cared for country for tens of thousands more -

your knowledge, your expertise and your lived experiences are the most

valuable resource we have and one that must be a guiding light in the post

COVID recovery.



I bet you can reel off a long list of policies that crash-landed in Warwick from

Canberra without local knowledge or insight or experience to inform them. I

want to change that; Labor wants to change that; our agriculture spokesperson

Joel Fitzgibbon; our regional services spokesperson Jason Clare; our water

spokesperson Terri Butler, our climate spokesman Mark Butler; and our leader

Anthony Albanese all want to change that. That’s why our Queensland Labor

Senators in Anthony here, Nita Green and Murray Watt, and our friend next

door in Blair, Shayne Neumann, spend so much time in regional and rural

Queensland.



We know as local leaders you know your regions best. You understand where

the strengths and challenges are. You know which opportunities are most

realistic and which are most likely to result in success.



***



Regions like yours have many businesses of all sizes and in different sectors of

the economy. Today I want to focus on agriculture.



Every day, the world needs more of what you produce here in the Southern

Downs. Global food demand exploded with the rise of the Asian middle class

and will increase by 70 per cent in the next 30 years.



Before COVID, global agricultural demand was growing strongly, because of

rising per capita incomes as well as population growth. Asia represented the

fastest growing export region for the Australian agriculture, fisheries and

forestry sectors. Over the 20 years to 2018-19 exports to Australia’s eight

largest markets in Asia increased 86 per cent to $33 billion and was

responsible for 60 per cent of the total value of agriculture, fisheries and

forestry exports in 2018-19.



Food demand in Asia was projected to double between 2007 and 2050, good

news for exporters of high value and high-quality agricultural products like

some of our best beef, vegetables, apples, wine grapes and strawberries

produced here.



As a whole, the agriculture sector has experienced relatively strong underlying

growth,  moderated by several major droughts over the last 20 years.



It was against this background the National Farmers Federation set the lofty

target in 2017 of raising farm output from around $60 billion where it currently is

to $100 billion by 2030.





Then came COVID-19.



Now we expect lower world prices for many agricultural commodities in 2020-

21 and, domestically, a significant shock to household incomes, though overall

demand for Australia's agricultural products is expected to remain relatively

strong especially compared with other parts of our economy.



But we need to get the policies right, near-term and long-term.



We have seen some very significant missteps with the implementation of

JobKeeper, which has excluded temporary visa holders and I know that has

had an impact on seasonal farm labour, particularly on the Granite Belt. The

Morrison Government promised a National Agriculture Workforce Strategy by

July this year but have failed to deliver one. Scott Morrison owes it to

Australians to come forward with a comprehensive plan for jobs, including

addressing the labour shortage in agriculture this harvest season and finding a

way to ensure local workers displaced by the recession are able to access work

opportunities in regional areas.



We also need to recognise the Australian economic picture has become much

more complex than the last recession of the early 1990s. The growth of

knowledge industries, the unwinding of the mining and construction boom, the

fall in manufacturing and the growing importance of health and aged services

has dramatically changed our national economic composition.



While the current recession has hit our capital cities first and hardest, regional

centres certainly aren’t spared, and job losses and firm closures in regional

centres are more at risk of becoming permanent.



And that underlies a critical point: if we are to capitalise on the post-COVID

agricultural opportunities we can’t afford for communities like yours to be

hollowed out and left behind.



A key part of this is maintaining services in our regional areas, including the

ABC which played such a crucial role in keeping communities across Australia

safe during the bushfires over summer. Fundamentally regional Australia

should have no lesser expectation of access to Government services than other

Australians.



We need you to be supported now and into the future so when we move into

the recovery you are ready to grab the opportunities within your reach.



***



The reality is that, even as production is revived, gross value is forecast to

increase by only 1 per cent to $61 billion next year because of falling prices.

So, if we are to achieve the NFF’s $100 billion farm output goal and maintain

our competitive advantage in agriculture we need to look at how we improve

agricultural productivity and resilience.



In the past Australian agriculture was able to increase output by expanding the

amount of land and water resources utilised by the sector. That’s no longer a

viable option; instead, the amount of water and land resources available to

agriculture has fallen significantly in recent decades and is predicted to contract

further in the future.



If we’re going to seize the global opportunity of growing food demand, we need

local expertise and we need national leadership.



When Labor was last in office, we worked with the sector to develop a National

Food Plan. It was the first step to a broader re-think about what sustainable

profitability looks like in the food and fibre sectors. Unfortunately, the White

Paper that followed in 2015 was a missed opportunity to build on that work.

That means investors are still working largely without government guidance or

strategic support. Sadly, we’ve heard nothing about the new plan the Prime

Minister promised at the Dubbo Bush Summit more than a year ago.



Even before COVID - despite the efforts of our growers and producers, there

were plenty of warning signs we needed to think about some new directions.



As the ACCC highlighted last year the Australian agricultural sector was

previously a world-beater in productivity growth. For much of the 1980s and

1990s the agricultural sector recorded annual productivity growth rates of just

under 2 per cent, making it close to the best performing sector in the entire

economy.



Unfortunately, the millennium drought halted productivity growth in the first

decade of the 2000s and over the last decade ABARES estimates that

agriculture productivity has only averaged around 1 per cent per year. The

difference between 1 per cent and 2 per cent annual productivity growth might

not seem like much but it would mean a 22-year delay in reaching $100 billion

farm output according to the ACCC.



With many of our competitors being low wage countries it is critical that we

boost productivity. Some of this lost productivity is of course linked to drought

and increased temperatures, but R&D investment has fallen significantly.



Climate change is a big part of the story here as well. This isn’t some inner-city

pre-occupation. Communities like this one and growers in particular are already

among the most affected. Last year ABARES estimated that climate change

had reduced average farm profits by around 22 per cent since the turn of the

millennium.



It’s a credit to the adaptation techniques of our agricultural sector that the

impact of climate change has not been bigger already.



That’s why the National Farmers Federation has joined the BCA, AiG, every

state and territory government, the scientific experts and of course Federal

Labor in adopting a target for net zero emissions by 2050. Net zero emissions

by 2050 is not only a goal we need to meet to avoid catastrophic climate

change impacts but if delivered will lead to more jobs and more income for our

agricultural sector.



We need to mitigate risks by ensuring that we continue to proactively work on

both adaptation and climate change mitigation strategies.



***



Making our regional and rural centres more resilient also means investment in

energy, communications, water, digital and transport infrastructure.



I know in the Southern Downs water security is an issue, with the Storm King

Dam still at critically low levels. That’s why we’re off to Stanthorpe tonight and

visiting the sight of the new Emu Swamp Dam site on Friday, and talking with

the Granite Belt Water office before heading back towards Esk.



And when we are talking about investment in infrastructure, we need a deeper

recognition of the role local government, especially in regional areas, can play

as a delivery mechanism in the post COVID recovery.



When we look at productivity and resilience in agriculture, we also need to be

focusing on how we best incorporate digital technologies like the use of GPS

and monitoring systems into agriculture.



But of course, in the end, productivity is also about people.



People think of growers and producers as traditionalists, as conservatives. But

agriculture has always been an industry that embraces new technology, new

methods, new ideas.



If we want our farms to continue to be more productive and more competitive in

the years ahead, then it’s the responsibility of government to train and provide

an agriculture workforce that has the skills and smarts to design, adopt and

implement new technology.



That’s why we need to protect and enhance our regional universities and

TAFEs as well, a point made repeatedly to Anthony and I on our road trips

including most recently in the mining communities around Emerald.



***



At the start of my speech I said if the Australian economy is to recover strongly

from this recession then regional Australia, regional Queensland, and regional

industries need to be a bigger part of the economic story. But we need a plan -

for agriculture and for jobs more broadly.



To achieve the NFF’s $100 billion agricultural target we need to make skills and

people; research and innovation; transport, water, energy, communications and

digital infrastructure; climate change; and local leadership all much higher

priorities than they are now.



***



Thanks for having me here as the Shadow Treasurer today to touch on a few of

these important issues.



I want to be part of a government that helps Australia climb out of this



recession, to build a recovery that brings growth and opportunity to every

corner of this country. And achieving that depends on engaging with regional

Queensland, listening and learning.



We want to win the next election with a plan that speaks for Warwick as well as

Western Sydney.



And - to finish where I started - putting that plan together depends on

genuinely listening to you and your communities. So I’ll leave it there and I look

forward to hearing your thoughts.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













