6 October 2020



PEOPLE WITH DISABILITY

AUSTRALIA pwda







Media release

A 'jobs' budget must include accessible jobs for people with disability  Following the fallout of COVID-1 9, tonight's "most important federal budget  since WWII" has focused on stimulating the economy with job creation

incentives. However, disability advocates argue these measures should have

included a greater focus on accessible employment.

"It's well recognised that people with disability face multiple barriers to finding

and keeping paid work," said Romola Hollywood, Director Policy and Advocacy,

People with Disability Australia (PWDA). "Without targeted measures, in a

tightening labour market, people with disability will continue to be excluded from

mainstream employment. This budget has missed a critical opportunity to turn

the tables, and that is a shame."

page 1 of 3

PWDA has called for a National Jobs Plan to address the ongoing

underrepresentation of people with disability in mainstream employment.

"We welcome the Government's announcement of a wage subsidy scheme to

help young people find a job, however, we would also like to see incentives for

employers to employ more young people with disability."

In PWDA's survey on the experiences of people with disability during COVID-19, more than 91 per cent of respondents reported increased expenses for

basics such as groceries, medical supplies and transport. Yet, some 680,300

Australians who receive the Disability Support Pension missed out on both

JobKeeper and the JobSeeker supplement, instead receiving two payments of

just $750 earlier in the year.

"This latest top-up of two $250 payments does very little to cover the

unexpected costs our community have incurred during the pandemic," said Ms

Hollywood.

In regard to National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS), Ms Hollywood said,

"PWDA acknowledges the increased funding to the NDIS, which we understand

reflects the natural growth of the scheme as it rolls out.

"We would, however, like to see a more detailed breakdown on how increases

in funding to the National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA) and the NDIS

Quality and Safeguards Commission will be allocated.

"We have learnt from the tragic death of Ann-Marie Smith that strengthening

safeguards for people with disability to prevent violence, abuse, neglect and

exploitation is an urgent priority, and we hope that the additional funding for the

page 2 of 3

NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission will be used to develop a proactive

approach to investigations and spot checks on NDIS providers."

More information:

Romola Hollywood

Director Policy and Advocacy

People with Disability Australia

M: 0431 998 273

mediapwd.org.au

Copyright 0 2020 People with Disability Australia, All rights reserved.

page 3 of 3

