



Media contacts: Minister Tudge - Steve Kidner 0466 385 097  Minister Colbeck - Aaron Langmaid 0456 889 018









The Hon Alan Tudge, MP  Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure  Acting Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs

Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck  Minister for Aged Care and Senior Australians  Minister for Youth and Sport









18 March 2020



International students ready to fill critical staff shortages in aged care

Aged care providers will temporarily be able to offer more hours to international students to  ensure the care of senior and vulnerable Australians, as part of the campaign to combat the  impact of coronavirus.

Acting Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs Alan  Tudge said international students would help fill critical staff shortages emerging in the sector.

“As more workers take leave to quarantine or because of health concerns, we need to make  sure there are enough staff to look after our older Australians who are particularly vulnerable  to coronavirus,” Mr Tudge said.

“Many international students already work in the aged care sector but are restricted to 40 hours  a fortnight. We’re relaxing those limits to help fill the temporary staff shortages.

“This follows similar concessions to major supermarkets to keep shelves stocked with essential  items.

“We  will  continue  to  listen  to  businesses  as  the  coronavirus  situation  develops  and  may   consider expanding these measures to assist other sectors if and when required. We will also  consider providing flexibility with other temporary visas should the need arise.”

The measures will be administered by the Department of Home Affairs and are available to  approved providers of Commonwealth-funded aged care services, only for existing employees.

Providers can register with the Department if they believe the changes will assist them.

Employers are still required to abide by all relevant Australian workplace laws.  Students have  the same rights under Australian workplace law as all other employees.

Media contacts: Minister Tudge - Steve Kidner 0466 385 097  Minister Colbeck - Aaron Langmaid 0456 889 018

Minister  for  Aged  Care  and  Senior  Australians  Senator  Richard  Colbeck  said  COVID-19  affects older Australians more than others and this is putting a huge strain on many aged care  providers and workers.

“Residential  aged  care  providers  are  limiting  visits  to  help prevent  and  control the  spread of COVID-19,” he said.

“Further restrictions are being considered - but it’s critical we plan for a scenario where a large  part of the aged care workforce is unable to come to work.

“Today’s  announcement  expands  existing  temporary  arrangements relaxing  visa  work   conditions to the aged care sector, applying to both residential and home care.

“Aged  Care providers have told me that  a relaxation of student  visa work conditions  would  support their workforce continuity in the face of COVID-19 challenges.

“These are temporary measures and are solely designed to address staff shortages.

“The Government will continue to work closely with the sector to ensure we have strongest  possible workforce in place as we deal with this extraordinary health challenge,” he said.

More  information  is  available  on  the  Department  of  Home  Affairs  website  or  the  Global   Service Centre on 131 881.







