

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister



TRANSCRIPT

INTERVIEW WITH JOHN LAWS, 2SM  THURSDAY 17 DECEMBER 2020



EO&E…

JOHN LAWS: Scott Morrison, Prime Minister, good morning.

PRIME MINISTER: G’day, John, I'm calling you- I’m speaking to you from Lismore this morning.

LAWS: God, you get around, don't you?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah well, we've been up here opening the last section of the Pacific Highway that  we've upgraded with double carriageway all the way from Hexham to the Queensland border. This last  section from Woolgoolga up to Ballina has just completed. So that's great. But we've also just called in to  the local state emergency services with the Premier and just had a great briefing from the wonderful team  up here looking after people in northern New South Wales dealing with these flood events. And they're  doing well. But there's been a few rescues, quite a few actually [inaudible] and [inaudible] and in  Queensland too in the Southern Downs where one of our farmers was lost in the flood last night. But yes,  no we get around. It's a bit damp up here, but the spirits are good.

LAWS: Okay, I, look, I'd be driven mad by people if I didn't ask you about China. You know, I think the way  you dealt with Beijing government and the way they tried to bully, I think it was admirable. But do you  think it's, do you think the relationship is permanently damaged?

PRIME MINISTER: No, I don't believe so, John. And I mean, it takes two to be in a relationship, and that  always requires respect for each other's sovereignty and each other's laws. And Australia will make our  laws in our country. They'll make theirs in theirs. And we don't make them to discriminate against any one  country when it comes to foreign investment or how we run our critical infrastructure, our energy systems  and communications systems. Now, we're a liberal, democratic, I don't mean Liberal in the partisan sense,  but we are a liberal democracy. We're a market based economy, not a state run economy. So we do things  different and we're not going to compromise any of those principles. And that shouldn't be an issue. And  where we have views on important issues like human rights or, you know, the pandemic or anything like  this, then obviously that's what you do in a liberal democracy. You've been a broadcaster, and a journalist  for a very long time, John, and you've had an open mike for all that period in a free country. And that's  that's one of the things we celebrate here.

LAWS: Well, you're quite right there. The trade dispute with China, which yesterday referred to the World  Trade Organisation. Are they going to be able to settle it down, do you believe, or is it any of their  business?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, look it will take time. The WTO always does, but they are the umpire here. And  China has always said that they would respect WTO rules. We certainly do. And those rules are very  important for world trade. But it's not just the letter of them, it's the spirit of it also. And so we're taking  that barley issue to the WTO. There are a few other issues around at the moment and we're assessing our  next steps on those. But I mean, you'll recall, John, I mean, with our export industry from time to time,  there are often disruptions. I mean, you'll remember the European Common Market,

LAWS: You bet.

PRIME MINISTER: And that was a huge disruption for Australia's exporters. But Australia got through it, it  adapted, it innovated, it overcame, it built its industries. And most, a lot of our growth in our Chinese  export markets occurred in the last five or six years. That's where most of the growth has come the  resources has been going for longer than that. And so we'll work with the sectors to deal with these  changes for as long as they continue. But at the end of the day, a good deal is one where both parties  benefit. And that's largely been the deal between Australia and China for a long time. And the basics of  that deal and its opportunities are still there. So it's in neither of our interests for this to continue beyond  what's sensible. But, you know, we can't see that resolved by yielding up who we are as Australians. I  mean, no Australian would want that. And I really appreciate the strong support we've had, particularly  in rural and regional communities, for just the consistent stand we've taken on this.

LAWS: China is a building a fish processing facility on Daru Island that's only about 160 kilometres north  off of northern Australia. Are you worried they will start fishing our waters?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, not just I mean, we've always had a strong view about illegal fishing and not for  Australia, but for our Pacific family partners as well. And that's why we've been building patrol boats and  gifting them to Pacific islands and helping them patrol what are vast oceans that affect all of our interests  and regardless of what illegal fishers- where they're from, I mean, when illegal fishing occurs, that is taking  people's livelihoods and sovereign livelihoods and not just if that affects Australia, but whether  throughout Indonesia or the Pacific islands, and that's why these international laws and rules are so  important. If we don't have these rules based systems around the world then things just don't work as  they should and people can't go about their lives and livelihoods with certainty. We want that for  everybody. It's not about any one country. It's just the rule of law globally. And we respect that and call  on everyone else to do the same.

LAWS: Sydney had a virus case yesterday, which is believed to have been contracted at the international  border, highlighting where our vulnerabilities remain. Is this going to delay international travel? Will it  have an ongoing effect?

PRIME MINISTER: No, I don't believe so at all. I've just been with the Premier and we’ve discussed that. I  mean, New South Wales has the gold standard system, not just I think in Australia, but I think you could  argue that globally, too. And you’d argue that pretty well, I reckon, they do a great job. And so when there  are incidents like this, situations like this, they move incredibly quickly, to get this down and get it under  control. And, you know, we've had, we just got the job numbers out you’ve probably already broadcast  them, John. But, you know, another 90,000 jobs came in, in November.



LAWS: Good news.

PRIME MINISTER: It's terrific news. The unemployment rate, the measured unemployment rate has come  down a couple of points, and that's great news. But a big part of that is because New South Wales, the  biggest part of our national economy, stayed open and Premier Berejiklian kept them open with sensible  policies that protected health, protected lives, but also protected livelihoods. And I think they've done a  great job with New South Wales. I really do.

LAWS: It's been a very interesting time generally. I mean, first we had fires, then we had floods, then the  pandemic. Now we've got more floods. I mean, there must have been a point when you were saying to  yourself, oh my god, enough is enough?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, look, you've seen it all before, too, John, over a longer period than me. And look  it's great to sort of work, look the broadcasters have done, I think, over the course of the year, as you  know I talk to a lot of people on radio, and keeping people's spirits up, I think is really important. And  whether it’s your programme or many others have done a great job. But you know, I'm of a Christian faith,  John, it keeps me going, and I’ve spent a fair bit of time wearing out the carpet on my knees with quite a  few prayers this year, I can assure you. And in many and most cases, I can say, they've been answered.

LAWS: Well, that's good. That's good. I'm happy to hear that, you seem to be out in the community every  day. You know, you deserve a bit of a break. Are you going to take some time off over Christmas? New  Year?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah. During COVID, over the course of this year, I have really missed being able to just  be out and finding out directly from people on the ground. You know, earlier this week, I was down in  Launceston and Devonport. And you know wherever I go, John, the JobKeeper programme has just kept  the whole show together. And I know it has been incredibly expensive. And the Treasurer and I didn’t  make those decisions with our Cabinet lightly. But that has been the difference between where Australia  is now with all the jobs coming back and what has occurred in so many other countries. I mean, this  Christmas, I'm looking forward to Jenny and the girls and my mum and my mother in law, it is our first  Christmas without my father this year. So that’ll, you know like for so many families, that'll be the case.  There'll be an empty place and we will remember him, but it'll be just nice to be together. And you know,  Australia is going to have a Christmas that so many other countries are not going to have, John. I mean,  you know, over in Europe and the United States and so many places where they are in lock down. That’s  not us, our borders are open like we all worked together to achieve. And I think Australians can be really  proud of themselves. And I've certainly never been more proud of my country.

LAWS: No, I’m with you, and it wouldn’t be a week, hardly a day would go by when I don't say to  somebody, my God, we're lucky to live in this country because we really are.

PRIME MINISTER: Always true. Always will be John.

LAWS: Yeah, well you're right there. Prime Minister, I hope you have a good Christmas. I hope you're able  to do what you want to do, spend some time with your family and enjoy a bit of a rest. Probably not a big  rest, but a bit of a rest?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah, we'll get a bit of a break. And the Deputy Prime Minister will step up for a week  over the January period. And we'll recharge the batteries, but we won't be far away. I'll just be spending  the time at home and hopefully get a bit of time down the south coast if events allow, we're keeping a  close eye on these serious weather events up here up north with La Nina. But it's good to see that La Nina  bringing a bit of rain, too, as you’d know we still need a bit of rain up around the Darling Downs and  through that area of south western Queensland in particular, it's still a bit too dry up there. And I know  they're looking for some relief, but the rest of the country [inaudible] how good is that. That’s just  tremendous.

LAWS: You’re quite right. How good is that? Well, Prime Minister, I hope you had a very, very happy  Christmas. I hope you're able to get a bit of a rest. And I hope that we are able to have further discussions  in the new year.

PRIME MINISTER: I look forward to it. God bless, seeya.

LAWS: Okay, goodbye. The Prime Minister of Australia, Scott Morrison.

[END]

Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

