

Budget fails public schools



aeufederal.org.au



/news-media/media-releases/2020/october/061020



Australian Education Union



6 October 2020



In what has been an extraordinary year due to COVID-19, public schools have been



ignored by the budget in what can only be perceived as an insult to teachers, parents



and students that are struggling under the most trying conditions.



AEU Federal President, Correna Haythorpe said; “The budget fails to fund the $19



billion shortfall,



the minimum funding required to meet the educational needs of Australia’s students.



Investing in public education provides funding to the students who need help the most.



There should have been an immediate injection of funding for extra support with



reading and writing for students who may have fallen behind during the period of



remote learning. Public schools would have been able to employ more teachers for



smaller class sizes and more one-on-one support for every student.”



In addition, an investment in public education would return many times the initial cost



over the long term while almost certainly encouraging GDP growth in excess of the



ongoing debt servicing cost on an annual basis.



1/2



The budget also fails to provide any capital funding for public schools that would



generate construction and manufacturing jobs whilst also providing new and much-



needed classrooms, bathrooms, libraries, heating and cooling, and sport facilities.



Correna Haythorpe said: “Thousands of public schools across the country are in critical



need of infrastructure improvement and yet since 2017 public schools have been denied



federal funds. In contrast this budget sees the continuation of the $1.9 billion set aside



for private schools over the next ten years.”



A similar approach taken during the global financial crisis reversed the decline in



construction and supported approximately 120,000 jobs over the life of the program. At



the same time it provided libraries, classrooms, canteens, specialist language



laboratories, science labs and sporting facilities to schools across the country.



Correna Haythorpe said; “If Scott Morrison considers public school infrastructure to be



wasteful, what does he make of his own government handing billions of dollars to high



fee private schools for second swimming pools, mock medieval libraries and retractable



orchestra pits.”



Instead, the Morrison Government washed its hands of public education yet again



preferring to overfund private schools to a tune of over $1 billion by 2023.



Correna Haythorpe said; “This budget has failed public schools. A strong education



system is the foundation from which we all build a better future, and that is in the



national



interest. Yet this budget failed to address inequality in school funding and



failed to invest in our students in public schools to help them reach their potential.”



Correna Haythorpe is available for interview tonight.



MEDIA CONTACT: SARAH JONES, 0423 162 310



Authorised by Susan Hopgood, Federal Secretary, Australian Education Union,



120 Clarendon St, Southbank 3006.



copyright Â© 2020



Australian Education Union



Technology by Union Systems



2/2

