SENATOR SUE LINES

DEPUTY PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE

LABOR SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC PILBARA BREAKFAST WITH KELLY GUDGEON

TUESDAY, 1 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: JobKeeper Payments for regional workers; JobKeeper payments to

international students and visa workers; Western Australian hard border.



KELLLY GUDGEON, HOST: Senator Lines spoke on the bill which Federal Labor are

supporting but they are seeking some significant changes to it. To find out more about that

I’m joined on Breakfast by Senator Lines, good morning Senator.



SENATOR SUE LINES: Good morning Kelly, how are you?



GUDGEON: Very well thank you. Here in the North West we’ve got some of the highest

numbers of people who are receiving JobKeeper payments. I know there are some people

who will be concerned about what changes are being made to the program. Can you firstly

outline, what is the bill seeking to do?



LINES: The bill will, over the next number of months, reduce the payment, so the payment

for workers who work more than 20 hours a week will be reduced from the current rate of

$1500 down to $1200 and then early next year to $1000 per fortnight. And the government

has now put in a new part-time rate of $750 a fortnight which will operate from September

to January, and then $650 a fortnight after that. So Labor’s very worried about those

figures, particularly the part-timers because for part-timers who earn less than $32 an hour,

which is most part-timers, who have a significant reduction in their working hours, this will

really reduce them to a very low rate.



GUDGEON: You spoke specifically about the exclusion of groups like casuals,

international students and backpackers. What changes are the Labor party seeking to

make to the bill around that?



LINES: The bill is currently in committee where we are debating those changes. We

haven’t had much success but we do want to put in protections for backpackers, for

casuals or visa workers, and with the job shortages we are currently experiencing right

across Western Australia, particularly in the regions, jobs that are normally done by visa

workers and backpackers, to us this makes sense. But the government won’t support this,

they want this legislation and, whilst we mostly support it of course, it’s got that sting in the

tail that it just doesn’t meet everyone and it’s clearly not flexible enough.



GUDGEON: One of the criticisms of the JobKeeper payment is that for some people it’s

providing more income for them to not work than they were receiving while they were

working and therefore giving them no incentive to get back to those jobs that are

desperately crying out for staff now,  like in those hospitality industries. What’s your

response to that?



LINES: I haven’t seen any particular stats on that. I know that is a problem for small

numbers of employers. But for most West Australians, and particularly people in the

regions that I talk to, and I’ve just done a very big regional tour. I’ve been down to

Esperance, down to Geraldton and I’ll be up in Roebourne in September, and I’ve also

been out to the Central Wheatbelt, it’s this issue of underemployment and low rates of

pay.  We’ve seen with Covid that our frontline workers, those people in aged care and

hospitality, in cleaning and so on, are the workers who mostly are on $22 an hour and

actually, desperately want more work. So I think there’s far more workers like that than the

handful of workers who sadly may well be abusing the system.



GUDGEON: I’m speaking with Federal Labor Senator Sue Lines following the debate on

the bill to extend the JobKeeper payment in the Senate last night. Senator, earlier in the

program I spoke with Federal Member for Durack Melissa Price who you called out on

being missing in action on the issue of JobKeeper. She said this morning that she’s

worried about businesses surviving and has called on the state government to set out a

plan to bring down the hard border restrictions. What’s your response to that?



LINES: Well once again the Liberals, and particularly Melissa Price, who after all is a

Minister in the Morrison government so she would be in a position of influence, is letting

Western Australians down. Western Australians don’t want the border open. And also not

only that the McGowan government has just put a massive package into the Pilbara,

there’s a ports package that’s worth about $80 million and there’s a jobs package across

the Pilbara that’s worth about $212 million. Now that was just announced last week and if

the Minister doesn’t know that she’s clearly not representing the interests of voters right

across the electorate. What’s also concerning is that the Minister is presiding over an

electorate that has some of the highest number of JobKeeper users in the country,

particularly in Shark Bay and Exmouth which are international tourist hotspots. So even if

we had some arrangement, where we had a partial border opening, which we would have

to look at and presumably we would have to move there at some point, it is international

tourism which is missing from Shark Bay and Exmouth and regions in the South West. And

Melissa Price, as the member for Durack, seems to be completely ignorant of that fact.

We’ve got in Exmouth and Shark Bay, Shark Bay is second to Byron Bay in the country in

terms of employers reliant on JobKeeper. These are critical times and what we haven’t

seen from Melissa Price is a plan going forward. So what is going to happen when job

keeper comes to an end in March, are we just going to throw people out of work? We really

have been urging the federal government to give us a plan for the future, and we’ve seen

the McGowan government plan, I’m amazed that Melissa Price hasn’t seen it. What we

haven’t seen is a plan from Melissa Price.



GUDGEON: So what do you think the Federal government should be putting in place then

to help people with that JobKeeper payment?



LINES: What we know about JobKeeper and JobSeeker is that it’s almost eradicated

poverty. That’s amazing, that we would be able to do that in such a short period of time.

We know that low income earners are spending more money, and that will also apply

across the Pilbara and across the seat of Durack. So we’ve got to look at, not the stop-gap

measures from Melissa Price and the Morrison government, of at the last minute ‘we’re

extending JobKeeper‘. We need a plan for the future and it would be really important for

the Prime Minister to stand up in the Parliament and say ‘until we are over the critical

stages of this pandemic, the Government guarantees to do X, Y and Z’. Everyone’s calling

for that, people want certainty, and I think that’s why people have been so happy with the

McGowan government, particularly the Premier, because he’s been very certain about the

decisions he’s made. It’s a pandemic, we’re all worried about it, I’m worried about it, I’m



worried for my family, I’m worried for my kids. We want to know very clearly that our

governments, both federal and state, are there to support us. Not at this late stage, here

we are, the first of September and we are only just extending JobKeeper now. This is

unacceptable, Australians, and West Australians in particular, want certainty.



GUDGEON: The bill is in the Senate at the moment, what’s the next steps with that?



LINES: Well, we would expect it today but in the committee stage it is unrestricted. And it

is an opportunity for all senators to ask the government questions about the operation of

JobKeeper and so on, so it could go on for a long time. But I would expect that we will get

it through today Kelly.



GUDGEON: That’s good news. Senator Sue Lines, thank you for your time this morning, I

appreciate you being available.



LINES: Thank you Kelly.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: CLARE DAVIDSON 0405 131 604



