

JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW   HOBART  FRIDAY, 21 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Morrison Government’s failure to prepare Australia’s aged  care system for COVID-19.

JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS: What  we saw from the Prime Minister this afternoon with his announcement out of  National Cabinet really was an admission that his Royal Commission was right  when it said we had no national plan for aged care. Clearly, the Prime Minister  and his Government are now scrambling to get a plan together for aged care  across this country. For those families of the 254 Australians in residential aged  care and the four older Australians in home care who have died from COVID  outbreaks in Victoria, my thoughts go to them and their families and their loved  ones. It is a tragic situation what we have seen and nothing is going to bring  back the months that the Federal Government, Scott Morrison and his  Government, lost and weren't prepared and didn't do the preparation that was  necessary to make sure that we were ready for the outbreak that has occurred  in Victoria in aged care facilities.

Clearly, we got an admission from the Minister today that more should have  been done, absolutely more should have been done and it could have been  done if the Government, the Federal government, had done its job. It is in  charge of aged care, it regulates aged care, it funds aged care. It was Scott  Morrison and the Federal Government's job to make sure that aged care  facilities, aged care workers and the aged care system right across our country  was ready for COVID-19 outbreaks.

What we heard today from the Prime Minister was an admission that we were  not ready, that we sadly did not do enough. And nothing for those families who  have lost loved ones is ever going to bring back their loved person because of  the months that were wasted by the Government when he didn't do enough.



And what we saw from Minister Colbeck today when he was questioned about  this, it is embarrassing for him, but I think it also calls into question whether or  not the Prime Minister should keep him in his role. Certainly the older  Australians and their loved ones and their families, I think, deserve better than  what we've heard today from the Minister for Aged Care about how prepared  he was to face questions, legitimate questions about whether or not the  Government and his Department and the aged care system was ready for  these outbreaks.

Frankly, what we saw today was not good enough from the Federal Minister for  Aged Care, and it's not good enough for the Prime Minister to suddenly be  scrambling three or four months down the track when his own reports warned  him that this would happen. To argue semantics about whether it's 80 or 100  per cent of the workforce. I mean seriously? These families and the loved ones  and the older Australians deserve better than this, and they should have got  better than this from our Prime Minister and from the Minister for Aged Care.

JOURNALIST: So should the Prime Minister sack him from swiftly?

COLLINS: Well, that's a question for the Prime Minister about whether or not  he still has faith in his Minister to be able to do his job, when the Minister  admitted today that more should have been done and that he's sorry that not  enough was done, I think it's not good enough for those families and their loved  ones, we are never going to get back those wasted months when valuable work  could have and should have been done.

JOURNALIST: Should the Minister at least stand down?

COLLINS: I think what we need from the Minister and the Prime Minister is a  legitimate apology. We need to know what they should have done earlier, what  they didn't do earlier and we need an unreserved apology to those families and  their loved ones from this Government.

JOURNALIST: Sorry, I'm going to ask pretty much the same thing, but just to  recap, because we haven't really answered the question, do you think that the  Minister should stand down over this?

COLLINS: That is a question for the Prime Minister about whether he still has  faith in the Minister's ability to do his job. I think the families and loved ones and  older Australians today will be asking legitimate questions about whether this  Minister did his job appropriately in the last few months when he should have  been getting more prepared for these outbreaks of COVID-19.

JOURNALIST: From what you were saying earlier, it sounds like you didn't

think that he's done his job properly. So if he's going to stand down, if you can  just imagine he will stand down, when should that happen?

COLLINS: I think what we need to do is see the Government actually get its act  together. Actually get together and get the national plan together for aged care  preparedness in COVID-19. We saw a bit of an announcement today but what  we know from this Government, what we know from the past is is we get  announcements and then the follow up action is slow and doesn't happen on  time. And I think Australians have had enough of it and they've seen enough of  it to not have any faith that this aged care preparedness plan can actually be  delivered. And if we have further outbreaks in other states and territories, how  do we have the confidence that this Government is ready.

JOURNALIST: So given the evolving nature of this crisis, would it be better  than (inaudible) about the Minister in charge of aged care just to wait until the  crisis subsides, maybe there's a review and then take action?

COLLINS: We've had a review into what happened in outbreaks in New South  Wales. The Government has had one of those reports since the middle of April.  Why did they not act on those reports? Why were we not better prepared?  Clearly today's announcement from the Prime Minister and the admission from  the Minister today shows that we weren't ready, the Government didn't do  enough, it didn't do it soon enough.

JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister seems to have confidence in his Minister,  do you have confidence in the Minister in his capacity to manage aged care  moving forward?

COLLINS: I think what we heard today from the Minister and his admission that  more should have been done, is a clear admission that they should have been  better prepared, that families have been let down by the Minister and by the  Government. We should have been better prepared for this COVID-19 outbreak  in aged care facilities right across Australia. We should have learned the  lessons from what happened in New South Wales outbreaks. If we get  outbreaks in coming weeks and months, and I certainly hope we don't, in other  states and territories I'm very concerned about what that will mean.

JOURNALIST: Given that he has had that day of reflection, though, about how  they could have done better and should have done better, do you now have the  confidence that he knows what he's doing moving forward?

COLLINS: The history shows us from this Government we get a range of  announcements and then we get a lack of follow through. We don't actually get  delivery on commitments made, particularly when it comes to aged care. We  still haven't had the Government fully implement the three interim



recommendations from its own Royal Commission, particularly when it comes  to home care. So we know that this Government is slow on delivery, but they  say a lot, but they don't deliver a lot. So I think it's now up to the Prime Minister  to ensure that what he said today actually gets delivered for once.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119





