

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE

CHAIR OF THE SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON COVID-19

SENATOR FOR THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC NEWS AFTERNOON BRIEFING

THURSDAY, 6 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Economy and unemployment; Government has no plan for

the recovery or jobs; JobKeeper and JobSeeker; National Cabinet; Return

to Parliament.



PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: The Federal Government is estimating the

Victorian lockdown will cost the national economy between $10 billion and $12

billion when stage three and four are combined. Katy Gallagher is the Shadow

Finance Minister and chairs this Senate inquiry into the COVID-19 response

and joins us this afternoon. Katy Gallagher, welcome.



SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER: Thanks for having me on, PK.



KARVELAS: What do you make of the latest Treasury figures around the cost

of stage three and four lockdown measures in Victoria?



GALLAGHER: First, can I start by saying to you and all the people in Victoria

living under really difficult circumstances, all our thoughts are with you. And

certainly the update from the Prime Minister today using Treasury forecasts I

think shows the economy impact that the lockdown is having, but there's a very

human side to this lockdown as you well know Patricia. Look, I think the

numbers when they were last released officially from Treasury were grim. The

update today from the Prime Minister, grim, getting worse. And I guess the

question we would say in response to that is we hear the Prime Minister telling

us how bad it is. We need to hear the Prime Minister telling us what the

pathway to economic recovery is. And that continues to be our focus. Just on

the unemployment figures alone today, it's another 100,000 on top of the

240,000 people that the Treasury forecasts were already predicting were going

to lose their jobs by Christmas. So we’re now up to another 340,000 to lose

their jobs based on the Prime Minister's update and we need to know what’s

going to happen. How are they going to be supported and where are the jobs

going to be created?



KARVELAS: It's a hard one to answer though, given this health crisis is

unfolding and we don't really know what will happen at the end of the six

weeks. 80 per cent of that $10 billion to $12 billion will be lost in Victoria. Does

that state need special federal assistance and what kind of form do you think

that should take?



GALLAGHER: Look, we're not pretending it's easy but you have a Federal

Government for a reason and that's to help show the leadership that you need

to get out of some of these terrible situations. So we would urge them to work

with Victoria, to understand exactly what assistance is needed, both

immediately as part of the crisis but in an ongoing way with business and in the

recovery stage. Obviously Victoria is going to be in a different position to the

rest of the country but the lockdown in Victoria, COVID-19 more broadly, is

having an impact on confidence right across the economy, right across

Australia. So there's a job to be done in every state to make sure that the

investments from the Government are working and what they are promising are

being delivered. And in the COVID committee today I think we got some pretty

average news about how the programs the Government has already

announced are actually rolling out on the ground. And I think there needs to be

extra effort to put in to make sure what they promise is actually getting out

because that in itself will support confidence, which will then support business

on the road to recovery.



KARVELAS: Unemployment could peak at 10 per cent, should the

Government consider changing the taper rate dates for JobKeeper and

JobSeeker? Labor has said that you do think it should be tapered down but

should those dates change for either just Victoria or nationally?



GALLAGHER: Well, again, I think we’ve already been in the space where

we've said in response to what’s happening in Victoria that the Government

needs to respond to the information it has before it at the time. Clearly those

decisions about JobKeeper and JobSeeker were made before the second wave

and the extent of the pandemic, the second wave was known in Victoria. So

clearly they should be taking advice about whether those plans, as they

announced, are still the right response. From our point of view we have worked

with the Government to support them when they've announced programs and

we will continue to do so. We want to be constructive but we want those

decisions to be taken in the best interests, whether that be in Victoria's interest

or the national interest. That needs to be based on the evidence they have

before them. We’re not privy to that, so we give them room to sort of consider

these matters as they arise.



KARVELAS: Tomorrow National Cabinet will consider how to deal with

potential food shortages because of staff reductions in Victorian distribution

centres. What are the options given the scale down, the stage four restrictions

in Victoria?



GALLAGHER: Well, again, I'm not privy to any of the advice that's going to

National Cabinet about that. Obviously there are significant impacts and I think

keeping a focus on the supply chain, how food and freight is moved around the

country is critical. We know Victoria is such an important component of that. But

I think it would help if some of the decisions and the information that gets

considered at National Cabinet was shared and a bit more accountable about

some of the decisions that are made. At the moment it's a pretty closed forum.

We've certainly struggled getting information out about National Cabinet, how

they make decisions, who is briefing them and what they're being briefed on.

That accountability and transparency would help people understand how and

why some of these decisions are made and if there are shortages what's being

done to deal with them.



KARVELAS: I just want to talk about the way the MPs from Victoria are going

to be treated when Parliament resumes. As a Canberran, how do you feel

about MPs and their staffers flying in from every corner of the country? Are you

worried they could be bringing in the virus?



GALLAGHER: I've been part of the working group that was put together to look

at how we make COVID-safe sittings of the Parliament in late August. I think

everyone starts from the position that the Parliament should sit. Other people

are doing their jobs every day. COVID-safe plans are in place. The Parliament

should be no different, particularly at a time like this when critical decisions are

being made. We started from the point of how do you make the Parliament be

safe and part of that today, with the announcement from the presiding officers,



is that MPs and Senators from Victoria will have to undergo a period of

quarantine, either in the ACT or in their home. Now that should certainly deal

with any concerns there were about Victorian Members and Senators coming to

the Parliament. But we've already put in place a number of ways of making the

Parliament safe. The way Parliament sits is quite different now and has been

since March. And so those social distancing, the hand sanitising, the doors

being open, the no glasses of water in the chamber, the no functions, no

visitors, all of those are in place. So I think with a combination of all of that, as a

Canberra, and I certainly have an interest in making sure the virus isn't brought

into Canberra, just like any other Canberran, I think all of those have been put

in place both to protect Canberrans but allow the Parliament to sit.



KARVELAS: Thank you so much for your time.



GALLAGHER: Thanks very much PK.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: PAT CRONAN 0432 758 224





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













