NDIS Fraud Taskforce investigates alleged fraud  involving Western Sydney healthcare provider   afp.gov.au/news-media/media-releases/ndis-fraud-taskforce-investigates-alleged-fraud-involving-western-  sydney

Thursday, 27 August 2020, Publish time: 8:00am   This is a joint media release between the Australian Federal Police, National  Disability Insurance Agency and Services Australia.

The National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) Fraud Taskforce has conducted  simultaneous search warrants and is reaching out to potential victims as part of an  investigation into large-scale fraud allegedly committed by a Western Sydney  healthcare practitioner.

The NDIS Fraud Taskforce investigation - codenamed Operation Pavo - comprises the  Australian Federal Police (AFP), National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA) and  Services Australia.

Operation Pavo investigators are looking into complaints a Sydney healthcare  practitioner falsified reports, overcharged for services and used the allotted NDIS  funding neglecting the best interests of their client needs under the scheme.

Authorities have calculated the current fraud value to be more than $120,000.  However, it is believed this will increase as the investigation continues and the full  extent of offending is known.

As part of the investigation, two search warrants have been executed in the Sydney  suburbs of Auburn and Granville yesterday (26 August 2020) by more than 20  members from the AFP, NDIA and Services Australia, who seized materials to further  assist investigations.

This remains an active investigation and charges against the healthcare practitioner  are being considered. Further details will be provided at an appropriate time.

AFP Superintendent Mel Phelan said the alleged illegal conduct appears to be an  attempt to take advantage of people from largely culturally and linguistically diverse  backgrounds.

“The AFP and our partners have serious concerns about any attempts to defraud some  of our most vulnerable community members,” Superintendent Phelan said.

“To people who may seek to take advantage of the NDIS, let this be a warning that  you are up against the collective expertise and resources of our agencies. Your hunger  for short-term profit will result in long-term negative consequences for you.”

The NDIA said it was working with participants to reassure them their plans would not  be affected and to ensure they were continuing to receive their disability-related  supports.

“The National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA) has a zero tolerance to fraud and  will not tolerate the misuse of funds intended to support people with disability,” the  NDIA’s Branch Manager of Scheme Integrity Scott Britton said.

“We are working with participants to ensure their plans are protected. The Agency will  reimburse any lost funds to any affected participants as quickly as possible.

“Any participant with suspicions they might have been the target of fraud activity  should contact the NDIS fraud hotline.

“Fraud is a crime, and you can help authorities stamp out NDIS fraud.”

The NDIA has a number of controls in place to protect the NDIS and participants from  exploitation through fraud such as detection, prevention and investigation activities,  fraud risk assessments and fraud awareness training.

Operation Pavo is an NDIS Taskforce investigation supported by the AFP-led Taskforce  Iris, which was established earlier this year to target the threat of fraud against the  Government’s financial support provided during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Anyone with information about suspected fraud involving the NDIS should contact the  Fraud Reporting Hotline on 1800 650 717.

Reports of other suspected criminal activity, including fraud against other government  support measures, can be made by contacting Crime Stoppers on 1800 333 000.

Media enquiries

AFP Media: (02) 5126 9297







































































