

T h e  H o n . D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T



Tuesday 15th December 2020

Minister Littleproud iv Sky News

KIERAN GILBERT: Let's go live now to the Minister for Agriculture, Drought, and  Emergency Management. David Littleproud joins us live today from Warwick in his  electorate. Tell us, Minister, what's the latest advice you have on the flood and La Nina  situation hitting the east coast?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, good afternoon, Kieran. From our perspective on the  Queensland, obviously it's eased a little bit. Conditions have become a little bit more  favourable. But there is some flooding still within the New South Wales. In fact, there's  been some evacuations off the Tweed River. And we're just asking those locals to make  sure they're listening to local warnings and listening to their local emergency service  personnel to make sure that if they're asking to move on, they do it quickly, and take that  direction up and make sure they adhere to the advice and continue to look for further  advice as it becomes apparent. There's storms brewing as we speak now, and I can even  look out my door here and can see storms starting to brew.  So, the La Nina is starting to come in which in some parts of the country is welcome, but  obviously we need to be prepared to pivot from bushfires into whether that be flooding, or  in the north, whether that be cyclones.

KIERAN GILBERT: How much damage is being done thus far?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: We're still waiting on the New South Wales Government in  particular to give us some updates with respect to that. Obviously, they're working to  protect life and limb at the moment rather than worried about the damage. We'll get those  assessments. And Queensland making those assessments today, but under the disaster  recovery arrangements, the Federal Government obviously pays its fair share, pays half of  the damage costs for public infrastructure. And then obviously if anyone's individually been  impacted by these disasters, then we work through those arrangements with the states.  So, those assessments will take place as emergency service personnel deem those areas  safe for other agencies to come in and make those assessments.

KIERAN GILBERT: But sadly, we can expect more of this to come, severe systems off the  back of that La Nina weather system that you and I have already alluded to in this  discussion.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, and look, the Bureau of Meteorology made it very clear in  August and then ramped that warning up in October that we were going into a La Nina  event, and that means that we're going to have earlier cyclones, more cyclones, more  severe cyclones, and that feeds into also wetter weather, more moisture. Now, that

Page 2

Transcript





T R A N S C R I P T



obviously in some parts of the country is very well welcomed after eight years of drought,  but still hasn't been reached in those parts, I might add, just yet. But we need to make sure  that we're prepared for that.  I've got to say, the state emergency service personnel and commissioners from around the  country have planned meticulously as they did for the bushfire season. We knew that early  on we were going to have to be ready for bushfires, and we have, and we've actually just  finished fighting one on Fraser Island only this week, and now we're pivoting into flooding.  But we were prepared for that and we're making sure that we do that with the guise of  COVID-19 over the top of us to make sure we can do that in a coordinated mechanism  between all the states. We're able to support one another between states and make sure  that we get the resources where we need to in a COVID-safe way.

KIERAN GILBERT: Let's look at the big story over the last 24 hours, and many of your  constituents have been affected, in fact, by the trade war with China. It just goes from bad  to worse. When will this start to improve? I mean, it's hard to see an offramp at the  moment.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, there is an offramp, and China needs to make it very clear  that there isn't discriminatory action being taken against Australia. That is their  responsibility under the free trade agreement they had with us, as well as the WTO rules in  which they sign up to. The world is watching. The world is watching China now and the  next move that they take. Australia has taken every action on face value, but there is now  mounting evidence to suggest that there is discriminatory action not only against  agricultural products, but also now resources. And it's important that if Australia- sorry,  China wants to be taken seriously in terms of trade, not just with Australia but other trading  partners. They need to make sure that they come clean, they are transparent, and they  start dialogue very soon with us to make sure that this can be rectified.

KIERAN GILBERT: What are the flow on effects of other nations observing this? I mean,  we are the canary in the coal mine, so to speak. We're copping it at the moment. But  what's the flow on impact? What are the- what's the reaction from other nations if this  continues to worsen here?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I think the first thing you'll see is what I was taught in grade 8  business economics, the greater the risk, the greater reward. If people- if countries want to  trade with China and they see and perceive that there's greater risk because there is risk  that has been shown in Australia to be discriminated against to be true, then they'll want a  higher price. To trade with those companies in China, they'll see that as being a higher risk  business proposition and commercially they'll ask for a higher price. This doesn't benefit  Chinese importers in any way, shape or form.  The best thing that can happen here is dialogue. The Chinese Government sits down with  us, we work through those issues that we have, and we do that quickly and transparently.  But unless they do that, then obviously there's mounting evidence that there is  discrimination against Australia. And I think the world is starting to watch and watch very  carefully about the next step of the Chinese Government.

KIERAN GILBERT: Well, given there is that sort of intervention, as you suspect, the  mounting evidence and as many have thought for many months, obviously the government  has to be more cautious in its language around that. But does it come to a point where  Australia then says, okay, well, if you're doing that, here are a few tariffs and here's the  increase in price for iron ore, which you need.

Page 3

Transcript





T R A N S C R I P T



DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, our language has always been careful and it's always been  about making sure that it was about trying to initiate dialogue. We won't turn our back. We  won't throw our toys out of the cot. We'll continue to engage. We'll continue to be mature  about this. And we'll make sure that when they're ready to talk that we'll be here. And  we've made that clear from the start. But we are a rules-based trading nation. And for us to  sit here and say that we're aggrieved and then do exactly the same really doesn't give us  the standing that we have built up over many years, many generations in the global  community of us being a good trading and fair-trading nation. And that's what Australia will  continue to do. We'll respect the rules, we'll respect the processes, and we will use those  processes where necessary.

KIERAN GILBERT: But tariffs and that sort of retaliation, as suggested by Matt Canavan,  amongst others, that's off the table?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, definitely. And look, I accept the parochialism and the  frustration that many are feeling out there, but this is times of leadership and it’s time to  make sure that we live by the rules in which we signed up to. That will not benefit anybody.  That will only exacerbate the problem. But we will not take a backward step with respect of  using other processes and procedures available to us under the rules in which we signed  up to. Otherwise, if we turn our back on the rules in which we signed up to, we know better  than any other nation that we're aggrieved with. So, we are a nation of values and  principles and I think we've shown that, we've shown the maturity and leadership through  this. We will continue to do that and we will never compromise on our sovereignty or those  values and principles. And if anyone thinks they are, they're sadly mistaken.

KIERAN GILBERT: Yeah, that's true. And I think that most people would think that that's a  reasonable proposition. You're not going to- you shouldn't compromise on our values. But  do you concede that the Government could've massaged a bit of this a bit better over the  last year or so in terms of the language around at the timing of announcements, that sort  of thing?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No, I don't. And I don't think that our timing on any of our  sovereign decisions about anything other than our own nation’s security. We should never  time any of our decisions as a sovereign government about what anyone else in the global  community might think about us. Our primary responsibility, as a Federal Government, is  to protect our citizens, to protect our democracy and sovereignty. And the timing of that is  predicated by what's necessary for the Australian society, and that's what we've done.

KIERAN GIILBERT: Do you think, from a trade perspective, is it time to hand the trade  portfolio back to the National Party? You had it for years. There's a reshuffle coming.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, look, let me say that the National Party has always believed  that it's a natural fit for the Nats. Resources and agriculture are predominantly in our  electorates. We represent regional, rural Australia. We have a close affinity to these  industries and that's one obviously aspect that the National Party strongly believes in. And  I'll leave those for discussions for the Deputy Prime Minister and Prime Minister have  around the reshuffle in the coming week.

KIERAN GILBERT: It's a nice idea, but how serious are you about that? Do you think it's  something that should be fought for?

Page 4

Transcript





T R A N S C R I P T



DAVID LITTLEPROUD: We're always serious about the portfolios in which the National  Party members hold. We have four cabinet positions and we have four others within the  executive. We take each one of those very seriously. They're precious to us. And what we  try to do, as the National Party, is sit down together and work through what are the  portfolios that will change the lives, particularly the people that we represent most. And I  think trade is one of those portfolios that I think the National Party has a natural fit too,  because agriculture and resources sit within our electorates. The people that work in those  industries are in our electorates. They're the people that we go to Canberra and fight for.  So we have a natural affinity to that. And obviously, that's something that the National  Party obviously believes in, and I know the Deputy Prime Minister does as well.

KIERAN GILBERT: One of the issues for the agricultural sector, your constituency is the  ag workforce, getting people in there to pick fruit and do other things on the land that they  can't get workers here to do, or enough of them. What's the latest when it comes to the  Pacific Islands scheme, which obviously has great benefits both ways? Is that re-opening  as it should in the wake of the COVID- the teeth of the crisis?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well firstly, Kieran, every Australian gets first crack at these jobs,  but sadly, they don't want to get off the couch and have a crack at it. There's a large cohort  that have been on unemployment benefits for some time that don't want to even have a go  at these jobs. And so we've thrown the kitchen sink at incentivising Australians. And I  accept the fact that many of these jobs are thousands of kilometres away from where  people are. But we've tried to incentivise them with payments to go and take these jobs  up. But we simply do not have the luxury to sit around and wait any longer. And in fact, we  do not have the luxury to sit around and wait any longer for the states either. We reopened  up the Pacific and seasonal worker programs that have 22,000 pre-vetted work-ready men  and women across 10 Pacific nations back in August. But we could not get the states and  their Chief Health Officers to agree on the quarantine protocols in which to bring them in.  These Chief Health Officers and Premiers have made plenty of decisions predicated on  capital city quarantine arrangements, but have forgotten about agriculture. And it's only  now that we're at a juncture, at a critical juncture, where we need these people in here  now to pick these crops. Otherwise, they will be left to rot. That we have finally got the  states to reaffirm that it's their responsibility to work through the public health quarantine  arrangements for each of their states, for them to look to new ideas about even being able  to quarantine on farm. Once, they've already tried it, but they're still only having half a go  at it. But we've got states that won't even sign up to ag workers' code where even if we can  get them in, then they can't move across the states freely. I mean, this is really a tested  federation. This crisis has shown the holes in federation and the fact that we can't work  with one another. I mean, lines we put on a map 120 ago, Australia's evolved past that.  And our Premiers need to lead through that and they need to make sure that they find  ways to bring these people in a COVID-safe way that their Chief Health Officers should  have been on this three months ago. But I fear that each and every Australian is going to  pay for this at the checkout, not only now - and I think they are now. We're seeing prices  already rise - but they'll be paying it in the next couple of weeks on.

KIERAN GILBERT: Yeah, well, it seems like a safe idea, given they're coming from Pacific  Islands where there's no COVID. I mean, where's the risk there?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, this is what we've been asking Chief Health Officer for so  long. But from bitter experience, obviously Victoria's bit gun shy about quarantine  arrangements and bringing anyone in, and that was more because of their  mismanagement more than anything else. But you are right, this is where we've got to use

Page 5

Transcript





T R A N S C R I P T



this thing called common sense. And unfortunately, it's evaded Chief Health Officers in  some states as well as Premiers. And this is their opportunity to fix it. Agriculture is  important to each and every one of us, and I think that COVID-19 has had an awakening  to each Australian about the importance of what's in this supermarket and the timeliness of  it and the cost of it. And I can tell you the cost of it is going to go up because our state  premiers have forgotten about agriculture until now. And I think it quite frankly, it's probably  a little too late.

KIERAN GILBERT: Deputy Nationals leader and Minister for Agriculture, Drought, and  Emergency Management, David Littleproud. Thanks for your time. And we probably won't  see you, so all the best for Christmas. See you next year.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: You too, mate. Thanks for having me.

Media contact  Douglas Ferguson, 0455 448 985





























