Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania











Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck  Minister for Aged Care and Senior Australians  Minister for Youth and Sport



01 September 2020



Taking action: $950,000 for Youth Action Projects Grants

The Youth Action Projects Grant Scheme is now open to individuals and organisations  supporting activities important to young Australians.

The Australian Government understands the unprecedented impact COVID-19 and last  summer’s bushfire season has had on young Australians.

Minister for Youth and Sport, Richard Colbeck, said the targeted scheme was an opportunity  for individuals and organisations to apply for funding to support projects that will make a  difference in the lives of young people.

“It’s a difficult time in our nation’s history and young people are feeling the repercussions of  job losses, breaks in education and social isolation,” Minister Colbeck said.

“Life as we know it is not the same, but we know young Australians are keen to take part in  activities that will help them and their communities thrive.”

As part of the program, grants of between $5000 and $20,000 are available for projects which  respond to the social challenges facing those aged 15-24.

The Government has engaged the Foundation for Young Australians (FYA) to administer the  scheme.

FYA is a non-profit organisation committed and passionate about improving the outcomes and  life opportunities for youth.

Projects need to be either new initiatives that recognise and respond to the hardship young  people face now and will face in the future, or existing initiatives which already provide a  valuable on-going service to young people, but which need further funding to continue.

Funds can be used to pay for any type of project including but not limited to staffing, equipment  purchase, consumables or marketing.

“While grants will be used for projects which support young people in a variety of ways, there  will be a particular focus on employment, transportation, mental health and the impacts of  COVID-19 and the Australian bushfires,” Minister Colbeck said.

Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania









“I look forward to working with FYA and seeing the outcomes of the exciting projects funded  by the Australian government for the benefit of young Australians everywhere.”

Successful grant recipients are expected to deliver projects over the 2020-21 financial year.

The grant round opens today, Tuesday 1 September and closes Wednesday, 7 October, 2020.

For more information and to download the application form, see here.



