

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

TODAY SHOW

FRIDAY, 27 NOVEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Hotel quarantine, SAS, Victorian BRI, China



KARL STEFANOVIC, HOST: We are joined by Home Affairs Minister, Peter Dutton in the

studio glorious plasma this morning and Deputy Opposition Leader Richard Marles. Good

morning to you both, nice to see you. To you first Pete, two months ago Scott Morrison said

he hoped to get as many people if not most home by Christmas. Has he let people down?



PETER DUTTON, MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: No, we haven't. The first point to

make is you feel terribly for these families and people who are separated at Christmas in

particular. It's tough. There are about 420,000 people who have come back to Australia

since this pandemic commenced. Obviously it's difficult to get a flight. Obviously, it's very

hard to plan in circumstances where you've got to go into hotel quarantine and there is a

cap on those places when people get back. We have brought back particularly the most

urgent cases where there are medical needs, where people are in a desperate

situation. We are working day and night to get as many Australians home by Christmas as

possible.



STEFANOVIC: What is happening with the Darwin Howard Springs facility? Has that

been expedited?



DUTTON: Yes, there is a space available obviously the Northern Territory government has

been very good to deal with and they've provided rooms there. But the other States have

also increased the cap that they had on the hotel quarantine numbers, so the numbers of

people that you can bring into the country is really a function of how many people can go

into that hotel quarantine. We know that there are cases where people are testing positive

who have been overseas in Europe, for example or the United States and they are testing

positive when they get into hotel quarantine. So, it's important that that regime conditions. It

is tough, because people want to get back by Christmas and we want to help them get

back.



STEFANOVIC: Ok, Richard, Labor has been very critical of this so far. How would you

get the people back?



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: There is

a whole lot of assets for starters that the Government could use. They have got an Airforce.

They’ve got a plane they are currently flying Mathias Cormann around Europe in. I mean all

of those things could be used and I think the other point to make is hotel quarantining is

really important, Peter is right in that sense, we've got to do it right. But quarantining is

not the State's responsibility, it's the Commonwealth’s responsibility. So often we are

hearing the Government hide behind State caps, they could put the resources in to make

sure there is the quarantining available to allow this to occur.



STEFANOVIC: Pete, in terms of that, why not get the RAAF to start flying people back?

Is it just the quarantining issue at this end?



DUTTON: Karl, we have already put on charter flights. There's no issue about the seats

and there's obviously commercial flights available as well. But the issue is when people get

here, if you're going into WA, for example, there is a cap on the number of hotel quarantine

spaces, and that's the difficulty that we have tried to work through. As I say to the credit of

the Premiers, they have increased the caps, but still, you know in some cases people have

gone overseas because, you know they want to visit somebody who is sick or visit

somebody in London, for example and the advice has been given at that stage, look,

it's going to be really, really  tough to get back. Flights have been cancelled or there is not

room in hotel quarantine, so just be careful when you make the booking to go. If people

have gone in the last month or so and expect to get back by Christmas it's tough. But

obviously we want to help as many people back as possible. We are doing that with charter

flights, with additional rooms within the hotel quarantine arrangement. Hopefully we can

get them back as quickly as possible.



STEFANOVIC: You don't want to overwhelm quarantine that's the last thing we need,

especially in Victoria.



MARLES: Again, we hear Peter talking about quarantine as if it's the State's

responsibility. The Commonwealth can put the resources in to make sure that there is

quarantine -



DUTTON: It is actually Richard, that’s the agreement of the National Cabinet.



MARLES: It's not. Quarantining is to do with our national border and our national border is

the responsibility of the Commonwealth Government. With the appropriate resources you

could have more spaces available. At the end of the day we have a situation where

Australians are faced with bills of tens of thousands of dollars to get home. It's an almost

unprecedented situation in our history that Aussies are effectively stopped from

coming home.



STEFANOVIC: Let's move on. Peter, in the wake of the damning war crimes report up

to 10 SAS soldiers are facing termination. Who is being stood down and why?



DUTTON: Obviously the Chief of Defence makes decisions about employment

arrangements within Defence, Karl. He will look at the individual circumstances or the facts

that he has before him and there will be Defence personnel who are stood down or

investigated on a regular basis. Its obviously a massive workforce and their standards

are no different to police officers or other public service employees, so there's a high

standard that is expected and the Chief of the Defence Force, Angus Campbell will make

those decisions on a daily basis, but he's made it obviously in relation to some of

these officers and there will be a due process to go through. But that's a decision he's

made.



STEFANOVIC: In relation to another matter now, it's revealed more than $700 million worth

of Australian coal is stuck on ships off the coast of China as trade tensions reach fever

pitch. Richard,  Dan Andrews told us on the show earlier in the week, that he was going

to persist with his Belt and Road agreement with China, should he do that?



MARLES: Well, that's ultimately a matter for him. I have made my views clear on that

agreement, previously on this program.



STEFANOVIC: You're not in favour of it?



MARLES: Federal Labor wouldn't sign an agreement of that kind.



DUTTON: Richard, foreign affairs is an issue for the Federal Government…



MARLES: I'm making it clear Federal Labor wouldn't sign a BRI, so that’s unambiguous.

But at the end of the day we have a problem with our relationship with China. There

are hundreds of thousands of jobs at stake here and I don't hear what the Government's

plan is to get the trading relationship -



STEFANOVIC: I'm not sure what you do. What do you do in a situation, they are

not returning calls, they are fighting with everyone around the world, it’s not just Australia.

What do you actually do?



MARLES: That's is the line that the Government seeks to run. I mean Japan has a whole

lot of issues with China, they speak for their national interest, they have territorial disputes

with China, they’ve still got a trading relationship with China. The Government needs to

take responsibility for the fact this is our largest trading partner, there are hundreds of

thousands of jobs at stake and there’s not a single member of the government who has a

personal relationship with anyone in the Chinese Government.



STEFANOVIC: I will say that to you Pete, it is fairly bleak when another country won't even

pick up the phone and say hello?



DUTTON: Karl, look, a couple of points here. This is an incredibly important issue and

to suggest that we don't have a trading relationship with China is just absurd. But the reality

is that the position of Australia, our adherence to our values, has not changed. I mean

there's no approach by the Australian Government that has changed. We haven't issued

a statement saying that we don't want to see China grow or we are opposed to different

elements of their system of government, etc. We've been very clear and consistent in our

principles. We aren’t going to give up freedom of press in our country, we aren’t going to

surrender our values or our sovereignty. Our approach is no different to the Rudd

Government or to the Howard Government in terms of the way in which Australia

holds itself on the world stage. China, as you say, does have a number of fronts open with

China with India. Sorry with Japan, with India, with Korea, you go through the list. As

the Prime Minister's pointed out, we want to have a very important relationship with China

continue. But we aren't going to compromise on our principles. We aren't going to tolerate

circumstances where there is an impact on our democracy for example.



STEFANOVIC: A very pressing final matter we need to look at today, finally Pete, you are

often seen as the hard man of Australian politics, the uncompromising bullish take

no prisoners Member of Parliament. I know for a fact you're a very big teddy bear. When I

think of Christmas, I think of you. The kids of Australia are very keen to know if you are

going to allow -



MARLES: Don't scare everyone, Karl.



STEFANOVIC: - if you’re going to allow Santa into Australia next month or whether he will

have to quarantine at Christmas Island?



DUTTON: That’s a bad dad joke, Karl.  There is a national interest exemption, so he is fine,

and he will get in. I understand he was most fearful coming to Australia, that if he went into

quarantine and missed the delivery schedule that he was worried about your beautiful

wife ringing him up and leaving an abusive text message, like she did with the Queensland

Premier. I think that was the greater fear that he had.



MARLES: That was well played.





DUTTON: It's all good.



STEFANOVIC: It's fair enough. She is not getting access to my phone ever again.

Bipartisan support?



MARLES: Totally. As I understand it, Santa doesn't get COVID. So, it's an appropriate

exemption.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













