SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE

MANAGER OF OPPOSITION BUSINESS IN THE SENATE

CHAIR OF THE SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON COVID-19

SENATOR FOR THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW   ABC CANBERRA BREAKFAST  MONDAY, 24 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECT: Return to Parliament

LISH FEJER, HOST:  School is back in up on the hill. Parliamentarians and their staffers are  flocking to Canberra. Well, some of them have even been here for two weeks quarantining just to be  safe and comply with ACT government regulation. But what, how will it, how will it all work up there  on the hill today? Katy Gallagher is the Senator for the ACT and Chair of Select Committee on  COVID-19. Good morning.

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER: Morning Lish.

FEJER: Are you ready for everyone to arrive back today?

GALLAGHER: Yes, look, there's well many of them have been here, as you say for a couple of  weeks and others were coming in over the weekend. So, it'll be good to see people again, like any  workplace, you know.

FEJER: It's been a while hasn't it? Since everybody has gathered there in the building together?

GALLAGHER: Yes, I think this is nine weeks. So, we had our normal winter recess, but then the first  two weeks of August were cancelled. So, it's been a bit longer than was expected.

FEJER: A big push to allow MPs to be able to still participate while not actually being there through  Zoom. How's that all going to work?

GALLAGHER: Well, we'll find out this week, this is a new way of operating and as Chair of the  select committee, I've been doing a lot of meetings over Zoom. But this is a different arrangement.  And look, I think a lot of work has been put into it by staff at broadcasting in Parliament House and I  think it'll work pretty smoothly, but there are some quite tight rules about how people can participate  remotely because, you know, part of it is a bit of a challenge if you're not actually in the chamber. So,  there are some rules including that your votes won't be counted, taking points of order, interrupting  proceedings, things like that won't be part of the virtual participation arrangement.

FEJER: Is there a new role for someone operating the Zoom calls or the video conferencing calls

and allowing them to, I guess, with Zoom calls, you have to seem to raise your hand, but not always  be heard, how they're going to operate that?

GALLAGHER:  Yeah. So, I mean, it will be quite tightly managed. And again, it'll be, it's a whole new  world. So, we'll see how it goes this week, maybe we can talk again at the end of the week. But the  week, we'll have quite a significant job. So, there'll be speaking lists and it'll all be organised, which  is quite normal. Normally, we had those sorts of informal arrangements in place where the chair, the  President or the Deputy President is given advance notice of who wants to speak and at what point  they speak. And those are usually adhered to. So, there'll be a similar arrangement for that. But yes,  I think Hansard and broadcasting will have new ways of kind of trying to work with each other to  make sure they capture exactly what happens on the floor.

FEJER: It's a big shake up, isn't it for the Parliament to be doing this?

GALLAGHER: Yes, it is. But like any other workplace, everyone's had a big shake up this year. And  I think it was really important with the situation in Victoria, that there was some way that we could  make sure our Victorian colleagues participate in the federal parliament. I think that's important for  the people of Victoria. So back in March, when we originally looked at how to operate in the COVID  world, the standing orders were amended in the House and Senate, although we'll do that again in  the Senate this morning, to look at virtual proceedings if it came to that because we really didn't  know what things look like in March and then things got better. We didn't need it. But then I think  we've reviewed now and this is a sensible way forward.

FEJER: Katy Gallagher is my guest this morning, Senator for the ACT and Chair of Select  Committee on COVID-19. Will all the meetings still be able to go ahead up on the hill, visitors to  Parliament House?

GALLAGHER: No. So, it's we've really reverted back to the operations we had in place in March.  So, there weren't really any visitors to the Parliament, the committee proceedings and the public  galleries will be closed. There's no functions, the dine-in facilities won't be operating. Meetings have  to be organised and conducted with social distancing in place and all of us when we're outside the  chamber or our offices are encouraged to wear masks. So, it'll be a quite a different and, you know,  very reduced in terms of people in the building and sort of all the normal ongoings of the sitting  week. It'll be very different.

FEJER: Normally, it's hard to read into what a politician's thinking, even with their full face available  for reading, let alone just their eyes.

GALLAGHER: Oh, well, I think I'm bit of an open book myself, but it won't be in the chamber or in  your office, and considering, so it'll be really moving around the building and when you're passing  people. So, I'm not sure how much people will see of that. But it'll be a big change for all of us.

FEJER: Yeah, the eyes have it, I think is where it'll go. What have you heard about the Liberal Party  fundraisers that were planned? Have they been cancelled as well?

GALLAGHER: Well, look, I mean, I heard, I don't know, to be honest, definitely. But my reading of  the President and the Speaker's advice was, you know, there are to be no functions in the building.  So, I would find I would be very surprised if they were going on. You know, I think people's eyes will  be all over like that this week. We're all having to change the way we operate and prioritise what we

do in the building.

FEJER: Yeah, certainly be watching it closely. Two weeks sitting and then everybody will go back  home to their respective states if they can get across borders, which they can with special exemption  but also quarantine in place. Certainly, the nation will feel like it's together again because it feels a bit  disparate at the moment, doesn't it?

GALLAGHER: Yeah, it sure does, it sure does.  I mean the Queenslanders, they have to go home  and quarantine for two weeks. So, the Victorians have done it up front, and you know, we just don't  know what will happen going forward.

FEJER: Well, thanks so much for joining me this morning.

GALLAGHER: Thanks a lot, Lish.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: PAT CRONAN 0432 758 224

