

JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW   2SM MARCUS PAUL IN THE MORNINGS  WEDNESDAY, 2 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Morrison Government’s failures in aged care.

MARCUS PAUL: Julie Collins is the Shadow Minister for Ageing and also Seniors. She  joins us on the program. Julie, good morning.

JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS: Good morning,  Marcus.

PAUL: All right. Look, I don't understand why on earth this is all being done in a veil of  secrecy. I’ve screamed blue murder at the start of the week when this came out. But why  are people who are entrusting the care of their loved ones in aged care.. Why aren’t they  being told which services are up to scratch?

COLLINS: Well, that's a very good question, Marcus, and I think it's one the government  needs to answer. Certainly, Labor has been trying to hold the government to account over  the last few weeks particularly, but for the last several years when it comes to aged care in  Australia. We have announced an eight point plan that we think the government could act  on immediately.

PAUL: Yes.

COLLINS: One of those is of course more transparency. Another is some independent  reporting on meeting standards, and some of the failures. What we really need I think in  the aged care system is much more transparency - and that will not frighten the good  providers. They will be really keen on it I think because they will want to show that they are  doing the right thing. There are a lot of homes and a lot of facilities doing the right thing.  There are also a lot of workers working incredibly hard day in, day out. Today's Aged Care  Employees Day so I want to say a big thank you to all those people working in aged care in  very difficult circumstances right across the country at the moment.

But I think we also need transparency that any of the funding going into aged care is  actually improving the quality of care. You know, we had an announcement from the

government this week which essentially says the Royal Commission and the Liberal New  South Wales government was right - that the Government didn't really have a  comprehensive plan but now are trying to come up with one - because they put another  half a billion dollars into their COVID response.

So clearly, it wasn't up to scratch prior. We know the system prior to COVID was already in  neglect, according to the royal commission. So we already know that there were really  serious problems in the aged care system prior to COVID-19 outbreak. And then we've had  a lot of secrecy. I mean, I was astounded when the minister admitted that the commission  was not doing physical checks on facilities during COVID due to medical advice, he  claimed. But the chief medical officer said he's not aware of any such advice being  provided.

PAUL: No, it's crazy. You're right. The government is trying to play catch up. They've been  called out on this. And when you say, Julie, that there are a number of reputable  operations, of course there are. And we don't for a minute blame any of the staff. It's the  issue around the way that these places are regulated. Unfortunately just throwing money,  you know, billions and billions of dollars at the sector over the years, really has just been  putting a bandaid over a broken leg as far as I'm concerned. And when you have issues  like we had earlier this week, that the Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission ordered  eighty two nursing homes to clean up their acts since the 1st of March, but none of the  providers were publicly named.

I mean, that what that does is it undermines the system. It shows there zero transparency  and most importantly, I think it leaves families in the dark as to what the breaches actually  were. I mean, they were apparently dubbed low or medium risk. What the hell does that  mean? If they were low or medium risk - we had so many people dying in aged care during  coronavirus - I'd hate to bloody well think how many people would have passed away if  they were high risk.

COLLINS: But even if they were low or medium risk legitimately, why not actually allow  people to be aware of that information, and allow the provider to say what they're doing to  fix it, and when they expect it to be resolved? Why not actually have a transparent system  where everybody has the information about what's going on in other facilities? It might  actually raise the standard across the board, where we know even with low breaches what  they're actually doing to remedy them. Obviously, the more serious breaches are notifiable  and people are aware.

But we need to have confidence back in the aged care system, and we can't do that until  the government is much more transparent about what is going on in these facilities. Until  we have a regulator that has enough powers to do their job properly. I'm not yet convinced  and I made it very clear when the regulator was established, when they combined the  Complaints Commission with the Safety Commission, I said I was concerned at that point  that the regulator didn't have enough powers to do their job properly. I'm still not convinced  that's the case.

And I'd be interested about whether or not the regulator thinks they actually do have the  powers they need to do their job properly. Because from where I'm sitting and from where  the public is sitting, it doesn't appear that the regulators are doing the job it needs to be  able to do.

PAUL: No, absolutely not. You mentioned confidence in the sector - I've spoken to the  Council on the Ageing, we've spoken to representatives, if you like, of senior Australians  from a number of different lobby groups -They say that two thirds of Australians would  much - at this point in time - to ditch aged care altogether. They have zero confidence.  Confidence in the sector is at an all time low. When you have people saying in those vast  amount of numbers that they wish, if they could, they could pull out their loved ones from  aged care. I mean, that should be ringing alarm bells as loud as anything for the  government.

COLLINS: Absolutely it should be ringing alarm bells. The other issue, of course, that we  know will become a bigger problem than it already is, is the home care wait list, because,  of course, for people who do not want to go into residential care or want to come out of  residential care, trying to get the services in their home is the alternative.

And there's a massive waitlist list. The government's interim report that was given to the  government in October, listed as its number one highest priority recommendation was for  the government to fix the home care wait list. There's still 100,000 older Australians waiting  for the care they have already been approved for. Now, that list I suspect - that's the data  as that march - will only grow in the post-COVID environment given what has happened  and what we've seen in residential aged care. So the government really needs to get on  top of this home care wait list.

PAUL: I've got a list here in the state that we're currently broadcasting, New South Wales,  more than 16,500 elderly New South Wales residents are languishing on the waiting list to  receive a home care package. Now, it sparked fears that many may have actually  prematurely been forced into these facilities that nobody wants to go into during a  pandemic. So we've got that, and then you combine the other - And this is the most  sobering statistic on the home care package list. The programme analysis of the home  care system has found around 30,000 older Australians have died over the past two years  waiting for their approved packages. This is Australia. This is not good enough.

COLLINS: Absolutely. We agree. And we managed to get those figures out of the  department and we were shocked, to put it mildly, about the numbers. I mean, obviously,  you know, you would expect some deaths on that list, but 30,000 in two years seems quite  alarming.

And then over 20,000 people we know went into residential aged care when they were  approved for home care. So we don't know whether that 20,000 went into residential care  because they had no other choice, because they couldn't get their home care package. But  the average waiting time across Australia, that is, you know, the time that people are  actually waiting for their level 4 home care package is well over two years and up to three  years in some places. How do you tell a 92 year old that they need to wait three years to  get the highest level of care package that they need to be able to stay at home?

It's just not sustainable and it's not good enough. And the government needs to do better.  The government keeps saying we're going to fix this, but they still haven't. And their interim  report was the 31st of October last year. And this is the problem with the government.  They're not doing enough soon enough and there's not enough transparency around  where the money is going.

PAUL: Alright, Julie, I look, you know, the boss Albo and I are talking on this regularly. And



we will include you in this discussion absolutely as we go forward, because it's something  that I'm not going to give up on. I have loved ones in aged care. We know the stats say  quite clearly that a number of Australians will be… well, a vast number of Australians will  be elderly in the coming decades. We have an ageing population and we need to be doing  much, much better to ensure these people are better cared for, because after all, they're  the ones who work their backsides off to give us the country we have.

COLLINS: Absolutely. We couldn't agree with you more. As you know, Anthony and the  Labor team have been saying for a long time, people need to be treated with respect and  dignity and they should be getting the care they need. They should not be having to wait  for it and they absolutely should be getting it when they need it.

PAUL: Thank you for your time, Julie.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119





