





The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister



The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE



Thursday 13 February 2020

EXTENSION OF TRAVEL BAN TO PROTECT AUSTRALIANS FROM THE  CORONAVIRUS

The National Security Committee of Cabinet has today agreed to extend the entry restrictions on foreign  nationals who have recently been in mainland China for a further week from 15 February 2020 to  protect Australians from the risk of coronavirus.

As always, our priority is to keep Australians safe.

This decision is underpinned by medical advice and recommendations from the Commonwealth’s Chief  Medical Officer and chief medical officers from each state and territory, on the steps necessary to  contain the spread of coronavirus.

The Chief Medical Officer confirmed that our arrangements to protect Australians from coronavirus are  working - there are no confirmed cases among Australian citizens and residents who have returned to  Australia since the introduction of the border measures on 1 February 2020.

The restrictions will be reviewed by the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee (AHPPC) in  one week.

We are announcing this decision now to give certainty to travellers, businesses and organisations.

The continuation of the travel restrictions means that for a further week, foreign nationals - excluding  permanent residents - who have been in mainland China will not be allowed to enter Australia for 14  days from the time they left.

As before, Australian citizens and permanent residents will still be able to enter, as will their immediate  family members (spouses, legal guardians and dependants only).



We continue to require Australian citizens, permanent residents and their families who have been in  mainland China from 1 February 2020, and who return Australia, to self-isolate for 14 days from the  time they left mainland China.

Australia is one of 58 countries that has introduced some form of travel restrictions on passengers who  have been in mainland China.

The AHPPC has advised that the situation with Coronavirus in mainland China has not improved in the  past two weeks.

There is continuing and concerning growth of cases and mortality in Hubei province and further, though  slower, growth in other regions of mainland China.

Today’s decision is one of a number of measures the Government has taken to protect public health and  keep Australians safe at home and abroad.

With help from Qantas and the cooperation of Chinese authorities, we have assisted the departure of  532 Australians from Wuhan.

On the advice of the AHPPC, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade will maintain its travel advice  for mainland China at “Do not travel” until there is a material change in the global situation.

Border measures to screen passengers on flights and vessels from mainland China and for people who  have been in, or transited through, mainland China in the past 14 days will also continue.

These measures are all kept under regular review.

We will continue to work in close cooperation with state and territory government authorities and our  international partners.

The Morrison Government can reassure Australians that our nation is well-equipped and prepared for  this global health challenge.

[END]

Media Contacts:  Prime Minister’s office: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  Minister Hunt’s office: James Perrin, 0447 534 427  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

