







The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology  Federal Member for McPherson

The Hon Michael Gunner MLA  Chief Minister of the Northern Territory

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

NT PROPELS INTO SPACE

24 July 2020

The Australian and Northern Territory Governments are teaming up to expand the  Top End’s space sector, with a new agreement to maximise the Territory’s natural  advantages to create jobs and grow the economy.

Federal Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said the  signing of a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the Northern Territory  Government and the Australian Space Agency came at an opportune time.

“Space is not only a growing sector of its own, but it develops technologies and  know-how that can be applied across a range of industries to help Australia emerge  from the COVID-19 crisis stronger than ever,” Minister Andrews said.

“This MoU will drive the creation of high-tech jobs in the Northern Territory, but will  also see the Top End contributing to the economic growth of the whole nation.

“The geographic location of the Northern Territory, including its wide open expanses,  makes it a hugely appealing destination for space companies and agencies from  around the world. The proximity of the Territory to the equator also means  advantages for commercial rocket launch.”

Northern Territory Chief Minister Michael Gunner said the Northern Territory is a step  closer to being a key player in the trillion dollar international space industry with the  signing of the MoU, which builds on the Territory Governments’ Territory Space  Industry 2020 Plan.







“While we are working every day to keep Territorians safe form coronavirus, we are  also preparing for the rebound - with new industries, new investments and new  jobs,” Mr Gunner said.

“We are perfectly positioned to benefit from the space economy and the jobs it will  bring. We are close to the equator, we aren’t prone to earthquakes, we’re close to  the sea and sparsely populated areas, and we have great weather.

“With technology shifts driving growth in the commercial space industry, Australia  has the potential to capture a greater share of this global industry and we want the  Northern Territory to be at the front of the pack.

“The space industry is real in the Territory with NASA and Equatorial Launch  Australia ready to launch their sounding rocket program from the Arnhem Space  Centre.

“We are in the space race, and we are in it to win it. It will mean more investment  and more jobs for Territorians.”

Head of the Australian Space Agency Dr Megan Clark AC said this agreement will  build on the existing assets in the Northern Territory.

“Existing infrastructure from ground stations such as the indigenous, owned and  operated, Centre for Appropriate Technology, and the Alice Springs Balloon  Launching Facility show the capability that exists within the Northern Territory,” Dr  Clark said.

“Growing the Northern Territory’s space sector improves other parts of the local  economy through the application of space technologies to areas like remote health,  bushfire tracking, emergency management, and agriculture.”

The Morrison Government is investing close to $700 million into the space sector as  part of our goal to triple its size to $12 billion and add up to 20,000 additional jobs by  2030.

Media Contacts:

Minister Andrews’ office: Jen Jennings 0435 121 347

Chief Minister’s office: Gerard Richardson 0438 693 898

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

