Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania









Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck  Minister for Senior Australians and Aged Care Services   Minister for Sport



24 December 2020







Holiday vigilance to protect older Australians in aged care

The health and safety of older Australians should be a priority this holiday season with families  urged to keep in contact with those most in need - but to take appropriate precautions.

While restrictions have eased across Australia, providers and families living across the  Northern Beaches and Penrith areas of Sydney must abide by the current visitation guidelines.

Until further notice all staff and visitors at residential facilities must wear a surgical mask.

Additionally, until at least Wednesday 30 December, all residential aged care facilities across  the Northern Beaches LGA must exclude visitors, except those performing essential caring  functions.

Up to two people are permitted to visit loved ones in residential aged care facilities in Greater  Sydney including the local government areas of Central Coast and Wollongong.

The rule also applies for Greater Sydney residents visiting regional aged care facilities.

There are no restrictions on people from regional NSW visiting residents in regional  facilities.

Updated advice for Residential Aged Care facilities and Home Care Service providers can be  found here.

Minister for Senior Australians and Aged Care Services, Richard Colbeck, said aged care  providers and families were required to follow the relevant visitation guidelines to ensure  loved ones could maintain contact.

“We know where there is community transmission there is a serious risk of the virus  spreading to aged care settings,” Minister Colbeck said.

Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania





“It is a difficult time for residents, families, providers and staff at facilities across this region  but it’s vital we prioritise and protect our most vulnerable.

“Of course, we want families to maintain contact with their relatives in aged care, and a phone  call or video call will mean a lot to those who can’t have visitors.

“Staff and management will continue to provide compassion and understanding, while also  being a strong line of defence for those in their care from the coronavirus.”

Australian Government support for aged care providers in the Northern Beaches hotspot is  already being provided, including asymptomatic testing, supplies of personal protective  equipment as required, and workforce surge and support where needed.

A new three-tier escalation plan, backed by the Australian Health Protection Principal  Committee (AHPPC), outlines how providers can respond to the COVID-19 threat level in the  local community and ramp the response up or down as needed.

The AHPPC guidelines outline visitation recommendations providers can put in place if they  are in a defined hotspot with localised outbreaks of cases (Tier 2) and when there is an outbreak  of COVID-19 in the community (Tier 3).

“Residents must be protected in the least restrictive manner and their health needs must be  balanced with their personal wellbeing,” Minister Colbeck said.

Additionally, Minister Colbeck said the Industry Code for Visiting Residential Aged Care  Homes during COVID-19, developed in conjunction with consumer peak bodies sets out a  nationally consistent, principles-based approach to maintaining residents’ visitation and  communication - the Government welcomes the latest version of the code.

In conjunction with the new visitation guidelines, it offers clarity for residents and families.

“It is an important time of the year for families to re-connect, particularly as we return to  COVID-normal environments with the current exception of the Sydney hotspots,” Minister  Colbeck said.

“The social distancing measures we have all adopted will protect our families.

“Don’t visit if you are unwell, practise good hand and cough hygiene, and follow the advice  available from staff at the aged care facility.”

All aged care providers are urged to ensure their outbreak management plan is up to date and  ready to be activated. They must also be alert to any staff or care recipients experiencing  respiratory and flu like symptoms.

The Visitation Guidelines for Residential Aged Care can be found here.

The COVID-19 escalation tiers and aged care provider responses can be found here.

The Older Persons COVID Support Line can offer information and support to seniors who need

Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania





assistance or are feeling worried and isolated. The line can be reached on free call 1800 171  866.

Mental health support is available to all Australians by calling Lifeline (13 11 14) or  BeyondBlue (1800 512 348) and further resources are available on the Department of Health’s  Head to Health website.

