



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

The Hon David Littleproud MP  Minister for Emergency Management   Deputy Leader of the Nationals  Federal Member for Maranoa



Pat Conaghan MP  Federal Member for Cowper





The Hon Leslie Williams MP  State Member for Port Macquarie

Mayor Peta Pinson  Port Macquarie-Hastings Council



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au

18 November 2020

PORT RECEIVES $3M TO COMPLETE FORESHORE  PEDESTRIAN PROMENADE FOR BICENTENARY

The Port Macquarie community has received its bicentenary showcase piece: a pedestrian  promenade extending south from the current Town Green West works and along Kooloonbung Creek  to the nature reserve, thanks to more than $3 million from the Australian and NSW Governments.

Federal Member for Cowper Pat Conaghan said Port Macquarie-Hastings Council is the latest Council  to benefit from the Bushfire Local Economic Recovery Fund with $17,933,000 now invested in  Cowper for infrastructure projects that assist community recovery.

“The Morrison-McCormack Government is helping our community to build back better after the  Black Summer Bushfires,” he said.

“I advocated strongly for this $3,050,000 for our community, and the $1.5 million Federal funding for  the Town Green West upgrade, because I know this project will provide the missing link in the  pedestrian walkway we all love and enjoy.”

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the local communities of the North Coast were some of the most resilient in all of  Australia, as his trip marked almost a year since he was last in Cowper during the horrific summer  bushfires.

“The Australian Government has been and will continue to stand shoulder to shoulder with  communities such as Port Macquarie, impacted by the devastating 2019-2020 bushfires,” the Deputy  Prime Minister said.

“Our Government has provided more than $69.5 million in support for residents, farmers and  businesses affected by the fires in Cowper alone, which builds on the more than $1.8 billion in  bushfire relief provided to all affected communities throughout Australia.

“Today’s announcement presents our bushfire relief in action whilst also highlighting our  commitment to supporting local jobs, local contractors and local suppliers, as we not only rebuild  from the summer of bushfires but also recover from the COVID-19 pandemic.”

This Bicentennial Walkway Project announced today are among 22 jointly funded community  infrastructure projects recently announced by Minister for Emergency Management David  Littleproud. These projects provide a $107 million boost to bushfire-affected communities across  New South Wales.

“We know that recovery is not only an individual journey, but a community journey,” Minister  Littleproud said.

“These 22 projects across New South Wales provide places for people to come together, attractions  for visitors, improvements to local infrastructure and investments in bushfire resilience - things that  will make a big difference to communities going forward, and help local economic recovery in places  hit hard by the fires.”

The $3,050,000 for the Bicentennial Walkway project follows $11.2 million being allocated to  Kempsey Shire Council for the Macleay Valley Skydiving Adventure Park and $3.6 million to  Nambucca Valley Council for coastal seawall improvements at Nambucca’s Main Beach.

Member for Port Macquarie Leslie Williams said overall, more than $500 million has been set aside  by the New South Wales and Australian Governments to deliver projects that drive local economic,  community and industry recovery.

“I am thrilled that this project has been approved for funding. The Port Macquarie-Hastings  Bicentennial Walkway Project will be an asset that will enhance our community which has been  identified by the NSW Government for fast track investment to assist recovery,” she said.

“Applications for the next round of Bushfire Local Economic Recovery (BLER) funding are currently  open until 11 December for project applications under the $250 million BLER grant program. Grants  of between $200,000 and $20 million are available and I encourage business chambers, community  groups, Local Aboriginal Land Councils and councils to apply.”

Port Macquarie-Hastings Mayor Peta Pinson said the Bicentennial Walkway Project will deliver  approximately 700 metres of promenade walkway.

“It has been extremely exciting to see the waterfront promenade progress along our iconic Town  Green, providing a wonderful area for locals and visitors to relax and enjoy,” Cr Pinson said.

“We’ve continued to work in partnership with our State and Australian Government colleagues and  look forward to work starting in 2021 and the walkway being open for our community to enjoy in  2022.”

For more information on the Bushfire Local Economic Recovery Fund grant program visit  www.nsw.gov.au/blerfund or phone 1300 679 673. Applications close on 11 December 2020.

Details of successful Bushfire Local Economic Recovery Fund projects in NSW - and across other  states - are available on the National Bushfire Recovery Agency website at  www.bushfirerecovery.gov.au/local-recovery-projects

Port Macquarie will celebrate its Bicentenary of European settlement on the 17-18 April 2021.

ENDS

Media Contacts:  Deputy prime Minister - Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Mr Conaghan - Liz Spry 0418 928 744  Ms Williams - Terry Sara 0409 834 648  Ms Pinson - Andy Roberts 0412 769 454

