Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania









Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck  Minister for Aged Care and Senior Australians  Minister for Youth and Sport





17 December 2020





$13.7 million to further strengthen integrity in Australian sport

The Australian Government is providing $13.7 million to boost the integrity of sport in  Australia through additional funding for both the National Sports Tribunal and Sport Integrity  Australia’s efforts to tackle escalating and rapidly evolving integrity risks - critically,  including child safeguarding.

Minister for Youth and Sport, Richard Colbeck, said the commitment, announced as part of  the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook (MYEFO), would strengthen the ability of  sporting organisations in Australia to withstand these serious integrity threats.

“We are providing $10.1 million to Sport Integrity Australia to introduce an independent  complaints handling process at all levels, from elite sports to the grassroots level,” Minister  Colbeck said.

“This complaints handling process will be complemented by the independent dispute  resolution mechanism provided by the National Sports Tribunal.”

“This opt-in model will enhance the protections for Australian sport and the community  against evolving integrity issues affecting sport domestically and abroad, including  harassment, bullying and child abuse, illicit drugs, manipulating outcomes and code of  conduct issues.

“This is an important measure to ensure a high level of independence if and when an inquiry  is sought.  We know how important that can be and will ensure sporting bodies do not  become a law unto themselves.

“The Australian Government has developed its National Integrity Framework covering  Australia’s 98 National Sporting Organisations. This investment in Sport Integrity Australia  and the National Sports Tribunal underpins the implementation of this framework and  continues the work towards a stronger and fairer sporting sector across Australia.

Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania





“Australians should have confidence in the integrity of sport at all levels. They should have  confidence that integrity matters will be handled both independently and fairly. This program  is designed to help sports meet those expectations.”

From January 2021, Sport Integrity Australia will commence implementation of an  independent and cost-effective assessment and treatment model for integrity complaints to be  operational in March 2021. The funding will also support expanded education and awareness  work, policy development, co-ordination, and compliance programs.

The National Sports Tribunal (NST) will also receive $3.6 million to extend its pilot program  for a further 12 months, until 18 March 2023, following the significant disruptions from the  COVID-19 pandemic.

The NST offers national level sporting bodies and their participants an opportunity to resolve  disputes efficiently and affordably, including through mediation, arbitration, conciliation and  case appraisal.

Minister Colbeck said the NST would be supported to deal with and complete valid  applications made to up until 18 March 2023.

“The Australian Government wants the NST to continue to deliver faster, more cost-effective,  independent and transparent sports dispute resolution services,” Minister Colbeck said.

“This will be particularly important to ensure that disputes that arise under the new National  Integrity Framework can be resolved independently and fairly, so that sports, their  participants and the Australian community can have confidence in the outcomes.

“We anticipate Australia’s peak sporting bodies, such as the Australian Olympic Committee,  Paralympics Australia and Commonwealth Games Australia, will be able to utilise the NST  for major future events such as the 2022 Winter Olympics and Paralympics, and 2022  Commonwealth Games.”

More information about the 2020-21 MYEFO statement is available online:  www.budget.gov.au

