

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T

Friday 4th December 2020

Minister Littleproud IV Sky News  PETER STEFANOVIC: Okay. Well, just on that, joining me now is David Littleproud  Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management. Minister, good to see you,  thanks for joining us this morning. So, have you got any concerns about that, just to stay  on this- the topic of Sydney at the moment?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No, I don’t. I think the fact that you can see the contract tracers  are working proficiently and efficiently through this just goes to show that we’ve learnt so  much since the start of COVID-19. The states are now acting swiftly to make sure they  trace, they lock down - and that’s how we should do it. We shouldn’t go back to arbitrary  lines on a map put there 120 years ago; we should back one another. We’ve backed the  nation to keep ourselves safe, and doing that with contact tracing, isolation and eventually  a vaccine.  So, you know, I have confidence. New South Wales has one of the best contact tracing  methods in the country, and I think everyone just needs to cool their jets and make sure  that we continue to stick to that process, rather than reverting back to old-type parochial  lines on a map that just work for political reasons, rather than for common sense.

PETER STEFANOVIC: Yeah. Well, I'm sure you'll be relieved that Queensland is not  going to change its position at the moment. But WA has suggested, as you just heard  there, that it may well look to delay its reopening with New South Wales. as you just heard  from Brad Hazzard too, he says that WA has got to get real. Do you think that would be  acceptable, if they did delay it because of this new case?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No, I don't. And, you know, the only reason it’s changed in  Queensland is that the election's done and dusted, because that was all Annastacia  Palaszczuk was telling Queenslanders, we were keeping you safe. It's funny now, she's  not rolling out Jeanette Young. She's got a health minister saying it’s okay, so it's all- it  was all care and no responsibility before. But with respect to WA, I get that it works;  they've got a state election coming up. Parochial borderlines are politically popular at the  moment. But Mark McGowan needs to do what's right for the country, he's part of  Australia. Western Australia needs to understand that we have an economy that relies on  one another, but we can also keep one another safe by trusting one another.

And New South Wales has proved that, I think they've proven themselves beyond doubt  with respect to contact tracing, getting on top of these localised- localising the lockdowns  and making sure that there is confidence to everybody about how we do it. And that's how-  that should be the formula we move on with.

Transcript



T R A N S C R I P T

PETER STEFANOVIC: Just onto this report, Minister, by the McKell Institute that's been  published in The Australian today. It's found fruit pickers in Coffs Harbour are getting paid  as little as $3 an hour. What's your reaction to that?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, it's unacceptable. And what needs to happen is those small  minority that bend the rules and cut corners and exploit people need to be weeded out.  And in fact, John Azarias was tasked with the responsibility of giving me a report around  this, and in fact, we're now acting with some legislation. Christian Porter’s, in fact, some  way through that legislation around labour hire companies and putting in some real  stronger regulations and trying to get the states to come with us. Because you’ve got to  understand that we need the states to mirror that legislation one by one. So I think this isn’t  just pointing fingers at state and federal. We actually work together to make sure that we  get effective regulation over this because it actually destroys the reputation of agricultural  work, and that's not what we want. The vast majority do the right thing. But in any industry,  whether it's agriculture or anything, there are always people who cut the corners, that do  the wrong things that try to- that unfortunately give us a bad reputation. So we need to  make sure that we weed them out quickly. There's punitive penalties for these people that  do the wrong thing and we remove them entirely from the industry.

PETER STEFANOVIC: Three dollars an hour. I mean, is that slave labour?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: It's disgraceful. There's no other way you can sugar-coat it. That is  disgraceful and that is exploitation. So, you know, you’d have to look at the individual  cases. And I would hope that there is mechanisms now that the state authorities are  working through with these individuals and looking at these cases and prosecuting. But  again, we need to strengthen this. We need to harmonise this across the country. And I  think that there is momentum towards that. Christian Porter and the other law offices  around the country, I think are working collaboratively on this to finalise this once and for  all.

PETER STEFANOVIC: The Australian Workers Union wants a royal commission into fruit  picking conditions. Is that something that you would support?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Look, you never say never to a royal commission, but I think you  need to work through these issues calmly and make sure that you use common sense  about how you can address it. You can address it with legislation and if you can do that  quickly, then why go through the torture of a long, protracted royal commission when you  could, in fact, rectify this with legislation and particularly if it's harmonised across the  country? That would be a far stronger leadership way in which to deal with this.

PETER STEFANOVIC: You would have noticed the surging price of iron ore in the last  couple of days, Minister. Is this an example of how China needs us as much as we need  them?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, we need one another, and that's what we need to continue  to work towards and ensuring that we continue to make it clear to China that dialogue is  always available. Our door is always open, our phone is always on, and we will continue to  have our hand out, ready to start that dialogue. That is the best way in which to address  grievances. And that is what we will continue to do. So it's important that we all understand  that trade benefits both nations and we’ll continue to try and enrich that trade. But we'll  also look to diversify for our producers. We've got 14 free trade agreements, including  China and countless market access for commodities around the world. And we'll continue

Transcript



T R A N S C R I P T

to try and enrich that and expand that. In fact, we're looking to trade agreements with the  UK and EU now as we speak and we’ll continue to work through that process. But the best  way to address any issues is through dialogue.

PETER STEFANOVIC: But I mean, that's happening from your way. You can't get China  to pick up the phone at the moment. So the problem’s, the problem’s on their side.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, we won't turn our back and stop that process because then  we're no better than anyone else. We have to show leadership here. We have to continue  to demonstrate that we are ready to start that process, to have that dialogue, to work  through the issues and to continue on with trade that's beneficial to both of us. That's  leadership and that's what this Government has been consistent about. We'll be patient.  We'll be there. We’ll be consistent, and we will continue to make sure that when China’s  ready to speak, we're ready there, ready to listen.

PETER STEFANOVIC: So you'll hold the line?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: We will. You never compromise on your values or principles as a  nation. Your sovereignty is precious to this country. In fact, hundreds of thousands of  Australians have lost their lives protecting it. We now need to be fierce custodians of their  legacy, and we will. And we would expect that of any nation, their sovereignty is their right  and we will respect that. But our sovereignty needs to be respected in return.

PETER STEFANOVIC: Okay. David Littleproud appreciate your time this morning. Thanks  for joining us here.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks mate.



Media contact  0455 448 985





























