



The Hon Stuart Robert MP  Minister for the National Disability Insurance Scheme  Minister for Government Services

TRANSCRIPT

E&EO

Transcript: Interview with Patricia Karvelas, Drive - ABC Radio National, Tuesday 11 August 2020  Topics: Government’s COVID-19 support for the Disability sector, Independents joining the Government

Patricia Karvelas:  Today the government released an updated plan to respond to a major outbreak in Victorian  disability care for more we’re joined by the Minister for Government Services and the National  Disability Insurance Scheme Stuart Robert, Stuart Robert welcome.

Minister Robert:   Thanks Patricia.

Patricia Karvelas:  The government started working on a plan to respond to coronavirus outbreaks in disability  care in March. Why did you decide that more was needed and when did you start this work on  this update?

Minister Robert:   You're right. We started this in fact in February, with the planning phase and then on the 18th of  March I pulled together the Disability Reform Council, all the state and territory ministers, so  we could coordinate it all. That went really well through the first wave, and then as things  started to look a little interesting in Victoria, almost a month ago, we started pulling together  what is now the Critical Response Group for the nation to prepare ourselves, if something like a  second wave came upon us, and unfortunately that's what we're seeing now.

Patricia Karvelas:  Take me through the key changes that are contained in this plan and the process for managing  an outbreak in disability care if it happens.

Minister Robert:

One of the reasons we put the Critical Response Group together was to look at if things went  dangerous across one, two or multiple jurisdictions we needed to be able to respond very  quickly. So I took one of my deputy secretaries to head the group up, that includes elements of  the National Disability Insurance Agency, the regulator, the Department and it stands up to me  every day at 4.30 in terms of a full brief.

We've put in place, providers of last resort in Victoria, although we're working across the  country to have that in place but that's been formally signed off in Victoria as well as a critical  response capability, and the intent being that we could move very quickly if we find providers  aren’t  coping. If we find, what used to be called group homes, it's now supported independent  living, where you might have two or three participants in a home. If one participant becomes  positive, we need to be able to move rapidly in there to ensure those participants are well, that  the other participants in the home are fine, that we can get alternate accommodation, those  sort of things. So it's a fairly comprehensive capability that has been well planned for, well  stood up and it's being used.

Patricia Karvelas:  The Commonwealth as you say is working with the Victorian Government through its Disability  Rapid Response Group. So who's ultimately accountable if something goes wrong?

Minister Robert:  Yeah, interesting question we both are and it's not ducking the question. It's the Disability  Response Group in Victoria is responsible for all people with disability and there's probably a  million people. If you go to the Survey of Disability, Ageing and Caring in Victoria with disability,  but only 100,000 are participants.

So the Victorian Government has a wide remit for care for providing mental health, for hospital  care for all people with disability including NDIS. But in terms of NDIS specific in a group setting  or specific for their attendant care, it's the NDIS. And then to make it even more complex, there  is 5,300 NDIS participants who are in a supported independent living, a group home if you will.  55 per cent of those are the responsibility of the NDIS, NDIA, the agency and 45 per cent are  responsibility, through an in-kind arrangement with the Victorian Government. So it's a little  complex, but it is actually very clear between the Victorian Government and the  Commonwealth Government, how it runs. Minister Donnellan and I were speaking this  morning. We've got representatives on their Rapid Response Group so we all, we all know  who's responsible for what.

Patricia Karvelas:  Okay, but ultimately who does the buck stop with if there is an outbreak like we've seen in aged  care?

Minister Robert:  If it's running rampant through your group home settings that the NDIS is responsible for clearly  I as responsible Minister would be. If it to me in-kind support arrangement group homes, then

clearly the Victorian Government. And it is well understood across both jurisdictions who is  responsible for what.

Patricia Karvelas:  Okay as part of this a panel of four large providers will offer advice, support staff and isolation  accommodations for smaller providers in an event of an outbreak, is that in place right now?

Minister Robert:  It is in place right now, absolutely.

Patricia Karvelas:  Okay and the majority of infections and disability care in Victoria are our amongst staff, what is  the capacity of the system to provide a replacement workforce?

Minister Robert:  Quite substantially. These are very, very large providers. At present this capability has not been  deployed. So we've identified 138 providers that we've been communicating with, perhaps  smaller that might need some support or guidance or assistance, and all of those providers are  actually doing a very good job in terms of where they're up to and haven't needed to support  yet. We're ensuring that there's enough PPE for 262 organisations and providers have actually  got over 190,000 pieces. So were ensuring that's moving through. We just want to make sure  that we're not leaving any stone unturned and we have a very large response capability if we  need it and at present we haven't needed to deploy any of it yet.

Patricia Karvelas:  Okay the age care sector setup is very complex too, people have said this is an issue are the  chains of command clear?

Minister Robert:  Absolutely clear considering that the response group briefs me at 4.30 every day, that brief  includes the CEO of the regulator Grahame Head, the CEO of the Agency and their key staff  including Department of Social Services, as well as the critical response lead.

So it's, it's one call directly to the Minister in terms of decision making required, and of course a  daily brief and daily reporting on looking at where figures are where participants are how  providers are going, including a health check on the sector with a focus on Victoria.

Patricia Karvelas:  Concerns have been raised that disability care workers, move between homes in a similar way  to aged care workers, have plans been put in place to limit the movement?



Minister Robert:

A lot of work has gone in place to encourage the limitation of that movement, you can't  eradicate it. Remember there's 100,000 participants in Victoria alone. A lot of them, in fact,  most of them will need some sort of interaction on a daily basis. Some will need attendant care  to help with washing or cleaning, others will need support in terms of allied health, and others  will just need community support and engagement. So it's quite clear that we want to limit, as  much as possible, and we've asked providers to do that, as much as possible.

Patricia Karvelas:  So have you in each stage, I don't mean to be rude, at this stage, you're just asking them to  there is no requirement on them, limiting the movement.

Minister Robert:  We've asked them to limit it because with 100,000 participants, all having detailed interactions  with providers of some sort, with the vast majority of them not by big providers, a third of them  alone are self-managed, so they determine their own supports and their own people that  provide care, with no visibility to government because that's choice and control as per the NDIS  Act. At present we can only strongly encourage and put in place facilities where if we need to  step in we can.

Patricia Karvelas:  Okay so, will it be enforced? How will you be able to ensure that that happens?

Minister Robert:  Remember the disability sector Patricia is very, very different to the aged care sector. The aged  care will have 150 residents in a home. The average group setting is three, within disability. The  vast majority, so 95,000 participants aren't in supported independent living, group home if you  will, they're in their own home, or they're living with mum and dad, with 50 per cent under the  age of 18. So it's a very, very different setting something you can’t enforce to say well providers  can't work across multiple sites because the vast majority of people, providing support in  disability aren’t from large established providers, that's not how it operates.

So that's why we work with participants to say here’s what we'd like to happen is there are any  issues? We can assist with limiting that movement if necessary.

Patricia Karvelas:  One of the issues in aged care seems to be that facilities weren't as well prepared, and that the  regulator basically wasn't able to do this kind of work, what steps have been taken to verify the  plans in place for group homes?

Minister Robert:  Substantial. In Victoria, they've all been contacted. There's been desktop audits done. We're  working with 138 providers now to assist them with anything that they may need. If you look at  the group homes, if you like, in Victoria right now, there are 17 participants. These are the  numbers from the Commission that I'm reporting, 17 participants COVID positive in only six

group settings, remember this is 17 out of 100,000. We've contacted over 68,000 vulnerable  participants across the country to ensure that have access to what they need, their support  plans are in place, they're comfortable they know who to contact, in case there are any issues.  So we are about as prepared as we can be in this setting.

Patricia Karvelas:  Just finally a story has just broken in The Australian that the Coalition or the Government is  trying to woo two particular politicians here in the Centre Alliance to join with the Government  that's Rebekha Sharkie and also Stirling Griff, is that going on?

Minister Robert:  No idea. I've got my head down, dealing with not just disability but of course the entire service  delivery for welfare across the country as well as the digital tech solutions so I'm pretty busy.  But having said that, why wouldn't an Independent want to join the Government, the  Government's performing well, we are delivering for the country. I encourage every  Independent to look at coming and joining.

Patricia Karvelas:  Thank you so much for joining us. Thanks to Stuart Robert, the Minister for Government  Services and the National Disability Insurance Scheme.



Authorised by S. Robert MP, Canberra



