Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg







THE HON KEITH PITT MP

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia  Member for Hinkler

THE HON MICHELLE LANDRY MP  Assistant Minister for Children and Families  Assistant Minister for Northern Australia  Member for Capricornia

Dr SAM McMAHON  CLP Senator for the Northern Territory

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE  23 October 2020



NAIF SUPPORTING EXPANSION OF TOP END BARRA FARM



A Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility (NAIF) loan to one of Australia’s most successful  barramundi farms is set to deliver a major economic and jobs boost to Northern Territory  local economy.

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt said the NAIF funding will  support the expansion of Humpty Doo Barramundi.

“It’s great to be making this announcement on National Barramundi Day with the $24.2  million NAIF loan supporting  this 100% Australian-owned business expand to meet growing  domestic and international demand,” Minister Pitt said.

“The NAIF loan, alongside private bank co-funding, will support the construction of a  purpose built hatchery for saltwater barramundi that will provide a significant boost to the  Northern Territory’s aquaculture industry and generate economic activity in the Territory as  we recover from the COVID-19 pandemic.

“The new funding will support around 110 jobs during construction, and a further 160 jobs  when the new hatchery is up and running.

“NAIF support will ensure Australian-farmed barramundi will be available in restaurants at  home, and around the world.” Minister Pitt said.

Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg



Assistant Minister for Northern Australia Michelle Landry said the loan was NAIF’s second  investment in Humpty Doo Barramundi, following a $7.18 million loan for the pond and  nursery facilities which were completed last year.

“NAIF has committed more than $2.4 billion to projects in northern Australia, including  almost $860 million for projects in the Northern Territory which support a forecast 3,000  jobs,” Assistant Minister Landry said.

“This latest project will ensure Humpty Doo Barramundi can keep up with demand for  Australian seafood while boosting opportunities for jobs in the Territory, including for  Indigenous communities.

“The Government is committed to expanding economic opportunities in northern Australia  and has announced a series of reforms to NAIF which will speed up approvals and make it  easier for projects to qualify for funding.

“The government has also extended the $5 billion facility to continue operations for a  further five years until mid-2026.”

Northern Territory Senator Dr Sam McMahon said the NAIF loan is the perfect way to  celebrate National Barramundi Day.

“The barramundi industry is synonymous with the Northern Territory and this NAIF loan will  mean more jobs at a time when we most need them,” Senator McMahon said.

“The NAIF is a fantastic contributor to the Territory’s economic recovery and it’s great to see  a home-grown business like Humpty Doo Barramundi making the most of this opportunity  to continue its growth.”

Humpty Doo Barramundi Chief Executive Officer Dan Richards said the NAIF and ANZ  financing was a major boost for the company.

“We are pleased to be able to make this further investment towards making Australia self-sufficient in producing Australia’s iconic salt water Barramundi, while creating new  opportunities for our fellow Territorians,” Mr Richards said.

“We would like to acknowledge the great work of the teams at NAIF, the ANZ and Humpty  Doo Barramundi to make this happen.”



ENDS

Media contact: Matt Dunstan 0411 535 072     Marnie Hobson 0407 090 230



Assistant Minister Landry - Tom Birkbeck 0418 908 159  Senator McMahon - Kris Civitarese 0418 220 411







Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg















