

LINDA BURNEY MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND SOCIAL SERVICES  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AUSTRALIANS  MEMBER FOR BARTON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RN BREAKFAST WITH FRAN KELLY  TUESDAY, 10 NOVEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Extension of JobSeeker COVID supplement; JobSeeker rate; JobMaker;  hiring credit scheme; Four Corners report.

FRAN KELLY, HOST: The Federal Government will reportedly extend the JobSeeker  COVID supplement for a further three months, to the end of March. But it will be likely paid  at a reduced rate again, possibly at a level of $150 a fortnight. That's a cut of $100 from  the current rate. Linda Burney is the Shadow Minister for Families and Social Services.  Linda Burney, welcome back to Breakfast.

LINDA BURNEY, SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND SOCIAL SERVICES:  G’day, Fran. How are you?

KELLY: Good. Thank you. We understand that the Expenditure Review Committee has  now agreed to extend the JobSeeker supplement to March 28th. A final decision was due  by Cabinet last night. Labor has been calling for the Government to extend it. Are you  happy now that it is extended in line with the end date of JobKeeper?

BURNEY: No. The Labor Party will be arguing in the Senate today that the supplement  should be kept at the current rate of $250 until the end of March in line with JobKeeper.  We will also be arguing in the Senate today that there should be a permanent increase to  JobSeeker. That's really important. And for our listeners this morning, Fran, they probably  remember the old Newstart payment and the discussion that I know you've been part of in  terms of a permanent increase, the Government has not announced that. And we will be  arguing for that. I think there's two points to this, Fran. There is the moral and the reality of  people who are incredibly poor and for the first time in their lives, where they have been on  JobSeeker, being able to put food on the table. But the second is an economic argument.  And that is that people who are on small amounts of money, like JobSeeker, use that  money in the economy, which is good for jobs and good for business.

KELLY: Okay, so you are happy, presumably, the JobSeeker supplement has been  extended to March, but you want a permanent increase there. We've got this increase now,  apparently, the Government's agreed to a supplement of $100 a fortnight.

BURNEY: $150 I think.



KELLY: $150 is it?

BURNEY: I think.

KELLY: Yes, I beg your pardon. $150. Is that adequate? Is that what Labor would set the  rate at?

BURNEY: No, and I'll be looking to talk to people like ACOSS and other stakeholders  today to see what they're saying. And I am not going to advance what Labor's position is  because we are still working through that, on what a permanent increase is. Our position,  as you know, is that we've been calling for a permanent increase. And this is not a  permanent increase. And we also note, Fran, and these are the Government's figures, not  Labor's figures, that at the moment, there's about 1.6 million people on JobSeeker. And by  Christmas, because of the virus and the incredible increase in unemployment, there will be  about 1.8 million people on JobSeeker by Christmas. And that's a lot of Australian.

KELLY: Does that explain, do you think in any way, the Government's reticence to make  this a permanent increase? It wants to see what the level of unemployment is by that time  before it either works out an amount and the slug that will be on the Budget bottom line?

BURNEY: I don't know what's behind the thinking of Josh Frydenberg and others on the  Expenditure Review Committee except that there are calls from the Business Council  through to ACOSS and everyone in between that there needs to be a permanent increase  to JobSeeker, that the amount of $550 a fortnight, the old amount, before the supplement  simply meant it kept people in poverty. And it actually stopped people from getting  employment, which is why we've been arguing so vigorously that there needs to be a  permanent increase. And today's announcement, by way of The Australian, does not give  a permanent increase.

KELLY: Well, this increase at $550 a fortnight for the supplement plus $150 brings it to just  over, I think, it's going to be $357 a week. That's still, as I understand it, below the poverty  line. I mean, I know you don't want to give this answer but I'm sure you look closely at what  is a liveable amount of money and what others are saying. Is that close?

BURNEY: It is below the poverty line. And as I said, at the top of our discussion, Fran,  Labor will be arguing in the Senate today with amendments to some social security  legislation which the Government rejected in the House of Representatives. They were  modest, sensible requests and amendments. And that is that we believe that the  supplement should stay in place at the current rate of $250 until at least the end of March.  And as I said, Fran, there needs to be a decision by this Government. And I'm just  astounded that they have not announced a permanent increase.

KELLY: Can I ask you about JobMaker? Because the hiring credit scheme that will pay  employers up to $200 a week if they take on a worker aged under 35 was the centrepiece  of the Government's Budget. It's before the Senate this week. I understand Labor will be  pushing for amendments. What amendments is Labor putting in place, putting forward, to  ensure older people don't fall through the cracks? That was the major concern, as I  understand it.

BURNEY: Well, Tony Burke and Brendan O'Connor have been working on this. The real  issue is that the JobMaker program, promising thousands and thousands and thousands of

people being assisted by this, there is going to be much less people assisted than the  projections bought by the Government. I think that's really important for people to  understand. The other thing, of course, is that it, as I understand it, it ignores people who  are over the age of 55.

KELLY: Over the age of 35.

BURNEY: Over 35, I beg your pardon. Yes, 35. And that's an awful lot of people that are  currently on JobKeeper or JobSeeker, and who will be increasingly on JobSeeker. So, it  seems to me that it ignores an enormous amount of people that are going to be terribly  affected and have been terribly affected by what's happening on the health front.

KELLY: So, just to ask you again, what's Labor's strategy? Because it's an expensive  program, $4 billion to create what we now know is likely more like 45,000 new jobs. If the  amendments from Labor don't get up, will Labor wave through this legislation?

BURNEY: Look, I feel like it should be Tony Burke speaking about this.

KELLY: What’s your view?

BURNEY: I think you can see, Fran, from Labor's conduct throughout the pandemic, is that  whilst we've pointed out to the Government where the problems are and where the flaws  are, and I think they've all been proven correct, and the Government has resisted Labor's  suggestions and then finally adopted them in many cases, particularly on the jobs front. I  think that you will see Labor continue with that pragmatic approach, and also a  constructive approach to getting help out the door for people who find themselves in  difficult circumstances.

KELLY: Linda Burney is our guest. She's the Shadow Minister for Families and Social  Services. Can I ask you about last night's Four Corners report? Allegations of inappropriate  behaviour levelled at two ministers, the Attorney General, Christian Porter, was the focus  of these claims. He has rejected them. He says they're not true. In fact, he says the nature  of the claims are defamatory and he's considering his legal options. But are there  questions now, does Labor believe there's questions now whether Christian Porter is a fit  and proper person to be the Attorney General, the country's first law officer.

BURNEY: Well, a couple of things there, Fran, I've watched the show. And I watched part  of Q&A after the show. Not all of it, but part of it. I note that Alan Tudge, who was also  mentioned last night in the show, issued a statement last night of regret. And Christian  Porter, this morning, has come out swinging, saying that he's looking at his legal options.  So, I'm going to be very careful about what I say. Christian Porter is not only the first law  officer in Australia but is also the Leader of the Government in the House of  Representatives, a job that I think is questionable in terms of his skills. But at the end of  the day, women in Parliament House and working in politics should be safe. And that's the  most important thing, that they should feel confident that they can come to work without  being pressured and without being harassed. And that's the paramount thing. And you  know, at the end of the day, people have to look into their own consciousnesses and also  the voters of the seats where people like Christian Porter and others will make decisions  about the future of those people. I just basically say, Fran, that people should be able to be  confident and safe in the workplace.

KELLY: Do you believe that the women in Parliament House feel confident and safe? That



it is a safe environment?

BURNEY: When you looked at that show last night, you would have to say, ‘Well, that's  questionable’. I have to say, from my own experience, Fran, that I have never experienced  any sort of harassment pressure. People wouldn't dare, I'm not quite sure. I'm a lot older  and in a much more powerful position than young women who are going in as staffers.

KELLY: This has zeroed in on two senior ministers and their positions in the ministry that  were sort of brought into question here. But no party is chaste and pure. I'm sure there's  bad personal behaviour on Labor benches as well. Is this a matter of conscience? And is it  a matter of conscience, as you say, for Christian Porter or whoever to look into their own  personal conscience? Or is it a matter for the Prime Minister given that he is the Attorney  General? Malcolm Fraser pointed out, Malcolm Turnbull rather, pointed out on Four  Corners the risk of compromise, he believes, in these situations is very, very real.

BURNEY: I listened to Malcolm Turnbull last night. And, of course, Christian Porter is  disputing Malcolm Turnbull's record of events. And that's between them. But at the end of  the day, I think it's really important that those of us that hold representative and powerful  positions within the Government conduct ourselves with integrity. And it seems to me that  issue of integrity is something that people need to think carefully about.

KELLY: Linda Burney, thank you very much for joining us.

BURNEY: Thanks, Fran.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DARYL TAN 0422 028 222







