

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES  MEMBER FOR HUNTER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2GB WITH DEBORAH KNIGHT  FRIDAY, 31 JULY 2020

SUBJECTS: COVID-19 in Aged Care; AUSMIN and China Trade; Labor  Environmental Action Network; Old technology.

DEBORAH KNIGHT, HOST: Angus Taylor and Joel Fitzgibbon are with us for  Friday question time. G’day fellas, thanks for joining us.

ANGUS TAYLOR, MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND EMISSIONS REDUCTION:  G’day Deb. Joel.

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: Great to be with you, Deb.

KNIGHT: Now, I want to kick it off with COVID because that has dominated the  news cycle and continues to this week. We've got an absolute full-blown crisis  in aged care in Victoria. And today these awful reports - appalling - that  residents who had died from COVID had been left in their beds for hours. They  simply don't have the staff, the capability, until we've seen the Defence Force  and interstate nursing staff moving to help. Angus how do we get to this point?

TAYLOR: Well it’s oobviously disheartening and seeing those images and  seeing the numbers in Victoria, more generally, over the last couple of days,  has been disheartening for everybody. But the crucial thing now is we deal with  it. There were 16 additional cases amongst the 700 in aged care yesterday, so  we shouldn't overblow it, despite the fact that those images were heart-rending,  there's no question about it.

KNIGHT: I think any family member, though, who’s got someone in aged care,  would say it's not - you know…

TAYLOR: Well, we do have to keep this in perspective. But look, the point is  we need to get additional workforce in there. We've done that with the ADF, as

you mentioned, and that's a real priority. And we've got to make sure we  continue to provide that support. And we're certainly doing that at the  Commonwealth level. But we've got to also remember here there's no easy way  out with COVID. This is a dreadful situation. We're in it together, and we've got  to keep working together to make this - make the best of what's a really tough  situation.

KNIGHT:  Absolutely. And the blame game, Joel, that we've seen this week,  you know, little digs happening between the Commonwealth Government and  between the Victorian Government particularly with aged care, it's not helping  anyone.

FITZGIBBON: And we have to absolutely avoid that, Deb. This is tragic. Both  complacency and stupidity are on the rise. Shows you can't legislate against  either of those things. And we need the community to respond. You know,  when I was young guy, drinking and driving wasn't frowned upon. It was just a  normal thing to do in those days, but it wasn't so much - it wasn't just random  breath tests that turned that around. It was community attitudes - people  frowning upon people who have - to be stupid enough to drink and drive. We  need people now to be rising up and saying to any idiot out there doing the  wrong thing, not complying, to tell them to wake up to themselves. And now on  aged care facilities, at least now we might be starting to realise that we have to  put greater value on them, the work, the work that people who work in the aged  care facilities do for our community. And we have to start properly resourcing  them. This is a crisis and the most vulnerable our community are paying a price  for something outside their control.

KNIGHT: Will we see action in that sector, Angus?

TAYLOR: Well we're seeing action on it. We're having an aged care Royal  Commission. But I think the priority has to be now, and just making sure we've  got the workforce in there to support them through COVID, because the tragedy  occurring now is all about having a workforce today. So that's got to be the  focus, Deb, rather than turning this into a broader political issue.

KNIGHT: And I know with the story that we've seen from Daniel Andrews today  - the Victorian Premier - that with the ADF, who were helping in the aged care  sector, but also helping with the contact-tracing and been doing door knocking  on people who’ve had positive cases, and one in four of the people weren’t at  home - were out and about, in the community.

TAYLOR: That that's absolutely right. And look, we've got 1500 ADF personnel  on the ground in Victoria, supporting. The thing we've got to remember here,  and I see this in my home region, is that most people are doing the wrong thing.  But as Joel said…



KNIGHT: Doing the wrong thing? Doing the right thing.

TAYLOR: Doing the right thing, sorry. Most people doing the right thing. But  there are a few doing the wrong thing and we need to call them out and, that is  that they are not helping anyone and what we've seen with the door-knocking in  Victoria is an element of that.

KNIGHT: Joel, we've reached the point in Victoria where all of the state has  been mandated that if you don't wear a mask when you're out in public, you'll  get a $200 fine. That's from Monday. Have we reached that point where it  should be mandated in New South Wales?

FITZGIBBON: Well, I think we just have to follow the health advice, Deb. And if  that is the case, then we should all welcome it, support it and of course, do it. I  mean, the fact that there was - the 25 per cent of the people who were  supposed to be home isolating, were door-knocked and found not to be home,  is a disgrace. And maybe it's about time we just started naming and shaming  these people.

KNIGHT: Well, that's what we've seen happen in Queensland, and there've  been, you know, people hitting back saying that it's a race issue, for these two  19 year-old women.

FITZGIBBON: Yeah, well these are the people you don't want to go to for your  legal advice, that’s all I can say.

KNIGHT: Yeah, all right. Good point. Now look, we've had the AUSMIN talks  this week. The Foreign and Defence Ministers both flying into the US. They're  now in 14-day quarantine after meeting with their US counterparts. China - top  of that agenda. And now, Angus, China's hit back, saying that we, Australia,  we’re the barking - we’re barking at China at the behest of America. They've  also called us gum stuck to China's shoe and ‘attack dog for the US’. They can't  really throw - well, they could, they’re hurling all the insults they can at us. At  the end of the day, though, China needs Australia too, doesn't it?

TAYLOR: Well they do. I mean, obviously, you know, iron ore and coal and  other agricultural products are very important to China, and they'll continue to  be but we, look to your broader point here, Deb, we make decisions in our own  interests, but we also have no closer strategic relationship than the United  States and those things are completely reconcilable. I mean, we are acting in  our own interests, but it's not surprising that a country like the US has interests  that are very aligned with ours and will continue to, and that's why these talks  are important and it's why continuing to strengthen that relationship is so  critical.



KNIGHT: And we've got to Joel, don't we, stand up to a bully.

FITZGIBBON: I remind you Deb, of the old saying - you not only have to do the  wrong thing - ah, right thing - but you have to be seen to be doing the right  thing. We have to have a more independent foreign policy, but also to be seen  to be articulating a more independent foreign policy. Think about what's  happening here. The US is becoming more assertive in its pushback against  China in strategic terms. But it's not suffering any of the economic  consequences. Their trade deal is holding firm. So the US is big and ugly  enough to take care of itself. But here in Australia, we are being invited by our  American friends to be, to join them in this greater level of assertiveness. But  we are being harmed, and we will potentially be further harmed, because this is  our biggest export market - agriculture, coal, iron ore, as Angus said, so we  need to be absolutely solid in our, and robust, in our national defence. We must  speak for Australia and not be seen to be speaking for someone else.

KNIGHT: Yeah. All right...

TAYLOR: ...Well we don't Joel. I mean, we stand up for Australia every day of  the week. And you do, we do. That's our job. But the relationship with the US  strategically is an important one and that's not going away.

KNIGHT: I've just got some breaking news through. Fellas, I've just got some  breaking news through, a helicopter has reportedly crashed with at least one  person on board and that's happened in New South Wales Riverina region.  That's just come through. We'll get some more details at the top of the hour in  the news, but that helicopter reportedly crashed in the Riverina region in New  South Wales. Joel, I want to talk to you about this, a week, we know, a day a  long time in politics. And last week when we talked, it seems as though it's  changed a lot when we mentioned the climate policy, that the internal divisions  within the Labor Party back then a week ago, it seemed it had all died down but  it's flared up again. Did you get a slap down from Albo?

FITZGIBBON: Well Deb, this is the point. The world is changing in all sorts of  ways and very rapidly, and managing that change is complex and difficult. And  the Labor Party is about getting the balance right between the workforce -  building the workforce, building job security - and our natural environment. And  my complaint this week was about a group of people who too often take an  extreme view on the environment...

KNIGHT: ...within your own party?

FITZGIBBON: Well a group associated with the party known as LEAN - the  Labor Environmental Action Network, which carries the name Labor in its title,

but from my perspective does not speak for the Labor Party, but is seen to be  speaking for the Labor Party.

KNIGHT: But there are members within your own party who back what they  say. And, and you've had Albo at a press conference saying that you were "just  wrong" with your criticisms.

FITZGIBBON: Well, LEAN has become a big organisation and there are very  many well-intentioned and legitimate people in that group who are members of  the Labor Party. There are others in my, in my observation, that are extreme  leftists who would take us to a policy position that would destroy working class  jobs, and indeed, are not members of the Labor Party.

KNIGHT: So what do you say to the Labor MP who tweeted this week that you,  Joel Fitzgibbon, are peddling conspiracy theories?

FITZGIBBON: Well, I say she's welcome to her view, Deb

KNIGHT: Okay, we'll leave it at that. Now, just before we go: technology, we're  talking VHS and old technology and I'll get to some calls on that in a moment.  But what old technology, Angus Taylor, do you cling to?

TAYLOR: Well, I have to admit that my dad bought a beta and to this day...

KNIGHT: ...Oh he didn't!

TAYLOR: He defends it as the higher quality thing.

KNIGHT: They always do defend it though, they say...

TAYLOR: ...he still got it somewhere. Look, the, the other one for us is we've  got our wedding video on a VHS. Now, I'm very happy with that because the  kids can't watch the wedding speeches and make fun of me. But it is one of  those issues we are going to have to resolve.

KNIGHT: How about you, Joel?

FITZGIBBON: I'm going to deflect to another family member too Deb...

KNIGHT: ... You had a go at your daughter last week, look at you!

FITZGIBBON: Well it’s my wife today, because my wife has one of these little  transistor radios which she carts around the house with her listening to her  favourite community radio station. But she reminds me that when we had the  last big superstorm, where, which took not only our heating and lighting, but



also our telecommunications network out, the only thing that was operating in  the house was Diane's transistor radio.

KNIGHT: There you go. Well, it's got to be part of any fire safety plan to have a  transistor radio with batteries in it, because she's right. Your wife is right, Joel,  and they usually are.

FITZGIBBON: Always right, Deb, I learned that a long time ago.

TAYLOR: Too true.

KNIGHT: You're a smart cookie. Good on you fellas. Have a great weekend.  Thanks so much for joining us.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641









