Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg







THE HON KEITH PITT MP

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia  Member for Hinkler

ROWAN RAMSEY MP  Member for Grey



MEDIA RELEASE

03 November 2020

MINISTER THANKS KIMBA COMMUNITY

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, the Hon Keith Pitt MP, thanked the  people of Kimba for their time this week to discuss the National Radioactive Waste  Management Facility.

Kimba has been identified to host the facility, where Australia’s radioactive waste, most of  which comes from the development of life-saving nuclear medicines, will be stored.

Minister Pitt said he valued the opportunity to speak with community members about  progress to establish the facility and future opportunities for the community.

“If not for COVID-19 travel restrictions I would have been here months ago, but I was very  pleased to visit Kimba and meet with the local community to discuss this critically important  facility,” Minister Pitt said.

“It will support the continued supply of nuclear medicine and research in Australia, that two  in three of us on average will need at some point in our lives.

“This project will consolidate our radioactive waste accumulated over about 70 years,  currently spread across more than 100 locations across Australia, into a one, safe, and  purpose-built facility.

“So, while it is nationally significant, it will also come along with local benefits, including 45  full-time jobs and a new alternative industry to agriculture, which will be particularly  welcomed during times of drought.

“It was important to speak with people both for and against the facility, and my experience  reflects what has been demonstrated in local surveys over the years and that is while some  people are concerned, most have a strong desire for this project to be delivered.

“Thank you to all community members who met with me including, Napandee landowner  Jeff Baldock, Kimba Mayor Dean Johnson, representatives from the No Radioactive Waste  on Agricultural Land in Kimba or SA, Working for Kimba’s Future and the Kimba Consultative  Committee.”

Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg



Member for Grey Rowan Ramsey welcomed the Minister’s visit.

“It was very good to have the Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith  Pitt here to talk about this very significant project, which will deliver long-term economic  benefits for the Kimba community,” Mr Ramsey said.

“The Minister met with community members and local business owners to discuss the  opportunities for and expectations of the community. I’m confident the experience has  helped him fully appreciate the drive and determination that exists here.

“The message was pretty clear, Kimba has been on this pathway now for five years, and  while there have been strongly differing opinions it has entered the construction process in  good faith and a decision has been reached.

“They would like now for the Parliament to deliver on its promises.”

To find out more about the facility, visit: radioactivewaste.gov.au



ENDS

Media contact:    Minister Pitt - Marnie Hobson 0407 090 230  Rowan Ramsey - Leonie Lloyd-Smith 0417 827 523























