KRISTY MCBAIN MP

MEMBER FOR EDEN MONARO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2CC LEON DELANEY SHOW

WEDNESDAY, 28 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECT: Bushfire Royal Commission.



LEON DELANEY, HOST: Bushfire survivors have rallied outside Parliament today. As the

Bushfire Royal Commission prepared to hand down its final report to the government. The

government will let the rest of us know what's in the report later in the week. The Commission

has received nearly 2000 submissions of over 2000 calls to its information line. Local member

for Eden-Monaro Kristy McBain was Mayor of Bega during the summer bushfires and attended

the rally today to meet with many of those who were affected. Kristy joins me on the phone

now. Good afternoon.



KRISTY MCBAIN, MEMBER FOR EDEN-MONARO: Good afternoon, Leon.



DELANEY: First of all, the rally outside Parliament a big turnout today?



MCBAIN: There were a number of survivors of the bushfire crisis, not just the most recent one,

but also with previous years and a number of their supporters all calling for action on climate

change. And also wanting some answers as to what's in the Bushfire Royal Commission

recommendations and I guess asking for action on those recommendations. There's been

several royal commissions into bushfires and natural disasters and from where they're

standing they're saying - we just want to see some action.



DELANEY: Indeed, I saw a quote saying that if all of this process, to my knowledge and

identify climate change as a factor is not followed up with some sort of meaningful action, then

it's all been for nothing. And I guess that sums it up, doesn't it?



MCBAIN: Yeah, that's right. I mean, today we had, you know, three people who are all been

impacted over three consecutive years.



Jan from Vimy Ridge near Tathra in 2018. Fiona from the Mid-North Coast in 2019, and Jack

from Rosedale near Batemans Bay in 2020. And their call was specifically - we've talked about

this ad nauseum. It doesn't have to be a political issue, but get on with it and actually, you

know, implement some plans and look towards the future because we all shouldn't be fighting

over two words called climate change.



We all should be actually just listening to the science like we've done through the pandemic.



DELANEY: Yeah, we heard earlier in the programme that a report from the Australia Institute

has found that a majority of Australians believe that climate change significantly impacted the

bushfires, they have concerns that climate change will continue to impact bushfires in the

future. A majority of Australians care about climate change.



There's concern about the government's commitment to a gas led economic recovery.



All of these messages are coming from the voters of Australia for some reason, it seems the

government isn't hearing that message. Do you have any idea why?



MCBAIN: They're not hearing the message. And what I would say is, you know, this concept

that, you know, climate change is something we talk about in the inner city, is just, you know,

ridiculous, you know, the, the three people that were there today, none of those people were

from the inner city. They're all from regional areas. They're impacted, we're all impacted, you

know, I don't think you have to go very far around my electorate to see the impact of climate

change. You know, we're seeing more frequent and intense weather events, whether that

floods, whether it's bushfire, whether it's torrential rain, and hail that cause significant

problems, I think we just have to get on with addressing it. And that's what people are calling

for. They're calling for action.



DELANEY: I think a lot of people are expecting climate change to be one of the major focuses

of the Royal Commission Report. But in fact, the Royal Commission has been looking at a

wide range of things, hasn't it, it's presumably going to make some sort of recommendation on

climate change action, but it's also looking at many of the other issues that rose to prominence

during the bushfire season, including the management of firefighting resources, the allocation

of infrastructure, you know, maintenance and various other issues. What do you anticipate

should be coming out of the Royal Commission report?



MCBAIN: Look what I think we need and, you know, having been the Mayor of the Bega

Valley, where we had three catastrophic bushfires within a couple of years -  is that there

needs to be a better communication system. And that communication system has to talk

between the jurisdictions between Victoria, NSW, the ACT - they actually need to talk to each

other because lines on a map may nothing to people on the ground fighting fires, or people on

the ground trying to access information. The recovery system needs to be streamlined.



There needs to be one agency that deals with recovery. Because at the moment, you have

traumatised people having to tell this story to multiple agencies to receive help.



We know that we need more land managers in regional areas, to deal with the management of

huge swaths of public land, whether that's crown land, whether it's state forests, whether it's

national parks, there are just not enough land managers in our region. And they have to be

funded properly.



And what I sincerely hope will be in there is money for the cultural burning programme. The

Bega Local Aboriginal Land Council has been promised funding since the Tathra fires in 2018,

which still hasn't materialised. And when you look at the Tathra fires, the section of land in

Tathra, that was managed through cultural burning, did not burn. So we actually have to start

incorporating traditional practices into our modern agencies, and get on with it. So I'm hoping

there's multiple recommendations that come out of it. But what I'm sincerely hoping is that

there's action



DELANEY: It was also concerned about jurisdictional issues as to what is a state

responsibility, what is a Commonwealth responsibility in states of disaster? What role the ADF

should play? Obviously, the ADF was of great assistance. But could things have been done

better in terms of how those resources were deployed, and how those jurisdictions

communicated with each other?



MCBAIN: Obviously, that was one of the big issues early on in this fire season was the federal

government saying, Look, that's not our responsibility. Normally, firefighting is not a federal

government responsibility.



I think the key problem was that, according to all data, you know, to the New South Wales RFS

data to every emergency agencies data to the emergency Chief, that we're trying to meet with

this government, they all said that the season, the previous season was going to be -

unprecedented. We, we would be facing fires in a number of locations, the federal government

should have been able to pre-empt that there would be multiple disasters happening at the one

time, that's when they should have been, or understood that they needed to step up, they

should have been pre planning for it. As I understand it, they pre planned the cyclone season.

Why aren't they pre planning for bushfire seasons, the ADF response was fantastic.



And I cannot commend the ADF highly enough for the work they did within our localities. I think

they would have liked to have done a lot more but the chains of command to send tasks up

and to be approved for the ADF to do them on the ground was too lengthy. And I think we

actually need to streamline that process so that local people on the ground, local emergency

managers on the ground can be tasking the ADF directly.



DELANEY: Yeah, of course, firefighting remains a state government responsibility. But when

we're dealing with any disaster on such a scale, it becomes a national disaster, doesn't it? So

therefore, we need a nationally coordinated response. And we need the mechanisms in place

to make that work effectively don't we?



MCBAIN: That's right. I mean, and the disaster wasn't in one state or one territory, it was in

multiple states and territories at the same time. And that pre-emptive action should have been

in place that pre-emptive planning should have been in place, there should have been an easy

mechanism for the federal government to come in and coordinate some assistance.



They should they shouldn't have to be, I guess, a role where you have to be asked, because

our RFS and our state government were all working very hard in response mode at the time,

probably didn't have time to send emails around change of command to sort out getting some

additional assistance in place. I think that needs to be streamlined and was better to assist

Australian people.



DELANEY: The final report of the Royal Commission, I'm told is likely to be released by the

government on Friday. Now, it has been suggested to me by one rather cynical individual that

they may be trying to bury it if they got to release it on a Friday afternoon. Do you hold similar

suspicions?



MCBAIN: It's probably not just me that holds those suspicions, I point to the three individuals I

was speaking to on Parliament House lawn, today, Jack, Jan and Fiona who lost their homes.



They want the report released so that everybody receives it at the same time.



Everybody should have the ability to read it and make comment on it, to release it on a Friday

afternoon, as you suggested, you know, when everyone's winding down into the weekend,

where you perhaps miss news cycles, I don't think gives proper credence to the event that

we've all witnessed of our black summer, you know, significant event.



You know, we lost a lot of lives over the last summer we've lost, you know, thousands of

homes, thousands of sheds and outbuildings , hundreds of thousands of kilometres of fencing

with lost livelihoods with lost livestock, you know, people are still really struggling and to have

the COVID-19 pandemic comes so quickly on the back of the bushfire disaster has really

taken, I guess, a spotlight off those communities hurting the most those businesses hurting the

most.



And we know that there are some regions that are going to take a lot of time to recover, and to

be hit so quickly with COVID-19 afterwards, takes a further toll that I think perhaps this

government may be missing at this point. And that is that there are people doing it really tough

on the back of cumulative disasters.



DELANEY: So when the report is released late on a Friday afternoon, you'll stay back late in

the office to read it, I guess.



MCBAIN: I will be on the road between Braidwood and Bega, but I will definitely be reading

that report because I think that the position I've been elected to I owe to my community who's

probably borne the brunt of the Black Summer Fires is to make sure I'm well across it, and I

can make comment on it very early.



DELANEY: Absolutely. I'm sure you'll have plenty of comments to make on Monday. Just

briefly, I also noted today that there was an online Memorial event today for fallen emergency



workers which was attended or participated in by the Prime Minister. Do you think there's an

element of hypocrisy there in the Prime Minister's actions?



MCBAIN: No, I don't. It is a day to remember a fallen emergency service workers and there

was also a tribute paid to those fallen emergency service workers in Parliament House today,

but both the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition Anthony Albanese, I think it's

timely to remember their service. I'm not going to play politics on that one. I think it was the

right thing to do.



DELANEY: Marvellous. Thanks very much for joining us today.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: IAN CAMPBELL 0417 482 171

