

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY

DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

WEDNESDAY, 26 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Scott Morrison’s failure to listen to aged care warnings; Liberal MP

Russell Broadbent’s aged care concerns went ignored; neglect in residential aged

care in Australia.



KRISTINA KENEALLY, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE: Aged care is a

Federal responsibility; it is Scott Morrison's responsibility full stop. As of yesterday, 335

aged care residents have died of COVID-19. In aged care facilities, there now 1,100 active

cases of coronavirus, and I express my condolences to the family members of those who

have died and my support and best wishes to those aged care residents who are currently

battling coronavirus.



We have to ask - how many of those deaths were preventable? How many cases of

coronavirus in residential aged care were preventable? If only Scott Morrison and Richard

Colbeck had heeded the warning calls - and there have been so many warning calls.

There were in April the outbreaks in Newmarch House and Dorothy Henderson Lodge in

New South Wales.



There's the call from Scott Morrison's own backbencher Russell Broadbent. Russell

Broadbent in 2017 resigned from his parliamentary positions because he was so frustrated

at the Government's lack of action at aged care in his electorate. Russell Broadbent who

says this morning that the Government put profits over care. Profits over people; that's the

aged care system that Scott Morrison's own colleagues describe. Scott Morrison and

Richard Colbeck are presiding over an aged care system that puts profits over people. And

we know from Russell Broadbent, today, that he raised these concerns, and he says back

in 2017, and ever since, I've been raising these concerns, raising these warning bells, and

I have been ignored.





The other big warning bell that Scott Morrison did not listen to is the Aged Care Royal

Commission. It handed down in October a report titled "Neglect". "Neglect" is the title of the

report handed to Scott Morrison in April about our aged care system.



Neglect. Neglect is people with open sores. Elderly Australians in residential aged care

with open sores. Neglect is physical abuse in residential aged care. Neglect is signs of

malnutrition; neglect is obvious signs of physical abuse. These are all findings from the

Aged Care Royal Commission interim report into residential aged care. Neglect, outlined in

that report, residential aged care residents that had maggots in their mouth and ants in

open sores. That's the neglect that is in our residential aged care system. That is the

warning bell that Scott Morrison failed to heed. Instead, he left the incompetent Richard

Colbeck in charge of aged care.



So now what do we have today in Australia? We have 335 residential aged care people

who have died of COVID-19. 335 residential aged care residents dead from COVID-19.

How many of those deaths were avoidable if Scott Morrison heeded the warning bells? So

today Richard Colbeck and Scott Morrison need to front up. They need to stop ducking and

weaving; stop passing the buck and blaming everyone else. Aged care is their

responsibility, full stop, and they need to ensure that Australia finally - far too late - gets a

plan in place to deal with the outbreak of coronavirus in our residential aged care homes.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











