



SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE   Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women

THE HON ALEX HAWKE MP   Assistant Defence Minister  Minister for International Development and the Pacific

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

23 October 2020



Standing with our region in response to COVID-19   Australia is working in close partnership with our neighbours in the Pacific and  Southeast Asia to give strength to a region-wide recovery from COVID-19.

The pandemic has put pressure on communities, economies and livelihoods. To deliver  support where our partners say they need it most, Australia has transformed our  development program through Partnerships for Recovery, pivoting 400 individual  programs worth $840 million.

As part of Partnerships for Recovery, we are releasing 27 country-specific COVID-19  Development Response Plans, which were created in close consultation with our  partner countries.

“Economies have been heavily impacted and livelihoods are being threatened,” said  Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Women, Senator the Hon Marise Payne.  “Australia stands with our neighbours as we respond to the human, economic and social  costs of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our shared prosperity and security across the Indo-Pacific depend on how we work together, today.”

The COVID-19 Development Response Plans provide a blueprint for delivery of our  development support at the country, regional and global levels. They further reshape  Australia’s development program in response to the pandemic, focusing on economic  recovery, health security and stability.

They provide a whole-of-government framework for Australia’s response, drawing on  the full suite of our development, diplomatic, and defence capabilities, as well as the  strengths of our private sector and civil society organisations.

Each response plan has been tailored to the individual partner’s circumstances and  needs over the next two years.

“These individual plans show Australia is a reliable and responsive partner who listens  and adapts to the needs of our neighbours and region,” Minister for International  Development and the Pacific, the Hon Minister Hawke said.

“The COVID-19 crisis is still unfolding and its impacts are highly uncertain. Our plans  are flexible enough to adjust as these impacts become clearer.”

The pandemic has presented enormous challenges to our region but, by working  together, we can achieve a shared recovery.



Media Contacts:

Minister Payne:

David Wroe | 0429 531 143 | David.Wroe@dfat.gov.au

Minister Hawke:

Wade Laube | 0409 193 057 | Wade.Laube@dfat.gov.au





