







The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology  Federal Member for McPherson

MEDIA RELEASE

NEW PREFAB INNOVATION HUB TO BOOST JOBS AND ECONOMY

31 July 2020

A new Innovation Hub is set to supercharge Australia’s prefabricated building  industry, potentially creating thousands of new jobs and adding up to $30 billion to  the economy.

The Morrison Government has provided $2 million to the Advanced Manufacturing  Growth Centre (AMGC) to fund and manage the new hub, following a feasibility  study.

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said the Prefab  Innovation Hub forms part of a coordinated national network of Innovation Labs,  which will harness existing research and business capability across Australia.

“The establishment of this hub couldn’t be timelier for the sector as it looks to rebuild  after COVID-19 and assists in the bushfire recovery,” Minister Andrews said.

“The hub will work to increase collaboration between industry and researchers, and  support new technologies and innovations that provide smarter, cheaper, faster and  more sustainable construction solutions.

“This is about meeting the needs of our local building and construction industry and  driving innovation that will see Australia greatly increase our exports and become a  key player on the global stage.”

AMGC Managing Director Dr Jens Goennemann said that the Prefab Innovation Hub  will build new capabilities in the manufacturing industry and construction sector.

“This Prefab Hub will connect recognised research institutions and industry bodies  that have experience in this area to form a network of Prefab Innovation Labs across  Australia,” Dr Goennemann said.







“The purpose of these labs is to help drive skills, accelerate adoption of new  technology, formulate regulatory proposals, identify new procurement pathways, and  recommend new funding mechanisms - all to support a burgeoning prefab  construction industry.”

PrefabAUS chair Damian Crough said there was enormous potential for  prefabricated construction to support ‘shovel ready’ projects.

“More than at any other time, prefabrication offers viable, necessary and relevant  alternative construction options delivering significant gains in quality, productivity and  affordability,” Mr Crough said.

Prefabrication covers a wide range of buildings, including tiny houses, larger homes  and offices.

The hub will build on the Government’s $28 million commitment to establish the  Building 4.0 Cooperative Research Centre.

For further information on the feasibility study and the hub, please visit  https://www.amgc.org.au/pre-fab-innovation-hub/



Media Contact: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846 / Jen Jennings 0435 121 347

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

