

SENATOR TIM AYRES

LABOR SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

WEDNESDAY, 2 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Richard Colbeck; Aged Care; Economic Recovery from Coronavirus;

Tony Abbott.



TIM AYRES, LABOR SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES Well, Australians can see

why Scott Morrison's been fighting so hard to stop the parliament from meeting because

the parliament's brought some measure of accountability to this government's performance

in aged care. We've seen the warnings: the age care minister Richard Colbeck got the

Aged Care Royal Commission interim report entitled 'Neglect', the Newmarch House and

Dorothy Henderson Lodge events in New South Wales where dozens and dozens of aged

care residents were infected with coronavirus, the events overseas where aged care was

absolutely a focus of the coronavirus pandemic.



Richard Colbeck's neglect of the Aged Care portfolio has led to an unmitigated disaster for

older Australians: 455 dead and rising. We've seen the neglect and maltreatment of aged

care residents in aged care centres, particularly in Victoria. We've seen aged care

residents with open wounds with ants crawling in them. We've seen aged care residents

who have not been cared for properly, who have not been fed. They've not been bathed,

dying in isolation without their relatives to hold their hands.



And this bloke Richard Colbeck is still in a job. His maladministration and neglect in aged

care has been laid bare last week and this week in the parliament. He should have

resigned last week. It's apparent to everybody in Canberra in the parliament, that this bloke

is not up to his job. He should have resigned last week. He should have resigned this

week. He must resign today and Labor will be pursuing accountability, we'll be demanding

improvements. And this minister must go by the end of today.



Further than that, I'll just say - the other significant news today, of course, is that the

national accounts will be released. There are more than a million Australians out of work.



It is predicted that 400,000 additional Australians will lose their jobs between now and

Christmas. Whatever the national account figures say, we are in the midst of a deep

recession with a government that doesn't have a plan to get us out of recession. We're in

the middle of a deep recession where we could be in a position by Christmas, where one

and a half million Australians don't have a job and the government doesn't have a plan for

jobs. That's got to be a clear focus of this government. But they lack the capacity to plan.

They lack the capacity to deliver and they haven't got a plan to lift the Australian economy

out of what is painfully clear, a deep recession.



JOURNALIST: Did you hear Tony Abbott's comments regarding perhaps we're spending

too much money on keeping people alive in aged care? It costs $100 000 or $200 000 -

perhaps we should let nature take its course in that regard?



AYRES: I heard Mr Abbott's comments this morning. We should be delivering the highest

quality of care and service in looking after aged Australians in aged care. We should be

delivering the kind of love and support that aged Australians have delivered to their

families over decades and decades. I wouldn't pay too much attention to what Mr. Abbott

has got to say about aged care. It's his government, the Turnbull Government and the

Morrison government that has sent the Australian aged care system on the course that's

delivered us to the place that we are today. He and Mr Turnbull and Mr. Morrison,

delivered cuts and delivered neglect in aged care. And that's why 455 Australians, more

than anybody imagined, have died in aged care of coronavirus, it's because of neglect and

maladministration. I've got to say finally about Mr. Abbott: I would be paying attention to

what the Chief Medical Officer has to say. I would pay attention to what the public health

experts have had to say. I wouldn't spend too much time listening to what Tony Abbott has

got to say about aged care.





JOURNALIST: And on the economy, we're listening to faceless experts *inaudible*



AYRES: Well Labor fought for the JobKeeper package. Labor fought hard for a wage

subsidy that will support Australians into jobs because Labor understands just how

damaging long-term unemployment is to the Australian economy, to Australians in our

suburbs and our regions. We've got to fight for jobs. We've got to fight for employment. I

wouldn't pay too much attention to what Mr. Abbott has to say about the economy. What I

want to see in this parliament is the government step up with a genuine plan for jobs, a

credible plan for the economy that means that we're not going to see one and a half million

Australians out of work at the end of this year.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JOE MCKENZIE 0431 377 319





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













