

20 Napier Close Deakin ACT Australia 2600 - PO Box 319 Curtin ACT Australia 2605  T (02) 6285 2373  E phaa@phaa.net.au  W www.phaa.net.au



Budget 2020: In a year of public health crisis, Australians deserved more

The Public Health Association of Australia (PHAA) has expressed major disappointment that in a year when  our nation is dealing with the biggest health crisis in a century, tonight’s Federal Budget has bypassed any  substantial investment that will strengthen the whole nation’s future long-term health.

PHAA CEO Adjunct Professor Terry Slevin confirmed the Association’s response, saying, ‘While the PHAA  supports government measures to get Australians back to work to counter the COVID-19 driven recession,  the budget has done little to build our nation’s resilience to meet future public health crises - which are  inevitable.

‘It’s terribly disappointing, and borders on disastrous, that in this biggest-spending budget in our history,  most of the eggs have gone into the economic recovery basket while urgently needed public health  investment has largely been overlooked.

‘Every year when the budget has been delivered, we have seen promise after promise for more attention to  prevention, always ‘next year’. After a year beset by an illness that can only be controlled through  preventive measures, it’s hard to believe that the Australian Government has not committed to greater  investment in protecting the population’s health,’ Prof Slevin said.

Australia has been caught short by a lack of previous investment and substantive preventive health policy  going back for well over a decade. Spending on preventive health has continually sat at less than 2% of  health budget, with tonight’s budget continuing the pattern.

‘Billions are being directed toward funding more pharmaceutical drugs, yet there is almost no new  investment in preventing the common chronic diseases which make people sick in the first place. Smoking,  obesity, alcohol. When will this investment happen?’ Prof Slevin said.

‘Other than some money to boost mental health services, health and medical research, and to support  Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community-controlled health organisations - which are absolutely  needed - we’re struggling to find anything in the budget for preventative health.’

The PHAA notes that the tax cuts announced tonight also favour those with the most, while failing the  Australians most in need who will receive proportionately less, contributing to deepening socioeconomic  gaps and inequality in Australia.

Prof Slevin continued, ‘This budget is devoid of any funding that will help to reinforce the dedicated and  overstretched army of public health workers who’ve carried so much of the burden, and contributed to  preventing an estimated 16,000 covid deaths in Australia.

‘Where is the funding for increased public health workforce capabilities, or a national independent agency  dedicated to controlling infectious and non-infectious disease? What is the government doing to ensure we  do better in future health emergencies?’ he asked.

Media Release  Public Health Association of Australia

Tuesday, 6 October 2020



20 Napier Close Deakin ACT Australia 2600 - PO Box 319 Curtin ACT Australia 2605                     2  T (02) 6285 2373  E phaa@phaa.net.au  W www.phaa.net.au

‘Our nation’s campaign to address the long-term health of Australia starts today. The PHAA calls on all  governments, federal, state and territory to make the health and wellbeing of our nation, from both  chronic and communicable disease, their number one priority for future budgets, starting in 2021.

‘We fully recognise the importance of getting the economy firing again, but we have learned that if  governments aren’t on top of public health, they’re not on top of economic management either.

‘Can we really wait for another budget to see any commitment to investing in preventive and public health  in Australia?’ Prof Slevin concluded.





For further information/comment:  Karina Martin, PHAA Media Manager 0450 522 762 kmartin@phaa.net.au

