

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister



JOINT STATEMENT



Thursday 10 December 2020



AUSTRALIA AND THE NETHERLANDS



The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Prime Minister of Australia, and H.E. Mark Rutte, Prime Minister of the  Kingdom of the Netherlands, held a Leaders’ virtual meeting on 9 December 2020.

The leaders expressed their deep sadness at the ongoing loss of life caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.  They stressed the importance of international cooperation to overcome the health crisis, including  universal, equitable and early access to safe, effective and affordable COVID-19 vaccines. They  reaffirmed their commitment to re-building resilient and sustainable economies in line with open and  rules-based trade. They also agreed to work together in relevant forums to promote the development of  international standards to enable COVID-proof international travel.

The leaders committed to continue to pursue truth, justice and accountability for the 298 victims of  Flight MH17 and their loved ones, including the 196 Dutch nationals and 38 people who called Australia  home. The leaders reaffirmed their strong support for the work of the Joint Investigation Team and the  ongoing criminal trial of four suspects in The District Court of The Hague. The leaders expressed their  disappointment in the Russian Federation’s decision to withdraw from the trilateral meetings with  Australia and the Netherlands regarding the Russian Federation’s role in the downing of Flight MH17.  The leaders agreed to continue to urge the Russian Federation to reconsider its decision. The leaders  also acknowledged further efforts to hold the Russian Federation to account through the cases brought  by the next of kin and the Netherlands against the Russian Federation in the European Court of Human  Rights in relation to the downing of Flight MH17. The leaders also acknowledged further efforts to hold  the Russian Federation to account through the cases brought by the next of kin and the Netherlands  against the Russian Federation in the European Court of Human Rights in relation to the downing of  Flight MH17.

Prime Minister Morrison welcomed the Netherlands’ Indo-Pacific Guidelines and its commitment to  cooperate closely with Australia and other regional countries in support of an open, inclusive and  prosperous Indo-Pacific. The leaders agreed to work together to maintain regional resilience and  capacity for sovereign choices and to promote and uphold international law, including the United  Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).

The leaders emphasised their commitment to multilateral cooperation, and to a rules-based global  order. They stressed the importance of multilateral institutions, including the United Nations, the  International Criminal Court, OECD, World Trade Organization and the World Health Organization, and  the importance of effective, independent leadership within institutions. They confirmed their  commitment to the continued and timely implementation of the World Health Assembly resolution of  19 May 2020 on COVID-19, including the impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation into the  response to the pandemic.

The leaders underlined the crucial role the rules-based trading system plays in supporting COVID-19  economic recovery. They emphasised the need for open markets, greater supply chain resilience and  enhanced trade and investment that contributes to sustainable development. In this context, they  welcomed progress towards a comprehensive, high-quality, sustainable and inclusive Australia-EU FTA.

The leaders committed to establishing a General Security Agreement (GSA) between Australia and the  Netherlands. The GSA will enable greater collaboration between our respective Governments and  reflects the commitment of both countries to work in partnership to uphold international law and  address common strategic security challenges.

The leaders agreed that resolute and coordinated action is key to tackling the urgent challenge of  climate change and environmental degradation. The leaders underlined their commitment to the full  implementation of the Paris Agreement and to step up global action to tackle climate change in the lead  up to COP26 in 2021, including through intensifying global cooperation on low emissions technologies.  Both leaders acknowledged the need to achieve net zero emissions and to pursue a low emissions  development strategy in accordance with the Paris Agreement. The leaders recalled the request by  UNFCCC COP21 to communicate or update their Nationally Determined Contributions reflecting the  highest possible ambition. Both leaders also acknowledged the importance of reducing waste and  emphasised their commitment to cooperation on the circular economy.

The leaders welcomed the continued broadening and deepening of the bilateral economic and security  relationship, including in the areas of critical minerals, disinformation and countering foreign  interference, as well as cyber security and critical and emerging technology.

[END]

Contact: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

Press Office of the Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Prime Minister, Canberra



