Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania









Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck  Minister for Aged Care and Senior Australians  Minister for Youth and Sport



9 October 2020



Aged care research centre to draw on world’s best practice

Flinders University has been awarded the contract to develop the first stage of the Australian  Government’s new $34 million Aged Care Centre for Growth and Translation Research.

Minister for Aged Care and Senior Australians, Senator Richard Colbeck, said the centre,  would draw on world best practice and examine new ways to deliver care for senior  Australians, and training and education for aged care providers.

Stage 1 will establish the model for the centre and set the research priorities for the first year  of operation.

“We expect to see improvements in aged care practice, as well as workforce efficiencies and  the use of technology to continue to improve aged care,” Minister Colbeck said.

“It will promote workforce reforms based on evidence from research, provide an incubator to  fast-track research into practice, and provide a forum to ensure that innovations can be taken  up by the sector.”

The Centre is one of the strategic actions from Australia’s Aged Care Workforce Strategy -  A Matter of Care.

It will be pivotal in enhancing and fast-tracking the reform required to ensure the delivery of  quality aged care services.

Minister Colbeck said the centre’s priorities will be informed by the findings from the Royal  Commission into Aged Care Quality and Safety and lessons learned through the COVID -19  pandemic.

It comes on top of the 2020-21 Budget allocation of $10.3 million over three years for the  Aged Care Industry Council to implement an aged care workforce strategy.

The Council will be a significant partner in guiding the operation of the centre and  disseminating its work to the sector.

Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania





“Older Australians deserve the best care possible, delivered by a skilled and capable  workforce, using best-practice models of care and the latest technologies,” Minister Colbeck  said.

Following establishment of the model, a request for tender will be released seeking a  consortia to establish and operate the Centre from early 2021. Australian Government  funding will continue through to 30 June 2024.

