







The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology  Federal Member for McPherson

MEDIA RELEASE

OPENING UP AUSSIE MANUFACTURERS TO THE WORLD

14 December 2020

Australian companies are set to gain new export opportunities, that have the  potential to create new jobs, with the COVID-19 Manufacturer Response Register  opening to keen international buyers.

The Government’s Advanced Manufacturing Growth Centre (AMGC) introduced the  online Register in March, so local manufacturers and suppliers of crucial products  such as Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) could support the national response  to the pandemic.

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said having stepped  up to support domestic production - manufacturers can now take on new markets  and sell their products overseas.

“By opening the Register to international buyers, Australian companies will be able to  utilise the skills and supplies they have developed and keep people in jobs, while  helping in the fight against COVID-19 overseas,” Minister Andrews said.

“The Register has been very helpful in matching manufacturers and suppliers of  COVID-19 related products to areas of demand.

“It has enabled businesses, hospitals, GPs and community groups to find suppliers  of PPE, including masks and gowns, and hand sanitiser.

“The Register has fostered impressive collaboration between companies and  accelerated the development of such products as ventilators and relief beds.”

AMGC Managing Director Jens Goennemann said the addition of international buyer  access to the Register would benefit local and international businesses alike.

“Australia’s effective response to COVID-19 has meant that local demand for these  products has reduced, but there is still high demand overseas,” Mr Goennemann  said.





“The Register has helped link buyers and sellers, forged collaborative efforts and  helped build new onshore capabilities - such as invasive ventilators. Now, with the  addition of international buyers, the Register will serve to broaden the positive impact  Australia’s manufacturing industry is having in response to the pandemic.

“Australian manufacturers supply world class products and international demand for  these will benefit local businesses and help bolster onshore manufacturing  endeavours.”

The use of the COVID-19 Manufacturer Response Register is free for all parties. The  purpose of the platform is to enable buyers and sellers to meet. Producers can  upload a profile and product description and buyers search for what they need.  Overseas entities can register as buyers but not sellers.

Once a contact is made, AMGC has no further involvement. Any business deals are  conducted between interested parties off the site.

The Register also allows buyers to search for products registered with the Australian  Made Campaign and with relevant Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA)  approvals.

For more details on how to use the COVID-19 Manufacturer Response Register go  to https://www.amgc.org.au/covid-19-manufacturer-response/



Media Contact: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

