







SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate  Senator for South Australia



MEDIA RELEASE

6 October 2020



TRADE, TOURISM AND INVESTMENT CRITICAL TO ECONOMIC  RECOVERY AND JOBS

The Morrison Government is continuing to support trade, tourism and investment in the 2020-21  Budget as part of Australia’s Economic Recovery Plan to get more Australians into jobs.

With one in 13 jobs reliant on tourism, our Government has provided billions of dollars in economic  support including through JobKeeper and the cash flow boost which provided tax credits of up to  $100,000 to sustain small and medium sized businesses during the pandemic, as well as tourism  specific measures through our $1 billion COVID-19 Relief and Recovery Fund.

Trade, Tourism and Investment Minister, Simon Birmingham, says “As we shift to the next phase of  our tourism recovery plan, new Budget measures will further support the sector and jobs by  stimulating domestic visitation to our tourism regions and encouraging domestic business travel.”

Tourism Australia will receive $231.6 million for 2020-21 to ramp up domestic marketing activities  to encourage Australians to travel again, and ensure they are well placed to aggressively execute  new campaigns to again attract international visitors when overseas travel is back on the agenda.

The Budget also provides an additional $51 million through our Regional Tourism Recovery  initiative to assist tourism regions that are highly reliant on international travellers to pivot to the  domestic market by adapting their products, experiences and marketing strategies.

This builds on our $50 million business events grants program to restart this important sector by  encouraging businesses to attend events, conferences and trade exhibitions. Getting business  events up and running again next year will encourage domestic travel and get people flowing  through our airports, on planes, spending money in restaurants and shops as well as staying in  hotels.

“With one in five jobs dependant on trade, our Government will continue to support Australian  exporters by keeping trading channels open and accessible during the COVID-19 pandemic,  expanding market access through even more trade agreements and continuing to support a global  rules-based trading system.”

That’s why our Government will invest $6.6 million over four years to pursue new free trade  agreement opportunities around the world and boost digital trade within our region. These efforts  build on our ongoing free trade agreement negotiations with key trading partners including the  European Union and the United Kingdom.

The Budget also provides $317.1 million to extend the International Freight Assistance Mechanism  until the middle of next year to restore global supply chains and keep international freight routes  and flights operating during COVID-19. This initiative will continue to keep Australian farmers in  business by ensuring they can get their high-quality produce into key export markets and that they  stay connected with their overseas customers, and ensure access to vital imports including  medical supplies.















“I will work with Home Affairs portfolio ministers and lead  a new Joint Ministerial Taskforce on  Simplified Trade, working with a dedicated Industry Advisory Council, to make trading simpler and  cheaper by reducing red tape, increasing the resilience of our supply chains, and supporting trade  growth and expansion,” Minister Birmingham said.

Australia’s emerging fintech sector will also benefit from additional funding of $9.6 million for  measures to help attract investment in the sector as we continue to expand export capacity and  generate high-value jobs and cutting-edge capability.

Media Contacts  Benn Ayre: +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs: +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment, South  Australia.

