









The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and  Technology



The Hon Alan Tudge MP  Minister for Population, Cities and Urban  Infrastructure





The Hon Steven Marshall MP  Premier













Thursday 10 September 2020



ALL SYSTEMS GO FOR SPACE DISCOVERY CENTRE

JOINT RELEASE

Construction has officially launched on the Australian Space Discovery Centre and state-of-the-art Mission  Control Centre to inspire the next generation of Australia’s space workforce.

Located in the innovation precinct of Lot Fourteen in Adelaide, the Australian Space Discovery Centre will  showcase interactive space exhibits and a careers hub.

Mission Control will provide facilities for space businesses and researchers to control satellite and space  missions.

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said the Australian Space Discovery Centre is  the Morrison Government’s centrepiece to ignite curiosity in young people and promote the benefits of  science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM).

“I am a huge advocate of opening doors for the next generation to engage with and enjoy STEM learning as  much as I did,” Minister Andrews said.

“Sparking young people’s imagination about space isn’t just about the wonder of the unknown, but about  making sure they can take advantage of the enormous opportunities the broader industry represents in  developing technologies that help life on Earth.

“Underpinned by a strong STEM education focus, the Australian Space Discovery Centre will highlight diverse  opportunities available in the space sector, including careers in manufacturing, engineering, space medicine,  geology, AI and computing.”

Federal Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure Alan Tudge said the start of construction  meant another critical boost for SA’s economy.

“This is part of the Adelaide City Deal which is delivering on its promise to not only transform Adelaide but  provide employment opportunities for locals,” Mr Tudge said.

“From those who will help build the centre, to those who will eventually work in it, we are creating local jobs  at a crucial time as we recover from the COVID-19 pandemic.”

South Australian Premier Steven Marshall said the Australian Space Discovery Centre and Mission Control  bolsters South Australia’s reputation as the space capital of the nation.

“Our state is home to the Australian Space Agency, SmartSat CRC, Mission Control and the Space Discovery  Centre,” said the Premier.

“Companies from across the space sector are flocking to our innovation precinct, Lot Fourteen, and creating  a pipeline of jobs for current and future generations.

“This sector will be critical in South Australia’s economic recovery from the global coronavirus pandemic.”

Head of the Australian Space Agency Dr Megan Clark AC said programs and activities in the Australian Space  Discovery Centre will be informed by the seven National Civil Space Priorities in the Government’s Australian  Civil Space Strategy.

“We would love the Australian Space Discovery Centre to become a place where the community can come  together to explore the latest innovations in space technologies and learn about Australia’s role in expanding  national and international space activities,” Dr Clark said.

The Australian Space Discovery Centre and Mission Control are due to open to the public in the first half of  2021.

The Centre is being delivered in partnership between the Australian Space Agency and Questacon.

The Australian Government has invested nearly $700 million into the Australian space sector as part of our  goal to triple its size to $12 billion and create an extra 20,000 jobs by 2030.

[END]

Minister Andrews’ office: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846 / Jen Jennings 0435 121 347

Minister Tudge’s office: Michael Bennett 0434 782 923

Premier Marshall’s office: Eleisa Hancock 0433 950 083

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

