

BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR SCIENCE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  MEMBER FOR GORTON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC AFTERNOON BRIEFING  TUESDAY, 27 OCTOBER 2020

SUBJECTS: JobMaker; Border closures; Djab Wurrung tree.

PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: Brendan O'Connor welcome.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, INDUSTRY,  SMALL BUSINESS & SCIENCE: Thanks very much for having me, Patricia.

KARVELAS: Now Labor has moved in Parliament to thank Victorians for the work,  particularly Melburnians of course, for the work locking down and defeating coronavirus.  Well, in the last couple of days, it's been zero which, of course, is such a relief to people  who've worked hard on this. Why did you make that decision to do that in Parliament?

O'CONNOR: I think it was important that the federal parliament stopped and congratulated  Victorians in order to really underline the scale of the effort, the historic moment. I think all  Victorians deserve to hear from their federal parliamentarians and leaders that what they  have done is a remarkable thing in the face of a second wave of this pandemic. And really,  when you look around the world and look at how often that's occurred, it's so rare as to  need, I think, such a record, such a reflection on a magnificent effort by our great state.

KARVELAS: Of course, there have been many consequences from that decision and the  length, including the loss of jobs, which is very much squarely in the area that you look at.  What are your concerns now about getting those jobs back online in Victoria and in  Melbourne. Clearly the recovery is going to take some time. That's the concern that the  Treasurer outlined in his speech, is that something that you're concerned about?

O'CONNOR: Absolutely concerned. But I guess where I differ from the federal Treasurer is  that we did have to make sure we suppressed this second wave, otherwise we would be  locking down and then sort of releasing or making conditions easier, easing and tightening  restrictions through the course of the remainder of this year into the new year. I think it was  absolutely vital that we got to this point where businesses now can open up with some  confidence that their clients, customers, patrons can re-engage with them fully. And so for  them, the businesses, particularly those small businesses that have been hit so hard by

being forced to close down, instructed to close down on health grounds, it's so wonderful to  think that they could be at this point able to re-emerge and for our economy to recover,  with, of course, important stimulus from both the federal and state governments.

KARVELAS: What do you make of Treasury's estimates that the JobMaker program will  create around 45,000 jobs? They're the figures that have been released.

O'CONNOR: Look it was presented to us as a 450,000 job increase on Budget night. The  Treasury has confirmed that only 10 per cent of that 450,000 jobs would be as a result of  the hiring credit initiative. That is the only jobs that would be additional to the jobs that may  grow in that period. And I welcome any job that's created by government initiatives but it  will fall short of the amount of jobs that will be lost, once we see the end of JobKeeper in  March.

So I guess the concern I have Patricia is that we have a very significant wage subsidy  program ending in March. And we have a much smaller, meagre initiative that is not going  to sustain those businesses and those jobs lost from March. So as I think I've said to you  earlier in an earlier interview, I'm concerned about the intersection of the current policy vis-a-vis the new initiative. I'm not sure they're going to join up properly. And that could mean  it's much more difficult for businesses. For example, if you have to add to your staff, when  you're recovering at the same time you lose all the JobKeeper support, I just can't see how  many businesses in Melbourne, or for that matter in parts of Australia where they've been  affected, will be able to add in net terms to their staff to get any support beyond  JobKeeper.

KARVELAS: But the government said the program would support, not create, 45,000 jobs.  That's actually the language they use. Could you really say that they have misled? I mean  that's what Labor has been saying. But really, that word is a differences. They don’t say it's  a sort of, you know, cause and effect, it's about supporting through the program's

O'CONNOR: Well I guess if people had heard that there was going to be 45,000 additional  jobs perhaps but most commentators and the other people that were commenting on the  Budget night did assume that 450,000 jobs would be the result-

KARVELAS: But that's not the government's fault if people can't read the papers properly.

O'CONNOR: I think the government was playing loose with the truth in referring to the  Hiring Credit JobMaker program, and 450,000 jobs in the same sentence. There was no  reference to 45,000 additional jobs. So we can argue as to whether it was intended or not.  But certainly many people concluded there'd be almost half a million jobs created. And I'll  just make the point there’s about 3 million people on JopKeeper. And there's 45,000  additional jobs. And even if you were to take into account, the 450,000 jobs that falls far  short of the many millions of jobs that are currently reliant on JobKeeper. Now I guess  that's the concern that Labor has on top of the fact that we think that it was being loose  with the truth, I think would be a fair phrase.

KARVELAS: Let me take you to the original criticism from Labor, right after the Budget,  which was that, you know, too many other workers missed out. This is clearly focused  around young workers, we know that it's specifically an incentive system for young workers  to be hired under 35. I want to know today, what is Labor's position? Do you think that  there needs to be a program or this program should be expanded to other groups? Or do  accept that it's focused on this one cohort?



O'CONNOR: Well, we're still coming to grips with the fact that it's 45,000, not 450,000.  We're examining it through a Senate inquiry. So we'll have a very quick Senate inquiry  before it comes back to the Senate at the next sitting week. I do think we have to  emphasise the support for young people. And to that extent, I'm not going to quibble that  the government's trying to work out how we can support people between the ages of 16  and 35.

KARVELAS: So let me just pin you down, if I can. So you're not calling anymore for it to be  expanded outside of this cohort. You think it's fair enough that it's focused on this group of  Australians?

O'CONNOR: I want to see what the senate committee has to say. It was a bit like if you  think about it, when I last spoke to you, when we we're talking about the need to see what  would come out of Senate Estimates, well what came out of Senate Estimates was  important, because it showed that 10 per cent of what was being referred to was the true  additional figure. So that does concern us in terms of terms of scale. In terms of what the  Senate committee may find, we'd like to see whether in fact there's sufficient rigour to stop  people being displaced if they're over 35 for people under 35.

So, in other words, we would be concerned if people would feel they're losing their rosters,  losing their hours, losing their jobs, because they're over 35 and not subsidised for people  who are. And we are concerned that that wouldn't be properly regulated and we want to  know what the government will do to prevent that happening. I'm not suggesting that's the  government's intent. But I am concerned that the government doesn't get these things  right. They make announcements, but that doesn't always deliver the way that they say  they intended.

KARVELAS: Okay. Just a couple of other issues, former Queensland Premier, and  obviously, you know, Labor heavyweight, if you want to call him that Peter Beattie says  that the border should be open in Queensland. That the borders should be open. Do you  agree with that proposition, particularly now that Victoria's had two double doughnut days?

O'CONNOR: I'd like to see all the borders open. As you know, PK we're the only state that  has our borders open. But people have been understandably too concerned to travel.

KARVELAS: They haven’t been desperate to visit us have they?

O'CONNOR: No, they haven't. But I think it's true to say in such an important week I think  that Queensland should be looking at opening up borders to New South Wales. And I think  the New South Wales Premier should be considering opening up the border to Victoria. I  mean, if the federal government and particularly the federal Treasurer wanted to keep  arguing that the Victorian government should be opening up in Victoria, then I'd be  expecting him to talk to the New South Wales Premier about opening up New South Wales  to Victoria. I think that's why it's so critical to really suppress this second wave in Victoria.  This really does give confidence now, I think, for all states and territories to consider  opening up their borders, and allowing this nation to be flourishing.

I mean, we won't be able to travel overseas for a very long time, and we won't be getting  people in as we would like, travelling here either permanently or temporarily. But we are in  a position it would appear to me on the recent news that we'll be able to open up our states  and territories. And this will create opportunities and provide opportunities for the



businesses that have been suffering through this pandemic. So I'm confident as a result of  the efforts by Victorians in particular and I have to say the Premier deserves credit too, to  see opening up of borders across the country. That would be a great thing.

KARVELAS: It would be a great thing. So do you think there's a sense of urgency around  this? Both the Queensland borders opening up to New South Wales, but also the New  South Wales border opening up to Victorians after a double zero day. Should that happen  on November the 8th when, of course, Victoria opens up more broadly as well?

O'CONNOR:  Look, I'm not a health expert. But I think there's a good reason to coincide  with November 8, opening up Melbourne to rural Victoria, when we've got very low live  cases, very low mystery cases. And I think there's every reason that Victorians should  expect to be travelling to New South Wales soon. And I do say also that other states,  Tasmania, Western Australia, Queensland, South Australia, should be thinking of opening  up more than they have to date, very soon. I mean, we are one nation, and we need to  make sure our economy gets going again. And one of the ways to do that is to remove  these borders when safe to do so. I think we're at a point PK where it's becoming very safe  to do so relative to any other part of the world. And I think that's a great testament to the  efforts of so many Australians. In particular, if I might say so, Victorians.

KARVELAS: Yeah, that's right. Just quickly, and I know you might not be across this and  it's not in your portfolio, but I think it's a very important issue. There's been a bulldozing of  a sacred tree and Aboriginal people are very upset about this. It's sparked a lot of anger.  It's a decision of the Victorian Government. Are you concerned about this? This is  Aboriginal heritage. There's Victorian Aboriginal people who are very concerned that these  trees have been removed.

O'CONNOR: Well, I'm not aware of the detail, but I am concerned always if First Nations  people raise concerns about loss of heritage. We just saw Rio Tinto and its decisions to  destroy the heritage of Juukan gorge. And that's devastating for our country and for First  Nations people in particular. I would like to know the detail here, but it would be concerning  to me, I'm sure to many others, if this has been done irresponsibly and without regard to  the to the cultural sensitivities of our First Nations people.

KARVELAS  Brendan O’Connor thanks for you time.

O’CONNOR: Thanks, Patricia.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ERIN SMITH 0458 950 010





