

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T

Friday 18th December 2020

Minister Littleproud IV ABC News Radio

GLEN BARTHOLOMEW: And David Littleproud of Queensland, is the Federal Agriculture  Minister. David Littleproud, the Federal Treasurer says it's too early for states to start  considering closing their borders to New South Wales. Do you agree?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, I do. And I think most of the eastern states are doing the  right thing. They're looking at localised lockdowns. That's the smart way; that's what  science tells us is the best way to manage this. And if we do that, we can keep the  economy going, but still be COVID-safe.  So, I congratulate the eastern state premiers who so far are just saying they're restricting  those that are in that particular area in the North Shore of Sydney.

GLEN BARTHOLOMEW: Why would Western Australia move to restrict movements to  people across that entire state?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I think it's more to do with the election in March. If you look  at Queensland before the end of October, these were the same decisions that have been  brought out by the Queensland Premier. I get it, it's politics. The Western Australian  Premier can't afford to have an outbreak before March, but we, at some stage, going to  have to back one another, back each other in terms of the science, in terms of the contact  tracing, that's what a modern federation should look like.   And I'd hope that Western Australia after the election will look to that as the model in which  the eastern states are now [indistinct], including Queensland. And I congratulate them for  that.

GLEN BARTHOLOMEW: But politics is one thing. This will have absolute effects on  people's travel plans around Christmas. There'll be people right across New South Wales  who can't head west.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, exactly. But it's also those people going into the North  Shore, north Sydney, the Northern Beaches that are getting impacted. We've got family  there. So my heart goes out to them. But for them, this is one of the consequences of  COVID. But for those going to WA, they had got family there, that had plans, this is just  basically the end of their Christmas, particularly if you're from somewhere like Griffith  where you've had no cases and you want to go and see family in Western Australia, you  are being impacted. And that's where the broad border closures just really don't work on  an economic sense or on an emotional sense.

Transcript



T R A N S C R I P T

GLEN BARTHOLOMEW: States are starting to tighten their measures even in the last few  hours, Tasmania included. And where you are in Queensland, their approach may well  change, I guess, in the coming days or even hours.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I hope not. And I think the noise coming out of Queensland  and the other states is that they're looking at the localised lockdown. And I think that would  prove to be the way into the future. And I think if we can prove it with this localised  lockdown rather than just state- straight state borders, I think you'll see that we'll be able to  manage any other outbreak between now and when the vaccine's rolled out.

GLEN BARTHOLOMEW: Does it have implications for trade?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No, look, I think at this stage we've been able to make sure that  essential services are seen as essential services, agriculture, resources. So, it's important  that the states to continue to be pragmatic. And I think this could be a way forward. And I  think if Queensland and the other states hold firm on a localised lockdown, I think this  could actually change the nature of the protocols in which all the states move forward into  the future, if we do have an outbreak. And we're going to have to learn to live with this and  that's just the reality of the situation.   And I think if we use common sense, science keep COVID-safe but also keep the  economy going, we'll get out of this COVID recession a lot quicker than anyone else.

GLEN BARTHOLOMEW: Well, I [indistinct] the Prime Minister expected to announce a  Cabinet reshuffle today. You keen to keep your job as Agriculture Minister?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: I certainly am and there's been no indication I'll be changing. As  the Deputy Leader of the National Party, I get to choose a portfolio within the National  Party portfolios, and I'm very happy as Agriculture and Emergency Services Minister.

GLEN BARTHOLOMEW: A difficult one this year, given trade tensions with China. How  much effect should people expect from the Government's move to take China to the World  Trade Organization over the barley import restrictions?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, nothing. That's due process and procedure that we're  afforded under the bilateral agreement we have with China and also under the WTO rules.  So there shouldn't be any repercussions for that. If there is, then it will add to the mounting  evidence that this is- that the issues that China are taking up with us aren't in fact, trade,  technical trade matters, but are in fact sovereign matters.   So there shouldn't be any issues at all with respect to us affording our own rights under the  WTO.

GLEN BARTHOLOMEW: And yet, China says we are the ones politicising trade. You've  obviously had a closer look at some of these issues and objections than most. Do you  have any faith in the reasons given by China for some of these moves, be it on barley,  wine or beef or timber, or is this obviously about something else?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, there's mounting evidence to suggest otherwise, and that's  why we're sticking to the procedures and processes afforded to us under the bilateral  agreement in the WTO.   We can't complain about another nation and then not stick and adhere to the process. So  that's why we'll stick to that. We believe we have a very strong case. And when that's

Transcript



T R A N S C R I P T

heard, I'm sure Australia will be successful and China will have to relent and acknowledge  that they've made a mistake.

GLEN BARTHOLOMEW: And that's, what, you think, realistically a couple of years away?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: It is. We have to be realistic on this. This takes some time. But in  the meantime, we're continuing to make sure that we can get our product into the other  countries, the other 13 countries that we have free trade agreements and the countless  countries that we have market access with. So we're working hard with industry to make  sure that we can continue to send boats left and right, instead of to China, if we have  issues.

GLEN BARTHOLOMEW: David Littleproud, thanks very much.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks for having me.

GLEN BARTHOLOMEW: The Federal Agriculture Minister, David Littleproud speaking  from Queensland.



Media contact  0455 448 985





























