

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE  SENATOR FOR THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  666 ABC CANBERRA  THURSDAY, 10 DECEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Senate Select Committee on COVID-19 Interim Report; deficiencies in  government response to COVID-19; and support for Mr Fluffy victims.

LISH FEJER, HOST: You might have been hearing of the senate inquiry that's been going into  COVID-19. They've tabled their interim report. It includes six recommendations. Committee  Chair Katy Gallagher has argued that it was, well, it was the leadership of the states and  territories that have enabled Australia to do relatively well in the face of the global pandemic,  not the federal response. Katy Gallagher joins us this morning. Good morning.

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER, CHAIR OF THE SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON  COVID-19: Morning Lish, morning Dan.

FEJER: What are the recommendations, the six recommendations that have been tabled?

GALLAGHER: So we've made a number - as you say, six recommendations. And this is  really, as an interim report to give some, I guess, call on the government to have these on their  agenda as we go through this pandemic, it's not over yet. But one is to be more open and  transparent about decisions that are being taken. So that health protection principle committee,  the Chief Health Officers around the country that have had their meetings, they've stopped  publishing minutes and reports of their meetings because the Prime Minister has bought them  under the confines of the national cabinet. So we think they should be more open about that,  like they are in other countries.

We've also made some recommendations around having a review into the COVIDSafe app,  because despite millions and millions of dollars, it's so far only identified 17 unique contacts.  And I understand it's due for a refresh and a revamp, no doubt costing a bit more. We've also  called for the establishment of the Australian Centre for Disease Control, which has been on  the agenda for a long time being talked about in Australia.

But I think this pandemic has really identified the need to have an independent body geared up  and ready to go to look at issues, infections, pandemics - all of those sorts of things. They  have them in other countries, including America, I guess is probably the best known one.

And then we've made some recommendations around the economic impact of the pandemic.

So monitoring, the withdrawal of support and the impact that's having on the economy. We've  again called on the government to increase the rate of JobSeeker, which is due to revert to  $40 a day in March.

And also people might be aware that the Prime Minister set up this very expensive National  COVID-19 advisory board, which was filled with sort of Prime Ministerial picks and business  people. It's cost millions and millions of dollars. And so far, we don't know what they've been  up to. So they're the recommendations. And then we make about 20 interim findings about  how the pandemic has been managed from the Australian Government's point of view.

FEJER: Where do you go then from here, once you've got those recommendations? How do  you then action those?

GALLAGHER: Well, this is over to the government now. So the report which has been  supported by other members of the committee, not the government members, I should say, but  it is a report of the senate committee to come back to the Senate, it's now over to the  government to respond to those recommendations. They'll choose whether or not they do. But  I think it just sends a message of, look, we've had a really good look at this. We've spent all  year on this. I've had 37 hearings, hundreds of hours of evidence, hundreds of submissions.  We've had a pretty close look at what's been going on. And I don't think the government should  dismiss the findings or the recommendations. So hopefully they will.

FEJER: Now among a few of those recommendations, we’ll start with the JobSeeker. One,  your assignment is going to be dropped back as the government have announced to $40 a day  from March. The recommendations to keep it at the level what are your recommendations,  have you put a dollar figure on it?

GALLAGHER: No we have't. Obviously it's been doubled, essentially with the Coronavirus  supplements through the pandemic. That's now in the process of being wound back. In fact,  we've got some legislation in the parliament today to wind it back even further. We haven't  specifically put a dollar figure on it because we think it's actually the job of the government to  do that. They've got the Treasury, they've got access to all of the costings and modelling and  the advice from all Department of Social Services and from Treasury and Finance about what  would be appropriate and we've given them the room to do that. I think we've made it clear the  business, community organisations, most economists all have said $40 a day is not adequate  and it needs to be permanently increased and the government should have done it by now.  They haven't. They've chosen to just keep people hanging on but we've got where the  government's expecting 1.8 million people to be receiving JobSeeker at the end of this year,  that's a lot of Australians who are facing a pretty sharp decline in their income in March. If this  didn't fix before then.

FEJER: This morning on ABC Radio Canberra, Senator Katy Gallagher, talking about the  interim report that's been tabled from the Senate inquiry into COVID-19, which she is the  senate chair, the committee chair. You also mentioned the COVIDSafe app; 17 new contacts  were found from and I think there was millions of downloads for that particular app. And they  are going to be updating it. What is the bottom line for that recommendation? Is it to scrap it?

GALLAGHER: It's to have an independent review into  the design and cost of it really,  because I think all the evidence or a lot of the evidence to the committee is it hasn't done the  job that the Prime Minister told us or would. I think if people recall, the Prime Minister said, Oh,  it's gonna be like, putting on sunscreen, you have it on your phone, and then you're able to go  out and the economy will open and everyone will be safe, it'll be part of the reopening strategy.

And it just hasn't lived up to that. We've had lots of problems about how it works, or doesn't  work, more importantly. The states haven't seemed to be able to use it to help them when  they're doing their contact tracing. In fact, they're just continuing to do their own contact  tracing. And I think you'll have noticed in the meantime, many of them have bought their own  apps or have been implementing the QR code as a better way of understanding where people  are, what risk they are, and how to track them down. If there's an outbreak.

FEJER: The ACT has been a perfect example of that developing theirs in-house, their check-in  Canberra app, which has gone on to the Northern Territory, I think Tassie as well. Senator, I

DAN BOURCHIER, HOST: Senator, I wonder if the committee found anything that the  government had done well?

GALLAGHER: I think, you know, JobKeeper, definitely. I mean, they came to it a bit late. We'd  been calling for it for a while, and they did a whole range of other economic investments before  they got to a wage subsidy scheme. So I think this goes to the committee's view that the states  and territories really led the shutdown, in that, in that crazy period in March, the government  was really trying not to shut down the economy and not to have enough national lockdown. So  their economic response was putting small bits, or relatively small compared to JobKeeper,  bits of money into helping business or cash flow boost and things like that. And they really  didn't want to have to get to the point where they had to start subsidising wages. But the states  and territories forced their hand, I believe, led by New South Wales and Victoria and said, look,  this is getting out of control - cases are increasing. We've got people coming in from overseas,  we need to stop this now. And it was that decision, pushed by Dan Andrews and Gladys  Berejiklian, that then led to the government having to go down the path of JobKeeper. But  without doubt, JobKeeper and JobSeeker have really cushioned the harsh economic  consequences of those decisions taken in March. And so in that sense, that's been a really  welcome investment in people's livelihoods, basically. And I think there's independent analysis  of that that would support that as well.

BOURCHIER: And what about the decision to close international borders? What was the  committee's view on that?

GALLAGHER: I think the view is, we've looked really closely at these because these was the  decisions taken in early March about what to do, there was decisions taken to close the border  to certain countries., China being the first one. And there was a whole different way of  managing people coming back from Wu Han. I think our view is that the government waited too  long to respond more broadly to countries like Europe, the UK and the United States, where it  was clearly there was widespread community transmission, but they didn't close the borders to  them till much later than those other key countries. I think there was China there was South  Korea was on the list. But places like Italy, which came I think, before America in the UK, but  there was sort of this staggered, closing the borders, but before they finally closed them all.

And during that time, you can see from tracking the case numbers, that this is where the case  numbers came from. The majority were coming from international travellers where it was clear  there was widespread transmission and the government, for some reason, didn't close the  borders when they had all that information. They took a bit, you know, and we're talking here a  matter of a week or two. So I know that these were heady times, and decisions were being  made quickly. But that really impacted on the number of people in that early, early stage of the  pandemic, because even though we've done really well, you know, we've had over 28,000  cases of COVID-19 in Australia and over 900 people have died of it. So there was still an  opportunity, I think, we could have done even better. And you could say, if you had even lower

cases, would you have had to then make some of the subsequent decisions to close down the  economy? I mean, we won't know that. But all of these decisions fit into that.

FEJER: Senator Gallagher, you've mentioned in part of those six recommendations, and  Australian Centre for Disease Control, looking at how science has really come to be the hero in  this in this fight this year. And yet the government have not supported universities and the  research sector through the JobKeeper/JobSeeker. How does that play into your  recommendations there?

GALLAGHER: Yes, I think the committee's view there is to have an independent, or you know,  a body that sits outside necessarily of the Australian Government - it would obviously have  close links to it. Just to focus particularly on improving Australia's pandemic preparedness,  operational response capacity, and communication across different levels of government. It's  really putting the experts in charge of all of those key decisions, because there were issues  with our medical stockpile, for example, we were caught short. And it was only through the sort  of harried efforts of a lot of people and the fact that we were able to control the pandemic from  a broader community transmission that we got through that period, without it being an absolute  disaster. I mean, there were not enough stores in the National Medical stockpile should the  pandemic have taken hold earlier. There just wasn't.

FEJER: How is that managed at the moment?

GALLAGHER: Well, it's run through the Department of Health, a number of agencies and  other agencies across government have impact influencing, you know, advice and input into  how that's managed. But it's clear when you talk to some of the medical experts around  Australia that there were concerns about the stockpile, what it had in it, how much it had in it,  and whether it had been geared up ready for a pandemic. I think all of the experts who watch  these things, closely acknowledged that there was always going to be a pandemic, it was  really when, what it looked like and what you needed to respond. And so there were concerns  pre-COVID about this. And the Health Department is a busy department and its got a lot on its  plate. I think this centre for disease control would give an agency a specific job to make sure  we were prepared, that we had all the arrangements in place across jurisdictions to respond in  the case of a pandemic, and to make sure that government was all joined up in terms of  communication.

FEJER: And finally, Senator Gallagher, Liberal Senator Zed Seselja, he's called on his  colleague and Federal Health Minister Greg Hunt, to consider Commonwealth support for  victims of Mr. Fluffy asbestos. I guess, what would Labor commit to?

GALLAGHER: Look, we haven't got a position in terms of Federal Labor on this. But as  someone who has been working, you know, was involved in some of the key decisions seven  years ago, around how we deal with Mr. Fluffy in the consequences, I welcome this sort of late  response from Senator Seselja. I think it is important that in a Labor government, I would  certainly be advocating very strongly that the Commonwealth take its fair share of  responsibility. Well, in fact, all of the responsibility for the situation that Mr. Fluffy households,  individuals have in terms of the impact on their life. The Commonwealth has completely  abrogated their responsibility, and I'm still feel cranky about it seven years later.

BOURCHIER: So Senator, should Federal Labor have a position on this?

GALLAGHER: Well, you know, I think so. I don't think it's going to be an issue that goes away.  All I'm saying is we haven't discussed it as a caucus yet. I think Andrew Barr's call for greater



support from the Commonwealth in terms of managing some of the ongoing effects, you know,  we've had the issues with the house or the homes in the buying back of the blocks and the  Commonwealth did nothing there either. But we had to move alone at that point, because it  was a desperate situation for those households. We couldn't have waited for that for a  government that was - Eric Abetz at the time, was refusing to do anything other than loan us,  on relatively average interest rates alone, to make sure we were able to afford to buy them all  back. Andrew has now refinanced and paid out because he could get a better interest deal  from the private sector rather than from the Commonwealth Government, which was actually  responsible for this man operating and allowing him - knowingly allowing him - to spray  asbestos in people's roofs which has had such devastating consequences.

BOURCHIER: We'll look forward to hearing what Labor's position is when that happens. For  now though, Senator Gallagher, many thanks for your time.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: PAT CRONAN 0432 758 224



