

TONY BURKE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ARTS  MANAGER OF OPPOSITION BUSINESS  MEMBER FOR WATSON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT   TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS WITH KIERAN GILBERT  MONDAY, 6 APRIL 2020

SUBJECT: Coronavirus; wage subsidy; Parliament.

KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: A lot to talk around ahead of this brief sitting of Parliament but  one of the most important really in the nation’s history when it comes to that legislation and  I want to ask you particularly about this anomaly that Andrew Clennell reported on. If a  business has a turnover of $1 billion and their turnover drops by 20 per cent, or even 40  per cent, they won’t get the JobKeeper allowance. A business with a turnover of $800  million, even if they’ve got a profit of $200 million, would still get that assistance. Do you  see a problem here with the way the government’s structured it, should it be done on  profits?

TONY BURKE: This is one of the key challenges with how they’ve designed it, in that  they’ve designed it based on downturn rather than on profit, and then you’ve got a very  hard edge, it’s a cliff where if you’re a dollar above a billion or a dollar below a billion in  turnover as to the extent of the downturn that you have to have. So, they have designed it  that way, it’s going to create all sorts of anomalies, I don’t want that to get it the way of the  fact that on Wednesday, we will get legislation through, on Wednesday when parliament  sits, to make sure that there’s a wage subsidy. But there is no doubt that there’s a whole  lot of design features that the government’s got here that if they were allowing the  parliament to sit more often there’d be a whole lot of mistakes that will happen, that we  would have been able to iron out and that’s one of the reasons why we’re engaging early  and pointing out some of the design flaws that are there. Because you can understand you  don’t want to create a situation where there’s an incentive for a business that, say they’re  at 28 per cent downturn, you create this bizarre incentive that if they can get their downturn  two per cent higher, all of a sudden they get a wage subsidy for their staff. There’s a whole  lot in the way it’s been designed that will create some really strange anomalies which at  this point we think, oh well, so what, let’s just get it done, and we’ll get it done, but what  that means on the other side is you’ve got a whole lot of workers who look at each other  and they’re in seemingly identical situations, one gets a subsidy for their wage and the  other doesn’t.

GILBERT: Yes well indeed if you’ve got two people, as Andrew said there, on $60,000 a

year, one works for a small and medium size business, the other works for a big company  who might have had a 30 per cent downturn just like the small business did, but they  wouldn’t get the JobKeeper. They’d have to go back to basically the Newstart or the Job  Seeker allowance.

BURKE: You’ll see a similar thing where workers who’ve been in pubs, if the pub’s owned  independently because of the shut down almost certainly the pub is going to have a 30 per  cent downturn. But there’s a whole of hotels owned by Woolworths, and those workers are  in the exact same situation, they’ve been shut down for the exact same reason, but  Woolworths, because their supermarket division is doing so well at the moment, almost  certainly you can’t imagine them qualifying. Now if this was a payment to the business that  would make sense, but when it’s meant to be a payment to the worker that flows through to  keep their connection with the business during this time. Two people in an identical job  shut down for an identical reason, one during the stand down will get $1,500 a fortnight  and keep a relationship with the employer and the other won’t.

GILBERT: And that’s the key point isn’t it because the government’s trying to keep that  relationship between the worker and the employer so, regardless of the size of the  employer, you want that connection to remain - so will you will be pushing for a flat 30 per  cent mark for all companies?

BURKE: What we’ve been doing, and we’ve only got some of the legislation very late last  night and we still don’t have all of the legislation, so we’re still working it out. We’re pleased  that the government’s given us access to what they have, and I don’t think the delay is the  government playing a game, I think it’s genuinely they haven’t written it yet. So the chance  to iron out all these sort of anomalies is to have the conversation now about who would  miss out. And by doing that to give the government time to be able between now and  Wednesday to start tinkering and making changes because it’s not like this goes through  and parliament’s back next week and we can fix it.  They’ve made a decision that  parliament will meet very, very rarely. Officially between Wednesday and the 11th of  august, nothing is scheduled to sit, and so you do have challenges in fixing this after the  event and also you’re simply not going to have the well prepared amendments and thought  through and lengthy debate that would normally improve legislation. None of that’s going to  happen. There’s not going to be a parliamentary inquiry, we’re just getting it done on  Wednesday. So now is the time to have those conversations because the key is the most  important people to keep their relationship with the employer are the people who are  relying on the job for their livelihood. But what we’re going to see in a whole lot of  households is we’ll find that parents who have a casual job find they don’t get the  continued relationship with the employer even thought that job has been supporting the  entire household and yet they’ll have kids who’ve had a job for a year and a half at the  local food court doing a three-hour shift on a Saturday and all of a sudden they’re going to  have their wage multiplied to $1,500 a fortnight. We didn’t call for the government to do  that part of it, that’s a decision that they’ve made, but effectively the most important thing  with a wage subsidy is that you subsidise wages and every time the people who miss out,  every time that’s put to Christian Porter, his response is to say “yeah that’s true but there’s  other people who might only earn $70 and suddenly they’re going to get $750 a week”.  That’s no compensation for the people who are seeing their livelihood disappear during  this time. That’s no compensation for them and they’re the ones who at the end of this,  that’s a critical moment, and the reason you do a wage subsidy, at the end of this you want  them to have kept their relationship with their employer because after other down turns  there’s been a whole lot of people when that relationship’s broken, who’ve never managed  to return to the workforce.



GILBERT: Yes and I guess the point is, whether it be that argument on the casual worker  who’s been with an employer for less than a year or that other element where the threshold  hits in terms of the size of the business, whether it should be done on turnover, or profit, to  be a more accurate assessment, either way you want them to be flexible over the next 48  hours. Because if you’re spending $130 billion, you want to get it right, you don’t want to  then see companies slashing workforces by thousands over the coming days because you  didn’t listen.

BURKE: Yes, and there’s a couple of ways that they’re spending money that’s  unexpected. I spoke about the examples where it’s a wage multiplier, that’s unexpected.  The other one that’s unexpected and they really shouldn’t be doing is paying a wage  subsidy at the same time that the worker isn’t receiving a wage, they’re just running down  their leave entitlements. The taxpayer gets no benefit out of that. That’s just creating an  incentive for employers to get people to run down leave and we’re not actually paying for  anything. It’s just money going to a balance sheet and the government’s already put in  measures that it said were for cash flow. Whenever you do something quickly, there’s  going to be examples that are not going to be great, but the principle surely should be the  more someone is relying on the income the more determined we should be to keep the  relationship with their employer. That ought to be the principle. At the moment because of  the way they’ve designed it, either you might miss out on that even though your  household’s reliant on the job you might miss out because of the organisation of your  business that you work for, it might be because the business you work for is a subsidiary of  a parent company, it might be because you’ve been working every day in this job but  you’ve been there for ten months and not for 12. I appreciate it when Christian Porter says  they’ve got to draw a line somewhere, they do. But when you get these sorts of anomalies,  it’s fair to say right now they haven’t drawn the line in the smartest way and there’s time to  fix it.

GILBERT: And just finally before you go, as much as the extra few hundred dollars a  fortnight for JobKeeper vis a vis the Job Seeker allowances, that’s important, but the most  important thing is to keep that connection, as the PM has said repeatedly, between the  worker and the employer, and if there are amendments to be able to achieve that, surely  the government will consider it, and I guess you’ve already said you’re going to pass this  thing regardless, so they’ve got that goodwill there haven’t they?

BURKE: That’s right. And this is why I was stunned when Christian Porter went on the  attack this morning. I mean really, the Australian people don’t want to see us having a  brawl at the moment. They want to see us working together and getting things done for  them. So where there’s a way it can be improved, we’re going to explain it, and we should.  And the government should be listening and we should be making sure that at the end of  this we get something that works. Because the lines you just attributed to the Prime  Minister, yep and he has been saying that, and as you know we were saying that for the  period when they were flatly ruling out doing a wage subsidy. We’ve now got to the point  that something we called for the government’s said they will do, let’s do it in the smartest  way, and not descend the way the Attorney-General tried to this morning into some absurd  political game so that we can pretend that one side of politics is wanting to block  something that we’re all in support of.

GILBERT: Mr Burke, appreciate your time, thanks.

BURKE: Great to be back.





ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ADAM GARTRELL 0427 008 525





