

SENATOR ANTHONY CHISHOLM

LABOR SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

THURSDAY, 10 DECEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: IR changes; Cashless Debit Card; Sports Rorts; Juukan Gorge.



SENATOR Anthony Chisholm, LABOR SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND: Just wanted to

make a few comments on some of the happenings. Obviously, the Government's IR changes

are really concerning for Labor, to bring them down yesterday under the cover of COVID. But

we know their real aim is to cut the pay and conditions of some of those workers that actually

helped get us through the pandemic. We know that these sorts of cuts to wages and conditions

are in the Liberal National Party DNA. But it's really disappointing that they want to use the

cover of a pandemic, to bring these in. What Australians need to know is that Labor will always

stand up for the wages and conditions of working Australians, we've told the Government that

they should withdraw those elements of the bill that are going to lead to lower wages and

conditions for working Australians. We've proven through this year that we will work with the

Government and be constructive where possible, but we're not going to play any part in any

legislation that's going to lower the wages and conditions of working Australian's.



Just a couple of other things wanted to touch on in regards to what happened in the Senate

yesterday. It was really disappointing to see that the cashless debit card has received an

expansion for the next two years. It is something that is again, an ideological pursuit from this

Government. I've spent a lot of time in Bundaberg and Hervey Bay, which is part of the trial

sites. And I know the stigma that it causes. I know the mental anguish that it's had on people

not being able to go about and live their life. And I've told some of those stories in the Senate



last night. So, it is disappointing the Government are able to get that through, they could not

provide any evidence at all, that this trial has actually been a success. And that's why there

was such strong opposition, it is disappointing that they are able to get a two year extension

through when they haven't proved that the trials currently underway have been successful.



Another significant outcome in the Senate yesterday, was the Senate voting to compel Senator

McKenzie to appear before the Sports Rorts inquiry. This is something that doesn't happen

very often. But the Senate was so frustrated that the Government are not actually answering

the questions. They're not being held accountable, and then not actually fessing up to the

Australian people about what went on with sports rorts. So, I was really pleased the Senate

passed that motion yesterday. And I would really encourage Senator McKenzie to stop playing

silly games, to just actually commit to a date and come and give evidence and be upfront with

the Australian people.



Finally, we also tabled yesterday, as Deputy Chair of the Joint Northern Australia committee,

the report into the Juukan Gorge destruction, obviously an event that is significant for all

Australians, internationally, but also particularly the PKKP people. It was something that we put

a lot of effort into, in what was a really difficult year. But it is pleasing to see the interim report

come down yesterday. It was scathing of the performance of Rio Tinto. But it also highlighted

the fact that there are substantial deficiencies in heritage protection at both the state level in

Western Australia and the Commonwealth level. So, I look forward to continuing the work of

that committee. We've obviously got a lot of work to continue on with next year as look at the

national implications of this as well. Thank you



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT:  FINBAR FULLER 0403 777 830





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











