





SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Finance  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Leader of the Government in the Senate

Senator for South Australia

TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Interview on Channel 7 Sunrise with Samantha Armytage.        Topics: Breach at Sydney Airport; returning Australians; quarantine rules  07/12/2020  07:20AM

Samantha Armytage:  Minister, good morning to you. Now, it was New South Wales police officers who  incorrectly allowed the travellers to get on a domestic flight to Melbourne. They have put up their hand, these  police officers, and said they did the wrong thing. How can we ensure that this doesn't happen again?

Simon Birmingham: So Sam, look, I acknowledge and welcome the fact New South Wales Police have  publicly apologised for this. But clearly, it is a reminder that the task of bringing thousands of returning  Australia's home each and every week to Australia and doing so safely is a very crucial one, but also one that  poses some of the greatest threats to us in relation to the spread of COVID and it’s why all of the systems  need to be thorough.

No doubt, New South Wales will be reviewing and tightening all of their systems and processes as a result of  this. Just as today, we note that Victoria will resume for the first time since the 30 of June receiving returning  Australians back into Australia. South Australia will also resume that for the first time in a few weeks and that’s  going to help us to continue to bring those returning Australians home. But those jurisdictions and others,  including New South Wales, have tightened a number of the standards as a result of some of those failures to  make sure that it happens as safely as possible.

Samantha Armytage: Yes. And we should point out that those two German tourists that made it Melbourne  are now in hotel quarantine in Melbourne and a lot of people on that flight are now in isolation. So hopefully,  this doesn't go any further than that. But does Australia need to restrict the number of international arrivals at  this point so we don't have as much chance of these mistakes happening?

Simon Birmingham: Well they are restricted, Sam. And now, Victoria and South Australia are coming back  online in terms of doing their part in receiving international arrivals, will see us taking around 6700 per week  but these are overwhelmingly returning Australian citizens. Now, on the one hand, we have a federal  opposition, the Labor Party here in Canberra, who continuously attack us and seem to pretend there’s some  cheap, easy fast way to bring Australians back home. But the reality is there isn’t. It is a high-risk proposition  when it comes to managing the spread and potential spread of COVID.

That’s why we worked so closely with the states and territories to make sure that within these caps, we are  getting as many home as possible but doing it as safely as possible, and the states and territories are doing a  great job there. Obviously, there are some opportunities for improvement, and this failure, being a clear one,  but we’re also providing Defence Force support to help them, and that’s the case in Victoria today as they  begin this task again.

Samantha Armytage: Absolutely. Okay, Minister. Thank you for your time this morning, we appreciate it.  Simon Birmingham: Thanks, Sam. Cheers.

Media Contacts  Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.

