

THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP  MINISTER FOR POPULATION, CITIES AND URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE  ACTING MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP, MIGRANT SERVICES AND  MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS



TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT HOUSE, ACT





17 October 2020

Subjects: Whole-of-government permission capability; digital passenger card; Australians stuck  overseas; VIC lockdown.

STUART ROBERT: Good afternoon. Great to be here with my friend and colleague, Minister  Tudge, where we’ll announce today - we’ll have a discussion paper out today, and a tender out  next week - for a whole-of-government permission capability. This capability is to build a simple  and easy way for Australians and others to engage with permissions. Be it a visa, be it a customs  permission, be it an agricultural permission. The first use case for the whole-of-government  permission project will be a simple visa and, of course, digitising the incoming passenger card.  And then we’ll build out the entire suite of government permissions. I’ll pass to Minister Tudge  to talk about the first use cases. Tudgey.

ALAN TUDGE: Thanks very much, Stuart. So, the very first use case that will be underway, and  we hope to have completed by this time next year, is to digitise the incoming passenger card.  So, at the moment everybody who arrives unto Australia, be you a foreigner or an Aussie, you  would complete this card and it has your contact information, your details, as well as some of  the biosecurity information. That, obviously, is sometimes difficult to read. It takes time to  manually process this and, in the future when we need to be able to contact trace people, we of  course would like that information to be able to get to health authorities immediately, rather  than having to go through the process of entering the data across to them.

So, from this time next year, our expectation is that we’ll no longer need this incoming  passenger card because we’ll have a fully digital incoming passenger card. And what’s more, by  having a digital product, in the future should there be a globally-available vaccine, we’ll be able  to attach an authentic vaccination certificate to the incoming passenger card so that we will  know if a person has, indeed, had that vaccination or not. And therefore, they will be able to  enter into Australia, potentially without quarantining.

Furthermore, by digitising this, we have much greater authenticity and integrity associated with  who the individual is. Because typically you’d do this on your phone, an image would be taken of  your face which would match up to your passport, to ensure there is integrity in relation to the  identity of the individual. And of course, from a contact tracing perspective it means that we will

be able to immediately have the information connected into contact tracing capability in each of  the state and territories’ jurisdictions, should they need it.

So, this is a significant development. As Minister Robert said, we’ll be putting this tender out  next week. And our ambition is to have this available for us next year. And this is just another  further step in our efforts to slowly reopen and safely reopen the Australian borders so that we  can allow more people to leave the country and more people to come into the country. Happy  to take any questions.

QUESTION: Will it mean that we could potentially reopen the international borders sooner?

ALAN TUDGE: We’ve already started that process, as you’d be aware. In terms of having some  arrivals back into Australia who are Australian citizens, and indeed some migrants coming in.  Obviously, as of yesterday we had some New Zealanders coming into the country as well. And  we’re slowly increasing the numbers there. We’re working, of course, on further quarantine  arrangements, we’re working on further bubble arrangements. But this would clearly be an  additional tool which would help facilitate the further reopening of the borders.

QUESTION: The Prime Minister flagged yesterday that more international students and  corporate visitors, that may not need to quarantine or at least have some other form of  quarantine like home quarantine, or corporate quarantine. Can you elaborate on that? What  does that mean?

ALAN TUDGE: Yes, so those things are all being investigated as we speak. Obviously, the  Howard Springs quarantine facility is potentially available for 5000 more Australians to be able  to quarantine there, which is good news for those Australians who are wanting to come back.  But we’re looking at all of these options so that there is more capacity for Australians, and  indeed for foreigners to be able to enter into the country in a safe manner. But what we’re  announcing today in terms of a new digital incoming passenger card is another further step  towards us safely reopening the borders too.

QUESTION: What’s corporate quarantine?

ALAN TUDGE: Well, we’re investigating all of these things. I'm not responsible for that  particular activity. But all of these are under consideration in terms of wanting to ensure that we  have safe quarantine mechanisms in place, so that people can safely come into the country.

QUESTION: How were the 17 Kiwis allowed to enter Victoria?

ALAN TUDGE: Well, let me just say a few things in relation to that, because clearly Premier  Andrews has had some very strong comments today in relation to this. And I think that his  comments today, frankly, are a complete distraction. And I hope that he actually focuses on  keeping up with his side of the bargain. Victorians have done their side of the bargain, in terms  of adhering to very severe restrictions for months now. And we hope that the Premier will  adhere to his side of the bargain tomorrow and start to open up in a similar manner to what  New South Wales has done.

I’m a Victorian myself. I just arrived literally last night and having quarantined for two weeks in  Victoria. And I can tell you, the mental health consequences of the lockdown are absolutely  enormous. Beyond Blue alone has had a 77 per cent increase in enquiries to Victoria compared

to any other jurisdiction. We know that we've had a 30 per cent increase in September on the  Medicare supported counselling sessions compared to September of last year. Let alone the  77,000 jobs that have been lost over the last couple of months. So, there's really serious  consequences associated with this lockdown, both from a health perspective, from a social  perspective, but equally from an economic perspective, too. And as I said, I hope that the  Premier will focus on doing his side of the bargain tomorrow, because Victorians have worked  so hard to do their side of the bargain.

QUESTION: Should those travellers be able to remain in Melbourne, the ones from New  Zealand?

ALAN TUDGE: Well, I just want to make this point clear as well. This was discussed in the  AHPPC meeting on Monday of this week. The concept that people may be arriving into New  South Wales and then potentially going on to other destinations was explicitly raised in the  meeting. And no official from any jurisdiction raised concerns in relation to that. There was an  understanding that when Kiwis arrived into Sydney, coming from a country which has zero  community transmissions, that there'd be no need for quarantining, and that once they had  arrived into Sydney that they would be treated like any other person in New South Wales - any  other Australian or any other visa holder - and therefore be able to travel into those jurisdictions  which enable those people to travel into them. And they, of course, included Victoria.

I'll just make one further point as well, in relation to a point which the premier raised on the- it  concerns the incoming passenger cards. They were requested this morning just after 8 o'clock  from the Australian Border Force Commissioner, and they were delivered to the Victorian  Government at midday. So, four hours later. As soon as the request was made, the  Commonwealth Government went straight to work in finding those incoming passenger cards  and delivering those incoming passenger cards to Victorian contact tracing authorities. Of  course, in the future this will be a digital process, so that when you actually enter the  information on your phone or on your computer before you depart, that will automatically go to  the contact tracers.

QUESTION: Who are they? Are they Victorian residents - those that are from New Zealand  [indistinct]?

ALAN TUDGE: So, there's 17 people. My understanding is they’re 17 New Zealanders who came  in last night that- I don't know their nationalities, actually, I'm not aware of that, whether or not  they're Kiwi citizens or whether they’re Australian citizens. I don't know. I can get that  information for you.

QUESTION: The Government has had some issues with some of its digital systems in the past  - census, COVID-Safe robodebt. How can Australians be confident that has happened?

STUART ROBERT: Well, I'll take issue with your statement that Australia’s has had problems  with its digital systems. Seven months ago, half a million Australians used to log onto our digital  platforms a day. Yesterday, it was 2.6 million. COVID-Safe is considered widely one of the finest  tracing apps on the market. And our digital systems now are quite expansive and quite  extraordinary. What we're building at now in terms of a permissions capability for whole-of-government is to allow a simple, helpful, transparent, respectful process for citizens to request a  permission. Now that includes those from overseas who are coming into Australia to request a

visa. And in the simple cases Minister Tudge has rolled out, we'll be looking at digitising the  passenger card and a simple visa - probably the electronic travel authority - so ensure that  people crossing the border, we know who they are. And then linking through, of course, to any  vaccination registers.

But the government's response throughout this entire pandemic, in terms of getting  Australia.gov.au up, getting COVID-Safe apps up, rapidly expanding the capability of our systems  from concurrent users to accessers(*), I think speaks volume of the capability of the  Commonwealth to deliver this. And I’m looking forward to working with Minister Tudge on it.

QUESTION: But they have been hiccups with a number of them, so how can you be sure that  won’t happen?

STUART ROBERT: In terms of the sheer volume of what government does, we process  Services Australia, more transactions than the four big banks put together and answer almost  200,000 calls a day - 130,000 calls to the welfare line yesterday were answered in just over 60  seconds - 2.6 million logins into MyGov, 82,000 concurrent users, all working seamlessly in  terms of government system and delivery. This permissions project is one more platform in this  whole-of-government digital platform, and I remain very confident working with Minister Tudge  on delivering. I remain very confident. We will release the tender next week, that we will choose  a good partner to work with, and ensure this adds value to how we open the borders next year.

QUESTION: And so, can you explain a bit more about how it would work in relation to  incoming passengers? So would they need to use their own technology? Will there be  technology provided for those who don’t have it? What about elderly people who might not be  tech-savvy?

ALAN TUDGE: Yes. So look, all of these things will be worked through. But basically, you'll be  doing these on your mobile phone or you can do it on a computer. And of course, , if you're an  elderly person that needs a bit of assistance, you can go and ask for that assistance. But our  ambition, of course, is to start with this incoming passenger card and digitise that, and then over  time for more of our visas to become digitised as well. Because obviously that that makes them  more efficient, adds greater integrity to the system, and improves with the identity as well. So  that we know exactly who is coming into the country. And of course, in a COVID world, it means  that we can have some surety down the track, if there is a vaccination, that we understand  exactly who's had a vaccination and who has not.

QUESTION: The AFP is now investigating the Leppington Triangle deal. How was it that the  minister in charge was not aware of the breach, was not aware about the price of the deal - was  that in confidence?

ALAN TUDGE: Well, that was actually all addressed in the Auditor-General's report. And as you  know, the Auditor-General has referred the matter to the Australian Federal Police and, given  it’s with the Australian Federal Police, I'm not going to comment further on that investigation.

QUESTION: How did he not know the price of the [indistinct]

ALAN TUDGE: Well, that was explicitly addressed in the Auditor-General's report and  subsequently.

QUESTION: What did the Auditor-General say?

ALAN TUDGE: Well, in terms that it wasn't briefed up to the minister.

QUESTION: Why?

ALAN TUDGE: That's a question for the department, not for me.

QUESTION: And who is ultimately responsible for that purchase.

ALAN TUDGE: Say that question again?

QUESTION: The purchase of the land, who was actually responsible?

ALAN TUDGE: The ultimate decision maker. I mean, in many cases, it will be a departmental  official, which is the person who signs off in relation to these purchases - obviously at arm's  length from the government. But these matters were addressed by the Auditor-General’s  report. There's been a referral to the Australian Federal Police to look into this. And there's also  two independent investigations underway, by the department, to get to the bottom of all of  this. We're taking this very, very seriously. And we will get to the bottom of this. The  department's putting in place the appropriate investigations. And, of course, has been referral  to the Australian Federal Police as well.

QUESTION: Is that official still in his job?

ALAN TUDGE: There's an investigation underway and it's appropriate that we allow the  investigations to do their job.

QUESTION:  But are they still working in the department?

ALAN TUDGE: Well, there's an investigation underway into all of the matters which you have  raised. And there's a proper process which will be gone through. There's a proper process.

QUESTION: [Talks over] And then the investigation…

ALAN TUDGE: There's a proper process which the department is undertaking. And obviously,  there's a process which the Australian Federal Police is undertaking as well.

QUESTION: [Talks over] Was there corruption at all involved in this?

ALAN TUDGE: We will let those processes go through. I mean, we've got an Australian Federal  Police investigation to determine whether or not there has been criminality. And so, I'm not  going to comment further on that Australian Federal Police investigation. And there are further  investigations being done by the department, by very good people, at arm's length, and they  will get to the bottom of these very serious matters.

STUART ROBERT: Thanks very much.

ALAN TUDGE: Thank you, everyone.

[ENDS]

