





THE HON JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES

MEMBER FOR HUNTER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SUNRISE

MONDAY, 24 FEBRUARY 2020



SUBJECTS: Sports Rorts; Labor’s commitment to net zero emissions by 2050.



NATALIE BARR, HOST: Well, despite the sports rorts controversy and National Party

chaos, Scott Morrison has clawed back support in the Australian's latest Newspoll. Primary

support for the coalition remained unchanged at 38 per cent. Labor is down one to 34, and

the Greens and One Nation were also unchanged. Labor's two-party preferred lead has

been reduced to two points 51 to 49. When it comes to preferred Prime Minister, Anthony

Albanese’s lead over Scott Morrison has been reduced to one point 41 to 40.



DAVID KOCH, HOST: For their take this morning we're joined by Nationals MP, Barnaby

Joyce, and Shadow Resources Minister Joel Fitzgibbon. Good morning gents. Barnaby,

has the stigma of the sports rorts scandal finally gone away?



BARNABY JOYCE, MEMBER FOR NEW ENGLAND: Well, I’d just like to thank the Labor

Party for deciding that by 2050 we will have zero net emissions. So, we'll have zero Labor

Party seats in regional Australia. The biggest threats to the Australian economy, I suppose

the drought, the coronavirus and the Labor Party policy that is going to obviously shut

down coal mines, it's devastating to the agricultural sector. And why are they doing this?



KOCH: Alright, we are going to get onto that. Hang on, we're going to get onto that in a

minute. But has sports rorts gone away? Has everyone forgotten about it?



JOYCE: I don't think that people think it's going to affect their life, Kochie. I don't believe

changes or perspective changes in leadership affects their lives. But things that do affect

their lives, like their job, does affect how they vote, and Joel knows full well the last election

at 20 per cent swings in him in Cessnock and the major booths, and he told them that it

was a scare campaign on climate change. Well, it’s not a not scare campaign anymore. It’s

the truth.



BARR: Well, Barnaby, maybe the polls are wrong like they always are?



JOYCE: Well, maybe they are. Maybe they are. But I tell you what, it's not wrong with the

responses that we're getting out at regional areas, especially in around agriculture, when

you hear people like Frank [inaudible] say we're going to let shrubs grow back in your

place to try and make this equation work.



KOCH: Okay. All right, Joel. Let's get onto that, Barnaby is fixated on it, as we were going

to get on to it. You're now committed to a climate goal of net zero emissions by 2050. What

does that mean for the coal-fired power industry? Now, you're on the right of the Labor

Party; you're defending coal mines. What does this mean?



JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: Barnaby wants to talk about anything but

his own party and their own dysfunction and their rorts, but I'm very happy to answer that

question Kochie. The majority of Australians want us to take action on greenhouse gas

emissions, we're going to do so and I believe that Anthony Albanese is now very well

placed to do what so many political leaders of all political persuasions have been unable to

do, and that is demonstrate to the community that we can do this meaningfully without

negatively impacting on our economy or Australian jobs. Net zero emissions simply means

that by 2050, we will be putting no more greenhouse gases into the atmosphere then we

are taking out. And I can take Barnaby to Keith Tulloch Wines in my electorate right now,

today, where they are already carbon neutral or already operating on the basis of zero net

emissions.



BARR: Joel, can I just stop you there. Anthony Albanese said yesterday that you still

probably going to be exporting coal in 2050. So, are you just going to export it and then

someone else is going to burn it and someone else is going to emit?



FITZGIBBON: Well, under our international obligations signed by Malcolm Turnbull in

Paris, we don't have to account for the emissions emitted in other countries. So, the

demand for our export coal will be strong for many decades to come - both thermal and

coking coal - and we will continue to take that economic opportunity for many decades to

come. Our coal generation industry is in - no Barnaby, this is not your turn mate - the coal

generation industry…



JOYCE: you’re going to need all day to explain this cyclone.



FITZGIBBON: … is in transition because as the coal generators come to the end of the

physical and economic lives, of course, they will move on and they'll be replaced with new

technology as we are already doing in the Upper Hunter. What Barnaby won’t talk about is

the cost of not acting.



JOYCE: You're about to move on. You're about to move on. I tell you what, I was in

Muswellbrook yesterday. I'll tell you what, Joel, you have it in front of you mate. They do

not like this, and they do not like the Labor Party and you stand there representing them.

You’re going to take it out of the height of the agricultural industry, ruminant animals, the

dairy industry, the pig industry, the beef industry. You say it, your own leader, Anthony

Albanese, says it's going to come across all sectors and all sectors, we know where it is

because last time it was our vegetation management laws. We had to leave the trees on

our place to make your equation. Now, your equation is zero. So, your fugitive emissions

from your coal mines, these fellas you are going put out of a job. That's going to have to

come from somewhere, Joel, and you're not telling us where and we know where it is. It's

going to come out agriculture and for people in the city, that's all right. You're just going to

pay a lot more for food. It's alright because Mr Albanese from Australia is going to save the

world and you're going to lose your job, Joel. You are going to lose your job.



FITZGIBBON: You are like a scud missile looking for a political opportunity.



JOYCE: I don’t have to mate, you’re the only target. Central Queensland you got smashed.

Mackay you got smashed.





FITZGIBBON: Both the National Farmers Federation and Meat and Livestock Australia

have both committed to zero net emissions by 2030, Barnaby. Get with the script, Mate.

You're a Neanderthal - get with the script.



JOYCE: [interrupting] Cessnock you got smashed. Muswellbrook you got smashed. You

are about to lose your job.



KOCH: Ring the bells. They're really in full flight there. Thank you, have a good week.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641





