

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T

Monday 9th November 2020

Minister Littleproud Today Show

KARL STEFANOVIC: Well Joe Biden is already speaking like a president, isn’t he? His  acceptance speech pledging to heal America after one of the most divisive elections in  history. But Donald Trump remains defiant this morning, back on the golf course and is still  refusing to concede defeat. To discuss, I’m joined by Agriculture Minister David  Littleproud, and senior writer at the Sydney Morning Herald and The Age, Jessica Irvine.  Good morning guys, nice to see you. David, to you first of all - world leaders, including  Scott Morrison, congratulating Joe Biden on his victory. But Donald Trump, and as you’ve  heard this morning on our show, they’re digging in for the long haul, legally.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, look, we obviously welcome the election of President-Elect  Biden, and we’ll obviously work with him like we did President Trump, we’ve got a strong  relationship. And it’s important that we let the process continue to unfold. That’s the beauty  of democracy, it mightn’t be pretty at times, but we need to let it unfold, and even within  that process, I respect the fact that President Trump feels aggrieved, and he has a right to  test that in a court of law. You should respect that - in fact that’s what they went to an  election for, it was actually to preserve those very rights. So we just hope that that  happens quickly, that his aggrievement can be arbitrated very quickly by the courts over  there in some way or another that the American people can move on with confidence that  their democracy is intact, and in fact they’re still a good global citizen that’ll hopefully play  nice with us and the rest of the world.

KARL STEFANOVIC: If there’s a drama though, David, if there’s some sort of drama with  the courts, I mean, all hell will break loose in America.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, but I think you’ve still got to trust the process. I mean, that’s  the basis of our society and their society -predicated off democracy and the rule of law,  and it’s a fair one. And everyone should be afforded- I get Donald Trump’s not everyone’s  cup of tea. But, the reality is he’s still afforded- should be afforded the same rights as  anyone else. If he feels aggrieved, like I could be here in Australia, then I’ve got a way and  a pathway to test that. He should be given that opportunity. But I just hope it doesn’t carry  on for too long, because I think we just need closure and a way forward.

KARL STEFANOVIC: Jess, how did you view the weekend?

JESSICA IRVINE: Well, waking up Sunday morning was pretty good just to have some  certainty, and I think this does cloud it, all the claims, you know, it’s not legit. It is, we have  a president in America and it is- sort of feels like a fresh breath of new air, and particularly  to have our first female Vice President in the United States, Kamala Harris, she wore white

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

for her speech as am I, in representation of the suffragette moment. That’s a major  milestone and moment for women, all over the world. And it does feel good, you know,  let’s not get too distracted, we have the outcome.

KARL STEFANOVIC: Okay. David, will a Biden presidency ease our tensions with China,  which are considerable and growing worse by the day?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, look, obviously we continue to want to have our hand out to  China to- and reach a dialogue with them, in fact, restart it. But anything that will help that,  we’re obviously open to. We’ve taken a leadership role, we haven’t thrown our toys out of  the cot, we’ve continued to keep our phone on and our door open to Chinese officials, and  my counterpart. In fact, I wrote to my counterpart only in the last couple weeks trying to  engage again. So, look, we’ll take whatever assistance but we don’t intend to compromise  on our values and principles as a country and as a good global citizen. But we’re prepared  to explain that to not only China, to any other nation that may feel aggrieved at what we’ve  said. But ultimately, our job as a Federal Government is to keep Australians safe, and we’ll  trade under fair rules and we just expect people to trade fairly with us.

KARL STEFANOVIC: You haven’t heard back from your counterpart, he’s just not that into  you?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Nah mate, he’s not the Lone Ranger, I suppose, just looking at  me.

KARL STEFANOVIC: It’s bad, aye Jess? I mean, it’s got to the point now where it’s a  terrible relationship.

JESSCIA IRVINE: Yeah, and my sort of read on Joe Biden is that it’s not necessarily that  they will- he will be any more relaxed with China. We’ve entered this new world where  countries are flexing their muscles and we’re not trading, and it’s a problem.

KARL STEFANOVIC: Yeah, it is. This could finally be my route back into Queensland  folks. As the state struggles to find enough workers to pick fruit, what about an exemption  to plug some of that gap, David, can we start talking here?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, look, we’ve tried to start this thing called the Ag Workers’  Code, and all the states bar Queensland, Western Australia and Tasmania have signed up  to it. Queensland refuses…

KARL STEFANOVIC:  So, can you explain that for us? Because, I think it’s- this- on the  serious side, this is ridiculous what’s going on.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, look, this is about the free movement of labour between  states in a COVID-safe way. And what we’re saying is, let’s allow farmers and ag workers  to move, and then there’s a third cohort that the states want to classify as seasonal  workers. And they’re sometimes backpackers that have been in the company for some  time, and even Australians that are doing it. But the challenge we’ve got is when one state  doesn’t sign up, it means that if you’re picking fruit in Griffith at the moment, you want to go  to Bowen to pick mangoes, you’ll get pulled up at Stanthorp and you’ll be put in a motel for  about $2800 worth of costs. The Queensland Government are currently flying in, they’re  flying in overseas workers from the Pacific and letting them isolate on farm and work on  farm. And worl on farm…

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T



KARL STEFANOVIC: See, I think that’s an absolute disgrace.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: It’s just not common sense, Karl. And you know, we’re  incentivising Australians with up to $6000 in reimbursement of travel costs to get them off  the couch and go and have a crack, and we’ve got states that are holding us up. I mean,  there are cohort out there that we really need to get up and have a go at this, because  farmers do not have the luxury to sit around and wait for someone to turn up and pick their  fruit. When it’s ready, it’s got to get off the paddock and onto your plate, and someone has  to be there to help them.

KARL STEFANOVIC: Okay. Jess, people just aren’t into fruit picking?

JESSICA IRVINE: Yeah, well I think they would be, you have to be get into Queensland to  pick the fruit. I reckon we need an exchange scheme with all those Melburnians who have  been locked up in their houses for so many months, they should get out, get some fresh  air. Let’s send them up there.

KARL STEFANOVIC: There’s no way that she’s going to let Victorians in. [Laughter].  There’s just no way.

JESSICA IRVINE: I know. Well, they got to open the borders. It’s getting ridiculous. It’s  time to open the borders.

KARL STEFANOVIC: Well, it is. Let’s finish on something a little bit different. I don’t know  how I feel about this story - which is saying something. Hollywood actress Anne Hathaway  has apologised - she’s been forced to, really - after her portrayal of a witch with three  fingers in her latest movie caused offence to people with disabilities. Jess, a witch with  three fingers. Insensitive, or too far?

JESSICA IRVINE: Well, it is something that has offended people with limb difference,  which is a class of disability. Some people are born with different limbs, some people, of  course, get there through tragic accident. And apparently it has caused offence to- there is  a condition where you’re born with three fingers. And so, she’s responded to that. You  know, witches are supposed to be, by nature, somewhat strange looking, I think it’s  unintentional but is has caused offence.

KARL STEFANOVIC: What do you feel about that, David?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, I’m with you Karl, this is a different one. I think you’ve got to  appreciate this wasn’t a malicious act. I mean, the actress and the production company  didn’t maliciously go out to offend anybody. And I think I get the sensitivities with this,  probably because it’s with young children. But I think we got to be careful as a society not  to over interpret everything, and just to look for a cause. I’m not saying this one isn’t valid,  but I just think as a society, we’ve just got to be a bit careful on this, and I don’t think there  was any malice in it and I think we just need to look at it through that lens. The intent was  about telling a children’s story, whether they just missed the mark on that or not, I  appreciate, but I think as a society let’s not get down that slippery slope.

KARL STEFANOVIC: I just think Hollywood needs to take a good, hard, long look at itself.

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

JESSICA IRVINE: I just don’t think they needed to remake Witches, Anjelica Huston was  amazing, in the first one. [Laughter]

SILVA JEFFREYS: Thank you, Jess.

KARL STEFANOVIC: I love that Hocus Pocus, that was a good film… said no one ever.  [Laughter]

SILVA JEFFREYS: Dominating the box office.

KARL STEFANOVIC: Thank you guys.



Media contact  0455 448 985

