RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

THURSDAY, 12 NOVEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Climate change; Shadow Cabinet.



JOURNALIST: Mark Butler, as Climate Minister- as Energy Minister, Joel Fitzgibbon thinks

his time's up. Is it?



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Mark

Butler has done a fantastic job as our spokesperson on climate change and energy. This is

a really difficult portfolio. It's one which evolves over time, in terms of what's happening on

the international stage, what's going on with technology, what's going on with our own

emissions journey, and Mark has done an admirable job in that role, and he should

continue.



JOURNALIST: But that, it's an embarrassment to the Party isn’t it, at this point? Joel

Fitzgibbon has spent all week; first of all, quitting Shadow Cabinet, now he's sniping at

ministry colleagues, thinking they too should go.



MARLES: We have a difficult process to work through in relation to our policies in respect

of climate change and energy. I'd be the first to say that. We are a party, which is deeply

committed to action on climate change. We have been that for decades now. Anyone who

went to the memorial for Bob Hawke, saw Bob Hawke talking about this issue back in

1990. It is part of our DNA. But at the same time, what was clear out of the 2019 election is

that we do need to lift our eyes, in who we talk to, in the breadth of people we're speaking

to. And that includes those who work in industries such as the coal industry and the gas

industry. Now, I think that's what Joel has been talking about for some time. There's a

process we need to go through. And along the way, it's going to be bumpy, we make no

bones about that. But I think we can see a settled position and we will get there. And we

will, we will absolutely get there. And I'd much prefer that; a situation where we're working

through our policies, than what we see on the other side. The Government are up to their

22nd energy policy as the Government and can't land a thing.



JOURALIST: So is Joel Fitzgibbon right then? You have lost your- the traditional base,

and you can't win them back?



MARLES: We lost the 2019 election. That happened. And we need to learn from that. And

we have, and the very first thing that Anthony Albanese did, as the leader of the Labor

Party was put in place, an election review, which was no holds barred, difficult lessons for

us to learn-



JOURNALIST: The answer is yes or no.



MARLES: Well, I think what you're seeing is us working through that process-



JOURNALIST: No, what we’re seeing is Joel Fitzgibbon say that you haven't learned the

lessons from the election loss. And this is what- what's happened? I mean, he's he's quit.



MARLES: Well, if I can answer the question. What we're seeing is working through the

lessons that come out of the 2019 election, that the election review put forward, and that's

going to be bumpy. But we are going to get to the other side of this. And that is critically

important. And as I say it stands in stark contrast to what we see on the other side of

politics- who are unable to land a single policy in this area.



JOURNALIST: Mr. Marles, you are Deputy Leader of the Party, you've got a backbencher

saying that a Shadow Minister should go. You haven't criticised him for saying that-



MARLES: Well, I support Mark Butler in his role-



JOURNALIST: Do you support Joel Fitzgibbon then as well?



MARLES: I don't think it is the place of others in the Party to be calling on members of the

frontbench to resign. Ultimately, you know, we're elected to the frontbench by the caucus

and the roles that we have, are given to us by the Leader. I think Mark Butler has done a

superb job in his role. End of story.



JOURNALIST: You talk about talking to those traditional voters. Is Anthony Albanese the

right Leader to do that?



MARLES: Yes. And Anthony Albanese has been doing that.



JOURNALIST: Not according to Joel Fitzgibbon



MARLES: Anthony Albanese has been leading our Party through the most difficult period

that I can remember; both in terms of, you know, the crushing letdown of losing the 2019

election, and it is impossible to overstate that. And dealing with the realities of that, is

something that Anthony has worked through in a deeply significant way. And, and then,

you know, the COVID-19 crisis has obviously given rise to a whole lot of hardship for

people around the country, which is, of course, our focus and, and the government has

been managing that and we have been giving, we've been giving our support to the

government in that process. It's obviously been a difficult time for Opposition.



JOURNALIST: We've seen this show before and we know how it ends. How is the show

not going to end the same way this time around?



MARLES: Look, you know, column inches are being written-



JOURNALIST: By people inside your own party.



MARLES: Commentary is being put on the TV. That's all fine. There is nothing-



JOURNALIST: You had a Shadow Minister that quit this week.



MARLES: Yeah, a Shadow Minister who also made it clear that this was part of where he

was seeing his own career going.





Inaudible



JOURNALIST: Now he is calling for one of your colleagues to quit-



MARLES: Okay, okay. You will need to let me answer the question. Joel made clear that

this has been something on his mind for some time now. As I said, at the caucus he spoke

to me a number of weeks ago about this step. Joel Fitzgibbon has been an ornament to

our party, and he is a very important voice and will can continue to be a voice going

forward. No, I don't agree with Joel’s call in relation to Mark Butler. Mark Butler has been

doing a fine job in his role as the Shadow Climate Minister. But we are going to work

through this issue. And yeah, there are going to be bumps along the way, but we're not

going to be shying away from that. And we will land a settled position here. And we're

going to do one which puts us in a much better position to contest the next election than

we did the last. And at the end of the day, will be a credit to Anthony Albanese, who has

led us through the most difficult period that I can remember.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363



