



The Hon Ken Wyatt AM MP

Minister for Indigenous Australians  Member for Hasluck

MEDIA RELEASE

26 October 2020

NEW INDIGENOUS BUSINESS HUB FOR WESTERN SYDNEY

Minister for Indigenous Australians, the Hon Ken Wyatt AM, MP, has today launched a new  Indigenous Business and Employment Hub, in Liverpool, New South Wales,

The Yarpa Hub is a partnership between the Morrison Government and the New South Wales  Aboriginal Land Council designed to provide the support Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander  businesses and job seekers need to realise the opportunities created through government and  private sector Indigenous procurement policies.

“The Yarpa Hub will help Indigenous businesses across New South Wales grow,  professionalise and meet the growing demand for their goods and services,” Minister Wyatt  said.

“The Hub is a key initiative of the Morrison Government’s 10-year Indigenous Business Sector  Strategy, supporting Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people build sustainable businesses  and become an integral part of the broader Australian economy.

“For Indigenous businesses, they will provide business advice, facilitate access to capital,  business growth support, tendering assistance, office space to work from, training and  seminars, networking events and connections to existing mainstream and Indigenous-specific  business support.

“For industry, the Hub will help link their members with larger businesses seeking to engage  Indigenous businesses in their supply chains, advice to corporates on how to engage  Indigenous jobseekers, and advice on providing culturally inclusive and supportive workplaces.

“The Hubs are delivered in close collaboration with state and territory governments to ensure  navigating business support is streamlined and Indigenous businesses can spend more time  creating jobs and growing the economy.”

Yarpa Hub Director, Ricky Walford, said the Yarpa Hub gives Indigenous business owners  unparalleled support and advice.

“The Yarpa Hub already has a strong membership base and we are proud to be helping  Indigenous businesses make the connections they need to grow, offer more employment  opportunities, and secure their futures,” Mr Walford said.

“We will leverage our great relationships with organisations such as Indigenous Business  Australia, Supply Nation, Many Rivers, University of Wollongong, KPMG and the Australian Tax  Office to ensure we continue our ground breaking work. With the final fit out of the new  premises complete, we’re ready to start welcoming people into the new office in a COVID-safe  manner.

“We’re honoured to take our place in empowering the Indigenous business sector and the  broader community.”

The Yarpa Hub is one of three Indigenous Business and Employment Hubs being established  around Australia.



Media contact: Luke Nayna, Senior Media Adviser, 0438 231 687

Authorised by Ken Wyatt AM, MP, Member for Hasluck.

