

SENATOR MARIELLE SMITH

SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC NORTH & WEST SA

WEDNESDAY, 9 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: JobSeeker christmas snapback; Anthony Albanese’s vision statement

on regional jobs.



NARELLE GRAHAM, HOST: Tell me if this sounds about right to you. In regional SA there

are 42.5 job seekers for one job vacancy. This will resonate if you're looking for work or if

you know someone who is looking for work. So 42.5 job seekers for one job vacancy. No

jokes about the half I know what you're thinking. In regional NSW 28.3 job seekers for

every job vacancy. Now the figures were sent to me from the Federal Labor Party. We’re

going to speak to both federal parties, major parties on this both Labor and Liberal but we’ll

start with the Labor Senator for South Australia Marielle Smith. Welcome to you.



MARIELLE SMITH: Hi Narelle, great to be with you.



GRAHAM: So fewer jobs in regional areas is that the crux of what you're saying?



SMITH: Yeah look what we know is that for every job vacancy in regional South Australia

there are 42 job seekers looking for a job. So, the number of job seekers and actual jobs

available just isn't lining up and it's particularly bad in South Australia when you compare it,

first of all to capital cities, so it's almost twice as bad than in Adelaide and significantly

worse than many regional areas around Australia.



GRAHAM: But is that new? Isn’t unemployment always higher in regional areas?



SMITH: It is but these figures are quite extraordinary, and I think your listeners would

agree. I mean the impact of the pandemic has just been extraordinary and it has hit

regional areas worse. So to have 42 job seekers for each job, they’re very bad figures and

they've certainly been exacerbated by the pandemic and it's flow on impacts on the

economy.



GRAHAM: In a moment I will speak to Tony Pasin and he is the Federal Liberal Member

for Barker on this. Marielle Smith is with me Labor Senator for South Australia and it's

great Marielle that you were able to get these figures together and you can send them

through, and you can point out the problem but what is the fix?



SMITH: Look the thing I'm most concerned about at the moment is at the moment there is

the government’s expanded rate of job seeker, which is the payment which goes to people

on unemployment benefits in Australia, that is scheduled to be snapped back to its original

rate come December and now that rate is very, very low. It’s around $40 a day which is

very difficult for people to live on. We know before the pandemic hit it wasn't enough to

have that stimulus impact in regional areas, it wasn't enough for people to live outside of

the poverty line and we're very concerned that if the government snaps back to this rate in

December it will cause significant challenges in regional South Australia. So I'm concerned

about that but I'm also concerned that we're yet to see a jobs plan from the Federal

Government to see us through this pandemic and address some of the particular

challenges we have in regional Australia.



GRAHAM: So you’re talking about JobSeeker there going back to being $40 a day

Marielle?



SMITH: Yes, so it is scheduled to go back to its original rate at December. Now there's

various rates of JobSeeker depending on whether you are single or whether you have

children and dependents and that sort of thing but the base rate is very, very low. It

currently has a supplement of around $250 for the Coronavirus Supplement Payment

which kicks in, in September. That's already been lowered from the $550 supplement that

we’ve seen throughout the pandemic. But both those, that supplement figure is scheduled

to just be completely abandoned come December.



GRAHAM: Your boss, I guess, Anthony Albanese, released Labor's plan for regional areas

of Australia today. Was all about investing in infrastructure, investing in education was

another point that he made. Doesn't JobTrainer do that, $500 million for education and

training?



SMITH: Look it’s certainly a start but what we know is that, particularly, our TAFE system

has been undermined by a number of years by this federal government. We’ve had

significant underinvestment in our TAFE system which means education and training

wasn't keeping up before the pandemic and it certainly got worse like many things during

the pandemic. So that's one of the things that we want to see invested in to get us through

the pandemic and get us through the economic recovery. But as Albo said we also need to

see more investment in critical infrastructure in terms of roads and rail and more

investment in state-of-the-art communications network because we know that's absolutely

critical to economic development in the regions.



GRAHAM: Albo also said above all it's about collaboration so working hand in hand with

local government, businesses and communities helping individual regions identify, develop

and mobilise their competitive advantages. So, getting the regions to say ‘hey this is the

area that we want to grow’ because the regions know themselves better than anybody

else. Give me an example of that though Marielle.



SMITH: Well that's right and we know in the regions different regions have different

challenges and different needs. So some regions may be better connected than others,

whereas other regions we know and certainly in parts of South Australia which suffer from

issues like significant blackspots and significant challenges in terms of accessing the NBN,

those regional areas know and appreciate that that's the key and critical challenge ahead

of them in terms of their economic development. In other parts of regional Australia there

may be particular industries which have significant potential around say renewable

energies or advanced manufacturing, but we need particular plans and particular

collaborations to make sure that those investments can take off and that the R&D can take

off.



GRAHAM: OK listening to this conversation is Tony Pasin the Federal Liberal Member for

Barker. Welcome to you



TONY PASIN: Good afternoon Narelle.



GRAHAM: So Tony, what is the Liberal’s plan? I mean these are pretty rough figures: 42.5

job seekers for one job vacancy in regional South Australia. What's the jobs plan?



PASIN: Well Narelle excuse me if I’m a little sceptical about this press release effectively

issued by the Labor party. I'm actually in regional Australia living this day to day and I've

got to tell you I've spent much of this week on the phone to employers who are telling me

that they have jobs to fill that they can't fill. Now I'm happy going to detail about who they

are but indeed on your own ABC today we had Teys in Naracoorte saying that there is a

crisis. And that crisis is they’ve got fulltime, well paid work and employment positions that

they can't fill.



The challenge here of course is what you’re hearing from Senator Smith is that effectively

[inaudible] ensures that JobSeeker, the unemployment benefit, maintains itself at a very

high rate. It's currently $1100 a fortnight and it's obviously having an impact in terms of

filling those employment positions.



What I'm focused on, what our government is focused on in the announcement that we

made this week around employment facilitators, is actually in this very difficult employment

position given COVID, getting people into employment. And I'm really finding it difficult to

reconcile on the one hand press releases coming out of Canberra saying how drastic

things are in regional Australia and on the other hand listening to employers on your own

radio station in ABC South East this morning saying look we can't fill these positions that

are available. Now I'm focused on making sure Australians get into those jobs because

they're not just fruit picking jobs on a seasonal basis we're talking about long-term well-paid employment with future prospects.



GRAHAM: Alright and we're talking in this case, with Teys, was talking about meat

processing jobs.



PASIN: Well that's right. I was just on the phone to the managing director of Big River Pork

in Murray Bridge who's in exactly the same situation. Now it's not limited to meat

processing there are other jobs in food processing there is actually a real issue here.

Employers are coming to us and saying people aren't applying for these jobs.



GRAHAM: So by that rationale Tony Pasin, are you saying that if we reduce the

JobSeeker amount that will encourage people to take up these jobs?



PASIN: What I don't want to see, Narelle, is a situation where people are incentivised

away from seeking full-time employment or indeed employment otherwise because what I

know and what I think your listeners know is the best form of welfare is work and if there

are jobs going unfilled and I’ve  spent a long time in the Riverland and I can tell you a lot of

people that are known to me and you,  employers on [inaudible] in other places are literally

screaming at me right now worried about a forthcoming harvests. In particular the limited

capacity to employ international either backpackers or Pacific Islanders given the visa

restrictions around international travel. There are literally jobs on the trees ready for the

plucking in regional South Australia and it's not just about seasonal work.



GRAHAM: Tony Pasin there who's the Federal Liberal Member for Barker. Also on the line

with me is Senator Marielle Smith the Labor Senator for South Australia. So in a nutshell I

guess Marielle Smith I'll get your response to what Tony Pasin is saying there, which is we

reduce the JobSeeker payment, we've got to encourage people to do the jobs. We actually

do have jobs in regional areas that we can't fill.



SMITH: Yeah absolutely Narelle I'm more than happy to respond. First I’ll just say that the

figures that Tony has criticised there actually come from his Government. So these aren't

figures that I've made up, they come from the Federal Liberal Government.



Also on the rate of JobSeeker, I'm not advocating a particular rate that JobSeeker needs to

be at. What I'm saying is we can't snapback to the rate it was before because we knew that

came with its own challenges and that's simply not sufficient to support regional

communities given the amount of reinvestment that the rate of JobSeeker has into local

communities and local businesses.



On the issues that Tony refers to absolutely I completely acknowledge that there are some

industries particularly in our Ag sector which have struggled with workforce challenges not

just during this pandemic but those challenges have been in place for many, many years

and they need to be addressed through a jobs plan from the Government. Now the

pandemic has exacerbated some of these issues because of its impact on certainly

attracting overseas workers who fill some of these jobs. It's also had a broader impact on

the sector in other ways but many of those challenges have been pre-existing and just

simply not addressed by the Government in the past and we need to see those

addressed.



Generally speaking though whilst there are some businesses who have these jobs

available these figures show us that that is not the global trend in regional South Australia

and if you talk to your listeners in regional South Australia who are looking for jobs I'm sure

that's what they will say. Most job seekers don't choose to not work, most job seekers take

the pride and dignity which comes from paid work and want to experience that. They want

to be out in the workforce, they want to be staying in their regional communities and

making a contribution but there are 42 of them for every job available. Those jobs simply

are not there in sufficient numbers to enable them to do that.



GRAHAM: That is senator Marielle Smith the Labor Senator for South Australia. So Tony

Pasin we've gone back to needing a jobs plan and what Senator Marielle Smith is saying

there is correct, in that the meat sector in particular has struggled for workers for a very

long time so we need a plan.



PASIN: Well Narelle we announced a plan as early as this week. 25 local employment

facilitators that will develop localised employment plans working with local task forces that

will include heads of industry. But I just want to, as someone who is focused on getting

people into work, can I put the offer out there that I made on national television yesterday.

If anyone listening to this is generally interested in employment and is looking for a job, I've

got access to employers who are genuinely interested in offering employment to people

who want to take it up get in touch with my office either in Mount gambier or Murray bridge

and I will help facilitate those connections. Because we are now in a position in many of

those industries, Narelle, that unless we get these positions filled the other jobs are at risk.

So the discussions I'm having with employees right now is, Tony unless we get these

positions filled the other 100 or 200 employees in our workforce are at risk because unless

we've got a critical mass we can't operate our plant.



GRAHAM: Tony, Tony Pasin while that is admirable what you saying there and putting out

that call that's awesome, that's also - don’t we have job networks that are supposed to be



finding jobs for people and filling these positions and helping people who are out of work

find a job rather than you having to do it? We're paying people to do that. We're paying

them really good money.



PASIN: Sure Narelle, But I'm not here to talk about the efficacy or otherwise of the job

networks.



GRAHAM: Because it’s not working?



PASIN: I’m not saying it’s not working but what I'm saying is I'm not going to stand

between Australians, particularly South Australians all the more so a regional South

Australian who wants a job and on the other hand an employer wants to give them one. If I

can step in and assist, I'll do it.



Now I gotta tell you I put that call out on national television yesterday and do you know

how many people rang my office Narelle? No one. I’ll tell you who did ring my office,

employers. Who were saying Tony put us on the list because we're desperate.



So if people are genuinely interested in working in this environment and like my parents

prepared to move for job, take an opportunity for jobs. That is that playing Europe post

World War or then contact my office I will do my best to put you in touch with the

Commonwealth funded employment facilitator and that person will put you in touch with an

employer is looking to employ people in regional Australia.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: TARA FATEHI 0418 616 964





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













