Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg







THE HON KEITH PITT MP

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia  Member for Hinkler

ROWAN RAMSEY MP  Member for Grey, South Australia

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE  27 October 2020

MINISTER TO MEET WITH KIMBA COMMUNITY

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, the Hon Keith Pitt MP, will visit Kimba  next week to meet with the local community and other stakeholders in regards to the  proposed National Radioactive Waste Management Facility.

“I’m looking forward to seeing the Napandee land myself and discussing work to date on  siting the facility, and meeting with local community members,” Minister Pitt said.

“The proposed National Radioactive Waste Management Facility has broad, but not,  unanimous community support, so I will be talking to people both for and against the  facility.

“In particular, I’m keen to discuss the flow on benefits to the community during  construction, as well as the 45 jobs that will be created once it’s operational later this  decade.

“The facility will also generate around $8.4 million in annual flow on benefits to the local  economy, according to Cadence Economics.

“When I took on the portfolio in February I wanted to get to Kimba as soon as possible, but  unfortunately travel restrictions imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic halted that.

Member for Grey Rowan Ramsey will be hosting the Minister and showing him around town  during his time in Kimba.

“This facility is broadly supported by the local community and will give us an alternative  industry to agriculture which is really important when times are tough,” Mr Ramsey said.

“It’s also an important facility for all of Australia, with on average, two in three Australians  needing nuclear medicine at some point during their lifetime.

“I’m looking forward to talking with the Minister and community about this and showing  him around.”

To find out more about the facility, visit: radioactivewaste.gov.au

Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg



ENDS

Media contact: Marnie Hobson 0407 090 230





















