

THE HON JOEL FITZGIBBON MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES  MEMBER FOR HUNTER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SUNRISE   MONDAY, 2 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Government’s Response to Coronavirus; Foreign Intelligence.

SAMANTHA ARMYTAGE, HOST: For more on the coronavirus emergency we're joined  by Nationals MP, Barnaby Joyce and Shadow Resources Minister, Joel Fitzgibbon -  morning to you both, Gents. Barnaby, serious development overnight. The first death in  Australia from coronavirus, this man from Perth, it's very sad. People are starting to panic  and buying in the supermarket. How worried should we be?

BARNABY JOYCE, MEMBER FOR NEW ENGLAND: I think we should be cautious. I  think we should have a plan. Obviously, the death of James Kwan - a person who was  senior in the tourism industry - it's very sad and we saw him walk off the plane. So, we  also know about other people who have the virus who have been in contact with people.  And I think it's incumbent upon everywhere, even this parliament, to have a risk plan.  When you think about this, in this parliament, people fly down in a plane - so they have  every reason to catch it - they hang around here for two weeks together. They sit next to  each other and they shout and then they get back in the plane and fly back to every corner  of our country. I think it's incumbent upon us as much as anybody else to have our risk  plan in place. And we see what happened in Korea where they said the reason that the  disease spread so much through that church was they were all sitting next to each other  and shouting. Well, it sounds like Question Time to me. Everybody has to do their plan to  minimise the risk as much as possible, to keep doing their job as much as they can, and to  hope and do everything we can to work towards a vaccine, which is obviously the issue  because the disease is going to spread. It's a pandemic. It's going to become endemic in  Australia. That's what some of the senior medical offices are saying; we have to have our  plan in place.

DAVID KOCH, HOST: And Joel, should we extend the travel bans? There's one in place  for China, now Iran, should we extend it to other countries, sort of Italy or South Korea?

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: Well, Kochie, sadly the virus is here and  tragically we've lost one life. So, we see now up close how serious the threat is. And of  course, this is a bit of a trade-off between the economy and public health. But it's not so  clear as all that because if you get widespread public health problems in our economy,  then the economy will be affected domestically in any case. I think all of us as politicians  and indeed members of the community just have to have faith in those who are at the

coalface - the Prime Minister, the Health Minister - who are obviously receiving daily  briefings from the experts, and we have to have faith that they get that balance right, that  they don't precipitous things that are unnecessary and might in themselves and of  themselves cause panic in the community. But of course, to do the things necessary to  keep us safe here in our own countries. So, I have faith that the Prime Minister is doing the  right thing. We, of course, expect to get the regular briefing so we can sort of run the ruler  across that and assure ourselves that is the case. And you know, from there, Kochie, we  all work together I hope in a calm and methodical way.

ARMYTAGE: We hope so. Ok, moving on Peter Dutton has can confirmed - sorry  Barnaby we want to get through this one as well - Peter Dutton has confirmed spies from  China, Iran and Russia are among a record number of foreign agents working in Australia.  It comes up after the head of ASIO warned there are more spies on our shores then at the  height of the Cold War. Barnaby, how much of a problem is this?

JOYCE: Well, I think that, obviously, anybody who wants to interfere in our sovereignty is a  problem. And, you know, they're not here because they want to help out. They're here  because they want to cause problems. And we've heard about people basically staying,  have been planted silent, and then a couple years’ time popping up. They're getting around  making sure that they find out who the people who are working against the interests in this  case that we've heard, it's obviously China, and harassing them. This is also an  interference in our capacity in our democracy. It's the same deal as before. It's a  methodical process of assessment, methodical process of tracking these people down.  And I want to commend what Peter Dutton is doing, I think he's a very good minister and  across this.

KOCH: Okay, Joel, ASIO is our spy group; do we have spies overseas? Are we doing the  same to other countries? Isn't that - doesn't everyone do it?

FITZGIBBON: The key thing, Kochie, is that we give our security agencies and law  enforcement agencies the powers they need to protect our national interest, and to keep  us safe. And of course, there's always this trade off or balance between being able to do  that and, of course, not creeping towards a police state. Now, I'm pretty hawkish on these  matters. I do believe we need to ensure that they do have those powers, but we've also got  a parliamentary process here and the Joint Intelligence and a Security Committee, which  does a great job and I'm always comfortable to have them running the ruler across these  issues, and comfortable and have confidence in the recommendations they make to the  parliament.

KOCH: Okay.

ARMYTAGE: Thank you, gentlemen. That was very civilized today. Thank you.

KOCH: Yes, Gee after last week.

FITZGIBBON: We will try and do it better next week.

ARMYTAGE: I was away sick, Gents but even I saw it spilling out into the corridors of  Canberra.

FITZGIBBON: You're a calming influence, Sam.



JOYCE: … [inaudible] we help your ratings.

ARMYTAGE: Thank you Barnaby, where would we be without you? Talk to you soon.  Thank you, gentleman.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0439 986 641









