





The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology  Federal Member for McPherson

MEDIA RELEASE

GOVERNMENT WORKING WITH INDUSTRY ON HAND SANITISER  PRODUCTION

23 March 2020

The Federal Government is working closely with Australian industry to further ramp  up local manufacturing of hand sanitiser amid the COVID-19 outbreak.

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said manufacturers  had already significantly increased their output and more was being done to grow  that even further.

“I want to stress to Australians that we have the capacity and the raw ingredients  here to continue to meet the increased demand,” Minister Andrews said.

“Industry, with the help of government, is stepping up to meet the challenges being  thrown at us by this virus.

“Our Government will continue to do what it takes to ensure supply and increase  domestic production of medical protection equipment - from sanitiser to masks to  ventilators.

“We also need the community to play their part by not stockpiling. There is no need  for people to have huge volumes of hand sanitiser at home.”

Ego Pharmaceuticals makes Aqium sanitiser at its factory in Melbourne. Managing  Director Alan Oppenheim said they’ve drastically increased how much they make.

“In February we made five times what we forecast and our factory is now running 24  hours a day, five days a week,” Mr Oppenheim said.

“We’re currently hiring to increase that to six days a week and we’ve stopped our  little bit of exporting to prioritise Australian needs.”

Minister Andrews said the Government had also worked with manufacturers to  ensure supply of ethanol - one of the key ingredients in hand sanitiser.



“Our large ethanol producers have indicated they have capacity to make more  pharmaceutical grade ethanol as needed.

“We have been helping to connect these producers with our hand sanitiser  manufacturers, and manufacturers are already placing new and increased orders.”

Manildra Group is Australia’s leading producer of ethanol and its Managing Director  John Honan said the company was rising to the challenge.

“As a family-owned Australian business we continue to locally produce ethanol, and  we’re committed to operating our manufacturing facilities around the clock to meet  demand,” Mr Honan said.

Minister Andrews will host a roundtable via teleconference this week to further  identify opportunities to increase supply and make sure we’re optimising our  domestic production capacity of hand sanitiser.



Media Contact: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD



