JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  MONDAY, 30 NOVEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: JobKeeper; National Accounts; Unemployment and underemployment; China  Tariff Dispute.

JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: I see overnight that the Treasurer has released a new  set of numbers about JobKeeper. These JobKeeper numbers are welcome but they're entirely  unsurprising given the easing of restrictions and the tighter eligibility criteria for the payment. There  are still 1.5 million Australian workers and their employers relying on JobKeeper payments and for all  of those workers the Morrison Government’s cuts to the payment will hurt. It's good to see the  numbers down but it’s not surprising given in the last few months we have seen some substantial  easing of restrictions around Australia and there's also tighter eligibility criteria for the payment. For  the 1.5 million Australians who are still on the JobKeeper payment the Morrison Government's cuts  will sting at the worst possible time.

Now, later this week, we'll also be getting the National Accounts figures for the September quarter.  Most economists expect there to be a substantial rebound in the quarterly GDP figures. Again, that's  a good thing, but not especially surprising given the easing of those restrictions around Australia at  the time and from such an extraordinarily low base, of course, we would expect there will be a  substantial correction. So that rebound in quarterly GDP, which we'll see in a couple of days time,  will be welcome, but it will be unsurprising.  What looks like a recovery on paper will still feel like a recession for many Australians. The Morrison  Government and Josh Frydenberg shouldn't be congratulating themselves while unemployment  queues are still lengthening, and people are still hurting and we still have a substantial problem with  underemployment. What really matters in the economy is not one quarterly GDP figure or another  but how actual Australians are really faring in real communities around Australia.

We would welcome a substantial improvement in the figures that most economists expect to see on  Wednesday but it won't be enough to undo the lasting damage done to the economy or to recover all  of the lost ground from this recession. We want to see the economy recover strongly. We want to  see people back into work, that's a real measure of how the economy is faring. It's not just a  quarterly GDP figure but how real Australians in real communities are actually faring, whether they  can provide for their loved ones. Again, Scott Morrison and Josh Frydenberg shouldn't be falling all  over themselves to congratulate themselves while people are still hurting, while unemployment is  getting worse and we expect to have longer term challenges with underemployment as well.

JOURNALIST: Doesn't this whole episode with JobKeeper show the Government's policies were  correct, it had the right level of stimulus, now the economy is on the rebound and businesses are  coming off that payment intact?



CHALMERS: The Government will fall all over themselves trying to claim credit for a recovery in the  economy but every serious economist knows when we've had a recession as deep and as damaging  as Australia has, that of course, the economy will recover. Josh Frydenberg will pretend that it is his  genius that has seen that happen but most economists know that from such an extraordinarily low  base, of course there's going to be a substantial recovery in quarterly GDP. I don't think any  objective observer of the way that the Government has implemented this stimulus would say that  they got everything right. They haven't got everything wrong, but they haven't got everything right  either. We called for wage subsidies and we were pleased when the Government had a change of  heart and brought them in but that doesn't mean that they've been perfectly implemented. Too many  people were excluded. Too many people in the unemployment queues were deliberately excluded  from JobKeeper by the Government. What that has meant is that unemployment queues were longer  than they need to be and we'll have a problem with unemployment and underemployment longer  than we would like to.

JOURNALIST: The JobKeeper numbers are being painted as I guess, a success [INAUDBLE] is it a  win to have fewer people on Jobkeeper?

CHALMERS: Clearly, we want as many Australians as possible in work. That requires government  help but it also requires new jobs to be created and they need to be decent, well-paid, secure jobs  and not just insecure, casual jobs like we've seen even before COVID-19. So ideally, fewer  Australians would need government support. But I don't think what we're seeing today is some kind  of policy triumph from the Government when you consider when the easing of the restrictions  happened around Australia and when the Government tightens the eligibility for the payment itself,  inevitably we're going to have fewer people on the payment. What really matters is not just one set  of numbers or another, especially not quarterly GDP numbers, what really matters is how Australians  are actually faring and whether they can provide for their loved ones. I think most people are  expecting that what looks like a recovery on paper will still feel a recession for too many Australians.

JOURNALIST: China has whacked tariffs on Australia, we're now looking at a WTO case. This could  take years to get a decision in our favour. Has the Government mismanaged that relationship?

CHALMERS: Clearly, the relationship is not in good condition. The Government needs to take some  responsibility for that. Not all of the responsibility for that, but some responsibility for the fact that the  mismanagement of this relationship has meant that there's a lot of anxiety amongst our exporters  and our employers who rely on these markets. What troubles us is that these issues have been  around for some time now, they've been getting worse, and the Government doesn't seem to have a  genuine plan to deal with it. There are a lot of businesses around Australia, a lot of exporters, a lot of  employers who are relying on this market, looking to the Government to come forward with a  comprehensive plan to get us out of this mess and we can't see that the Government has one.

JOURNALIST: What would Labor do differently?

CHALMERS: We don't have the same kind of access to all of the expert departmental and  diplomatic advice. But clearly, some of the language around the relationship has not been helpful  over recent years. More needs to be done via the usual diplomatic channels to repair this  relationship because the relationship as it stands now, is costly to a lot of exporters and a lot of  employers and that means that ship needs to be righted.

JOURNALIST: Would you support taking this to WTO? Is that the right avenue to appeal?

CHALMERS: Clearly we need to be exploring those kinds of avenues. Let’s see what the  Government proposes whether it's more than just a response to a question on the Insiders program  and whether there's something genuine substantial behind that. I would expect that our  spokespeople Madeleine King, and others will get some visibility of what the Government plans to do  here and we'll come up with a considered view once we know what that is.

JOURNALIST: The Government's leading Labor 51-49 in the polls, the Government has now been  ahead for eight months. Is that disappointing?

CHALMERS: Look at a time where we've got a million unemployed, at a time when we expect more  people join the unemployment queues between now and Christmas, I don't think that Newspoll  numbers are the most important numbers that we should be focused on. We should be focused on  unemployment and underemployment and all of the ways that we need to make sure that we can  kick-start this recovery and get people back to work. Polls are interesting but they are not the most  important thing so I won't be focusing on them.

JOURNALIST: Is Labor going to back the Government's foreign relations bill in the parliament this  week around the Belt and Road Initiative, I understand Labor has some reservations around the  language?

CHALMERS: We've expressed those views in the past and we'll have more discussions and we'll  make our position known. Thanks very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: NATHAN JOHNSTON 0488 176 452

