

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES  MEMBER FOR HUNTER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SUNRISE  MONDAY, 30 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; Economic Stimulus.

DAVID KOCH, HOST: Well Scott Morrison has outlined tough new restrictions to further  stem the spread of Coronavirus. They include a ban on indoor gatherings of more than two  people. Over seventies should stay home and self-isolate and everyone else has been  urged to stay home except for essential shopping, medical services, exercising or going to  school or work. Nationals MP, Barnaby Joyce, and Shadow Minister of Agriculture, Joel  Fitzgibbon joins me now - good morning, Gents. Barnaby, you think Australians are finally  realising just how serious this has become?

BARNABY JOYCE, MEMBER FOR NEW ENGLAND: Yeah, I think they are. I think a lot  of Australians have given up talking to people for lent, which is very, very good of them.  They shall go straight to heaven for that one. But we've kept - people who have died is 16  and that's an absolute tragedy, of course for those who have died, but we're not mimicking  what's happening in Europe yet. There is a sense that we're flattening the curve out. That  is a great credit first and foremost to the medical staff, to the Australian people who are  actually most of all playing the game, to people like politicians and your good selves who  are getting the message out. But we can't take that for granted because the disease that  would have left China - viruses mutate, it's probably not the same virus that's going around  at the moment. Just like the flu, you have a different flu every six months for the different  hemispheres. And we've just got to keep our wits about ourselves and make sure that we  don't drop the ball on this one. Take some confidence that we're what we're doing is right.  But be very aware that the real flu season which virus will get around and cool, dry weather  that is still before us. It's still coming. We're about a month away from it. So, we're going to  get things right now.

NATALIE BARR, HOST: Joel, the PM last night really hinting that the states, particularly  New South Wales and Victoria, could be set for total lockdowns, but leaving it up to them.  Do you think that's the right idea?

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: Look, Nat, I think the main thing is that we  get it right. And going back to your first question, I'm very pleased that people are now  taking it more seriously particularly in the regions where there was a gap between the  capital cities and our people in country Australia. So, that's on the improve, although I was

just listening to the beach report in Newcastle on local ABC in Newcastle and I understand  there's not much social distances going on around the beaches in Newcastle this morning.  So, we need to do a lot better. Look, it doesn't matter who makes the decision in the end. I  think inevitably, we're heading for tighter controls, bigger lockdowns and that's probably a  good thing, quite frankly.

KOCH: Yeah, although I love so many people say we've got to shut the entire country  down and then in the next breath go, I feel so sorry for those people in the line outside  Centrelink. Lockdown means loss of jobs and absolutely devastating so many people. It is  a balance, Barnaby Joyce, who'd want to be a leader these days. But we understand  another economic package, stimulus packages, coming in a couple of days with a  guaranteed wage subsidy of $1,500 dollars a fortnight for workers who have been axed.

JOYCE: Yeah, we're seeing this around the world, I was just listening to a report from  Denmark. We've got to make sure that we keep the load bearing walls of our economic  house intact. And so other things might happen, you might lose a window, you might lose a  door, you can replace it, but the load bearing walls of our economy must be kept intact.  Otherwise, with all this new debt we're taking on, our capacity after this is over to repay it  and to get ourselves up and running again will be severely compromised. And one of the  issues of keeping those load bearing walls going is the vital people in jobs. We've got to  make sure that they don't disappear into the ether, that they're still there. So, after this  passes, we're back on our feet and running because we're going to have to run a lot harder  because we're going have a hell of a lot more debt to repay.

BARR: Yeah, Joel, a lot of people saying to me, there's a lot of there's a lot of money  flowing into business. But businesses are saying one of the main ways to get out of this is  to take on more debt, and they're not sure they're going to survive it to be able to take on  more debt.

FITZGIBBON: Nat, whether it's business or people more generally, money isn't getting  where it needs to go. Either it's too slow or people aren't qualifying. That's why I suspect  Scott Morrison regrets now not going down the wage subsidy path, which would have  delivered money immediately for employees. Allowed employers to keep people on, giving  employees more certainty. Rather, he's gone down this Centrelink path where people are  finding now they just aren't qualified, whether it be the young person who's moved away to  study at university and now finds they can't get Jobseeker's allowance because they  they're not yet independent of their parents, or whether it's the partner couple where one  has lost their job and the other partner is earning more than $48,000 and doesn't qualify.  Now, the Prime Minister says he's going to fix that, and I hope he does, but I think we're  eight weeks on now since we last started talking about this, and people are still living with  uncertainty. And still without any financial support.

KOCH: It is a fair point. Yes, Barnaby?

JOYCE: They're devising the plans as we go along; this is new for everybody. And the  Prime Minister has said, and the Treasurer has said, that they're going to go down the path  of making sure that we also help the employer keep the employee in a, you know, in a job  and to keep them on board. Now, we're doing no more than what they're doing in Europe. I  was just listening to the reports then. The path they're going down is a path we are  following in so many of this. Not only just in observation of the disease and how to deal  with it, but also in trying to work out how to help the people who are dealing with it.





KOCH: Yeah, absolutely. All right, Gents. Thank you for that. Appreciate your time.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641









