

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS WITH KIERAN GILBERT  SUNDAY, 22 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; coronavirus stimulus packages; confusion around clear  messaging during the coronavirus issue.

KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: I have got Anthony Albanese, the Labor Leader, here in the  studio. Before we get on the Government’s second economic package, let me ask you  about the move by Victoria and NSW to a shutdown of non-essential business. Is this the  right decision, do you think?

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Well, I am  sure that they are making any decision based upon medical advice. And one of the things  that we know, I think, and I have said this throughout this medical emergency, which has  obviously had economic consequences, is that if we know we are going to do something  next week, we should be doing it today. The sooner we act, all of the evidence is, the  sooner we act, whether it is a health impact, restricting the number of people who contract  this virus, early action will do that, or in terms of the economy, the economic impact will be  mitigated the more and the sooner we act as well.

GILBERT: And that would make sense to go to this latest move by New South Wales and  Victoria that you would support that sort of initiative because that is getting in early. The  numbers are still concerning though in terms of their trajectory. Would you like to see non-essential business and schools shut down now?

ALBANESE: Well look, I'm not privy to the advice that they are. So, I'm sure that they will  make the right decision. But what we do know is that the numbers are really concerning.  They're now more than 1,000, the numbers of daily infections that continue to rise on a  trajectory which is of real concern. And we know from overseas and those nations that  moved earlier, that shut down social contact across the board that tested more people, we  actually know some of the things that work by looking at who's done what, when, and  compare it with nations that weren't as quick to move like Italy, that last night saw almost  400 people die in one day.

GILBERT: You're going to be holding a meeting with the Prime Minister this afternoon  ahead of Parliament. It looks like you're only going to be sitting for one day, not the four  days that we normally would see Parliament sit. Do you see that as a sign that you're going  to be consulted more by the Prime Minister right now?



ALBANESE: Well, I think it's unfortunate that there hasn't been more genuine  consultation, for example, about the economic package that was announced today. We're  still waiting for legislation. And of course, the Government hasn't consulted us on those  measures. We've been privy and able to get health advice from the authorities. But with  regard to Government actions, it's not consultation to have the meeting after it's already  been announced. So, what this afternoon will primarily be about is consultation about the  functioning of the Parliament and that is because it has to happen. Be very clear, for some  of these measures, you need 76 votes. So, you'll need both the Government and the  Opposition, voting together.

GILBERT: Is your inclination to support the package, even though you are not happy with  the level of consultation, will you back it?

ALBANESE: We have made it very clear that what we're about here is outcomes. People  want to see outcomes, not arguments. And we'll be working through those issues. We'll be  supportive at the end of the day when it comes to any final votes. We won't be standing in  the way of economic stimulus because the country needs it.

GILBERT: That includes the superannuation access? Because that goes against the grain  of what Labor has fought a long time for?

ALBANESE: Well, it is not clear whether that needs to be legislated. One of the things that  we'd say though, is that this is not the best time for individuals to be withdrawing money  from superannuation, given the impact that the fall in the share market has had. So, it's not  good for individuals. It's also not good, it can be said, for the superannuation industry and  the role that it plays, the trillions of dollars of funds that it holds that are our national assets.

GILBERT: Treasury says it's only 1 per cent of the entire nest eggs which the  superannuation industry controls, 1 per cent. He says it's the people's money, they should  have it now when they need it.

ALBANESE: Well, they don't support superannuation. They never supported compulsory  superannuation when it came in. They've tried to undermine it each and every opportunity.  But the fact is that superannuation is one of the things that is a ballast for our economy. It  provides us with stability. And what I wouldn't want to see is either people essentially  missing out on a large part of their retirement incomes or for the super industry as well.  Now is not a time for the superannuation industry to be selling assets because they'd be  fire sales. Because the sort of assets that the superannuation industry own, for example,  they're the major shareholder at Sydney Airport, Brisbane, Perth, the major airports. Now is  not the time to be selling those assets.

GILBERT: The coronavirus supplement and the other payment to households of $750.  The supplement of $550 a fortnight. Do you welcome those measures? It is basically a  doubling of Newstart.

ALBANESE: We think all of that is good. Newstart should have been increased before  now, Kiran. It's very clear that the reason why the Government had to do something for  existing recipients is $40 a day simply isn't enough to survive on. That's been a fact that  has been there for some time and we've been calling for it. Our concern is that the  Government says that it's not worried about politics, but it does seem to have one eye on  when stimulus measures are made. So, for example, the first $750. Why is that not in



people's pockets right now contributing to the economy? They've held it off until the end of  next week because they want it to feed into the April to June quarter. And then the next  payment they want it to feed into the following quarter.

GILBERT: They did argue that it's because they needed to sit in Parliament and legislate  it.

ALBANESE: They could have sat in Parliament last week, Kieran, and it would have been  easier than, indeed I wrote to the Prime Minister, as you know, two weeks ago, saying that  Parliament should be recalled, that we needed economic stimulus sooner rather than later.

GILBERT: We've only got about a minute left. I do want to get your thoughts before you go  on whether you will seek again, face to face with the Prime Minister when you meet him  today, a seat at the table of the national cabinet, which includes state leaders. Do you want  that? Will you be pushing for that today?

ALBANESE: That's a decision for him. He's chosen to not do that. I would have thought  that was a common-sense thing to do. And one of the concerns I think that people have is  when they hear that there's a national cabinet, they don't think it's what it really is, which is  just COAG given a different name. It's a good thing that that's happening, Kieran. So,  whether I'm there or not, it is not about individuals. But if the Prime Minister genuinely  wants to involve the Opposition, he can't continue to make announcements and then talk to  us about it after the fact.

GILBERT: In a few words, a message to the Australian people right now? Because it's a  pretty scary time.

ALBANESE: Look, it is. But they need to stay calm, listen to the authoritative sources and  take a listen to that advice. Make sure that they engage in social separation, which is really  physical separation. And we'll come through this and we'll come through this as a nation.

GILBERT: Mr Albanese, as always, it is a pleasure. Thank you.

ALBANESE: Thanks, Kieran.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053





