

THE HON MELISSA PRICE MP Minister for Defence Industry Member for Durack

THE HON MICHELLE LANDRY MP Assistant Minister for Children and Families Assistant Minister for Northern Australia Member for Capricornia

PHILLIP THOMPSON OAM MP Member for Herbert

SENATOR SUSAN MCDONALD  Senator for Queensland

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

QUEENSLAND BUSINESSES TO GO ONLINE TO GET DEFENCE READY

Central and North Queensland businesses competing for work will be able to put their best foot forward using Defence’s new online tutorial series Getting Defence Ready.

Defence has developed the online tutorial series to help local businesses pursue contracts under the Australia-Singapore Military Training Initiative (ASMTI).

The series has been developed in response to social distancing requirements and travel restrictions in place because of COVID-19.

Minister for Defence Industry Melissa Price said this initiative would make it easier for small business and industry to work with Defence and access opportunities in the defence sector.

“While Defence’s primary goal is to obtain value for money to deliver defence capabilities, it remains committed to maximising the role of Australian businesses,” Minister Price said.

“With numerous opportunities available under the ASMTI, I want to ensure businesses have the tools they need to compete for work and participate in our defence industry.

“I am excited to see Defence innovating in the way it engages with businesses in these challenging times.”

Minister Price said local businesses play a key role in the development, maintenance and service of Defence training areas.

“The ASMTI is already delivering significant economic benefits for Queensland, with 23 businesses based in the Rockhampton and Livingstone Shire regions sharing close to $79 million of work,” Minister Price said.

Date received: 19 October 2020

“Recently, I announced two contracts worth more than $10 million which were awarded for works and services on site.

“This online tutorial series is in line with the Government’s intent to maximise local industry participation as part of the Government’s Local Industry Capability Plan initiative.”

Member for Capricornia Michelle Landry welcomed the creation of the series.

“Businesses in Central Queensland are continually looking for opportunities to engage with Defence and take advantage of the opportunities available in relation to the ASMTI and the Shoalwater Bay Training Area Expansion,” Ms Landry said.

“With the creation of Getting Defence Ready online tutorial series, businesses will have more clarity on how they can work with Defence to deliver projects in the area.

“Major construction works recently started on the expansion of Shoalwater Bay Training Area, which is bringing optimism and opportunities for the local and national economy during a period of economic uncertainty brought on by COVID-19.”

Member for Herbert Phillip Thompson said providing local contractors with opportunities on Defence projects was a priority.

“We have extremely capable small and medium businesses in Townsville which stand ready and willing to make the most of the new Greenvale training area,” Mr Thompson said.

“As a garrison city our local contractors are familiar with Defence projects and with a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity like the ASMTI, I know the online tutorial series will give them an extra edge.”

Townsville-based Senator Susan McDonald said she knew of many North Queensland businesses that had the capability and expertise to win Defence contracts.

“There are so many benefits to accessing services that are not only based in Australia but in the regions closest to military training areas,” Senator McDonald said.

“Late last year, Defence convened workshops throughout the North to advise and encourage local businesses to tender for contracts, and these were very well attended.

“I believe this new online tutorial will be extremely popular and I will be encouraging businesses to make full use of it.”

The tutorials provide tips on how to lodge an expression of interest, prepare a high quality tender and meet contractual obligations when working with Defence.

The ASMTI will deliver advanced military training areas through the expansion of Shoalwater Bay Training Area in Central Queensland and the establishment of a new training area near Greenvale in North Queensland.

To view the Online Tutorial Series and learn more about Getting Defence Ready, visit defence.gov.au/Initiatives/ASMTI/

Media contacts Ben Spencer (Minister Price’s office): +61 412 754 310 Defence Media: (02) 6127 1999, media@defence.gov.au

