Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania







Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck  Minister for Aged Care and Senior Australians  Minister for Youth and Sport



21 August 2020



Interim report shines a light on issues facing Australian youth



The issues facing young Australians have been highlighted in a Youth Taskforce  Interim Report released today.

Aimed at informing the Morrison Government of issues and matters of concern  for young people, the report will also underline tangible measures to support those  in most need, particularly during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Minister for Youth and Sport, Richard Colbeck, said the report provides a  snapshot, informed by extensive consultation, relevant data, surveys and research.

“The major findings in the interim report confirm the key issues for young  Australians identified in other youth surveys, including mental health and  employment concerns,” Minister Colbeck said.

While the consultations heard of varying issues, the Taskforce stated there were  also many ideas for improving services and making a genuine difference in the  lives of disadvantaged young people.

“I thank every person who shared their experiences and positive ideas.”

The Youth Taskforce was established in July last year in a tangible step by the  Australian Government to ensure young people continued to have a voice.

This was particularly important following the impact of last summer’s bushfire  season and the spread of COVID-19, Minister Colbeck said.

“Both events have impacted young people particularly hard and exacerbated  many problems, especially for the disadvantaged and marginalised.

Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania



“Rather than preparing a final report due to COVID-19, the Taskforce is now  concentrating on developing a National Youth Policy Framework which will  consider the impact of these emergencies as well as underlying issues.”

The Australian Government is committed to implementing measures to support  young people.

It has already delivered more than $126 million in initiatives including extending  Jobkeeper and expanding our 50 per cent wage subsidy for apprentices and  trainees.

Additionally, the $2 billion JobTrainer fund will provide up to 340,700 vocational  education and training places for school leavers and job seekers to gain the skills  they need to get a job.

Mental health services continue to be a key focus with more than $174 million  for service providers and $1 million in funding for youth advocacy organisations  to help young people reach their potential by establishing a sustainable and  vibrant youth advocacy network.

The National Youth Policy Framework will be developed by the end of 2020.

Minister Colbeck said young people, youth organisations and relevant  government agencies will be consulted on the framework in the coming months.

The Youth Taskforce Interim Report can be found here.

