Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.







The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health



TRANSCRIPT

16 November 2020



ABC NEWS BREAKFAST WITH PAUL KENNEDY

E&OE…

Topics: COVID-19; New Vaccine Manufacturing Facility; Victoria’s Lockdown.

PAUL KENNEDY:  Let’s get more on two of those top stories we’re following, the Adelaide coronavirus cluster and the  vaccine hub to be built in Melbourne.

The Federal Health Minister Greg Hunt joins us now from Parliament House in Canberra. Minister,  thanks for your time this morning.

GREG HUNT:  Good morning.

PAUL KENNEDY:  Good morning. We want to just start with Adelaide and talking about South Australia's contact  tracing.

Are you satisfied that everything is in place to contain this cluster?

GREG HUNT:  Yes, I am. We've had both Jane Halton, former secretary of health and finance, review the  quarantine system around the country, and the Chief Scientist Professor Alan Finkel review the  contact tracing.

I've had a briefing this morning from the National Incident Centre, and last night from the Chief  Medical Officer of Australia, Professor Paul Kelly, and their advice is that the system in South  Australia is strong.

We are standing up the National Incident Centre contact tracing capability to assist South Australia,  we have offered them the ADF, and if more is required, more will be provided.

But these are the sorts of challenges that if we trade or engage with the world, if we bring  Australians home, we will face, in a world where there's over half a million cases a day, and having  these strong testing, tracing and isolation systems are absolutely critical.

And South Australia, on all the evidence, does have exactly that.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





PAUL KENNEDY:  Okay. Going from that, was Western Australia right to reimpose those border restrictions? Was that  the right call?

GREG HUNT:  We don't have any advice from the Chief Medical Officer that there's a base for any state or  territory not to be open to any state and territory at this time.

PAUL KENNEDY:  Does it worry you, though, that this is what we might see? We're calling it COVID-normal, but  states still pretty keen to protect their borders ahead of Christmas?

And I know you would love to see the borders open before Christmas.

GREG HUNT:  Well, what we know is that, in a world where Australians are returning from high concentration  areas of COVID, where we're sending our wheat or our wool or our iron ore, we're receiving critical  medical supplies.

There’ll be an exchange between Australia and the rest of the world, even under the tightest of  conditions. And there's a risk it could be in WA or Queensland, it could be in New South Wales or  South Australia, that at different times, there will be cases.

And to have the strong systems of test, trace, isolate - those are the most significant protections for  Australians. And we've reviewed them right around the country; they're strong.

But now, we're kicking into action with the national resources of the Incident Centre, and if South  Australia requires the Australian Defence Force, then the Prime Minister’s offered to make them  available.

PAUL KENNEDY:  Okay. You're travelling to Victoria today - tell us about this new biotech centre. I'm interested,  firstly, in the time frame. When will it be up and running?

GREG HUNT:  So, it's a five-year process to construct a major new vaccine facility.

It locks Australia's sovereign vaccine manufacturing capability in for the next two decades, and  very significantly, it won't just be the largest vaccine manufacturing plant, we're advised, in the  Southern Hemisphere, it will be the first of what's called a cell-based manufacturing plant.

So, it moves from being an egg-based to a cell-based plant, which gives it more flexibility, greater  capacity and greater speed, and it will support for pandemic flu, seasonal flu, antivenoms and Q  fever.

PAUL KENNEDY:  If this was in place before this pandemic, what would have been the benefit?

Would we a have seen a vaccine sooner? Or is it just the greater benefit being that we can produce  vaccines within Australia?



Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



GREG HUNT:  Well, it's the long-term benefit. We're fortunately well placed already, we have the capacity with  CSL's existing plant in Melbourne, and that's an egg-based facility, and the world is moving to  cellular facilities.

So, we didn't want to lose that capability. And the new plant allows faster and greater capacity, but  CSL will be producing 81 million units of domestic Australian-made vaccine for Australians  through both the University of Queensland agreement, and the agreement to contract manufacture  for AstraZeneca.

So, we're currently well placed, but we want to be even better placed, because who knows what will  come. But we'll have that national vaccine manufacturing capability, as well as the long-term  contracts for flu and for antivenoms.

PAUL KENNEDY:  Greg Hunt, you're travelling with the Prime Minister today, you’ll meet with the Premier of  Victoria.

How do you describe Victoria and the Victorian Government’s efforts now to deal with that second  wave, and have so many days of zero positive tests in a row?

GREG HUNT:  Look, I think the outcome now is significantly better. Obviously, it's a great relief for my state,   for your state.

It’s moving from what was an outbreak that had very real human consequences and tragedy  involved. But the advice from Alan Finkel is that the contact tracing in Victoria is very significantly  improved, and we welcome that, and we'll continue to offer support.

So, as a country, we're getting there. We will have outbreaks, exactly as we've seen today. But with  that strong system in place, we're confident we can continue to manage it.

PAUL KENNEDY:  And in hindsight now, did the Victorian Government get it right by staying in lockdown so long?

GREG HUNT:  Well, we always supported, going in, reluctantly and regretfully, going into the lockdown once the  contact tracing system wasn't able to cope in Victoria.

There were some differences about the speed at the end, particularly once they were well below  their case level that New South Wales was able to manage. And so, we agreed on the way in, we  felt that perhaps we had more confidence in their system than they did on the way out, because the  mental health consequences, as we know, are enormous.

And one of the things that the Prime Minister and I will be doing today in Melbourne is meeting  with Pat McGorry, talking with Beyond Blue, talking about the mental health consequences of the  pandemic, but also preparing Australians for an improved mental health system going forward.

And that's why we were concerned, because whether it’s young people or older people, isolation,  loneliness, economic insecurity, all of these things effect mental health and that’s what motivates  us.



Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



PAUL KENNEDY:  We believe the plane is waiting for you, to take you to your home state, so we'll let you go.  Minister, thanks for your time.

GREG HUNT:  Cheers, Paul.

ENDS

