







The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology

The Hon Steven Marshall MP  Premier of South Australia

MEDIA RELEASE

SA COMPANY TO PRODUCE MASKS IN FIGHT AGAINST COVID-19

31 March 2020

A South Australian packaging manufacturer will begin making millions of surgical  masks and respirators from its Adelaide factory in the fight to stop the spread of the  coronavirus (COVID-19).

The Federal Government and South Australian Government have reached  agreement with Detmold Group to produce 145 million masks - 100 million for the  National Medical Stockpile and 45 million for South Australia.

The company will over the coming months employ up to an extra 160 staff and will  invest over $1 million in local supplies that will support other Australian businesses.

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said Detmold is the  latest in a line of Aussie companies rising up to the challenge of COVID-19.

“This is a fantastic example of how our strong manufacturing base in Australia puts  us in a position to be able to make more of the medical supplies we need during the  outbreak of this virus,” Minister Andrews said.

“We have a sufficient supply of masks at the moment but this work will ensure we  sustain that supply over the months ahead.

“This new production line won’t be up and running overnight, that’s why we’re  attacking this challenge from all angles, including continuing work to secure further  masks out there in the market.

“This agreement also shows the great collaboration on display between the different  levels of government and we will continue to work with the states and territories to  secure the supplies we need.





“It’s important to stress though, this is not just about increasing the supply of our  masks and other supplies. We need all Australians to play their part and follow our  strict social distancing rules to help slow the spread and ease demand.”

South Australian Premier Steven Marshall said today’s announcement is a great  example of state and federal governments working together to fight the spread of  COVID-19.

“This is part of the Government’s strong plan for securing South Australian jobs and  protecting our healthcare workers and the community against the spread of COVID-19,” said Premier Marshall.

“Through this partnership we can be confident we will have an uninterrupted supply  of respirator and surgical masks to provide our doctors and nurses working on the  frontline.”

Detmold Group CEO Alf Ianniello said his company is extremely proud to be  stepping in to help during this unprecedented health crisis.

“Detmold is a South Australian company with a long history of employing locals, so  to be able to assist with both flattening the curve in this time of crisis and helping  keep South Australians in work is immensely rewarding.”

“Work has already commenced on the manufacturing facility which is located in  Brompton, South Australia and production will start by May of this year.

“We expect to have the capacity to manufacture over 20 million masks per month by  June, and the facility will produce both surgical masks and respirator masks.”



Media Contacts:

Minister Andrews: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846

Premier Marshall: Ashton Hurn 0409 199 107

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

