SENA

TOR THE HON LINDA REYNOLDS CSC Minister for Defence Senator for Western Australia

MEDIA RELEASE

DEFENCE SUPPORT TO MANDATORY QUARANTINE MEASURES COMMENCES

The Australian Defence Force (ADF) has deployed teams across the country to work in partnership with state and territory law enforcement agencies to conduct COVID-19 quarantine compliance checks.

The ADF will provide logistics support for the state and territory police as they enforce mandatory quarantine and isolation measures.

In New South Wales, more than 30 ADF personnel have deployed to Sydney Airport to support state police, with at least another 40 supporting the quarantine of six separate hotels.

In Queensland, around a dozen ADF personnel deployed to Brisbane Airport and Cairns Airport to support state police. Another dozen personnel are supporting the quarantine of a hotel in Cairns.

Fifty ADF personnel have been approved to deploy in Western Australia to support quarantine measures for new arrivals. A small number have already supported the movement of baggage from Fremantle to Perth Airport and Rottnest Island Ferry Terminal.

The ADF is working with other state and territory authorities to determine their support requirements and stand ready to provide that support at short notice.

The ADF response is being undertaken through the provisions of the Defence Assistance to the Civil Community (DACC) framework. ADF members have no coercive enforcement powers.

As of today, around 350 ADF personnel are supporting state and territory authorities.

Assistance from the ADF is coordinated through the Emergency Management Australia-led Whole-of-Government response to COVID-19.

Information about Defence assistance to the states and territories, as well as the Whole-of-Government response, is updated on the Defence website when details are finalised: https://news.defence.gov.au/national/defence-response-covid-19

Media Contacts Nicky Hamer (Minister Reynolds’ Office): +61 437 989 927 Kenny Ang (Minister Reynolds’ Office): +61 437 111 470 Defence Media: (02) 6127 1999, media@defence.gov.au

30/03/2020

