

MURRAY WATT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR NORTHERN AUSTRALIA  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DISASTER AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT  LABOR SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW   CANBERRA  TUESDAY, 3 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Prime Minister’s bushfire failures; fake $2 billion bushfire recovery  fund; government secrecy; Senate Estimates.

MURRAY WATT, SHADOW MINISTER FOR DISASTER MANAGEMENT: We've  obviously had our first day of Senate Estimates yesterday and unfortunately, we saw a  repeat of what we've seen from this Government before at Estimates, which is a  determination to shut down questions and to get answers on behalf of the Australian  people. We saw yet again yesterday a ridiculous number of questions being taken on  notice rather than answers being provided. And we saw all sorts of claims that matters had  gone to Cabinet when we were simply asking questions about basic advice that have been  provided to Ministers. So it's very disappointing that there has been this change of  approach under Scott Morrison as Prime Minister in Estimates where it is getting harder  and harder for the Opposition to get answers on behalf of the Australian people.

Despite that, we did get some answers and some new information about the Government's  failure to prepare for the bushfires and now its failure to respond properly in the recovery.  What we found out yesterday is that we got confirmation that the Emergency Management  Department of the federal government briefed the Emergency Management Minister and  the Prime Minister on multiple occasions about the risk of the bushfires happening this  year before they actually occurred. That's their words, not mine, that they were briefed on  multiple occasions. So it confirms what we've always thought about the bushfires, which is  that the Prime Minister was warned repeatedly, not only by the ex-fire chiefs, but by his  own government departments about the significant risk that these bushfires placed. And  despite all of that, he did nothing to prepare people for the bushfires. And we saw the  tragic consequences of that.

We also found out that claims that the Government is making about its use of bushfire  funds, particularly in terms of tourism support, aren't real. We found out that stories that  were emerging in the regional papers last week - that money has been diverted from  bushfire support and tourism promotion in bushfire areas has been diverted to areas that  need support with coronavirus - aren't true. When I put those issues to the coordinator of  the Government's bushfire response, Mr Colvin, he said he'd only heard about this in the  media yesterday. He'd never been consulted about any decision to divert some of his  funds to help with bushfire recovery away. So I think the Government has got some

explaining to do about what they actually are doing to support the tourism industry through  the coronavirus.

But finally, and most importantly, we found out that the Prime Minister's claims to have  created a $2 billion bushfire recovery fund are completely fake and completely  imaginary.We asked the officials yesterday to demonstrate to us where this fund was.  Now, everyone remembers the number of press conferences and media releases we've  had from the Prime Minister saying that he has created a $2 billion bushfire recovery fund  as a way of supporting bushfire victims. But what we learned is that this is only a notional  fund, again, to use the public servants’ language. And if you have a look at any dictionary,  the word notional means not real. It is a fake.

This is a phantom fund that the Prime Minister continues to go around claiming that he has  set up and I think that is an enormous betrayal of bushfire victims. Right now what bushfire  victims need from this government is more support, not spin. We know that the Prime  Minister failed to prepare for the bushfires. That's been confirmed again yesterday. And  now we know that he's failing with the bushfire recovery. And I understand just in the last  few minutes, the New South Wales Liberal Minister, Andrew Constance, has again gone to  the media, pleading with the Prime Minister to fix his bushfire response, especially with  small businesses. So this is not just Labor making complaints about the way the  Government is handling its bushfire recovery.  It's now coming from New South Wales  Liberal ministers. It's coming from the New South Wales National Party deputy premier.  The Prime Minister has got to fix his bushfire recovery and start actually helping  Australians.

JOURNALIST: So you say it's notional. That must be devastating for the people on the  ground then if it's not going to happen. Do you think he has plans to put some money there  or no plans at all?

WATT:  Well, I think that these claims from the Prime Minister to have a $2 billion fund, are  an enormous betrayal of bushfire victims. He has spent weeks now reassuring bushfire  victims that he has a $2 billion fund, ready to go, ready to support them. And what we now  find out is that it's imaginary. It doesn't actually exist. It doesn't- it's not set out in any  budget paper. There's no line item that shows that there's money there. What he's said  only is that money will be made available if it's needed. Well, we know that this money is  needed. It's needed right now. It was needed last week and the week before that. And it's  not appearing. I mean, the reality is that Scott Morrison's claims to have a bushfire fund are  as imaginary as the support he ever provided to Malcolm Turnbull.

JOURNALIST: [inaudible] they might be relying on insurance companies to do all his  work?

WATT: Yeah, I think that there is a huge reliance on insurance companies to pay for the  costs of the recovery. The problem, of course, is that there are many people out there who  don't have insurance or don't have enough insurance. And that's where they need the  Government to be stepping up and actually providing real support and all we're asking the  Government to do is to follow through on its promises. All this Prime Minister is about is  about making announcements and about marketing. He doesn't actually care about the  follow-through. And we've got another example of that here.

ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: TALI ELEY 0448 078 456







