





SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Deputy Leader of the Government in the  Senate Senator for South Australia



TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Interview on Channel 9, Today, with Allison Langdon and Karl Stefanovic.        Topics: Tourism Stimulus Package; Coronavirus;  03/16/2020  08:42 AM

Allison Langdon: Well, tourists coming to Australia now face 14 days in self-isolation. It’s a hard line  move by Prime Minister Morrison, aimed at kerbing the spreading of the coronavirus, but the question is: at  what cost?

Karl Stefanovic: Plenty. The Federal Government has unveiled a $1 billion tourism stimulus package  though, with Australia's tourism industry now at serious risk of collapse. Simon Birmingham is the Federal  Tourism Minister and he joins us now from my home town, Cairns. G’day, Minister. Thank you for being with  us this morning.

A billion dollars -where will it go and is it enough?

Simon Birmingham: Hello, Cairns- hello Karl there. Well, this billion dollars comes as part of the $17.6  billion that our government announced last week as economic stimulus, recognising the huge impact that  coronavirus is going to have right across our economy, but the even greater impact that it's already having in  terms of the tourism sector and our trade-exposed industries as well. So, that’s what I'm doing here in Cairns  today, is meeting with local businesses, explaining to them the up to $25,000 assistance that's going to flow  automatically into the bank accounts of small and medium sized businesses; talking to them about the  subsidies we're making available to keep apprentices on and to make sure we sustain employment and  training opportunities for people. But also, around this billion dollars, what else can we do to target that  support, to make sure we sustain those businesses who are going to be feeling the pinch over the coming  months?

Allison Langdon: Yeah. Because you talked about $25,000 but I mean, you have many small and  medium sized businesses, where their monthly costs are something like $70,000 plus, so it doesn't go very  far. But just looking at that impact, I mean, how does this not completely decimate the tourism industry?

Simon Birmingham: Look, it is having a grave effect already. We saw, before the travel restrictions of the  latest nature were announced on the weekend, that bookings were already down more than 90 per cent from  key markets. So we know that this industry is already feeling the pain. And look, the reality is that there will be  business closures. There will be job losses. These are tragically unavoidable but what we are trying to do as a  government is to reach in as far as we can, to support small business, to provide those pay ments, to try to  sustain them, to try to keep people employed; and that we’ve put this extra fund there, which I’m now urgently  consulting with the industry to try to find out what we can do to make sure that regions like this one here in Far  North Queensland, who are disproportionately affected, get some extra support and that we target that where  it's needed most.

Karl Stefanovic: It's so completely devastating. I’ve got a cousin who’s a marine biologist on a boat  that goes to the reef. I’ve got an aunty who works up in Kuranda, at a farm up there. It's not just those  businesses directly. Obviously, if you’ve got workers on these boats, or at those the farms, they don't spend  money locally now because they're not getting income. The flow-on effects are huge and dramatic. I just  wonder if it is enough at this point?



Simon Birmingham: Karl, we’ll make sure we continue to evaluate the situation, and if there is more that’s  required, then more, ultimately, will be done. We’ve got a Federal Budget coming up in a just couple of  months’ time now, and so we’ll be working closely in the lead up to that to see the impact of the measures  we’ve put on the table already. $17.6 billion widely, I think, recognised as being the type of scale necessary at  present. But if this looks like going on for too long and too deep, then yes, of course, we’ll have to respond in  other ways.

Allison Langdon: So Minister, we’ve got Easter long weekend coming up, we’ve got school holidays.  Well, what is the advice around that? Is it to, when the kids are on holidays, to keep them home, or do you  want us to travel within Australia and support local business? Which one?

Simon Birmingham: Well, our whole plan, first and foremost, is to slow the spread of coronavirus so that  we save lives. And so, firstly, everybody should follow the latest public health advice as it's issued. Now, at  present, there aren't any restrictions in relation to domestic travel. And so, for those who don't have personal  conditions they need to worry about, who aren't in the high risk categories, and who are feeling completely  healthy, then, if you can get in the car and undertake a day trip or a short few days away, we’d certainly  encourage people to get out and make sure you support local businesses, because by supporting those  businesses, you may well be saving that business or saving somebody's job.

Karl Stefanovic: I know. But that’s- it's a tough message, isn't it? I mean, here we are, we're saying no  big gatherings and trying to restrict overseas and they’re restricting the number of people you’re with to 10. I  mean, and so for us to go: okay, we need to visit Australian tourism spots. Some of them have been  decimated by the bushfires. Then, we're saying: okay, we can't gather in certain places. I mean, that whole  mixed message is very difficult to navigate.

Simon Birmingham: It is a fine balance, and that's why people firstly have got to follow the health advice.  But then, within the parameters of their personal situation and that health advice, think about what you can be  doing, whether that is getting a takeaway meal and going and sitting in the local park to eat it, or any of those  sorts of things that can keep a restaurant, a tourism hospitality business going, that's what we’re going to  need to do, because if we all purely retreat into our homes, then of course, that economic harm is going to be  even greater.

But, first things come first and public health is of the utmost importance. That's why our government ’s put  these international restrictions in place. That's why we were one of the first countries in the world to do so in  relation restricting travel from China. And frankly, if other countries had perhaps taken the early steps that we  did, we may not have seen the spread of the virus elsewhere around the world as it has.

Karl Stefanovic: Simon Birmingham, thank you so much for your time today. Appreciate it. Good luck.



Media Contacts  Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.

