





MATT THISTLETHWAITE MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR THE REPUBLIC

MEMBER FOR KINGSFORD SMITH





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS

TUESDAY, 10 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Economic impact of COVID-19 and fiscal stimulus, Newstart, Family law

inquiry / Pauline Hanson.



ANNELISE NIELSEN: Joining us live for our politics panel is Liberal MP Katie Allen and

Labor MP Matt Thistlethwaite, thank you for your time. Now this Coronavirus response, the

language from the government has been very much ramped up over the last week. Matt

Thistlethwaite, we'll start with you. What do you think about this discussion that we could

be seeing a rise in the debt ceiling?



MATT THISTLETHWAITE, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL

SERVICES: Well obviously the government needs to come up with a stimulus package,

Annelise, and they're going to have to fund that somehow. We've been saying for some

months now that the Australian economy has been struggling before the bushfires, before

the Coronavirus, unfortunately the outbreak of Coronavirus in particular now is only going

to make a bad situation worse. That's brought about the need for a stimulus package to

boost the Australian economy to hopefully avoid a recession and the government doesn't

have any meat if you like left in the Budget to fund that. So they're going to have to go into

additional debt, it does put pay to the notion that they're better economic managers at

managing debt because when Labor left office net debt was at about $175 billion dollars

and it’s now at $430 billion and only going to increase because of this. So look, we'll have

a look at what the government comes up with in terms of a package but we've been saying

for some months now that they needed to stimulate the economy.



NIELSEN: What do you make of that argument, Katie Allen, is it reckless to be looking at

increasing the debt cap to $600 billion?



KATIE ALLEN, MEMBER FOR HIGGINS: Well let's just be clear we had a rise in our GDP

at point five higher than expected at the end of last year so we're definitely heading in the

right direction. We've got a balanced Budget and now what we're looking at is an ability to

respond to a completely unexpected global shock that's going on, I mean no one could

have expected this, we've been through droughts, we’ve been through fires and now floods

and so this is a very important time in our history to stay calm, but also to respond

effectively and I'm very pleased to hear what we're hearing with regards to a substantial

package at the end of this week that's going to be proportionate, it's going to be calm but

also it's going to be able to be ramped up quickly using the current payment system so I

think this is good news that we as a country are going to be able to respond to what looks

to be an extremely significant global event.



NIELSEN: It does seem like the government is pulling off the table at the idea of a cash

splash like we saw during the global financial crisis, Matt Thistlethwaite do you think that

this would be the time to be putting money in people's pockets or is it gonna go very far

considering most of us could be stuck at home and not able to spend it out in the economy

anyway?



THISTLETHWAITE: Well the advice that government received when the global financial

crisis hit, Annelise, to go early, to go hard, and to go households and that's exactly what

Labor did when we were in government and it worked. Australia was the only nation in the

OECD that avoided recession and kept people in jobs and that was vitally important. That

was a system that worked back then, you really need to if you're going to stimulate growth

in the economy get money to people who will spend it and they're generally people who

are on lower incomes. So my fear is that it will be too little, too late. It remains to be seen

whether they go hard, whether they go households but what certainly can be said is that

they haven't gone early and that's the big concern I think that it's too little, too late and that

we do see increases in unemployment as we've been seeing for some months now with

particularly underemployment rising, unemployment rising, below trend growth the

Australian economy has been in a bad situation for at least the last couple of years and the

government's done nothing about it.



NIELSEN: Katie Allen do you agree is this too little, too late?



ALLEN: Well let's just start with by saying that my predecessor Peter Costello actually

handed over the books in a pretty pristine state when Labor came to government and to

say that they were the responsible for the GFC, that Labor was responsible for the GFC,

doesn't take into account the historical context and the books that they inherited. And let's

have a look at their pink batts and school halls, you know, fiscal stimulation package how

successful that was. What we're looking at is a response from set of measures that look at

you know keeping people in their livelihood, we want to look at making sure that big

businesses is supporting small businesses and I think the stimulation needs to look at

what's proportionate and going to be useful that's going to be temporary because we don't

want to have a baked in impact on the bottom line. So we've got to respond very quickly

and I think the Prime Minister has laid that out in a very responsible way.



NIELSEN: Matt do you agree with calls for a raise to Newstart as economic stimulus?



THISTLETHWAITE: Well we've been saying for some months now that the government

should reconsider the level of New tart and look to raise it. We all know that if you provide

additional funding to people that are on very low incomes, that are on Newstart and the

like, they're not going to save it, they're going to spend it and they'll spend it on

consumption within our economy and that's one area in our economy over the last two to

three years where you've had very low rates of consumption, that's led to very low rates of

business investment and that's affected productivity. For the first time since records are

being kept in Australia, labour productivity has actually gone down under this government

now, since they've kept those records it's always been growing but it's been going down

under the recent couple of quarters with this government and that says everything about

their approach to economic management. So you do need to provide stimulus to

households particularly to low income people who we know will spend that in the economy

and that's why we've been calling for the level of Ne start to be looked at.



NIELSEN: Katie Allen, what do you think, will this be the kind of systemic change do you

think should be done long term or is it time for a raise to Newstart anyway?



ALLEN: I think the issue is that everything's on the table at the moment and we're looking

very closely at all possible responses. It is worth noting that retail spending was increasing

at the end of last year in fact that was helping with our GDP, so there was already a gentle

turn in the economy. I think it's important that we have measures that are going to help

keep people in jobs and most importantly keep businesses going and that's the difficulty

about this future that we're moving into, the Coronavirus is really something that's

completely unexpected and to plan for this future we need to balance the health of the

nation with the balanced books and that's a really fine balance to do. And I would say that

we've been really focused on making sure that the Coronavirus epidemic here in Australia

has been really well contained compared to other countries around the world. And I think

the fact that we've been on the front foot, we've been very prepared and that we're putting

all our resources into making sure that we're responding very well to this. It was very

disappointing last week when there was a National Security Committee that were meeting

and yet Labor was calling for divisions all the way, through despite the fact that the Prime

Minister called for pairs. So you know I think there's a lot of resources being put forward to

respond to the Coronavirus, we are listening and as we heard in earlier news stories the

Attorney General is also the Minister for Industrial Relations, is having round tables with

small business and big business about responses that are going to help the economy and

make sure that we get through this. And as the Prime Minister has said we want to be

ready for the bounce back.



NIELSEN: If I can just change gears for a moment, the family law inquiry is starting in

Queensland today, it's the time when we really have this national focus on domestic

violence after the horrific murder of Hannah Clarke and her three children in Brisbane. Matt

Thistlethwaite, do you think Pauline Hanson should be on that family law inquiry?



THISTLETHWAITE: Look, given the comments that Pauline Hanson's made in the past

which we believe are insensitive and inappropriate there are question marks about her

being on that inquiry. You know, it comes on the back of the one of the most horrific cases

of domestic violence that we've seen in this country and I just feel so sorry for that family

and those friends who laid to rest Hannah Clarke and her beautiful children yesterday. And

it just highlights the need for a strong family law system, a very strong Family Court system



in Australia, appropriate funding for early intervention and support services, particularly

domestic violence shelter support services in our community and making sure that we're

actually trying to reduce the incidence of domestic violence in our societies. Given the

comments that she's made in the past look you know I just don't see how you're going to

get better outcomes given the approach that Pauline Hanson has taken in the past.



NIELSEN: Katie Allen, what do you think, should Pauline Hanson be on that inquiry

considering her comments as Matt Thistlethwaite said?



ALLEN: Well I sit on a number of parliamentary committees myself with a number of

inquiries and the inquiries and the committees are evidence based, which means

everybody has an opportunity to proffer their views and their opinions but the committee

will look at the evidence base. There's not one committee member that has, you know,

more impact than another, this is not chaired by Pauline Hanson, it's chaired actually by

Kevin Andrews and I know he will be very responsive to the evidence base that he's

proffered to the committee. And I think welcome Matt’s comments that you know our

record investment of $340 million last year into domestic violence, particularly housing, as

well as our loan relief for women who are facing domestic violence is incredibly important

because women have to have the ability to move quickly. We know that often that they

delay taking the steps because they have nowhere to go, they don't have the financial

support, so the steps that we've put in place the record funding I think is very important and

I really welcome this investment in an incredibly important area for our community.



NIELSEN: We've run out of time so I have to leave it there, Matt Thistlethwaite and Katie

Allen, thank you for your time.



THISTLETHWAITE: Thanks Annelise.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: BEN LEESON 0404 648 275





