1





The Hon. Christian Porter MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Industrial Relations  Leader of the House



TRANSCRIPT  Mornings with Gareth Parker  Wednesday, 1st April 2020



E&OE

Subjects: Coronavirus - Artania - JobKeeper - Parliament

GARETH PARKER:  I've just learned that Seven West media staff, Seven West media staff are going to take a 20  per cent pay cut until June 30 - that is senior staff.  Non-senior staff are going to be reduced  to four days a week, which is effectively a 20 per cent pay cut. So that news has just come to  me.

The Attorney General, the Industrial Relations Minister is Christian Porter.  Christian, good  morning

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Yeah good morning to you I hope all your listeners are staying safe.

GARETH PARKER:  Absolutely. Lots to discuss.  The economic package we'll come back to in a moment because  you know, I said yesterday that was a very good piece of policy and we spoke to Mathias  Cormann about it but there's obviously a fair bit still to talk about with that. To start I know  this isn't your portfolio we've been in contact with Peter Dutton’s office but the situation with  the Artania - we need to get this ship out of Australian waters, don't we?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, we do and we will but obviously it's about timing. I've spoken with Peter this morning.  And look, I think…let's look at what's been achieved so far. So Commonwealth  Government’s facilitated the repatriation of approximately 850 passengers on charter flights  back to Germany, from the Artania. Now just keep in mind that two or three days ago there  were a lot of voices in the sort of publicly, public commentary sphere who said that that  wasn't possible - and that was too risky and people should be moved to islands and all this  sort of stuff. So let's just keep in mind that in a calm, responsible, humanitarian and safe  flight, we've moved 850 passengers off the vessel, bussed them out chartered them off; low

2



risk; the right thing to do. Now the vessel is the subject of an order to leave. And they don't  have to do that tonight. But they are subject to an order to leave. My information is that there  are still 12 passengers on board some of whom are very unwell. And their level of either  illness or frailty is such that they cannot get in a plane.

GARETH PARKER:  So 12 passengers are still on board?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  So that's that's my briefing but that’s, is changeable. But there's also the crew. And  passengers who are too unwell or too frail to fly and the crew will have to go home in the  boat back I presume to Germany. Now we've got a responsibility to those passengers to  ensure that the West Australian health system gives them the available attention to ensure that  they don’t, if I can put this bluntly, die on the on the voyage home because they've not  received proper attention before that voyage commences.  And that is just a humanitarian  responsibility that I think that we have. And if you have a look at the way in which our  passengers on vessels in places like Japan were treated, we wouldn't want to treat people any  less well than that.  We have an humanitarian obligation, so yes, it has to leave, we also have  an obligation to make sure it leaves with people in decent enough condition that they survive  the journey back.  And so that's a balancing exercise. And I think it's one that's been worked  on cooperatively between customs and our Government and WA Health and the WA  Government. Yes, of course, they've got to leave, but they've got to leave in a way that is safe  and fair and as humane as all of us circumstances can accommodate.

GARETH PARKER:  Can you shed any light on why the sheep would have requested to stay at Fremantle until  April the 15th?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  I don't know but I would be suspecting that that is about the condition of some of the  passengers on board, but I don't have a specific briefing about that. But based on the briefings  I've got, I would say that that is about people getting some form of basic health assistance  that will allow them to undertake the journey.

GARETH PARKER:  The overriding concern is obvious though, isn't it? You've got already 13 crew in Joondalup  Hospital with COVID symptoms - there are 450 crew remaining on board and we know how  this ship, cruise ships incubate and transmit this virus now

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Correct when they're full, they do when they're full, right?

GARETH PARKER:  Yeah.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  But this is now an empty cruise ship. So one of the difficulties that was had on the cruise ship  that was off the coast of Japan and then in a Japanese port was that it was completely full  with its passenger manifest, so you're right - isolating people on a full cruise ship is very,  very difficult. But when you've got 850 odd of the passengers off the cruise ship and back in

3



Germany, it becomes a different matter. Everyone agrees that the cruise ship has to leave and  it's under a direction to leave. The timing of that has to be a judgment around health of some  of the passengers who are unwell or frail and that's a matter of health assessments and us  doing the best that we possibly can in all the circumstances. But you right. I mean, there there  are timing issues here.

GARETH PARKER:  All right. There's obviously ….

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  …..but I think it's very important to keep in mind that a couple of days ago, a whole range of  people were saying that it was impossibly unsafe to move 850 passengers from the vessel out  to the airport, and we did that.

GARETH PARKER:   I have already said this morning that we clearly have humane obligations to people  humanitarian obligations to people and that that operation in particular was well executed. So  I acknowledge both those points.  The rescue package that Prime Minister and the Treasurer  announced the JobKeeper plan, I think is brilliant. I think it gives us a fighting chance to get  to the other side of the crisis.  Can you just take us inside the discussions that sort of led to  that because it's, you know, you've been on this program the last two weeks and I've been  asking you about a program of this nature and the view was, well, look we'd rather not  because we'd rather use existing delivery mechanisms. Now the delivery mechanism is the  payroll system which is a good solution.  Is this going to save jobs?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Yeah, I mean, look the type of programs that have been undertaken in the UK, as I said last  week are putting all of your eggs in one very complicated basket. I think the UK system  suffers from the major problem that you're actually incentivising the stand-down of  employees.  Like people get 80 per cent of their wage up to a capped amount once they've  been stood down. This package’s strength is in the fact that we've been able in short time to  design something that incentivises you to keep connectivity with your employees - and that  connectivity is obviously through a $1500 subsidy to their wage. Now, it's not  uncomplicated, like it's not easy to put these things together. But trying to find an existing  delivery mechanism was the hunt that we were on for the intervening two weeks and the  delivery mechanism is through the ATO essentially and using existing corporate and business  payrolls to deliver a payment to staff to keep them connected through that employment and of  course, give them a safety net at the same time.  Because obviously, many of those employers  are going to be working with distressed businesses and you know what the target there is - if  you've received a 30 per cent decrease in your turnover under $1 billion or 50 per cent over  $1 billion you meet the definition of distress. So I think the strength is there's some  simplicity, it complements the welfare response, it uses an existing delivery mechanism, it's  not overly complicated in that you're trying to calculate 80- per cent of what could be 100  different pay ranges in a single business, which is monstrously complicated. So we believe  this will work. We think it complements what we've already done. We think it's necessary. It  took a couple of weeks to get it into a shape that we think meets all the KPIs and markers that  we want to try and meet. But you know, we're in completely uncharted territory here -  completely uncharted and we’re trying to cover every single base. So you've got a wage  response, you've got a welfare response, you've got individual responses to businesses and in

4



the health system, we believe they can all complement each other.  And it is of course    massive expenditure - I mean, it is just astonishing, but it's necessary.

GARETH PARKER:  Yeah, beats 30 per cent-plus unemployment and the new Great Depression, which is what the  trajectory we could have been heading on without it.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, I think that we've got to consistently understand as the Prime Minister has consistently  said that we're fighting a health battle and an economic battle here and the two things just  can't be perfectly separated or de-linked.  If we ruin our economy and ruin our economies that  have key workers providing key and essential services, then that will limit our health  response and any limitation to our health response will compound and reverb right into  worsening economic effects. So you have to get both of these things right.  And I think, you  know, it is very, very hard because it's uncharted territory, but we are slowly dampening the  curve of the pathology of the virus, we’re I think making good decisions through the National  Cabinet and the way in which we're slowing down the economy spread to stop the spread and  slow the spread of the virus is considered. It's not just dropping a samurai sword through the  economy, like it's doing it in a considered, staged way. And we're constantly trying to balance  those two things and reach the bottom-out point where we can start reviving the economy.

GARETH PARKER:  How much did Sally McManus and Greg Combet have to do with it?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  They’ve been very helpful, but they're not involved in cabinet discussions ERC discussions.  They've been very helpful both on the IR front but I think if you asked both of them, they  have not been involved in the key discussions around this, this payment. But again, Greg  Combet is sitting on the Advisory Commission with Nev Power, to the Prime Minister and  his and many other people's expertise will be called on in drafting the legislation that will  make these $1500 payments to what look’s like 6 million workers a reality.  But these are  individuals in a sea of people who are offering advice and assistance to government and this  was a decision of the Treasurer, the Prime Minister the ERC and the Cabinet. It was a  government decision and it was being planned for some time.

GARETH PARKER:  The Parliament will obviously need to meet again to ratify it, debate it, there may well be  changes at the margins to the package as well. What are the arrangements for that? You're in  charge of the House. What happens with Parliament?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  I am.  Well you know, I've been working with our Cabinet team on the on the actual package  itself. Now I'm turning my mind to how we reconvene Parliament so that we can deliver the  legislation which makes those $1500 payments reality.  We want to that obviously as quickly  as possible. There's some pretty significant drafting that's got to be done before we can get  back to Parliament to actually pass the drafting. So that's being worked on furiously at the  moment. The last time we had Parliament there were about 90 people there, I think you  would expect to see less than that.  The legislative quorum for a Parliament is 31 Members,  so you'll certainly see more than that. But we've got all these added complications of border  closures between states and quarantine rules around people moving from state to state. So it'll

5



probably be the most complicated Parliament that's ever been called in terms of how the  logistics of it work so that we can actually get enough people in the Parliament voting and  have its procedures as regular and as orthodox as possible in all the circumstances. So   there have been easier Parliament's to convene I’d have to say but we'll get there.

GARETH PARKER:  Will MPs have to, you know, go into self-isolation when they return from Parliament to their  home states?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well each of the state's rules are a little bit different on these things? Probably South  Australia, I think, from my recollection is the strictest at the moment. But you know, we've  got a big country and we've got a lot of MP’s out there. And I think we'll be moving them in  from the places where we think it's safest to move them in from - and where the rules that  allow them to move into Parliament are sort of conducive enough to have that happen. So  we've got 150 people who are out there and we'll make sure that we get the people that we  need in Parliament and we want to do that in a safe way.  And one of the risks of course with  Parliament is we’re flying people from all around Australia, and they're all in the Parliament  building and then we're flying them all back to other parts of Australia. So we have to try and  do this in a way that meets all of our constitutional and legislative requirements that provides  fair scrutiny - that operates like a normal Parliament, albeit with less people - and we do it in  a safe as possible way for all the people that come here and all the people in our communities  that we go back to. And none of us want to be coming and traveling and then coming back to  our communities that were elected to serve and doing that in a way that promotes any risk. So  we'll be doing this very, very cautiously, very safely. We managed to do it a couple of weeks  ago, this will be a little bit harder again, but it'll get done. And at the end of that process is  $130 billion worth of wage subsidies to Australians plus the massive welfare response plus  the response, the individual businesses, plus the health response. And we've made ourselves  pretty resilient on an economic and health basis to this. I would argue as resilient and robust a  response as anywhere in the world and we’re probably doing better than just about anywhere  in the world at the moment so let’s hope that we can keep this going because there’s got to be  another side to this and we want to all get out of it and get this economy cranked back up and  fire out of it as hard as we can.



ENDS





Authorised by Christian Porter, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

