ED HUSIC MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES

MEMBER FOR CHIFLEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS

MONDAY, 14 DECEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: China; the Nationals; US; Energy Policy; UN.



DANICA DE GIORGIO, HOST:  For more on that and the rest of the day's news, I'm now

joined by Labor MP Ed Husic. Ed Husic, your thoughts on this?



ED HUSIC, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES: I think it's a

positive development. Obviously, we're very keen to see wherever we can with countries that

are doing well in beating COVID, that we have these type of travel bubbles open up. So I think

it's a really great thing to hear that this is likely to happen. Clearly, we have to wait for a few

things for instance, hoping that the numbers stay low in terms of infection. For a more

substantive response, I'll leave it to my colleague Chris Bowen as the Shadow Health Minister,

to give some more thoughts to this. But so far so good.



DE GIORGIO:  Positive step in the right direction and maybe we're a bit of trouble next year.

Who knows.



HUSIC:  To be honest, at the end of this year, it'd be good to get a few more bits of good

news. So regardless of politics let's welcome the good news.



DE GIORGIO:  I totally agree and now let's discuss the situation between China and Australia;

this trade war, this ongoing trade matter. Now over the weekend, the former Resources

Minister Matt Canavan, he's actually calling for a levy on iron ore exports to test China's metal.

That's a very key industry for China. Would you support that?



HUSIC:  I think it's interesting to see that there is no problem in the country that can't be sorted

by an ad campaign from the Liberal Party and now there's no problem that can't be sorted with

a tax. We've had from the Nationals and the Liberals a backpacker tax, a biosecurity levy that

went nowhere and we're still having to spend the money we were going to rake in from that, to

deal with biosecurity issues. Now tax and spend Matt Canavan wants to put a tax on iron ore

and turn his back on the whole rules-based approach in the way that we have trade settled

along international understanding and he wants to make this move. So I think it's quite

surprising and it's interesting too if someone from the West coast was going to argue about

doing the same thing on coal. You could imagine that Matt would lose his mind at that type of

suggestion, but he's quite happy to do that, in terms of iron ore that makes such a big part of

WA's economy and their exports.



I think the other interesting thing to tell is this and it hasn't really been picked up by media.

There is something happening within the Nationals and last week you had the Former Minister,

Bridget McKenzie put forward legislation that was an ambush on forestry reform. She brought

that in last Thursday off the top of my head and a Former Nationals Resources Minister in Matt

Canavan has suddenly brought about this idea and they're doing them quite separately to their

frontbench colleagues. It says to me that there's a lot of there is a lot of problems brewing

within the Nationals and the issue for us is these people are in Government. You can't afford to

have chaos and confusion being demonstrated by these people.



DE GIORGIO: Is it really that big of a surprise call, though. We've got a case now where China

is not answering the phone. They haven't agreed to trade talks. They're not being bipartisan on

the matter. So a levy like this, wouldn't that bring them to the party?



HUSIC: I do not think this will be something that industry would necessarily welcome. They

would not want, at this point in time something that inflames the situation, rather than sorting

out where we go from here. We do have big issues that we need to sort out and particularly in

terms of China, working out how we diversify, why we've put too many of our eggs in that one

basket. It's happened under this Government; they've had seven years to try and sort out and

they haven't. It's going to take some time and in saying that as well, me saying it as an

Opposition MP, diversify, it's easy to say, it's harder to do. So I recognise this absolutely

because we've got premium prices and we've sold a lot of volume. To find other markets that

could take up the slack as it were is not going to be easy. But we need one foot to follow the

other in this and we're just not seeing that effort.



DE GIORGIO: Is it the case though that China needs Australia more than Australia needs

China when it does come to iron ore because we're such a big exporter of it here in Australia?



HUSIC: China does depend a lot on our iron ore and we've got high quality product. So the

relationship I'd say is valuable to both us and then let's be honest right. The thing about what

Matt Canavan is trying to do in increasing the price of our iron ore is to encourage China to

look elsewhere for iron ore and it is it is developing other options compared to us. So what

Matt Canavan is saying, in terms of this approach, is a longer-term threat to where we're

headed. It doesn't sort out the problems we've got right now and it signals to me that there is a

brawl within the National Party, where some of their backbenchers are quite happy to cause

problems for their frontbench rivals.



DE GIORGIO: Should the US do more do you think to help patch the relations between

Australia and China. We look at an incoming Joe Biden Presidency, could he or should he

usher in a new era of stability?



HUSIC: I think at this point in time what is likely to happen, is I've certainly as others have

taken note, the US wants to work closer with its Five Eyes partners. It wants to work with allied

nations to deal with this and to not have people single out. For Australia, it is vitally important

for us to work with like minded countries and to be able to send a strong signal to China that

this is not the way to go and if it thinks it's going to have some sort of success by putting this

type of economic pressure on us, I think it's actually going to run counter to what they think.

The US has got a big part to play in that. I think President-Elect Biden, is really important for

Australia in terms of his election and the leadership that they can show. Because I think under

the Trump Administration, they spent more time sending mixed signals on this and they didn't

really care about what impact that had on us.



DE GIORGIO: Just finally, I want to ask you about Scott Morrison's UN Summit snub over the

weekend, is it embarrassing that Australia wasn't invited to speak? How big of a deal is it?



HUSIC: So I said a few moments ago on the trade issue, how important it is for us to work with

others. It really is important for us longer term to have a number of people standing on the

same side of the street, as it were, on issues that matter to us. In this case, I think increasingly,

Australia is being seen as not cooperative or not playing the same game. For us to be able to



be heard in international fora is really important. So to be ignored, and have the door shut on

us is not good for us longer term and people should worry. Australians should be concerned

longer term, what this means for the standing of the nation. That a whole set of rules might get

set up internationally without our input and this is largely because there's only one group and

one group only that is driving the stand in Australia. It's the Coalition party room. Most

countries get we've got to get net zero by 2050. Most big firms in Australia get it. Most states

and territories in this country get it. But the Coalition party room doesn't and therefore the

Coalition Government won't do anything counter and as I said, long term real concern to us.



DE GIORGIO: That's certainly an interesting one on the world stage. That's for sure. Ed Husic,

we have to leave it there. Thank you for joining me.



HUSIC: Thanks for your time.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE BOYD 0438 881 997

