

SENATOR THE HON KRISTINA KENEALLY

DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

THURSDAY, 5 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Michael McCormack blaming the states for the bushfire crisis; Gladys

Berejiklian; Greg Hunt jerking around state health ministers; Scott Morrison’s failure

to lead.



KRISTINA KENEALLY, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE AND SHADOW

MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Well, I got up this morning and, as I always do, read a

copy of The Australian. There on the front page - open warfare. Let's start with the Deputy

Prime Minister Michael McCormack. Inexplicably, Michael McCormack is out blaming the

states. That's right, when it comes to the bushfire crisis and the bushfire recovery, the

Deputy Prime Minister Michael McCormack is not standing up and leading, he is sitting

down and shifting blame. He is blaming the states. Michael McCormack says in The

Australian today, quote, he is quite annoyed that the states haven't stepped up and done

more to help with the bushfire crisis and the recovery. He is annoyed that somehow, to

quote Michael McCormack, this has all “fallen in the lap of the Federal Government". Well,

breaking news for you Michael McCormack - you're the Deputy Prime Minister, you are the

Federal Government and in a time of crisis, the Australian people look for leadership. They

don't look for blame shifting, they don't look for marketing spin, they don't look for Defence

Force being used in a political advertisement from the Prime Minister trying to tell us what

a great job he's doing, they look for action, they look for response, they look for help. And

let's talk about the states. My home state of New South Wales (sic: and Australia) had 33

people die. My home state of New South Wales had significant loss when it comes to the

death of citizens, the death of firefighters and, quite frankly, the loss of wildlife, the loss of

homes, the devastation that was reaped upon New South Wales in this bushfire crisis was

the worst in living memory for that state.



And where was the state Premier Glady Berejiklian? I'll tell you where she wasn't - she

wasn't in Hawaii. She was out every day, talking with communities, working with the Rural

Fire Service and our other emergency services. She was leading; she was leading a

response. And, by the way, while Scott Morrison was in Hawaii, where was and who was

the acting Prime Minister? It was Michael McCormack. Michael McCormack, while Scott

Morrison was in Hawaii, you should have been out leading. You should have been out as

the acting Prime Minister. It is extraordinary to open up the front page of our national

broadsheet and see our National Deputy Prime Minister taking such a significant swipe at

the states - some of them his own Liberal colleagues. It is shameful and, quite frankly,

people are frustrated with this Government. They are frustrated and disappointed because

Scott Morrison is not a leader, he's an ad man. He doesn't have a plan, he just has a

marketing strategy and he's sending out his Deputy to go out there and blame shift to other

levels of government. Well simply not good enough.



But you know the open warfare doesn't stop there. We've got on the bottom of the front

page of The Australian - Greg Hunt. Greg Hunt, again, failing to step up and lead, failing to

have a plan, no leadership when it comes to the coronavirus. What do we learn? We learn

that the Liberal Health Minister in New South Wales Brad Hazzard asked Greg Hunt last

week for assistance and direction and a plan if there was an outbreak of the coronavirus in

aged care homes. Well what do we see? We see here today in New South Wales,

tragically a death in an aged care facility, staff in an aged care facility who have, with

concerns, not turned up for work and New South Wales asking for help from the Federal

Government and the Federal Government saying, "it's not our problem; we're not involved

with this. This is your problem". Again, we are confronted with an international global

health emergency - the Australian Government's already declared it a pandemic - and

where is the Health Minister Greg Hunt when his own Liberal colleagues at a state level

come to him ahead of time asking for a plan? He has gone missing. Greg Hunt has been



jerking the state health ministers around now for weeks. First, they've been trying to

privatise their aged care services and then they backflip dramatically on Friday after the

states arced up. Today we have news that the state health ministers, including the Liberal

Minister in New South Wales, had been trying to get help out of Greg Hunt and the

Commonwealth Government, the Morison Government, and they have been left with no

help, they have been left to fend for themselves. Australia is now facing a significant crisis

that the world is confronting when it comes to coronavirus. It will have impacts on our

economy and on communities. We are also still in the beginning of a recovery phase with

the bushfire crisis and we have a Government that is failing to step up on both fronts. What

did we hear in Senate Estimates this week? That only a handful of businesses and farmers

have been able to access loans. The Prime Minister announced a $2 billion loan facility, a

fund, and what do we find that in Senate Estimates? Only $400,000 in total has been

loaned out. The Prime Minister defended this saying it was a "notional fund". We know

what the "notional" means? It means it's “something that doesn't exist in reality”. So once

again, we've got a Prime Minister who's got a “notional” bushfire recovery fund that has

paid out almost nothing. It doesn't really exist, his fund, it is a marketing scheme. It is not a

plan. It is no wonder that Australians are disappointed and frustrated with Scott Morrison.

He's not a leader. He's a marketing man.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











