

JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC THE BUSINESS

TUESDAY, 3 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: The Reserve Bank decision on interest rates; National Accounts and

Stimulus Measures.



ELYSSE MORGAN, ABC THE BUSINESS: The Morrison Government's holy grail of a

surplus is under attack from every quarter already battered by bushfires and drought, the

Coronavirus is the new grim uncertainty for the economy. Shadow Treasurer Jim Chalmers

says the heavy lifting has been left to the Reserve Bank, accusing the Coalition of a failure

of economic leadership. I spoke to him from Parliament House. Jim Chalmers, you pointed

out the weaknesses in the economy today. Do you agree with the Government that the

economy needs fiscal stimulus?



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: Well, Elysse we've been saying for some time

that the Government needs to come up with a plan to boost the economy and not just

because of the relatively recent outbreak of Coronavirus or even the fires over the

summer. The economy has been remarkably weak for some time. It was slowing last year,

wages have been stagnant for a really long time now and so we've got issues in the

economy which have been left unattended for a long time. We've been calling for the

Government to come up with a plan to deal with those weaknesses and it's even more

pressing now that they do so.



MORGAN: Okay. We are where we are - what should it be? What form should it take?



CHALMERS: Look, there are a range of options available to the Government and we

make suggestions but they have a better sense of the budget position at the moment.

We've got a bit of a glimpse of the budget position on Friday. But we've said before that

there are options available to them, like bringing forward part of their tax cuts. They could

do something about Newstart or infrastructure. I think there is a case to be made for some

kind of tax incentive for business investment, a bit like what we took to the last election and

have been calling for for most of the time since then in concert with the BCA, the Australian

Industry Group and others.



MORGAN: The Government would say that they have done several things to help the

economy. They did bring in the tax cuts. They are coming. They've also sped up

infrastructure spending and investment. And that also they're in a position to provide

stimulus to the economy now because they have been prudent. They have been trying to

build the surplus.



CHALMERS: Well a number of points about that. I mean, first of all, we voted for the tax

cuts because we thought it was important to support the economy. Those tax cuts haven't

done as much good in the economy as we had hoped and the Government had hoped.

They're not finding their way in sufficient volumes into our shops and businesses to provide

a big boost for the economy. They've underperformed from that point of view. The Reserve

Bank's now cut interest rates four times in ten months. Clearly, that hasn't been enough to

spur the economy either. So something else needs to be done. I don't accept that the

Government confronts the serious challenge of the Coronavirus and the fires before it, I

don't think they confront those challenges with a strong budget or a strong economy. And

we've been making that point for some time now.



MORGAN: You said earlier that you would support bringing forward income tax cuts as

part of this as a stimulus program. However, you've just said that, you know, so far these

tax cuts haven't worked as well as they should or as they hoped. So why would you bring

them more forward?



CHALMERS: The point that we're making, I have been making for some time is that

something more needs to be done. I mean, if the Government does come to the table with

a plan and we think it's a good plan, we'll support it. If we think it's insufficient or not

designed the right way, then we'll make those points as well. We've all got an interest in

the economy coming out of this Coronavirus crisis and dealing with some of the other

longer standing challenges. We all want those to be dealt with. We all want the economy to

grow more quickly so it can create jobs and opportunities in our communities. We've all got

an interest in that. So we'll play a constructive role, as we have been. But we can also

point out at the same time that the Government has been dragging its feet on coming up

with a plan. There's been an absence of economic leadership and Australians are already

paying a price for that.



MORGAN: The Reserve Bank move today, it's down to 0.5 per cent. You have concerns

that today's rate cut will do little to help and may actually hurt confidence further?



CHALMERS: I am concerned that the Reserve Bank is running out of ammunition. This is,

as I said, the fourth interest rate cut in ten months. Rates are now a sixth of what they were

during the worst of the Global Financial Crisis and it hasn't been enough to shift the

economy in a meaningful way. Growth has still been relatively slow since the election. So I

am concerned that they're running out of ammunition. But most of all, I'm concerned that

they're being left to do all those things on their own.



MORGAN: Do you think the Reserve Bank should have held off? If the Government has

stimulus coming, should the Reserve Bank of held off?



CHALMERS: No, I don't second guess the Reserve Bank in that way. I don't pretend to

give them advice. The point that I'm making is they're doing the best they can.



MORGAN: One obvious result of the latest cut to the cash rate will be another lift in house

prices. We've already got Sydney and Melbourne in double digit price increases over the

past year. Is now the time that APRA might need to step in with some kind of

macroprudential rules to keep a lid on that?



CHALMERS: Well, you're right that the interest rate cuts so far, the three that we had

before today, have had an impact on house prices, particularly in those big markets. That's

been one of the consequences of those rate cuts in addition to what's happening to savers.

Obviously the APRA and the other regulators, they'll take into account all kinds of

developments, like interest rate cuts, like movements in the economy, like the Coronavirus,



like the fires, and they'll try and calibrate their settings. I don't want to give them that kind of

advice.



MORGAN: The Council of Financial Regulators met yesterday. Obviously, rate cuts would

have been part of the discussion, as well as financial stability and the health of household

balance sheets. Would you be disappointed if they weren't talking about macroprudential

measures as part of what's happening now?



CHALMERS: It's been some years now since I've had much to do with the Council but I

know that they look at these sorts of things all of the time. I know that the discussion they

have is pretty broad ranging and they would be factoring in all these things.



MORGAN: Jim Chalmers, thank you very much for your time.



CHALMERS: Thank you, Elysse.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













