

17 March, 2020

KAP IMPLORES ALL TO “LOOK AFTER AUSTRALIA”  Katter’s Australian Party (KAP) MPs have called on all Australians to support their communities and  economies in the coming weeks and months by staying local and shopping local wherever  possible.

As the world, and nation, continues to navigate its way through the uncertain times caused by the  escalating COVID-19 crisis, the KAP is calling on all Aussies to spare a thought for the workers and  businesses being disastrously impacted.

“These are unprecedented times, but we are saying to everyone ‘if Australia has looked after you,  it’s now time to look after Australia’,” KAP Leader and Traeger MP Robbie Katter said.

Mr Katter said while Australia was very well-placed in comparison to other countries to battle the  coronavirus, its economic impacts would likely be felt here for years to come.

“Today we heard our Federal Finance Minister Matthias Cormann warn that ‘many businesses will  close and many Australians will lose their jobs’,” he said.

“This is likely an inevitable reality in some cases but overall, we can help curb this - we all have a  role to play.

“Make sure you support your local small grocer, butcher and chemist - don’t just head to the big  multi-nationals and don’t spend your time in isolation looking to buy online.

“Those receiving stimulus packages have a particularly important task to play in all this.”

Last week the Federal Government announced in its first stimulus package round that welfare  recipients (Pensioners, Newstart recipients etc.) would receive $750 per person and small to  medium-sized businesses would get between $2,000 - $25,000 to help with cash flow.

Mr Katter said it was pertinent to the future of the nation that this money was spent, but spent  wisely and in a way that benefited Australia.

Further federal stimulus measures are expected to be announced in the coming days.



“It’s important to remember that all this stimulus money has been paid for by the taxes of hard-working Australians, not the overseas corporations or big multi-nationals - so it is pertinent that  this money be reinvested here,” Mr Katter said.

“In the case of small, local economies, we know any money spent circulates those communities four  times over so it really does benefit everyone.”

KAP Member for Hill Shane Knuth pointed out that while travel restrictions were getting more and  more restrictive, across Australia regional communities, like the Tablelands and Cassowary Coast,  were the perfect destination to explore.

“There are plenty of beaches, waterfalls and local tourism attractions for everyone to enjoy,” Mr  Knuth said.

“It also creates the incentive to spend locally - every little bit spent at small businesses helps keep  local employees employed.”



—ENDS—                Media inquiries: Morgan Oss, 0428 772 544



