

JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RN BREAKFAST  FRIDAY, 31 JULY 2020

SUBJECT: Victoria nursing home outbreaks, Morrison Government  ignoring warning signs.

HAMISH MACDONALD, HOST: It has been a bleak 24 hours for Victoria with  723 new coronavirus cases declared yesterday. Once again aged care homes  in the frame with ten more deaths linked back to facilities. Questions are now  being asked about the sector's level of preparedness, particularly in Victoria but  elsewhere as well given the outbreaks in Sydney aged care homes in April and  May also. Speaking on Wednesday, the Prime Minister said these issues would  be interrogated by the ongoing Royal Commission into Aged Care Quality and  Safety.

SCOTT MORRISON: I want to be as upfront with you as we possibly can about  what has occurred in these facilities and I said the Royal Commission will have  absolute ability to go into the intricacies of these issues and I hope they do  because all lessons always must be learnt.

MACDONALD: That's Prime Minister Scott Morrison speaking at Parliament  House earlier this week. In a statement issued yesterday though, the  commissioner Tony Pagone said that he did not have the resources or time to  conduct such an inquiry. Julie Collins is the Shadow Minister for Ageing and  Seniors. She joins me from Hobart. Welcome back to breakfast.

JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS: Good  morning Hamish and to your listeners.

MACDONALD: Something very clearly has gone terribly wrong inside Victorian  nursing homes. Were you aware that they were so ill prepared?

COLLINS: I think that the issue here is the Government should've been aware  that they were ill prepared, the regulator should have been aware that they  were ill prepared. And we should have learnt the lessons of what happened in  Dorothy Hanson Lodge and Newmarch House, the two outbreaks in New South  Wales. And we should have learnt the lessons of the other various reports that  the Government already has sitting on its desk.

MACDONALD: When you say the various other reports I mean, were there  specific things as far as you are aware pointing to problems that that might  create this scenario we now face?

COLLINS: Well clearly the system was already in crisis. That's why a Royal  Commission was called. We already knew that the system was struggling. We  have been saying for a long time that there are not enough staff in aged care  that they're not paid enough. The Government had a specific workforce  strategy developed by Professor Pollaers. Professor Pollaers is in the media  today saying he's very disappointed in the Government's lack of response to his  recommendations. We had a report into what happened in Earle Haven on the  Gold Coast where we had a provider walk out and leave residents without any  staff. And the Government was recommended to develop protocols to ensure  that we could find a way to manage something like this happening. And then  when you know what we're seeing in Victoria happen, the Government is  saying well we could never have predicted this but people did and people had  recommendations and the Government had recommendations before it on how  to deal with these issues. I think the families, the residents and the older  Australians who are being moved out of their homes deserve some answers  from the Government on this. I do think that Victorians particularly those  families that have been impacted deserve some answers about what could  have been prevented here. Yes we know it's a difficult situation. Yes we know  it's unprecedented, but we did have some warning because the system was  already in crisis.

MACDONALD: You just mentioned Professor Pollears, that's Swinburne  University Chancellor, John Pollears. His report is mentioned in the Herald Sun  newspaper this morning, it claims that the Federal Government was warned  years ago about systemic workforce problems plaguing the sector. Were you  aware of that report prior to this?

COLLINS: Absolutely. Professor Pollears report when he tabled it, I read it in  detail. I've been calling on the Government for a long time to implement the  recommendations. I have raised it regularly in correspondence, I've raised it in  the Parliament, I raised it with the Minister directly about implementing this  report.

MACDONALD: When you say you've raised it directly with the Minister what's

the response been?

COLLINS: Well we're being told you know yes we're doing it, yes we're trying to  implement it, these things take time. But you know older Australians and their  loved ones in a global pandemic don't have that time. And the question is is  what could we have done beforehand to be better prepared for what's  happening in Victoria? You know we've had the Minister apologise to some  families and residents for what's happened in Victoria I understand on TV this  morning. But clearly the Federal Government should have been better  prepared. We know it's difficult. We know the two tiers of government are  working together now to try and resolve this situation and that's a good thing  and we welcome that. But we should have known and we did know and we  probably should have been better prepared for this.

MACDONALD: Just in terms of the specifics because I suppose we're all  aware to some degree of the scenario that confronts aged care homes in  Victoria right now. What was included in this report from Professor Pollears that  might have changed the situation currently because it obviously dealt with mass  casualisation, skills gaps, high staff turnover. How would that change where we  are?

COLLINS: Well if we'd developed a workforce strategy about dealing with some  of these issues out professionalising the workforce, about doing some of the  things that were recommended in there, we would have had better prepared  workforce. But even basic things like training in you know protection equipment  also, you know the Government was aware prior to the pandemic that only one  in five aged care workers had done that training. We now understand it's  around 150,000 but that's still less than half of all aged care workers that have  actually been trained in how to use the equipment they now need to do their  jobs.

MACDONALD: The Victorian Health Workers Union is reportedly rung around  its members in the wake of the crisis this week. Some workers are telling them  that they're too scared to go to work. Have you been in contact with them, have  you heard that?

COLLINS: I've certainly heard that and I raised this as an issue with the  Government in March. I raised it continually, the Minister then introduced the  retention bonus to try and assist with some of that. But unfortunately about 40  per cent of the aged care workforce are excluded from that retention bonus  payment to try and support staff because we understand that there aren't  enough of them and they're not paid enough. And that retention bonus I think  should be extended to all staff working in aged care.

MACDONALD: One of the worst hit homes is the Epping Gardens facility

where at least 27 staff and 59 residents have reportedly contracted  coronavirus. An independent adviser has been installed by the Federal  Government to oversee the welfare of residents. There's a raft of allegations as  I understand it against staff. Do you have any concerns about the way these  complaints are being handled?

COLLINS: Well clearly it's a good thing that the regulator has moved in. But  what we're hearing is just absolutely tragic. I really feel for the older Australians  that were in that facility and their families and the loved ones who have been  witness to the disaster that this has been. It would be incredibly tragic to their  family member. I just can't comprehend frankly what they're going through and I  think that the Government should be doing everything it can to make sure that  people are communicated with and that people are getting the high level of care  they need and if they can't get that there are other appropriate arrangements  made for them to be transferred to somewhere where they can get that care.

MACDONALD: Are you satisfied that everything is being done now that can be  done to get on top of this?

COLLINS: I'm very pleased that they've brought in the AUSMAT teams. I'm  very pleased that we've now got the two tiers of government working very  closely to try and resolve this issue. But I am concerned for those people  tragically that it's been too little too late for.

MACDONALD: But just to be clear there's not additional things that you want  immediately?

COLLINS: Yes certainly, we want the retention bonus extended to all staff. We  want an assurance that staff know how to use PPE and they've been trained in  infection control. Those things should be done immediately. We cannot have  people working in the system that are not appropriately trained and that are  using protection equipment and have access to protection equipment but don't  know how to use it properly.

MACDONALD: Just on the Aged Care Royal Commissioner, he's clearly hosed  down any expectation that his inquiry can look into what's going on in Victoria.  Are you surprised by that?

COLLINS: Well the Royal Commission has a deadline for reporting has been  extended twice now. One due to extenuating circumstances with the untimely  and sad death of one of the commissioners and then obviously due to the  COVID outbreak. I do think that Victorian families should have a right to have  their say and have a right to be heard about what has happened. But we also  need to be cognisant I guess of we don't want to delay a final report that might  delay further action in aged care. The Government also has a report into what



happened at Dorothy Henderson Lodge that it should release publicly in my  view. We're waiting on the Government report into what happened at  Newmarch House which should be available early August. That should also be  released publicly because we do need to learn lessons early.

MACDONALD: Dorothy Henderson Lodge review, have you seen that?

COLLINS: No I have not. It has not been released publicly, I understand the  Government has it.

MACDONALD: Well are there other things that the other states and territories  can be doing now? Because obviously you know there is some commentary  suggesting that that more could have been done earlier. It seems to me that's  what you are suggesting with regards to Victoria. Are there steps that should be  taken in the rest of Australia, clearly still at risk?

COLLINS: What we think the Government should be doing is is learning the  lessons of what happened at Newmarch House, at Dorothy Henderson Lodge  and what's now happening in Victoria. So that when outbreaks occur, and they  will occur as we're being told by the Prime Minister across the country, we're  going to have to live with this virus for some time. The Government needs to be  ready. We cannot have another system failure like we have seen in Victoria in  aged care in other states and territories and we need to make sure we're doing  everything we can to stop the spread in Victoria today.

MACDONALD: Do you think coming out of this there needs to be a  conversation about the way we do aged care in this country about the role of  profit in the sector?

COLLINS: I'm hoping that that's what the Royal Commission does which is why  I wouldn't want to see the Royal Commission's final report delayed too much  because I do think that we need action from the Government. We cannot  continue to have more and more reports without action and I think we've seen  the lack of action and the implications of that about what's happening today.

MACDONALD: Julie Collins, thank you very much.

COLLINS: Thank you, Hamish.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119









