BILL SHORTEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT SERVICES

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE SCHEME

MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  TODAY SHOW  TUESDAY 17 NOVEMBER, 2020

SUBJECTS: South Australia COVID outbreak; $1.2 billion Robodebt settlement, COVID-19  vaccine, State of Origin.

ALLISON LANGDON, HOST: Thanks for joining us this morning. Adelaide is a city under siege,  tough new lockdowns in force, long queues for testing, panic buying in shops and the military being  deployed as a COVID cluster threatens the entire state's recovery from the pandemic. And now  other states and territories have either banned or restricted all travel with South Australia. Let's  discuss with Shadow Minister for Government Services Bill Shorten and Triple M's Gus Worland,  nice to talk to you both. Bill, you survived Melbourne's harsh lockdown. This is going to be tough on  Adelaide.

BILL SHORTEN, MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG: Yeah, my heart goes out to South Australians,  the small businesses, especially people who might have family in the state who need to see them.  But you’re better to go hard and go early. I know there's a debate about closing the borders, but just  do it and get it out the way. But as someone who's been through 15 weeks of lockdown, the earlier  you act, the earlier you'll come out of it.

LANGDON: I mean, we're feeling for them at the moment, I  guess when you look at it, too, you've  got a prison, a hospital, primary schools, aged care home and a shopping centre all visited by those  who are infected. I mean, talk about a super spreader event. This is a real challenge.

GUS WORLAND, TRIPLE M:  It certainly is. And it just shows how quickly it spreads. And every  time we think we're just out of it; it drags us back into it, doesn't it? So I agree with Bill that go hard,  go early and try to nip it in the bud, because a lot of people are telling us at the moment that we're  not quite over this. 2021 could be just as tough. So we've just got to keep doing what the medical  people tell us to do, even though there's obviously harsh realities that go with that.

LANGDON: We keep being told we need to learn with this virus. That's something we've been told  for months and months now. But when you guys talk about going hard and going early, Bill, how do  you feel about the fact that New South Wales and Victoria are the only two states that remain open  to SA? You're still recovering from that lockdown, are you okay with the border not shutting?

SHORTEN: Well, I'm curious about it. I mean, I think the next couple of days will be telling. I was  reading a professor of epidemiology who said that every person who's infected has 10 close  contacts and that every 10 people who are close contacts will see 10 other people, so if you've got

17 people, that's 170 people in contact and seventeen hundred people that those people see. 17  doesn't sound a lot, but in reality, that's seventeen hundred people who have been in  communication, in touch with people. And so you've just got to go hard and early. There are no  shortcuts to dealing with this disease.

LANGDON: But don't tiptoe around it. Bill, do you think Victoria should shut its border to Adelaide?

SHORTEN: Listen, I don't know is the short answer. I've got a lot of confidence that the Victorian  authorities have shown that we’ve got what it takes to shut this down, if they are not doing something  today, well, you know, there might be a good reason for that. I'm sure, though, it's a day by day  prospect. And if they're not shut, I suspect they will be soon.

LANGDON: Gus, your thoughts on this, because this really threatens the Prime Minister's plan to  reopen the entire country by Christmas, doesn't it?

WORLAND:  Yes, certainly doesn't look like it. We'll see, the next couple of days will be telling. But  I'm surprised they didn't just pull the pin and say, you know what, South Australia at the moment is  going through something, and like Bill said, 17 could turn into just so many more so quickly, so the  border should be shut, I believe, to South Australia right now and just let them cope with this over  the next few days and keep a look at it, but seems silly to keep it open to them for me.

LANGDON: But I mean, is this what we then do every time we have an outbreak anywhere, we shut  down all of the internal borders in Australia. What about all the small businesses or the tourism  operators, the aviation industry? What happens to them, Bill?

SHORTEN: Well, I think we've seen that it's not a choice of shut down or don't shut down. It's a  choice to shut down early or shut down late. And when you look at it that way, I don't think you have  an alternative. I mean, I think it's sensible, if the South Australian Premier restricts social gatherings,  border movement. You know, I think we've learnt a lot. I mean, everyone's now COVID-19 expert,  aren't they?

LANGDON: Well, it sounds like you're saying you think Victoria should shut its borders.

SHORTEN: Listen, I've got a bit of confidence in the medical authorities in Victoria. So, you know,  the last thing they need is a politician from the cheap seats giving them free advice. But I suspect if it  gets bigger -

LANGDON: That’s never stopped any of you guys before!

SHORTEN: No, well everyone's planning the talk show career, aren't they?

LANGDON: Well, I mean, this threat of a second wave in South Australia has focussed on the need  for a vaccine more than ever, which is why this morning we are rejoicing another major  breakthrough, this US developed vaccine by Moderna. It's proven to be almost 95 per cent effective  and can be more easily transported than the Pfizer jab. Huge. This is hugely significant, isn't it?

SHORTEN: Yeah.

WORLAND: Oh look, absolutely fantastic and the fact that we had 90 percent last week, now nearly

95 percent. So we're so close now. And of course, it's a matter of getting it out to everyone, making  sure everyone gets it and then safely gets that actually put into their bodies. That's the key. But what  about old Trumpy boy, Trumpy boy saying make sure that everyone knows in history that it's all  about me and on my watch. That's the disappointing part for me today, is the fact that he tried to  politicise it. But at the end of the day, we are getting so close to that vaccine. That's the only way to  really guys that I believe will be able to open up this world again if we have a vaccine. So fantastic  what they're doing.

LANGDON: Bill, how do you feel about how Donald Trump has refused to accept he's lost the  election?

SHORTEN: Well, I've made no secret of the fact that I think we need to go back to a calmer style of  American politics that Biden represents. But a little bit of me will wonder what it's like to wake up in  the morning and not have Donald Trump say something surprising and new every day, every hour  on Twitter, on every platform in the world. So maybe we'll miss him. No, probably not.

LANGDON: Sounds like you might miss him. But I do want to ask you about this, Bill, because this  is something you've really pushed for, it’s been close to your heart. The government has now settled  a Robodebt class action lawsuit, compensating more than four hundred thousand Aussies. Bill, it’s a  big payout, but there is no admission of responsibility and there's no apology yet.

SHORTEN: Listen, what happened is the Government sent out Robodebt demands to four hundred  thousand poor people and said, you've got to pay up. But the problem was it was illegal. So I helped  put together a class action, people have got their justice. I did notice the Government last night, they  seem to swallow the Donald Trump playbook and saying, yeah, we've paid one point two billion  dollars to 400,000 people, but we've done nothing wrong. I mean, you know, I think the money  speaks. But the real issue is, this is over four years, a Government illegally going after its own  citizens and apparently no one was responsible. Now, I think we need to get to the bottom of that.  And that's why we can have a Royal Commission to find out, like, how do you stuff it up and illegally  take one point two billion dollars off 400,000 people?  That’s bad.

LANGDON: Well at least they’re about to be compensated. That's a step in the right direction, isn't  it? Now, Gus, I need you to give Karl a bit of a reality check for me this morning, because he's got  this crazy idea that somehow Queensland's going to win State of Origin on Wednesday night.

WORLAND: Yeah, I think we need to have a quiet word to the big fella. He's obviously had a head  knock of some description. I mean, the thing is, it's going to be tough for the New South Wales team.  Obviously, a world record COVID crowd of over fifty thousand, and Queensland to be going nuts and  stuff. But at the end of the day, New South Wales is a much better team than Queensland. We  played poorly in Game 1, showed him what we're all about in Game 2, and it's going to be all about  us taking the series, Freddy and his boys three in a row. We're going to slowly but surely get to that  record that the Queenslanders had not so long ago. So give yourself an uppercut, Karl, and sort  yourself out brother. I know you're a Queenslander, but you're kidding yourself

SHORTEN: Well, there you go.

KARL STEFANOVIC, HOST: I've got one word for you, Gus.

WORLAND: Yep.



STEFANOVIC: Stage fright.

WORLAND: Is that two words?

SHORTEN: Is that two words?

LANGDON: I think it’s two words.

STEFANOVIC: In Queensland it’s one.

LANGDON: Well, says it all really, isn't it?  Anyway, respond to that, will you, Karl? Thanks,  gentlemen.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM HOULIHAN 0438 366 400

