SENATOR THE HON LINDA REYNOLDS CSC Minister for Defence Senator for Western Australia

SENATOR MATT O’SULLIVAN Senator for Western Australia

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

ARUNTA RETURNS HOME AFTER SUCCESSFUL DEPLOYMENT

The Royal Australian Navy frigate HMAS Arunta has returned to her homeport of Fleet Base West in Rockingham, Western Australia, following a successful five-month regional deployment, most recently supporting Operation ARGOS.

During her 164 days at sea, Arunta concluded three-months on a regional presence deployment as part of a five-ship Task Group in October, taking part in a series of Southeast Asia and Pacific engagements, which included several successful multilateral training exercises.

Arunta briefly returned to Darwin for a logistics visit before embarking on a further seven-week East Asia deployment.

Minister for Defence, Senator the Hon Linda Reynolds CSC commended the crew for their professionalism during the deployment.

“The crew of Arunta made an important contribution to upholding the rules based international order, by enforcing United Nations Security Council sanctions against North Korea as part of Operation  ARGOS,” Minister Reynolds said.

“Arunta conducted a number of ‘rights of passage’ transits which highlight Australia’s commitment to a peaceful, inclusive, sovereign and resilient Indo-Pacific region.

“I commend the ship’s crew who have worked tirelessly and professionally throughout the deployment.

“I also thank their families, because without their support, the deployment of our ADF personnel would  not be possible.”

Senator for Western Australia, Matt O’Sullivan welcomed the ship’s crew home to Fleet Base West.

“I’m pleased to have had the opportunity to thank our men and women who have done outstanding  work during their deployment,” Senator O’Sullivan said.

No publication date : received by Parl Libarary  on 26/11/2020

“Given the entire deployment was conducted during a global pandemic with only essential, COVID-19-mitigated logistical port visits, the crew has performed extremely well in challenging circumstances.”

Commander Troy Duggan, RAN, Commanding Officer of HMAS Arunta said he was proud of his  crew’s dedication.

“The crew has remained focussed and professional during this deployment.  Importantly, they have built confidence and knowledge among the various partner nations we were operating with,” Commander Duggan said.

Media Contacts

Ben Martin (Minister Reynolds’ Office): +61 447 219 902  Nicky Hamer (Minister Reynolds’ Office): +61 437 989 927 Defence Media: media@defence.gov.au

No publication date : received by Parl Libarary  on 26/11/2020

