

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS BREAKFAST  TUESDAY, 18 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECT/S: Victoria dealing with COVID-19; Scott Morrison failing the  Aged Care Sector; Parliament returning

LISA MILLAR, HOST: But let's return to the coronavirus situation in Victoria  now. Deputy Opposition Leader Richard Marles joins me from Melbourne.  Good morning, welcome to Breakfast.

RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR  PARTY: Good morning, Lisa. How are you?

MILLAR: Look, we're good. But we- our heads are spinning with the revelations  that continue to come forward. I want to talk about aged care in a minute. But  first can we start with the hotel quarantine? Because we now know that 99 per  cent of this second wave have come from overseas travellers, and what will  turn out to be one of the worst bungles. Surely someone needs to start  claiming responsibility for this.

MARLES: Well, actually, I think you've seen a Premier in Victoria be  incredibly responsible in the way in which he's gone about dealing with this  issue. Look, obviously mistakes have been made. I think Daniel Andrews  would say that. But there's still a way to go with the judicial inquiry, both to  understand just what happened, but also what chain of decisions there were  which allowed this to happen. But with all of that, at least with Daniel Andrews  what you've got is a Premier who firstly put in place the judicial inquiry  immediately, which has been doing its work without fear or favour. And every  day Daniel Andrews is standing up, taking the heat, taking  responsibility, answering questions in relation to all of this, and actually giving  a sense of confidence that there is a Government in place in Victoria which is

trying to get on top of this issue, and hopefully that's what we're seeing. But,  frankly, that stands in stark contrast to what we're seeing at a federal level.

MILLAR: Well, last Friday we saw the Prime Minister on the issue of aged care  apologise, and say he was deeply sorry for what had happened. That's not  good enough for you?

MARLES: Well, I think it's very different to what we've seen on the side of  the Victorian Government, where Daniel Andrews has actually put in place the  judicial inquiry, but he's also fronting the cameras every single day and making  it clear not just where responsibility is being accepted, but what the  Government is now trying to do to fix this. I mean, it's all well and good for  the Prime Minister to do his press conference last week, but by and large what  we've seen on the part of the Federal Government is fingers being pointed  everywhere but themselves. And certainly, there is no sense at all being given  by the Federal Government about what they intend to do going forward, in  terms of fixing this. And what we're seeing in aged care, which is clearly the  Federal Government's responsibility, is the single most terrifying and most  lethal aspect of the whole coronavirus pandemic playing out in Victoria right  now. And it's obviously a sector in crisis, and there is no sense at all that the  Government has a plan going forward.

MILLAR: Bill Shorten, on Sunday on Insiders, said that it's very difficult to serve  two masters if you're a private healthcare operator - that's profit and caring  for people. What would Labor be doing if it was in government right now?

MARLES: Well, I mean, the people who are in government is the  Morrison Government. They are the regulator, and that applies to both the  public and the private sector. They're the ones who need to be making  clear what measures are being put in place in relation to staffing, for example.  And what we're learning is that, you know, the facility that was put in place to  provide for surge staffing is inadequate and has only been half spent. What  we're seeing is that very little has been done in relation to proper regulation  around the question of infection control. I mean, we knew before COVID even  came to Australia that the aged care sector was going to be a particularly  vulnerable sector to the disease. That played out vividly in relation to  Newmarch earlier in the year. And in the aftermath of that, you would  have thought that the Federal Government would have taken the lessons  from that and applied them to the rest of the sector so that we could have some  readiness in dealing with what's now been playing out in Victoria. But instead  what we learned is that in the aftermath of Newmarch, what the  Federal Government was doing, from evidence in the Royal Commission,  was engaging in hubris and self-congratulation. That's what they were doing.  They were not taking the steps that were needed to be taken in order to protect



this sector from this virus. And now we are seeing play out within the sector a  crisis which is completely terrifying. I mean, terrifying to everyone who has  family in the sector, obviously terrifying to the residents in the sector,  terrifying to the staff, who are going in there each and every day, frankly, risking  their lives, and they're really hearing nothing from the Prime Minister in terms of  the taking of responsibility and laying out a plan of action for how this is going  to be repaired in the future.

MILLAR: First day of Parliament, August 24. Your electorate, you're based  around Geelong, you've chosen not to go to Canberra and isolate. Are  you getting any further news about how you're going to be involved in the sitting  of Parliament? And are you happy yet with how that is going to happen?

MARLES: Look, I'm hopeful, is the answer to your question, that there will be a  video facility which will allow me to participate. I mean, certainly, like a number  of MPs, we're feeling a need to be in our community and with our families, to be  frank, at this moment in time. I don't have details yet as to what measures are  going be put in place which will allow a video participation within the  Parliament, but I'm hopeful that that will be put in place over the course of  the next week. And whilst being here in Geelong, I'll still be able to participate in  the proceedings of Federal Parliament.

MILLAR: Alright. Richard Marles, thanks for your time this morning.

MARLES: Thanks, Lisa.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363





