

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE   MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  MELBOURNE   MONDAY, 16 MARCH 2020

RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER: Thank you for attending this  morning. And, I'd like to extend my thanks to Andrew Crisp, the Victorian  Emergency Services Commissioner for the briefing he has just provided to me,  along with the senior leadership here at the Victorian State Control Centre.  They are doing a fantastic job in helping to help keep Victorians safe during the  coronavirus crisis. And coordinating the work that is being done here at the  State Control Centre continues to place Victoria in a position of national  leadership around the question of dealing with the coronavirus. Labor  welcomes the decision that has been made to put in place a 14 day isolation  period for all people returning to Australia. We think that this is a very sensible  move forward, in terms of being able to protect our community and making sure  that as much as possible we protect the community from further spread of  coronavirus. It is really important that we get clear and consistent messaging  from the Commonwealth Government as the coronavirus unfolds. It makes no  sense that we can go to football on Saturday night but it's not okay to go to the  football on Monday night. It makes no sense that it's okay to shake people’s  hands on Sunday morning but it's not okay to shake people’s hands on Sunday  afternoon. We understand that this is a rapidly evolving situation. But what that  means is that there is a greater imperative on the part of the Commonwealth  Government to make sure that it is constantly and clearly and consistently  communicating with the Australian public around the question of the  coronavirus. We don't need scrambling for one-liners, we need clear leadership  and decision making from our Prime Minister and from the Commonwealth  Government. The question of schools remaining open is clearly one which is  evolving- a number of private schools have already made the decision to close  and this is a question that is being considered by governments around the  country. Now, in those circumstances it is really important that we have a plan  in place in relation to those people who work in essential occupations,

principally in health but also in emergency services, in policing. It's really  important that plans are being worked out right now around how those families  will deal with potential school closures in the future. Now, Chris Bowen our  Shadow Minister for Health raised this question yesterday. This is an urgent  issue that the Commonwealth Government needs to be working on right now.  This is not good enough to be scrambling on this question down the road. We  are not in a situation now where we can kick a single can down the road; we  cannot have complacency from our Federal Government on this question. And  if we do find ourselves in a situation where schools are closing, it also  heightens the need to be working out arrangements for a significant proportion  of our workforce who are casual employees and we've been calling on the  Government in relation to that as well. Now it stands to reason, it is a matter of  logic that, in terms of social distancing measures; the sooner those measures  are put in place the bigger the impact that they will have. Every transmission of  this disease which is allowed to occur makes the whole question of dealing with  this disease so much harder. And so, we need to see the government being  proactive on this. It is absolutely essential that the Federal Government acts in  a way which means that this disease does not significantly take hold within our  society but that is what the Commonwealth Government must do right now.

Any questions?

JOURALIST: Was the Federal Government too late in implementing that total  travel ban- that quarantine, where every new arrival in Australia?

MARLES: It's an important measure to be taken. But again we need leadership  from our government here. We've seen a range of social distancing measures  being introduced by companies in the private sector and various agencies  around Australia- we actually need to have clear and consistent leadership from  our Commonwealth Government in relation to these clear social distancing  measures. And it is self-evident that in terms of any step that's going to be  taken in relation to social distancing but the earlier that it is taken, the bigger  impact that it will have. And it is imperative that we are doing everything we can  as a nation to make sure that this disease does not significantly take hold within  our country.

JOURNALIST: You said we need clear and effective and consistent  information, has Dr Brendan Murphy been an effective communicator?

MARLES: Well this is a matter for the Prime Minister of Australia and he is the  person who is the chief communicator in relation to this and the Commonwealth  Government. They are the elected representatives. They are the people who  are ultimately answerable to the Australian public. Now, to have a situation  yesterday where it was okay to be shaking hands in the morning but it's not

okay to be shaking hands in the afternoon- it makes no sense. It doesn't give  people a sense of calm and a sense of confidence that there is a clear set of  decisions being made about how to deal with this crisis as it evolves. Now we  understand that it does rapidly evolve. But that only heightens the need to have  clear and consistent and frequent communication on the part of our  Commonwealth Government.

JOURNALIST: Are you happy for Parliament to come back in a limited  capacity?

MARLES: That's a matter which is going to be worked out between the parties.  Obviously it is really important that we are dealing with questions of stimulus  and that stimulus is allowed to flow at the earliest opportunity. And we have  made clear our support for the Government in relation to that. We want to make  sure that stimulus is sufficient but that which has been announced,that is very  important that it is allowed to be rolled out and we understand Parliament's  crucial role in terms of that. The precise logistics of how that might work, in  terms of Parliament being recalled is a matter that is being spoken about  between the parties now.

JOURNALIST: Would you feel comfortable and confident in returning to  Parliament House with the thousands of people inside, given the current  conditions?

MARLES: It is an issue which is being worked through by the respective parties  and they're obviously taking proper advice around that. Our first responsibility is  to the Australian people. There is a decision that needs to be taken for the  benefit of Australian people in terms of stimulus; we're very clear about that.  And I feel completely comfortable about playing my role in making sure that that  stimulus is in the hands of the Australian public at the earliest possible  moment.

JOURNALIST: How do you think Australia's placed right now to deal with an  outbreak? There is a sudden ramping up of community infections.

MARLES: Well again this is where we need to make sure that we are getting  very clear consistent messaging from the part of the Federal Government.  Where there is leadership on the part of the government and where there is a  clear plan about how we move forward. The answer to our ability to be able to  manage this going forward lies in the decision making and the leadership that  the Commonwealth Government ultimately puts in place. But it is really  essential that in doing this this disease is not able to significantly take hold  within our community because with the mortality rate associated with it, the  consequences of that are very clear.





JOURNALIST: Right across Australia, we're seeing people have difficulty going  grocery shopping, supermarket shelves are empty. Woolworths has taken the  step of opening early to allow the disabled and the elderly to get what they  need, should other supermarkets follow?

MARLES: Yeah look I really appreciate that question. There is an  understandable anxiety that people have around shopping and being able to  make sure that they are in a position to deal with whatever is about to occur  within our society. But we do need to be really mindful of those who are most  vulnerable, and make sure they too are in a position to be able to get the  provisions they need to get through this crisis. I think the step that Woolworths  have taken to open an hour earlier and to have that dedicated to pensioners,  people with disabilities, those who are most vulnerable, is an act of community  leadership which should absolutely be commended and I do that right now. And  in saying that, the other retail chains should follow suit, from that act of  leadership on the part of Woolworths, to enable people who are most  vulnerable to have an opportunity to buy the provisions that they need to  provide. Again, this is an example of leadership which has come from the  community. What we need to see though, is leadership from the Federal  Government. And it's really important that Scott Morrison and his Government  are talking to the major retail chains to make sure that there is an ability for  those who are most vulnerable in our community to be able to get provisions  that they need at supermarkets.

JOURNALIST: Here in Victoria, the State Government is going to be offering  care packages to people who end up in isolation and don't have access to the  essentials. Is there anything the Commonwealth can do to make that more  uniform across Australia?

MARLES: Again, I think it's really important that what we see is best practice  around the country. And in terms of state action becomes the practice of the  norm around the country; the Commonwealth does have a role to play in  making sure that best practice becomes everyday practice across the entire  country.

Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363





