

JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN



AGED CARE ROYAL COMMISSION FINAL HEARINGS

The final submission of the Counsel Assisting the Aged Care Royal Commission has  confirmed that Morrison Government mismanagement has transformed Australia’s aged  care system into a national shame.

Peter Rozen today told the Commission one in five nursing home residents was receiving  substandard care.

That’s not good enough.

The Counsel Assisting’s submission follows the deaths of more than 680 older Australians  in residential aged care homes from COVID-19 this year.

And it came as the Morrison Government Senators used today’s Senate Estimates  hearings to seek to undermine the Royal Commission’s credibility by attacking a staffer’s  personal tweets.

Liberals on the committee also voted to prevent Labor senators from asking officials about  Coronavirus deaths, rejecting the issue as “not relevant’’.

Aged care is a Federal Government responsibility.

But Mr Morrison and Aged Care Minister Richard Colbeck have failed in their duty protect  older Australians.

When the Royal Commission previously highlighted the Morrison Government’s failure to  plan for COVID-19 in aged care, Mr Morrison rejected its evidence.

He also failed to properly respond to the Royal Commission’s interim report which included  calls for urgent action on the home care waiting list.

There were more than 100,000 older Australians waiting list home care when Scott  Morrison called the Royal Commission and there are still more than 100,000 waiting  today.

Despite the need for real action, the Morrison Government racked up $1 billion in debt but  included no significant new funding for residential aged care.





Day after day the evidence mounts of serious neglect in aged care homes and every day  all we see from the Morrison Government is running away, passing the buck and not  accepting responsibility for its own failures.

Scott Morrison needs to listen to the Royal Commission. Older Australians deserve action.

THURSDAY, 22 OCTOBER 2020

MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119





