

ANDREW LEIGH MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR TREASURY

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR CHARITIES

MEMBER FOR FENNER



SENATOR CATRYNA BILYK

SENATOR FOR TASMANIA



AUSTRALIA’S CHARITIES NEED SUPPORT, NOT SILENCE



Charities across Australia are struggling with increasing demand and dwindling

resources as they step up to help people falling through the gaps left by the

Morrison Government.



Since the spread of coronavirus started, demand for charities’ help has

skyrocketing. Earlier this year, Foodbank reported that demand was up 78 per

cent, yet their supplies of donated food had shrunk by 27 per cent. The

Salvation Army has seen increased demand, but its Red Shield Appeal has

raised less than half of its $8 million target.



These experiences were echoed by Tasmanian charities and not-for-profits

which took part in a forum today, hosted by Shadow Assistant Minister for

Charities Andrew Leigh and Senator Catryna Bilyk, exploring the impacts of the

spread of coronavirus on the sector.



One charity told the forum that their workload had increased by nearly 200 per

cent since the start of the year, but their funding hadn’t kept pace with the

growing demand. Some charities have zero fundraising.



Other attendees spoke on the difficulty of maintaining their volunteer bases as

both social distancing and the recession started to bite. 90 per cent of

Tasmanian organisations had stood down volunteers. Many volunteers haven’t

returned.



Speaking on the rolling crises of the summer bushfires and the spread of

coronavirus, one charity representative said:



“It has exposed our need as a community and a society for volunteers.

Whenever the chips are down, it’s volunteers that people turn to and it’s

volunteering that bring people together”.



But despite these stories from the charitable sector - which accounts for a tenth

of the national workforce at 1.3 million workers - the Morrison Government has

turned a deaf ear to their calls for better support.



Charities and their volunteers should be recognised for their significant

contribution to not only Australian society, but the Australian economy as well.

Yet there were no new initiatives in the federal budget to help ease the burden

on the sector.



The Morrison Government needs to acknowledge the not-for-profit sector, not

ignore it. Charities deserve support, not silence.



TUESDAY, 3 NOVEMBER 2020



MEDIA CONTACTS:





STEPHANIE ANDERSON (LEIGH) 0431344056

DANIEL HULME (BILYK) 0447 000 867





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













