JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

PRESS CONFERENCE

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

WEDNESDAY, 2 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: National Accounts; JobKeeper; AFL Grand Final; Wages.



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: This is the darkest day in the Australian economy

for almost a century. This Morrison-Frydenberg recession is deep and it's devastating for

millions of Australians and their families. But not even the worst numbers on record can do

justice to the human cost of this recession. Recessions destroy jobs and they destroy

opportunities for real people in real communities. We need to avoid at almost any cost a lost

generation of Australians sacrificed to the worst recession in almost a century.



You've seen the numbers by now; the record quarterly contraction in the economy, the deepest

recession on record, the deepest recession for almost a century. There are very troubling

developments when it comes to living standards, wages, business investment, and especially

consumption. The consumption numbers are so weak because people are scared. People are

scared to spend because they're worried that they'll fall through the cracks, worried that they'll

fall through the safety net, and worried that this Morrison Government will leave them out and

leave them behind.



It's not a surprise today that Australia is in a deep recession; the surprising thing is that the

Government seems to have absolutely no idea what to do about it. Australians know that the

economy is weak, but they don't know what the Morrison Government intends to do about it.

The worst recession in a century, a million unemployed and rising, and still no jobs plan from

Scott Morrison and Josh Frydenberg.



We have always acknowledged the devastating economic consequences of this diabolical

pandemic. The Labor Opposition in the federal parliament has tried to be responsible and

constructive, to agree where we can and disagree where we must, to try and improve the

support being provided in the economy where that's possible. But there is absolutely no doubt

that this recession is deeper, and the recovery will be weaker, because too many Australians

are being left behind. The cuts to JobKeeper, the cuts to wages, the cuts to super, and the

freeze on the pension will make a bad situation worse, not better. It makes absolutely no sense

when unemployment is rising for government support in the economy to be falling, as it is

today under this Morrison Government.



The main take out from today's figures is that we have the deepest recession in almost a

century, a million unemployed and a number which is still rising, but still no jobs plan from the

Morrison Government. Josh Frydenberg a few moments ago said to the million unemployed

Australians and the 400,000 that he expects to become unemployed between now and

Christmas that at least we're doing better than the Americans and the other countries with

which we compare ourselves. That comparison is absolutely meaningless to the million people

in Australia who are unemployed. That comparison is cold comfort to the 400,000 Australians

he expects to lengthen the unemployment queues between now and Christmas.



Josh Frydenberg once again told Australians that things were bad but they already knew that.

What he didn't tell Australians is what he's going to do about it. Cutting pensions, cutting

wages, cutting JobKeeper, cutting JobSeeker, pointing the finger and shifting the blame is not

going to grow the economy and create jobs for more Australians. What we desperately needed

to hear today from Josh Frydenberg was a plan for what he's going to do about it and once

again it was a missed opportunity for him to tell us.



JOURNALIST: Jim, the economic effects of this pandemic were pretty much impossible to

avoid. Shouldn't the Government's performance be judged on how quickly we recover from this

recession rather than [the fact] that we're in a recession in the first place?



CHALMERS: The recession is deeper and the recovery will be weaker because the Morrison

Government's left too many people behind. We asked in the parliament yesterday how much of

this so-called $314 billion that the Treasurer talks about in economic support has actually been

provided by the Morrison Government and he could only get to $85 billion. The consequence

of that over-promising and under-delivering is that more Australians lose their jobs. The

consequences of the Treasurer deliberately excluding casuals, aviation workers, university

workers, and arts and entertainment workers from JobKeeper is that the unemployment

queues which are already long will become even longer. We have always acknowledged the

economic consequences of this pandemic. It's time for the Government to acknowledge that

how they've gone about responding has meant that the recession is deeper, the recovery will

be weaker, and the unemployment lines will be too long for the foreseeable future as the

Reserve Bank has said as recently as yesterday. The onus is on the Government. Having

failed to respond adequately to this recession they need to tell us what they intend to do to

create jobs in the recovery.



JOURNALIST: The fact that Australia is doing better than countries such as the US and UK -

you say that that's cold comfort to people. That might be so, but does it not suggest that the

measures the Government has put in place thus far have been effective?



CHALMERS: The numbers that we're seeing today show that the recession is deeper than it

needs to be because too many people have been left out of what is otherwise welcome

support from the Government. We know that casuals and some of the other workers that I was

mentioning a moment ago, they make up a large component of the record one million

unemployed Australians and the 400,000 we expect to lose a job between now and Christmas.

If you've lost a job, if you're one of that record one million Australian, or you're one of the

400,000 expected to lose their job, it doesn't matter at all to you whether our situation as a

nation is slightly better than some of the other countries we compare ourselves to. It is cold

comfort for Australians who've lost a job, cold comfort for the Australians who have been

deliberately excluded from JobKeeper in particular.



JOURNALIST: Is extending nationwide programs like JobKeeper and the Coronavirus

Supplement the best solution given that the third quarter is expected to show Victoria doing

much worse than the rest of the country?



CHALMERS: Clearly in the future Victorian businesses and Victorian workers will make up a

bigger component of some of these national programs. That's how the eligibility regime works.

Now is the worst time for the Government to be winding back JobKeeper while unemployment

is still rising. The Reserve Bank yesterday said that the economy needs more support, not

less. The Morrison Government is heading in the other direction. That will prolong some of this

economic misery and it will mean that the unemployment queues are longer than they need to

be for longer.



JOURNALIST: Is there a case to be made if some of these companies are not going to be

here at the end of this recession no matter what, they're zombie companies, is keeping them

artificially alive for longer, really just delaying the inevitable?



JOURNALIST: No I think the most important thing is what it means for jobs and what it means

for employment. At the beginning of this when we proposed wage subsidies to the Government

they initially said it was a bad idea. We welcomed their change of heart when they came

around to our view. They said that the reason for having these wage subsidies was to keep as

many people as possible connected to an employer. I think that that still should be the guiding

principle. It's easy for people to get lost in the big numbers and it's easy for people to swim in

the big, complicated spreadsheets but at its essence what recessions are about is joblessness.

Our big fear for the economy is that this spike in unemployment concentrates and cascades

through the generations in a way that sacrifices a whole generation of Australian workers. If we

are to prevent that, we need to get serious about it. That means ensuring that JobKeeper is

tailored to the economic circumstances which have got worse since the Government

announced their changes. But just as importantly, if the Government's in such a rush to pull

back on JobKeeper, where's the jobs plan to replace it? It makes no sense for them to be in

such a rush to pull back JobKeeper, especially when they have absolutely no idea what they're

going to do to create jobs once that welcome support is withdrawn.



JOURNALIST: Is Labor's offer for bipartisan support to bring forward the second and possibly

the third phase of income tax cuts still on the table? Is that something you'd like to see in the

October budget?



CHALMERS: We've said for some time that we'd have an open mind to the Government

bringing forward parts of stage two of their proposed tax cuts. We've said that for some time

because we think that middle Australia needs help now rather than down the track. We need to

be conscious of all of the fiscal consequences of doing that. But the Government has not come

forward with a proposal. There have been smoke signals about this for some time. If and

when they do bring something to the table then we'll discuss it in our usual forums, in our usual

way, come to a position and announce it then.



JOURNALIST: Jim how do you feel about the AFL Grand Final being taken out of

[INAUDIBLE]?



CHALMERS: As a proud Queenslander I'm absolutely delighted, especially in the year when

the Lions are going to win the flag, that they'll be able to win one at home. I think it's a

tremendous outcome. I want to pay tribute to Premier Palaszczuk and Sports Minister Mick de

Brenni for encouraging and ensuring that the AFL made a really good decision today. I know

that a lot of people who live in Brisbane and the surrounding areas will be really excited about

that outcome. It's a really good thing. We haven't had a heap of good news this year, like all

Australians, but I think it's going to mean a lot to footy fans and to the city more broadly to have

the Grand Final in Brisbane. I'm looking forward to it.



JOURNALIST: Jim in terms of Labor's preference for stimulating the economy going forward,

would you rather see tax cuts for those middle income earners or would you rather see things

like infrastructure project work or greater services to keep the economy moving?



CHALMERS: We want to see a comprehensive plan for jobs. All along we've been saying that

the Government should be considering a range of things. First of all, get JobKeeper right so

that we're responding adequately. In terms of labour-intensive projects, whether it's

infrastructure or social housing, we've said for some time that those kind of projects make a

heap of sense when we've got the unemployment crisis that we're facing. We've said that we

need to get energy policy right. You look at the business investment figures is in the National

Accounts today; they're very worrying but they've been worrying for some time. Business

investment was really weak even before COVID-19 so we need to get energy policy right

because business tells me that's a handbrake on investment, a handbrake on growth, and a

handbrake on jobs. There are a whole range of things that the Government should be

considering. When Josh Frydenberg was asked, he didn't mention a plan or put forward any

ideas in his introduction a moment ago. Mark Riley asked him if he had a plan and as always

he falls back on harsher industrial relations. He said he draws his inspiration from Margaret

Thatcher; that will send a shiver down the spine of every Australian worker. We need a

comprehensive jobs plan, not cuts to wages, to pensions, to super, or to JobKeeper.



JOURNALIST: The ABS found compensation of employees fell below 50% for the first time

since 1959. Does this tell us anything about whether the economic supports have been too

much in favour of business and not enough in favour of workers? How should that be adjusted

going forward?





CHALMERS: The Government needs to be supporting workers and businesses. In lots of

ways it's two sides of the same coin. We need to support businesses that hang on to their

workers. We need to see those things together. The wages story which is obviously incredibly

troubling in these National Accounts, has been troubling for some time now. I know that you've

written about that before, Paul. We've had a wages crisis, a crisis of insecure work and

underemployment in this country since well before COVID-19. This crisis has accelerated and

exacerbated some of those things which worry us most about the economy. Weak wages,

underemployment, and insecure work have been the defining features of the economy under

the Liberals for the entire duration of the Government and not just the last few months.



I'd better leave it there. Thanks very much.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949

