

JIM CHALMERS MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR RANKIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RADIO NATIONAL BREAKFAST  WEDNESDAY, 7 OCTOBER 2020

SUBJECT: Federal Budget.

FRAN KELLY, HOST: The Shadow Treasurer, Jim Chalmers, is in our Parliament House  studios now. Jim Chalmers, welcome back to Breakfast.

JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: Thanks for having me on your show, Fran.

KELLY: The Treasurer says this budget will give people hope. Does it do enough to set  the nation on the road to recovery, in your view? Do you like this blueprint?

CHALMERS: No, it doesn't Fran. The best way to think about this budget is that the  Government's managed to rack up a trillion dollars in debt, and still unemployment is too  high for too long, still too many people are left out and left behind, and there's still no vision  for the future.

KELLY: What did you want to see in this budget that's not there? I mean there is a lot of  money being spent to try and get jobs growth, and according to Treasury estimates in this  budget, these measures will create one million jobs.

CHALMERS: There are a lot of obvious gaps in the budget, but you want to talk about  unemployment, Fran, before we get to those. The Treasurer was just talking about  unemployment getting to 5.5 per cent by the end of the four-year forward estimates; that's  still higher than it was before COVID-19 -

KELLY: Yes, but we're in the worst recession we've seen in 70 years.

CHALMERS: In four years' time, Fran, after racking up more than a trillion dollars in debt  we're still going to have higher unemployment than we did before the crisis. As you rightly  pointed out, 160,000 Australians are expected to lose their job between now and the end  of the year. The point we're making is that having racked up a trillion dollars in debt, they  haven't made enough inroads into that unemployment, and there are still people left out  from the blueprint that they released last night. I know there are a lot of numbers flying  around but consider this number, Fran; 928,000 Australians who are on unemployment  benefits are not eligible for the hiring subsidies in what they announced last night. That's  an obvious gap -



KELLY: I just put that to the Treasurer, and he said there's other measures in their budget  spending and in their general post-pandemic spending splash for them, including training  positions and free courses?

CHALMERS: Fran, there's almost a million of them, and even if you added up all of the  numbers that he quoted to you, it still doesn't get anywhere near providing the sort of  opportunity the Australians have a right to expect from a trillion dollars of debt and all this  spending that's going around. There's hardly anything for women, nothing for childcare,  nothing substantial for public housing, nothing substantial for cleaner and cheaper energy,  and nothing substantial for aged care. It really beggars belief Fran that you can spend that  much money and rack up a trillion dollars in debt and still not address some of the obvious  challenges in our economy now and into the future.

KELLY: The Government is arguing that the key to the economy coming back, and to  providing the surpluses - ultimately, someday in the distant future it would seem, at least  10 years away - is confidence and being able to get the economy moving again in order for  people to feel confident. Do they need the Opposition in this country to be backing the  Government here and in that vein, will Labor back the legislated tax cuts and big tax  incentives for business when they're introduced first thing this morning?

CHALMERS: Central to having confidence in the future is having a Government that has a  plan for the future, and a vision, and can explain to people where they fit in that  vision.  That's where the budget fell down last night. In terms of the tax cuts, we've been  saying for some time, and I've probably said to you many times on this program Fran, that  we are up for income tax cuts for low- and middle-income earners. We called for stage two  to be brought forward, so obviously we will be supporting that. There are lots of other tax  measures in the budget. We're inclined to support those as well but I think your listeners  will understand when even one initiative costs $27 billion that we want to make sure we go  through the detail and make sure that that money is being responsibly spent. We're  inclined to support the tax package. We want to work through all of the complexity and all  of the big dollars associated with it, but subject to that we're inclined to support it in the  parliament.

KELLY: The Government's going to have all these measures - five of them, I think -  wrapped up in one omnibus bill. Given that you want to examine more closely a lot of these  measures - some of the business incentives, for instance, and the R&D changes - would  you urge the Government to separate the tax measures and just put them into a bill that  you could give the tick immediately?

CHALMERS: Ideally, but in terms of the income tax cuts, the Tax Commissioner can have  the confidence to implement those new tax scales. We've indicated publicly that we'll be  supporting the income tax cuts component of it. That's all the ATO really needs to  implement it. Ideally the Government would be looking for an economic outcome here but  typically they're looking for a political outcome. They wrap it all up; they show us these tax  cuts worth tens of billions of dollars at 3:30 in the afternoon and demand an answer by  7:30 on the same day. We want to be responsible about it. We've said we're inclined to  support it, but I think we owe it to the Australian people to go through it and make sure that  the details check out, particularly when we've got a Government which has form in making  big announcements and big claims and falling over on the implementation. It's our job to  make sure that we do that work.



KELLY: Labor didn't support company tax cuts proposed a few years ago. The  Government's got a big spend for business here nevertheless, but it's in the form of an  instant asset write off with close to $27 billion in tax relief over the forward estimates for  businesses and there's another $5 billion through a temporary loss carry back provision.  Do you support those pretty generous measures for business?

CHALMERS: They're really the ones that we're talking about Fran. We're inclined to  support them, but we want to have a look at them. In principle, those are better ways of  going about boosting investment in the economy than the company tax cut would have  been. We've been making that point for some years now. We've got a business investment  problem in the economy, and it didn't just show up along with COVID-19. It's actually been  a problem for some time. Businesses haven't been investing as much as we'd like. It's  partly because there's been a paralysis around energy policy and a lack of certainty around  energy policy, but more broadly as well. We've said for some time this needs to be  addressed. Ideally these measures will be a good way to address them, but when you are  talking about some of these sums of money that you just identified, it's responsible for us to  go through it.

KELLY: And is Labor still calling for the Government to extend JobKeeper even as the  Government has announced this $4 billion job hiring subsidy we've spoken about already,  with employers is being paid $100-$200 a week to place younger job seekers into jobs.  Given that, is Labor still calling for JobKeeper to be extended? We've got to get people off  these government support lines at some point, don't we?

CHALMERS: Yes, at some point Fran. But we are calling for the Government's cuts to  JobKeeper to be reconsidered. When you think about businesses in Victoria, and Cairns  where I was last week talking with small businesses, there's a lot of weakness in the  economy right now, the economy is not ready for hundreds of millions of dollars to be  pulled out. There's no guarantee that those workers who are facing JobKeeper cuts and  eventually will be kicked off JobKeeper will find their way into some of these other  programs. Think about the tax cuts too Fran, an average worker will be getting something  like $50 a fortnight from these tax cuts. If you're one of the couple of million people on  JobKeeper losing $300 a fortnight right now given those cuts at the end of last month, you  can see that a lot of people will be worse off.

KELLY: Jim Chalmers, thank you very much for joining us.

CHALMERS: Thanks so much, Fran.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949









