

BILL SHORTEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT SERVICES

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE SCHEME

MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

MELBOURNE

THURSDAY, 31 DECEMBER 2020



SUBJECT: Morrison Government cruel crackdown on welfare payments, 2020

reflections



BILL SHORTEN, MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG: The Morrison Government. What a

surprise.  Announcing a welfare crackdown the day before they kick millions of unemployed

Australians in the gut, taking away their money tomorrow. 100 dollars that unemployed people

are losing tomorrow. This is the Morrison Government's marketing con man stunt. They're

trying to distract people on New Year's Eve with a welfare fraud crackdown because on New

Year's Day, there'll be millions of Australians losing 100 dollars a fortnight on JobSeeker and

JobKeeper. The Morrison Government's giving millions of Australians one massive New Year's

hangover, which is going to last for a long time. Happy to take any questions.



REPORTER: Thanks very much for that.  The Government says that 650 incidents are being

referred to prosecutors, 13 million dollars in welfare clawed back. You’re saying in reality,

they’re just about to rob millions of Australians of a lot more?



SHORTEN: Well, the Morrison Government is about to rob millions of Australians, literally

billions of dollars on New Year's Day. So, they're trying to con everyone with welfare fraud

crisis. It's the classic distraction tactics from marketing central, which is the Morrison

Government. These people are running a big confidence sting on Aussies. We all know that

we're still in the middle of COVID in Sydney and now in Melbourne. We know that there's

millions of people searching for fewer jobs than ever. And this Government, on New Year's

Day, is going to cut millions of people. It's too harsh, too mean, too stingy, too soon, and it

shouldn't be happening New Year's Day.



REPORTER: If you were in the PM’s shoes, how would you handle the situation? They have to

get out of the economic hit somehow. Would you be scaling back JobSeeker [inaudible]?



SHORTEN: Well, you can't continue government benefits indefinitely, but we are in the middle

of COVID, if you're living on the northern beaches or in greater Sydney, you're in lockdown.

Small businesses are doing it hard. In Melbourne, the State Government's announced new

restrictions tonight, New Year's Eve. We're not out of COVID yet. Millions of people are

unemployed. There's far fewer jobs available for all the people looking for them. This is the

wrong time to take 20 dollars a day off, people. This is the wrong time to do it.



REPORTER: Bill just on JobSeeker generally, do you think there is a need to increase the

permanent rate? And if so, how much by?



SHORTEN: Yeah, we've got well over a million people who are unemployed. You've got about

12 adults competing for every single job in the country. You can't just tell people who have lost

their jobs, especially during COVID, that they should just get by on forty dollars a day. It's too

low. This government is going out of its way to punish the unemployed. There's a lot of small

businesses and a lot of unemployed people who've taken one for the national team. They've

lost their jobs, not for any mistake that they've made, but because we have a pandemic which

is ravaging the world. Why is it that this government can waste hundreds of millions of dollars

on their mates in rorts? Yet when it comes to knockabout everyday Aussies in the country and

in the city, who can't get a job, they're just going to take 10 or 20 dollars a day off them. This is

a stingy, mean government. New Years Eve should be a time to say goodbye to 2020. But it

looks like the Morrison Government is going to continue the pain. And this time it's not due to a

virus that's due to the Morrison Government being too mean, too stingy, too harsh.



REPORTER: Mate, 2020 has been a tough year for everybody. What’s your hopes for 2021,

you’ve lived through the Melbourne lockdown, what’s your hopes for next year?



SHORTEN: I hope the next is better than this year. I hope that small businesses are able to

get back on their feet. I hope that the Year 12 kids next year won’t do it as hard as this year.

And I hope that we can get to lowering our borders and getting back to being one country

again.



REPORTER: 10 News, just following on Minister Robert’s announcement this morning, talking

welfare fraud. Would you classify Robodebt as welfare fraud?



SHORTEN: Yeah. Stuart Robert is the classic case of the pot calling the kettle black. The

biggest welfare fraudsters in this country are the Morrison Government. They've had to repay

1.2 billion dollars to nearly half a million Aussies. This was welfare fraud by the Commonwealth

Government. Now they've got the cheque to come after people for ten or twenty dollars a day.

Just this government is out of touch with the lives of ordinary people.



REPORTER: What do you think of them, talking about 13 million dollars being recovered in

this operation. How does 13 million compare to 1.2 billion?



SHORTEN: The Morrison Government's having a New Year's Eve joke with Australians, they

want to boast about recovering 13 million dollars, yet they ripped 1.2 billion dollars illegally, off

nearly half a million Aussies. If there was a gold medal for being a welfare fraud in this country,

the Morrison Government gets the gold.



REPORTER: You said before that we can’t keep government benefits indefinitely, but do you

think that Government should say outright a kind of benchmark of where we should get to, to

continue the benefits until the economy recovers to a particular point?



SHORTEN: Australia has been hard hit by the COVID virus. The tourism industry is doing a

really tough a whole lot of sectors are doing it tough. This Government shouldn't stop winding

back JobKeeper, which has helped keep people in work and JobSeeker for the millions of

people who are unemployed yet. Let's wait till we get through COVID. Let's wait till we get

through the shutdowns and all the closures and all the lockdowns before the government starts

getting out the razor gang into and starts cutting people's benefits, when people are doing it

hard, not because of themselves, but because of a virus which came in from overseas. Why

should ordinary Aussies be kicked in the guts by this government? All good? Happy New Year,



everyone.



ENDS







