

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE  SENATOR FOR THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AFTERNOON AGENDA WITH KIERAN GILBERT  THURSDAY, 26 NOVEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Scott Morrison’s broken promise to bring stranded  Australians home by Christmas; The release of Dr Kylie Moore-Gilbert.

KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: With me now is Katy Gallagher, the Labor Senator  and Chair of the Senate Select Committee on COVID-19. Thanks very much for  your time. We've heard some of those harrowing testimonies today by families  and Australians stuck overseas. What is the key problem in getting them home?  What's the stumbling block?

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER, CHAIR OF THE SENATE SELECT  COMMITTEE ON COVID-19: Well, I think after listening to evidence from all of  the departments involved today, I would say a lack of leadership essentially  from the Commonwealth Government. There's a lot of - it's all the states’ fault,  they've got the caps on, they've got the quarantine constraints. And there isn't  any sense that the Prime Minister, who made a promise that he'd be getting  Australians home by Christmas that he has, sort of, taken charge of this and put  in place any kind of national response. It's all being led by the states and  territories, and any fault is being laid at their feet. And I don't think, from our  point of view, we don't think that's reasonable.

GILBERT: So in terms of the leadership you want to see, how does that  override those state-based restrictions on incoming numbers?

GALLAGHER: Well, ultimately, the Commonwealth has responsibility for  quarantine. They have powers under federal quarantine laws where they could,  and Jane Halton made a number of recommendations about establishing  particular zones, looking at a national facility, looking at enhancing the national  capacity, as opposed to just forcing all the states and territories to look at what

more they can do. We accept they're doing a lot and we have to keep  Australians safe. But we've got thirty six thousand Australians wanting to get  home -  desperate to get home. The Jefferies family has been trying to get  home for the best part of eight months - costing them fifty thousand dollars,  potentially losing jobs, trying to pay mortgages. I mean, these people have  rights too and facilitating their return hasn't been the number one priority for  Scott Morrison.

GILBERT: So in terms of expanding say the Howard Springs facility as Trudy  touched on in her report there - that the government's in close contact with the  Northern Territory government for that. That only still allows two thousand  additional arrivals per month. So it's going to take many months before we clear  the backlog. Is it just simply a case that there are too many, given the capacity  constraints?

GALLAGHER: Well, I think, you know, the borders closed on the 20th of March,  this has been a problem the Commonwealth has known of for this entire  pandemic. So more than eight months now. Action only really started in  September, when it started becoming a media issue and there was growing  criticism about people being stuck overseas, and some of the terrible stories  involved. So, I think there's been a lack of focus, a lack of attention. I think  there's been comments made, including by the Prime Minister, that well I told  people to come home, and they didn't and this is the result of it. And I think that  fails to acknowledge individual circumstance, or show any compassion for the  fact that we have thousands of Australians desperate to return home, and  significant limits on that, and the Commonwealth Government, it seems, not  prepared to take the challenge up and really look at what they could do to  supplement over and above what the states and territories can manage through  their hotel quarantine.

GILBERT: Do you accept though that this is an incredibly complex this  scenario...

GALLAGHER: Yep.

GILBERT: ...Because you've got people, whether it be in Canada, as we heard  from that family on our clip earlier, to India, you know all over the place - to  coordinate all of the individuals to get them back when really commercial flights  are the only option at the moment. That's also very difficult, and they're subject  to the commercial demands as well.

GALLAGHER: We're certainly not saying it's easy. I don't think anyone's  pretending that. Yes , there are logistical concerns that need to be managed.  But there's also been eight months to start putting things in place. The effort

really didn't start till September, which is what has led to the amount of people  being stuck overseas. And the evidence we heard today - people have been  screaming out for help for months, haven't even had calls returned. So I think...

GILBERT: Do you want the Air Force jets to be used?

GALLAGHER: Well, I mean...

GILBERT: Is that the solution here because at the moment, people are making  the comparison between Mathias Cormann...

GALLAGHER: Yes, quite rightly.

GILBERT: ...Flying around Europe and South America on an Air Force jet. And  yet people are stuck overseas. Is that what you want to see?

GALLAGHER: Well, Labor made that suggestion months ago, and it was poo-pooed by the Prime Minister at the time and said it's ridiculous. And then we've  got him acknowledging yesterday that the one of the reasons they've loaned the  RAAF plane to a private citizen to fly around Europe, is because they didn't  want him to get COVID. Well, we had a witness today who's got COVID, waiting  to get home. He is now back in Australia. But I don't think that sits well with  them. So I think it does look like there's one standard for mates and friends and  then there's another standard for others and I don't think that's reasonable. And  I think all effort, if it involves using the RAAF jets, more repatriation flights,  setting up a national centre with increased capacity, looking at other alternatives  like home quarantine with ankle bracelets as Jane Halton has recommended.  All of those things should be done but it should be done with a sense of  urgency.

GILBERT: Do you accept though that in scenarios where, for example, the  Indian cricket team were able to arrive, that special arrangements via Cricket  Australia are appropriate, given the broader interest in that particular summer  sport and so on? It brings a lot of joy and attention in this country. Is that fair  enough that there are special arrangements in circumstances like the cricket  summer?

GALLAGHER: Well, I think people would be reasonable and understand that if  they felt that Australians were being looked after as well and that's the problem.  I think everyone gets that there will be situations where we need to let skilled  workers in for particular purposes. Indian cricket - I love cricket. I love watching  the cricket. So I get how important that is. And I think they would be reasonable  about that if they felt that people weren't being excluded or treated unfairly or  not prioritised. And  that's how some of the people we've spoken to feel. They



feel like they are getting lesser treatment from their Prime Minister in their  government than others. And I think kind of the lack of action, the lack of  urgency feeds into that perception and that is unhelpful at the moment as well.

GILBERT: One person that is returning, thankfully, is Kylie Moore-Gilbert, the  academic. That's some good news finally in 2020.

GALLAGHER: Absolutely. I was listening to the radio early this morning. And I  thought it's so lovely to hear a good news story at the beginning of the news  bulletin. And yeah, I think everyone's been, you know, just so worried about her.  804 days - I don't think we can go close to understanding what that's been like.  And congratulations to everyone who's been involved in getting her safely on  her way home.

GILBERT: The consular officials did a wonderful job. We will hopefully find a bit  more information as to what went on behind the scenes but certainly great news  that she's heading home. Thank you, appreciate it Katy Gallagher.

GALLAGHER: Thank you Kieran.



ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: PAT CRONAN 0432 758 224















