



The Hon Stuart Robert MP  Minister for the National Disability Insurance Scheme  Minister for Government Services

The Hon Coralee O’Rourke MP  Minister for Communities  Minister for Disability Services

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE





Authorised by S. Robert MP, Canberra



Wednesday, 23 September 2020

Queensland transition to the NDIS completed

Queensland’s transition to the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) will be officially  completed on 1 October 2020, when NDIS Full Scheme arrangements take effect.

There are now around 85,000 Queenslanders in, or currently seeking access to, the NDIS.

The commencement of Full Scheme arrangements means the total combined investment in the NDIS  from the Commonwealth and Queensland governments is expected to reach more than $4 billion in  2020-21.

Minister for the National Disability Insurance Scheme, Stuart Robert, said the full scheme agreement  is a significant milestone in the NDIS rollout.

‘Queensland now joins the rest of the country, apart from WA, with the NDIS operating under a full  scheme agreement, securing the future of the NDIS for all Queenslanders,’ Mr Robert said.

‘The Commonwealth has recently focused on ensuring people with disability could continue to access  and use the NDIS during the coronavirus pandemic.

‘Despite the challenges of the pandemic, we’ve seen more than 6,000 Queenslanders join the NDIS  between April and June this year.’

Minister for Disability Services Coralee O’Rourke said to now have tens of thousands of  Queenslanders with disability accessing, or seeking access to, life changing supports under the NDIS is  a significant achievement and one that can’t be underestimated.

‘I am particularly proud that there are now more than 36,000 Queenslanders with disability receiving  funded disability supports for the first time, thanks to the NDIS,’ Ms O’Rourke said.





Authorised by S. Robert MP, Canberra



‘We want to maintain momentum to make the NDIS as accessible as possible and bring more  Queenslanders in to the scheme so they can access life-changing services and supports.

‘Increased numbers of NDIS participants also supports the development of our Queensland NDIS  market, and creates more jobs, including jobs for people with disability.’

Both the Commonwealth and Queensland government have been investing in ensuring people with  disability have fair and equitable access to the NDIS, particularly in Aboriginal and Torres Strait  Islander communities, culturally and linguistically diverse communities, people experiencing  psychosocial disabilities, and ageing parents or carers of people with disability.

This includes Commonwealth funding of $20 million to expand the National Community Connectors  program and $20 million to set up Assessment and Referral Teams (ART) in regional, rural and remote  areas to help more Queenslanders access the NDIS.

At the end of August, ART had received more than 1,500 referrals for assistance, with 440 of those  people approved for the NDIS.

The Commonwealth and Queensland governments will continue to work together to increase NDIS  participation in the state.

[ENDS]

Media contact:

Minister Robert’s Office: James Larsson - 0427 100 431 or Liam Jones - 0448 763 351  Minister O’Rourke’s Office: (07) 3719 7170

