





TRANSCRIPT

Senator James Paterson

Liberal Senator for Victoria

Tuesday 28 January 2020

Sky News: The Bolt Report

Subjects: Uluru tourism, constitutional recognition, NZ election, Coronavirus

Andrew Bolt: Joining me is the panel, Labor Senator Kimberley Kitching and Liberal Senator James  Paterson. Happy New Year to you both. Thanks for joining me.



Senator Kimberley Kitching: Happy new year to you. You look well, well and tanned and rested.



Bolt: Well, I actually put on seven kilos and I've starved myself. I thought, I'm going back on TV. So  I've taken back five or six of them.



Senator James Paterson: Andrew, that's going to be on a gossip column tomorrow, or a media diary.  I wouldn't have shared that myself.



Bolt: Anyone seeing me lying on the couch, day after day. Reading, reading, reading would have  known. Oh, my gosh. Yeah, I shouldn't have said that. Stop. Joining me is the panel, the Uluru thing.  Fewer bookings, Kimberley, means fewer local jobs include for local Aborigines. This really is not  good.



Kitching: Well, I think we have to remember, though, that people did go to Uluru but didn't always  climb the rock because they like the views. And obviously, my view is from the distance of the rock in  the sunset, for example. But I don't know whether we can sort of equate, you know, directly that the  you know, we can't confirm.



Bolt: No, we can't.







Kitching: So but I do feel for Australian tourism whole, you know, across the country. I think that we  really do all need to be at home, holidaying at home, actually buying the produce from regional  areas because they are really going to suffer.



Bolt: I'm buying my drought milk.



Kitching: And I think that also we're not really seeing yet the effect of the Coronavirus on tourism in  Australia. And I think that that will be, you know, that'll be a significant loss.



Bolt: Do you think, though, the Coronavirus, I just, don't say that because I just said in the editorial  saying, wait a minute, I think that's being overblown as a risk. Well, our politicians are hiding to  nothing if they say the same.



Paterson: It would be a very bold, very premature call to say that Andrew. And unwise, frankly, to  say that. I think we have to take all the preparations that we are.



Bolt: I didn't say that. I said take the preparations. But I'm saying don't panic.



Paterson: I mean, of course, we don't want encourage people to panic unnecessarily and everything  we do must be evidence based. And I know our scientists in the health department are looking at  this sort of thing hour by hour, with updates from the World Health Organization and straight from  China. So we're taking all the preparations, hoping that it doesn't turn out to be as bad as some fear  that it will be, but being prepared in case it is.



Bolt: Now. Kimberley, that was a masterful segueway you did there. You got me right off the issue  without having to comment on it. So that's great. But sticking on Aboriginal issues, Ken Wyatt -.



Kitching: You've had a busy week.



Bolt: I have. The Minister for Indigenous Australians. Today's tact and adviser Josephine Cashman,  we had her on the show earlier after she said Aboriginal historian Bruce Pascoe wasn't Aboriginal, I  don't think he's an historian either. But that's another matter. And there's nothing in his genealogy  to say is Aboriginal. Is it fair to sack an Aboriginal woman for saying this bloke is white?







Kitching: Well, I think when parliament resumes resumes next week, we. The minister, it would be  behoven upon the minister to explain his decision and why he took the decision he did. I notice from  Ms. Cashman's interview with you that obviously that that panel or that advisory group seems to  have a lot of personality on it.



Bolt: Marcia Langton? Yes.



Kitching: And I think that, you know, we'll see what Minister Wyatt says when parliament resumes. I  presume he will give some explanation on on the reason for the sacking of Ms. Cashman.



Bolt: James, sacking someone for whistleblowing when the facts seem on her side. She says Bruce  Pascoe is not Aboriginal and there's nothing in his genealogy to say he is, nothing. That seems to me,  what, that seems to me like punishing truth.



Paterson: I'm not in a good position, Andrew, to judge those facts and to have a definitive view on  who's right and wrong in that debate. What I would say is a more general statement, though, about  this co-design process is that it's vitally important that a broad spectrum of views within the  indigenous community and the rest of the Australian population are well represented in the process,  because if it becomes too narrow and if it becomes exclusively dominated by certain voices at the  expense of others, then I think the outcomes that it would produce will be much less likely to be  taken seriously by the parliament and by political parties and by the media and the community. It  needs to have that legitimacy.



Bolt: Kicking out a conservative Aboriginal woman does not seem to me, you know, for a process  that's supposed to be about reconciliation. Seems to me very unreconciling.



Paterson: Well, thank you for putting a very fine point on a very subtle point that I was trying to  make there, Andrew.



Bolt: That's me. The dutch clogs down the corridor. You can hear me coming a mile off. By the way.  Why is Ken Wyatt called the minister for Indigenous Australians? Does that mean he's actually the  prime minister? Because most of us are actually born here, too. I'm indigenous. You're indigenous.  You're indigenous.



Kitching: I think I'm basically seventh generation.



Bolt:  Either of you are entitled to say that. And, in my defence I have to say that even Noel Pearson  admitted that I was becoming indigenous for that very reason because I've got nowhere else to go.







Kitching: Well, I think it's the title. You know, the titles get decided this before the swearing in.  Sometimes as we've seen in the past.



Bolt:  Are you going to say wheteher you agree or don't agree or shall I just move on to James?



Kitching: No, you can move onto James.



Bolt: Oh, James. It's your minister. Indigenous Australians who born here is not indigenous?



Paterson: I have to say Andrew, I find this very hard to get worked up about. I think everybody  knows what we mean when we refer to Indigenous Australians.



Bolt: You're the guys who called him the minister for indigenous Australians, I didn't.



Paterson:  Well, I'm saying, I don't share your concern about it. I don't think it's a big deal. I think  everyone knows what the purpose of the portfolio is, what the purpose of the ministry is. We have a  very bad set of outcomes for a lot of indigenous Australians, it's a big problem, and we need  someone to work on it.



Bolt: Yes, it is. Well, I guess what it means is indigenous Australians, you know, anyone can be  Aboriginal now. And indeed, Bruce Pascoe is. How about that? The new international political star of  the left is New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinta Ardern. You've got a poster up anywhere? Anyway, it's  it's just you know, that's after the Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, turned out to be a clown  and an apparently African-American who knew. Today, Jacinda Ardern banked on a personal  popularity called an election. Here's the key. The election isn't until September 11. Have a listen.  Here she is making a pick.



[MEDIA CLIP]



Bolt: September 19, I should have said, an eight month election campaign. What could possibly go  wrong, do you think?



Paterson: Reminds me of something...an election in -







Bolt: Eight weeks was bad in Australia? That was a killer.



Paterson: I was thinking even earlier, Andrew, my history goes back longer than that. 2010, a prime  minister announced an election date a long time in advance and didn't work out so well.



Bolt: Julia Gillard.



Paterson: That's the one.



Bolt: How long, how long in advance was that?



Paterson: It was about six or eight months. I think it was, yeah.



Kitching: Yeah.



Bolt: It doesn't work.



Kitching: No, it really doesn't. But I think that, you know, I think that Jacinda Ardern, the polling  seems very mixed coming out of New Zealand -.



Bolt: Sure does, she's on the slide. Right. Well, she's a hero abroad, but inside?



Kitching: Well, I think that's a very good point. I think like Justin Trudeau, he was very well received  overseas outside of Canada. Not so much within Canada. And I think Jacinda Ardern probably,  probably suffers from the same sort of comparison. But I think also when you looked at the national  leader, Simon Bridges, I think that he seems very green. I don't mean that in terms of  a political  sense. I mean, he seems very green. Nowhere as impressive as John Key was. I think that, you know,  I think it's going to be a difficult election to call some time out. Plus, remember, also on their ballot  papers, they'll have two referenda, one on the legalization of marijuana for recreational use and one  on legalizing euthanasia.



Bolt: That is so interesting, isn't it? Placed two social issues there as referenda on the same date and  presumably, in my opinion, to make the election about those issues where she feels stronger rather  than the sort of stuff that people might think, well, the economy is not what I'd hoped.







Paterson: It's funny you say that, Andrew, because I was on a delegation to New Zealand last year  and in fact, Jacinda Ardern at that time, it might have been updated since I'm not totally on the pace  of New Zealand politics, hadn't declared a position on the marijuana referendum. And I think it was  more as a result of the minority government that she had to put together, which is in coalition with  the Greens, that she's had these social issues put on the ballot coming up for the election. So it will  be interesting to see if that plays in her favour or not.



Bolt: And whether Winston Peters will stick close to her or move back to the Nationals. Local politics  Health Minister Greg Hunt says 400 people have stuck in China in areas affected by the Coronavirus  and shutdown. They feel cut off and they want to be evacuated. The government is looking into this  with New Zealand's cooperation. What should Australia do?



Kitching: Well, I think that if we can get people out safely and keep them isolated, because obviously  you need the fortnight of the process to see whether they have been infected. I think we should do  it. You know, we owe it to our fellow Australians to do that. Of course, getting in and out of China  might be difficult because China is in lockdown. There's not a lot of flights going anywhere. And  obviously that's impacted on the lunar new year as well. So, you know, for Chinese internally within  China, but getting out of China has become appropriately difficult because you don't want people -



Bolt: Yeah, but I think China would agree if we say we'll assume the risk. Mind you, it would be an  interesting thought, wouldn't it? How many of those people would be prepared to go in a locked  cylinder to fly to Australia with 400 other people who might have the Coronavirus? That's a thought.



Paterson: That's right, Andrew. And as Kim, sorry, as Senator Kitching was saying, the other  countries have taken their people out of that to put them in isolation when they've arrived for up to  two weeks because of the incubation period.



Bolt: Well, it's up to whoever puts up their hand. But I think that suggests that if people do go on  this, it's easy to check if you've got a temperature, you don't go if you do. Sorry, if you don't if you  have a temperature, you don't get on the plane if you are free, back home. So I think we'll see them.  Kimberley Kitching, James Paterson, a big year ahead. Thank you so much for coming on. Really  appreciate it.



Kitching: Very big.



Paterson: Thanks, Andrew.



ENDS

