

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

TRANSCRIPT

Monday 24th August 2020

Minister Littleproud Media Conference Mural Hall,   Parliament House

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well thank you all for coming. Finally, some common sense. The  Queensland Government over the weekend has relented after calls from the Federal  Government, from rural and regional Australia to listen, to understand us, what we do and  how we do it. The Queensland Chief Medical Officer has granted exemptions for farmers  in New South Wales who have land in Queensland to come up, to get a permit, a practical  solution to come up and to be able to check their livestock, to tend to their crops. They're  also allowing agricultural workers to come up, if they have a contract, and prove that they  have employment in Queensland to come and work in the agricultural supply chains. This  is an important step. It just shows that it can be achieved, that despite the parochialism,  despite what the states have tried to do in terms of having broad scale arbitrary border  closures, you can use common sense. You can get leadership. And it's now beholden on  the other states to follow. Now, while there was some real achievement made at National  Cabinet around ensuring that we came up with some protocols and framework that we can  all work by, it just goes to show that states can work and move quickly without waiting two  weeks. This is critical for those farmers in Victoria who have property in New South Wales,  farmers in Victoria, in South Australia. So Queensland has just proven, through their Chief  Medical Officer, that this can be achieved if we work together, if you understand, if you  come out and listen to the forgotten Australians, understand our lifestyle, understand what  we do and how we feed and clothe you, then you can get a practical solution that will keep  Australians safe, that will keep Queenslanders safe.

Now, while this is a great first step from Queensland, and it's a great step for agriculture  production systems, it doesn't go far enough with respect to health. This is still silent with  respect to health issues, about those- particularly in northern New South Wales that rely  on Queensland medical services, to be able to get those when they require them. And I  just say to the Queensland Government, I congratulate you but you've still forgotten one  very important aspect of this: your fellow Australian. This is about your fellow Australians.  This isn't about your parochial borders -borders that were put in place over 100 years ago,  an arbitrary line that regional Australia have outgrown and evolved past. This is about  understanding we're all Australians and you have a right to medical treatment, no matter  where you live in this country. But this just goes to show that if we can do it on agriculture  production systems, we can do it on health. We can work together. And it was a flashpoint  for federation to make sure that we work together, and Queensland's led the way with  respect to this. There's still more work to do and I just hope that now that Queensland's  given some leniency to New South Wales that the New South Wales Government will look  within themselves and look to those that are south of them, particularly in Victoria, and

TRANSCRIPT



TRANSCRIPT

show them the same respect and decency that the Queensland Government is trying to  show New South Wales.

This just goes to show that there is an achievable pathway through this. I'm proud to say  that we fought hard for this as a Federal Government. We don't have jurisdiction over this.  I don't intend to take the foot off the accelerator on this. I intend to make sure that we  continue to prosecute this clearly to achieve an outcome that achieves common sense and  a practical application that keeps Australians safe but keeps Australia moving.

QUESTION: Minister, what does this mean for the Agricultural Code? Is this effectively  what you want to see done across the country?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, this will feed into that. The Agricultural Code that was  announced on Friday after National Cabinet, it goes to around protocols of having a  COVID safe plan, having PPE equipment, having traceability of where you are and who  you are interacting with. The Chief Medical Officer in Queensland isn't waiting for that.  They- I presume she will build that into it. The letter is to the Department Secretary of  Agriculture in Queensland that Mrs Young has sent to her. So, obviously they will work  through those details, but can I also say, I have to congratulate the Chief Medical Officer in  Queensland because I did challenge them to say go out and listen to these communities.  And if it wasn't for Lawrence Springborg, the Mayor of Goondiwindi, who was able to  calmly articulate what could be achieved, then this wouldn't have happened. And that was  the challenge that I set down to all chief health officers, and Jeanette Young actually did it.  She listened to a local mayor, understood the community, understood the needs, and  she's delivered. So we'll continue to work with the other states. And the code will obviously  also feed in because it is important to understand that this doesn't cover seasonal workers.  So we will continue to need to make sure there are protocols in place for seasonal workers  particularly as we get towards the end of the year because those demands will continue to  rise and will be a challenge for us. And it's important that we don't wait until October or  November to sort this out but to actually do it now to make sure that the agriculture  industry has certainty. But a great first step and it is great to know that someone is  listening to us in the bush.

QUESTION: So is your message to other Premiers then do exactly what Queensland has  announced today and then build that code in?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well yes. They have every opportunity - every state border is  different and I am not saying that arbitrarily they should follow Queensland to the letter. I'll  leave them to their own jurisdictional power to make those decisions because you have to  understand the nuance between each state.

But I think that there is a practical way forward that Queensland has shown after we just  basically belted the hell out of this issue until it became a national issue, the fact is that  Queensland have finally relented and it shows it can be done. And I just say to those  premiers, get your chief health officers to sit down with one another and find a pathway.  You don't have to wait two weeks; you can do that without the Federal Government. You're  big people now; you run the state. You can do it without the Federal Government having to  do everything for you.

This is an opportunity for you to show leadership, to show that federation works. So that's  the challenge I'll lay down to the premiers and the chief medical officers. You've got the  opportunity to lead this; the Federal Government has led it and we made it a national issue

TRANSCRIPT



TRANSCRIPT

and it is now important that they follow through and show that federation works; that they  can lead their states and they can lead the nation by doing it.

QUESTION: Last week, you announced - you lifted the temporary bans on the seasonal  worker and the Pacific worker visas?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: There was no ban. I think …

QUESTION: Well the temporary halt to the intake from them. So I'm just wondering about  when you talk about federal leadership, where do you go from there? Because that's not  really an effective measure to get more agriculture workers in given the weekly limits on  international intake that state governments have imposed. So just wondering what's the  next step for that workforce to boost the numbers?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well the next step sits with each individual state. The Northern  Territory Government, the smallest jurisdiction in the country, was able to come up with a  pilot program for 170 mango workers to be brought in and in fact, they're coming in this  week.

There is nothing stopping any other state now from doing exactly the same in whatever  industry is pertinent to their particular state. They have to lead this. Again, they're big boys  and girls now. They actually have to put some rubber to the road and do the job. We have  given them the framework to be able to use the Pacific Worker Program and the Seasonal  Worker Program. We are giving them that opportunity. There'll be between 1000 and 4000;  that should be in by Christmas. And- but we also need to make sure there is freedom of  navigation and movement of these seasonal workers between states because while some  are up in Queensland at the moment, they're going to have to go South Australia as the  summer comes into effect and the picking requirements come in. So that's why we can't  wait until October for even that measure. We've actually got to get the states to agree now.

So ultimately, what we are saying, this is again where federation hits the road. It is so  important that the states don't just say: phew, we've done this, dust our hands off, we walk  away, ag's settled. It's not. There's still more work to do. They are the ones that have the  power to make the decisions. We will support them, make no mistake with what we are  trying to do in giving these visas to the Pacific and Seasonal Worker Programs. We'll  continue to do that; we've been forthright and upcoming. But they undertake the medical  advice on how those people should act within their individual jurisdictions and that's how  federation has been set up and that's what we respect.

QUESTION: [Indistinct] have changed in Victoria, why shouldn't JobKeeper and  JobSeeker be extended at their current rate beyond September?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well as we've said from the start, we're continuing to be agile and  work through that. This is an evolving crisis. And I think what you've got to understand is  as the data continues to come through, as we get this lagging data from the economy and  how it's been affected by COVID, we'll make the appropriate decisions and tweaks to all  the programs that we have. But none of these programs can go on forever.

And we've to make sure we understand where the economy is, what's driving the  economy, what's going to drive the jobs and get us out of this recession. And so those are  the decisions that we make calmly with the data and I know the Treasurer and Prime  Minister and Finance Minister and whole Cabinet will work through that, making sure it is

TRANSCRIPT



TRANSCRIPT

predicated off fact, not emotion, not about hear say but get the data and make calm,  decisive decisions appropriately.

QUESTION: Just on seasonal workers, Minister, are there any further plans to extend  travel exemptions for other countries?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, under the program it only relates to those that applied for the  Seasonal and Pacific Islander Work programs. We have no immediate idea of going  towards other countries. We are trying to, in fact, get more of those countries that are  signed up to those programs to apply for this and that would obviously bolster from 1000 to  4000.

We've got to provide them comfort that their citizens that are coming to Australia are safe  and that we can also give Australians the comfort that they'll be safe. But I also have to  stress that all these jobs will be market tested first. So you can't bring- you can't bring  Pacific and seasonal participants in unless that job has been tested and you've got to  appreciate while there are many Australians that are unemployed at the moment, many of  them are nowhere near where these jobs are.

And you've got to understand there's some thousands of kilometres between where our  unemployed Australians are to where these jobs are. And in fact, these jobs last for some  two to three weeks in some instances.

So it's a very fluid, transient requirement that's needed here and that's what we're working  through with the states and industry in each specific one. But now is the opportunity for the  states to work with their individual industries to understand their need and make sure we  work together to get an outcome.

QUESTION: Minister, you said that - sorry, you mentioned that there are unemployed  Australians who could be going and doing these seasonal worker jobs. Are there any plans  to move those Australians? And you know, you say it's thousands of kilometres, but surely  it's closer than the Pacific?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: I totally agree. You've got to understand, we are working through  a suite of measures, not just in terms of Pacific and seasonal worker programs, but also in  terms of incentives around social security, mutual obligation. And a lot of that's being  worked up as we speak, and there'll be some announcements around that in the near  future. But you've got to appreciate some of these that are unemployed, while we'd love to  simply say: get in a car and drive up to Darwin and start picking mangoes. Some of them  do have family commitments, and you've got to appreciate that not everyone can just fall in  that bucket. While it might sound simplistic and popular, we've got to work in the practical  realities of the dynamics and demographics of this country, and we'll continue to do that in  a practical way and look at how we can incentivise Australians to go and take these jobs -  we already do - with respect to relocation payments, within the social security. For those  that are on the JobSeeker payments, there are incentives already for relocation. We'll look  at that and look at those that are on Austudy. Is there an opportunity for those that go to  uni that are receiving that? They can't go and backpack around the world. Maybe they can  backpack around the country this summer and earn a quid, and go back to uni with a few  dollars in their pockets ready to hit next year. So we'll work through a range of measures,  along with international students that are here. We're trying to be as agile as we possibly  can to make sure that we get the outcomes, understanding the pressures that are going to  come, particularly as we get into the warmer months.

TRANSCRIPT



TRANSCRIPT



QUESTION: Minister, do you think there's any blowback to border closures reflected in the  NT election result? And what are the lessons for other [indistinct]?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I think COVID-19 saved Mr Gunner. Let's be honest, the  state, 230,000 northern territories [sic] have racked up an $8.2 billion debt. Mr Gunner and  his Government are having a fat old time out there. But what every Australian has to  realise is we're all going to have to pay that back. That's a big debt for 230,000 Northern  Territory Australians up there to pay that debt back. They're going to need support from  the rest of the country, and this is where I think Mr Gunner got lucky with COVID-19. The  facts were he was on his way out. And I admire him for the way that he's handled, as every  premier and every territory leader has kept their citizens safe. That's their job. That's what  they do. That's our job as well. That's what we've been doing. But someone's going to  have to pay for this and it's going to be you. And that's the reality of what we've got. The  decision up there for 230,000 Northern Territorians to pay $8.2 billion worth of debt. That's  a big mountain to climb. And I think, you know, the fact that the CLP has come back with  such a strong, such a strong result, is testament that most the Northern Territorians are  starting to think about that now. A little bit more time, I think we might have got them.

QUESTION: Minister, on borders. Today, Queensland has had nine coronavirus cases.  They've had this harsh border measure. Isn't it proof that these border controls aren't going  to stop the spread of COVID when it is in the community? And would you make  representations to the Government to just remove the borders altogether?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No, I think you've got to be careful on this. I think- and this is why  it's so important and frustrating that a state like Queensland couldn't have listened to  regional and rural Queensland and New South Wales sooner. When we had the outbreak  in Brisbane, they were able to make localised lockdowns, and that's what we should be  doing. We've got the smarts; we've got the traceability now. It's really just about us using  that and understanding we've got to live with this virus. It's going to be a challenge but  we've got the technology and we now got the processes to make sure that we can have  localised lockdowns rather than having arbitrary lines that take everyone out of the  economy and impinge on everyone's rights. And that's what I'd say not only to Queensland  but to every jurisdiction. You've got to make sure that you can appreciate that local  lockdowns are a far more effective way to be able to contain, but also help us fight this  economic crisis that we're in. And so they have some real responsibility on that, and that's  where I think the medical advice is telling us: localised lockdowns are far better than broad  lockdowns of state borders.

QUESTION: Minister, last week, the National Farmers' Federation announced they'd  pursue a sector-wide for net zero emissions by 2050. You were disappointed with that. Are  you concerned that there's financial, new financial risks now due to that strategy that  they've announced?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, there always has been. I just cast your mind back when the  Labor Party decided to roll this number out. They didn't know how they were going to do it  and they didn't know how they were going to pay for it. Let me just make it clear: ag's  about 13 per cent of emissions, but they also rely - I mean, NFF wants to have a broad  emissions target like this, other industries are bought into it like transport and energy,  which farmers actually rely on. So ultimately, someone's got to pay for it. You've got to be  honest about this, if you're going to put something out, you've got to have a quantitative  pathway to achieve it. And I would rather say openly and honestly, and look farmers in the

TRANSCRIPT



TRANSCRIPT

eye and say: if we can achieve it by 2050, this is a path where they can do it with  technology that won't bust your budget. Because ultimately, someone's got to pay for it.  And while Labor continues to have this identity crisis about whether they're going with coal,  whether they're not, whether they're having these targets or not, and whether there's going  to be a split from the ALP. You know what? We don't care.

We're going to focus on you. We're going to focus on making sure we get out, out of this  COVID recession and that's doing it in a responsible way, a responsible way of making  sure that we meet our international commitments in terms of reductions of emissions but  making sure that we can pay for it. That's a responsible, honest conversation that we  should be having as political leaders with the people of Australia. We shouldn't be putting  things out there that we cannot justify and cannot quantify, and that's why I say, great to  have all these aspirations that’ll give you a warm fuzzy feeling at night. You'll be able to  put your head on the pillow and shut your eyes, but it'll achieve zero. What I'm saying is,  and what our government has said, is that we will put in place a pathway that will achieve  that and we'll be honest with the Australian public about how we do that.

QUESTION: [Indistinct]… by the NFF?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, you'll have to ask the NFF. That's a matter for them I respect  them. I've got a close working relationship. And in fact, I have to say, it's okay that we don't  always agree. I have to say that Fiona Simson has done an amazing job leading the NFF  over the last three or four years that she's been there and I think- and we'll continue to  work closely with them but we're not always going to agree.

QUESTION: Minister, this is obviously a win for farmers in Queensland and New South  Wales, but what about people in the border communities not in the safe travel zone, trying  to get medical care and unable to do so or having to quarantine after doing so? Should  there also be a similar exemption for those communities trying to get medical assistance?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well this is the challenge I put out to the Queensland  Government. And as I said earlier, I thank them for what they've achieved here today. But  you know what? This is about human health as well. Just because you're on one side of  the border, a border that was put in place over 110 years ago, doesn't mean that you no  longer have a right to health care. You know, I get premiers want to beat their chests and  be parochial about their state because it plays well politically, but these are human beings.  These are your fellow Australians that rely on you, rely on another state to provide critical  healthcare. That shouldn't be taken away because they live on the other side of the  border. We are better than that. We are truly better than that as a nation. And I would hope  that our chief medical officers, who are medical professionals, and the premiers can look  inside their hearts and understand these are human beings, your fellow Australians that  you are affecting so badly. And we are not second class citizens. We should not be  forgotten because we live in regional and rural Australia. We had just as much right as  anyone else but we don't feel as though we've been heard. We feel as though we're the  forgotten Australians, and that is a blight on state governments if they don't understand  that their fellow Australians are being hurt.

QUESTION: Does Michael Sukkar have questions to answer over those branch stacking  allegations that have been aired?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well I seen Mr Sukkar's put a statement out and I respect that.  That's a matter for the Liberal Party. I'll let them work through that in a calm, methodical

TRANSCRIPT



TRANSCRIPT

way and a transparent way. I think they've been very clear on that. The Treasurer, as the  leading Victorian, has made it very clear - that he'll work through these processes to make  sure that any wrong has been righted.

QUESTION: What needs to be done on Queensland's borders in terms of those health  exemptions to make sure people can get their treatment? What actually needs to happen  there? And similarly, has Palaszczuk- has Premier Palaszczuk politicised the borders  here?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Sorry.

QUESTION: Sorry. Has Premier Palaszczuk politicised the borders?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, look, I don't think it's healthy for me to throw barbs at  Annastacia Palaszczuk. I think the Queensland people will make that determination. What  I'm just saying to the Premier, and I'm saying to all Queenslanders, when you make your  determination about the Premier, she's done what every other premier and territory leader  has done. She's kept you safe. That's our primary responsibility, as a federal government,  state government, to keep you safe. Nothing extraordinary about that. But what you've got  to say is those fellow Australians that might just sit on the other side, understanding that  they have a right, should be listened to you. They rely on us. Those northern New South  Wales people rely on us in Queensland, and you just can't turn your back just because an  election might be coming up. And I hope the Premier isn't doing that. And I challenge her  to actually look at this in a practical way with Jeannette Young, the Chief Medical Officer,  to look calmly at this, to sit down with those communities and understand the hurt, the  heartache that she's causing those individuals. That's what a good leader would do. And if  you wanted to go to an election, you could say that: as a premier, I was a leader for, not  just Queensland, but the entire nation. Otherwise, what it looks like at the moment is  political opportunism. I just hope it's not that. I really hope it's not that.

Thanks guys.



Media contact  0455 448 985





























