

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY  DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC 702 MORNINGS WITH WENDY HARMER AND RIBBIE BUCK  FRIDAY, 31 JULY 2020

SUBJECTS: Ruby Princess; Border Force confusing negative flu test  results for negative COVID test results; NSW Special Inquiry cover up; the  need for Scott Morrison to apologise for failing to stop the one boat that  mattered.

WENDY HARMER, HOST: The exclusive report by the ABC's political editor  Andrew Probyn has revealed that a senior Australian Border Force officer  mistakenly believed that passengers with flu like symptoms had tested negative  to COVID-19, when they had tested, instead, as being negative for the common  flu. And this is, you'll remember, going back to when 2,700 people are allowed  to disembark the Ruby Princess cruise ship in Sydney. Now, since then, you  will, since Andrew Probyn's report the Australian Border Force has pushed  back and they say, well, we're not we're not responsible here. I'll give you the  quote, "The Australian Border Force strongly refutes the claims in Andrew  Probyn's ABC 7.30 reporting that a senior ABF officer allowed those people to  disembark." They say that "no ABF officer had all authority to make biosecurity  decisions in relation to the Ruby Princess." We should just say before we  continue that we've requested to speak to New South Wales Health Minister  Brad Hazzard but he won't be commenting it until the Special Commission of  Inquiry into the incident is finished and as you heard there Robbie says that's  due in about two weeks.

ROBBIE BUCK, HOST: Kristina Keneally is the Labor Senator for New South  Wales and Shadow Minister for Home Affairs. Good morning to you.

KRISTINA KENEALLY, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE AND  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Good morning, Robbie, good  morning Wendy and to your listeners.

BUCK: This is quite a tangled mess and I guess we'll get some more detail in a  fortnight's time but the revelations or the allegations that we saw aired last  night. From your point of view you suggest that the responsibility in this case,  sits at the feet of border Force?

KENEALLY: Well the documents that Andrew Probyn relied on last night In fact  come from the Government, their Freedom of Information documents and  evidence, thousands of pages of evidence they tendered to the Special  Commission of Inquiry. I think it's important to understand what those  documents show in black and white. They show that it was Australian Border  Force and Federal Agriculture officials on board the Ruby Princess on the  morning of 19 March. They show that it was the Australian Border Force who  missed took those flu tests for COVID tests. They show that the Federal  Department of Agriculture officials did not conduct their required travellers with  the illness checklist for COVID-19. And they showed that it was the Australian  Border Force that gave permission for the Ruby Princess to disembark her  passengers, spreading coronavirus across Australia. Now, I'll agree with the  Australian Border Force statement. They don't have the legal authority, but this  isn't about the legal authority that they have under law, it's about what they did.  And what the evidence shows, in black and white, is that the Australian Border  Force received those health reports, misinterpreted them and made the  decision to allow the passengers to get off this boat.

HARMER: So when you read the statement in their press release, the  Australian Border Force press release that ABF officer had authority. Let me  read it very clearly, no ABF officer had or authority to make biosecurity  decisions in relation to the Ruby Princess, you're saying that does not get them  off the hook?

KENEALLY: No it does not. A couple things to bear in mind here, Wendy. Four  days before the Ruby Princess arrived, the Prime Minister Scott Morrison said  that arriving cruise ships would be, quote “under the direct command of the  Australian Border Force.” And what these documents show, in fact, is that it  was the Australian Border Force who made that decision. In fact, the Australian  Border Force, if I can quote the actual documents that we're relying on, and this  is what the Morrison Government has admitted in writing: “At the conclusion of  ABF Customs and Immigration checks, someone from the Ruby Princess crew  asked whether the vessel had clearance to disembark, and the ABF responded  "Yes".

HARMER: Now I would understand you, you'd be very keen as a Labor senior  member, to be sheading back the responsibility of this to the Minister, Peter  Dutton, do you think that that chain can be clearly established?

KENEALLY: What I'm really concerned about here is that the Commonwealth

Government are responsible for our borders. It's in the Constitution, it has  always been thus. You know, this is a Government that prides itself on its  border security. This is a Prime Minister who has a trophy to himself in his  office saying he stopped the boats. They failed to stop. Scott Morrison and  Peter Dutton failed to stop the one boat that mattered, the Ruby Princess. And  when they put Australian Border Force in direct command of arriving cruise  ships, they didn't give them the resources or the training or the support to do  the job. So I would say the Prime Minister and Peter Dutton need to apologise  to those frontline Border Force officers, they need to apologize to the hundreds  of Australians who got coronavirus and they need to apologise to the family  members of dozens of Australians who died as a result of contracting  coronavirus through the Ruby Princess wave.

BUCK: Alright, as we mentioned before, though this is a complicated affair.  And we know that it wasn't just Border Force who were involved in the, I guess,  the care of these passengers when the Ruby Princess docked, but also New  South Wales Health. And we know as part of the Special Commission of Inquiry  that New South Wales Health were regretful that they didn't have an officer  there to meet the ship, we know that Kelly-Anne Ressler who's a representative  from New South Wales Health, when she spoke at that Commission of Inquiry.

[GRAB] KELLY-ANNE RESSLER, NSW HEALTH OFFICIAL: "Myself and my  colleagues at the public health unit were working very hard. We did what we  could."

BUCK: And they're obviously regretful that there wasn't more done, so it's not  entirely the responsibility of Border Force, surely?

KENEALLY: You know I'm really glad you brought this up because I think it  helps explain to people what how this spaghetti bowl of arrangements works.  You're right. New South Wales Health has a role to play. And they, it looks like  they didn't do their job properly either. But let's understand, New South Wales  Health works under a delegated authority from the federal Biosecurity Act, they  are delegated officers operating under a Commonwealth regime. And there is a  reason that Australian Border Force and Federal Agriculture Biosecurity officers  were on board the Ruby Princess ship when it arrived, because the borders are  a core a responsibility of the Commonwealth and the final decision as to  whether or not a ship can disembark her passengers does not sit with New  South Wales Health. It is actually meant to be given by the Federal Department  of Agriculture. In this case, it was given practically by Australian Border Force  on the morning, and an hour later given formally by the Federal Department of  Agriculture. But this is only after Agriculture didn't complete their traveling with  travellers with illness checklist to check for coronavirus and after Australian  Border Force misunderstood flu tests to be COVID tests.



HARMER: Now, Senator we know that, you know, for us, mere mortals are  they trying to unravel this, this is a very difficult proposition and as we have  mentioned, there is a formal Inquiry which is yet to hand down its details. I  know that you will be pursuing this for a number of reasons, not the least of  which is some political motivation, what do you hope will come out of this entire  process or lack of?

KENEALLY: I’ve got to say, Wendy, the thing that really impresses me the  most is the fact that we have, in the middle of a global pandemic, with all the  risks of cruise ships that were known at that point—let’s not forget, the  Diamond Princess was a month before the Ruby Princess, we knew cruise  ships were a problem—and the Federal Government didn't put in place the  proper arrangements to manage it, and Australians got sick, and Australians  died. And quite frankly, the Australian Border Forces has known of these  mistakes since the 20th of March. I want to know, did the Minister know? Were  they involved in covering it up? And quite frankly, can I also point out that the  Special Commission of Inquiry has been barred from getting evidence from  federal officials. The Prime Minister said that they would cooperate. In fact,  what these documents also show is that the Commonwealth Government, the  Morrison Government is fighting a legal summons from Brett Walker, the  Special Commissioner of the Inquiry and refusing to send federal officials to  give evidence and answer his questions. Now, the first thing I would like to see  come out of this is that the Prime Minister reverses that decision, contacts Bret  Walker and makes sure that these federal officials are there to give evidence to  the Special Commission Inquiry, but more broadly I'd like an apology from the  Prime Minister, not for me, not for any political purposes but because there are  people whose parents, partners, husbands, wives brothers and sisters, died  because of the failure to manage the risk of this ship. Those are the people that  deserve an apology. They're the people I'm most angry and upset for. And  lastly, I'd like to think that our Commonwealth Government, that is responsible  for securing our borders, could get its act together, I mean, you used to be able  to trust the Commonwealth Government can secure our borders to manage our  borders but, sadly, you can't trust this Liberal Government with our borders  anymore.

BUCK: We will leave it there Kristina Keneally, but thank you very much for  your time this morning.

KENEALLY: Thank you, Robbie. Thank you, Wendy.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110







