



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

The Hon Scott Buchholz MP  Assistant Minister for Road Safety and Freight Transport  Federal Member for Wright

MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au



22 December 2020

NEW FREIGHT DATA SHARING STUDY RELEASED

A new study involving freight data sharing trials with companies including Woolworths, Nestle and  Toll Group has identified opportunities to improve Australia’s vital supply chains that ensure goods  get to customers.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the study will lead to improvements in getting goods to customers by improving  access to real-time supply chain freight data.

“The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted more than ever the critical importance of our freight supply  chains and all those involved,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“The study provides insights for governments and industry for infrastructure planning and delivery.

“It shows how increasing digitisation can improve visibility of freight for supply chain partners to  decrease unexpected delivery disruptions.

“The study involved three parts: two pilot trials with industry operators Nestle, Woolworths, Toll and  Infrabuild and a third pilot working with GS1 Australia dealing with data aggregation.

“The Australian Government has committed $8.5 million to fund projects such as these that are  enhancing the collection of freight data across the nation and settle the design of a National Freight  Data Hub.”

Assistant Minister for Road Safety and Freight Transport Scott Buchholz said the report could open  the door to improved productivity and efficiency for the freight industry.

“The report noted sharing real-time freight data would mean our supply chain operators could  respond to delays and errors quickly, which will help our truckies do their crucial job getting goods to  businesses and consumers,” Assistant Minister Buchholz said.

“We want to ensure our freight is moving efficiently across the country, getting to our doors as  smoothly as possible.



“This study has given the Australian Government a deeper insight into ways we can improve our  freight supply chains.”

iMOVE Managing Director Ian Christensen called on industry to take bolder steps to embrace data  and increase information sharing along supply chains or risk being out-competed by overseas  operators who are already reaping the efficiency benefits.

“Freight operations overseas are working vigorously to reduce ‘transactional friction’ along supply  chains,” Mr Christensen said.

“Australian businesses need to catch up and recognise the importance of sharing data to maintain  the competitiveness of local supply chains.

“State and Federal governments in Australia are also focused on achieving stronger supply chain  performance.

“Their interest is in making informed decisions on new infrastructure and better freight policy and to  do that they need a clear view of the overall picture.

“This is best achieved by aggregating (anonymised) real operational data from the freight industry  itself.

“iMOVE wants to find ways for governments and businesses to work together to make this happen.”

More information on the Freight Data Exchange Pilot Projects, including a copy of the Summary  Report, is available at www.bitre.gov.au/publications/2020/freight-data-exchange-pilot-project-summary-report.

Ends.

Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Joanne Williamson 0418 475 668 | Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Assistant Minister Buchholz - Scott O’Connell 0413 424 384  iMOVE - Jacqueline King 0404 045 293



1.

