





The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology  Federal Member for McPherson



TRANSCRIPT

Interview - Channel 7, Sunrise

31 March 2020

Topics: Aussie manufacturer pivoting to make masks for coronavirus

E&OE:



David Koch: A South Australian company that makes packaging for McDonalds and KFC  will soon start making surgical and respirator masks for frontline health workers around the  country. Detmold has come to an agreement with the Federal and South Australian  Government to produce 145 million masks as demand skyrockets. Federal Minister for  Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews joins me now. Minister, this is pivoting at  its absolute best, isn’t it? Just how will these masks be available?

Karen Andrews: Look, good morning. This is absolutely pivoting at its best. So what we   had was one Australian company that manufactured masks. We’ve now had Detmold put  their hands up, they manufacture packaging, so they’ve not manufactured masks before.  They’ve put their hand up, they’re going to start producing surgical masks and P2 masks for  us and it’s going to bring in another 145 million masks in total into the Australia the market.  So good on Detmold. I mean it’s a fantastic story. They’re going to be employing an extra   160 people or so people in there. But congratulations. I am so proud of the Aussie spirit, I’m  so proud of Detmold.

David Koch: So did you go to them or did they come to you and say: hey, we reckon we  can do this with our production line and our staff?

Karen Andrews: Look, a bit of both. So discussions were happening with the South  Australian Government and Detmold - they’re an SA-based company. We actually then  started talking to both the South Australian Government and Detmold, and the outcome is  that 45 million masks will go directly to South Australia through the South Australian  Government and 100 million masks will come federally for distribution right around  Australia.

David Koch: Okay. If other businesses are thinking - gee, I could be involved in that - what  more do you need? Do you need other supplies that we could produce here?

Karen Andrews: Yeah. We’re looking at a whole range of things. I mean, later this week  there’s going to be a roundtable with textile and clothing manufacturers to look at the



production of gowns. So we know that we need some more gowns. We’re trying to procure  those but we’re looking at Australian textile businesses, clothing businesses, to see how  they can step up. The response has just been overwhelming. So we put out a request for  information about maybe two weeks ago now and there’s already been over 340  businesses put their hand up, saying they’re prepared to do what it takes. It’s brilliant. It’s  brilliant.

David Koch: That’s fantastic. Okay Minister. Thank you for that. Appreciate your time - and  Nat, I’ve been told the masks don’t smell like chicken nuggets.

[ENDS]

Media Contact: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

