





RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

AM AGENDA SKY NEWS

TUESDAY, 10 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Coronavirus impact on economy; need for stimulus; Scott Cam’s

taxpayer cost; Domestic violence.



ANNELISE NIELSEN, HOST: Deputy Labor Leader, Richard Marles from Brisbane.

Richard thank you for your time. The coronavirus stimulus package is the top item for

today, do you think the Government shouldn't be ruling out a rise to Newstart.



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: I think

it's very important that what the Government does in relation to stimulus is come to the

table with a response which is sufficient. This is going to be a very significant event, it is an

event which is going to have an impact on our economy greatly and it's very important that

what the Government does in relation to stimulus is significant. Now we've been saying for

some time, well before this summer, well before bushfires, well before coronavirus that the

Government needed to do more in relation to getting the economy going and one of the

points we made was in relation to Newstart. As we also suggested bringing forward stage

two the tax cuts, bringing forward infrastructure spending. Whatever the Government is

going to do though they've got to make sure they turn up to the table with a sufficient

answer.



NIELSEN: Now the ASX, the ASX 200 is down through around 3 per cent already that's a

pretty damning day on the markets again. What do you think the Government needs to be

doing in particular to stimulate the economy?



MARLES: Well it's a matter for the Government to put forward its package. As I've just

outlined, we've been saying for some time well before this summer that the economy

needed stimulus and we've made suggestions in relation to that in respect of how the

Government deals with the Coronavirus and the impacts that it has on the economy, it's for

them to come forward and we'll take a constructive approach to this. But it is very important

that the Government make sure that it brings sufficient to the table. I mean this is a very

significant moment, it is a moment where what we need from our Government is

leadership. It's a moment where we cannot afford as a nation to have any form of

complacency and it's really important that the Government brings forward a sufficient

response.



NIELSEN : We've had Mathias Cormann on again this morning saying that they won't be

engaging in what he says is a Rudd-Gillard cash splash that was reckless. Do you think

the Government should be looking at cash payments to stimulate the economy?



MARLES: Well look we'll have an assessment of this when we see what the Government

brings forward, they're the ones who have the benefit of the briefings, they're the ones who

are sitting in the chair. I would make the observation that what the Rudd-Gillard

Government did in the face of the Global Financial Crisis was to act with leadership, it was

far from complacent in the way in which it acted and it did so in a way which saw Australia

as one of the OECD countries which did not go into recession. It was in that sense a very

significant achievement. What we need now is similar kinds of leadership and it's very

important that this Government is not complacent in the way in which it deals with this

crisis because it is a very significant moment which is facing our nation.



NIELSEN: Now can I ask, we've just had Scott Cam on the show and he's talking about his

role as ‘Skills Ambassador’. He was pretty defensive about his salary of $350,000 because

we know up until this point it's been five months and we've had about ten social media

posts out of it. Do you think the Government's getting a good deal for the taxpayer out of

this deal with Scott Cam?



MARLES: Well I listened to the interview, I think defensive is a fair word to use. I mean

ultimately what the Government needs to be doing in relation to VET is to properly fund it. I

mean what we've seen is a whole lot of cuts to that sector. That's the critical issue here. An

ambassador in the form of Scott Cam is all well and good but at the end of the day it's the

extent to which you fund the system which is going to determine whether or not we are

turning out enough people with the qualifications to do that work within our economy and

that's really the way forward in relation to this.



NIELSEN: And just finally when we're discussing the domestic violence response, after in

particular, Hannah Clarke's horrific murder of her and her three children in Brisbane last

week. This has prompted a national discussion, right at the time we have the Family Law

inquiry kicking off in Townsville with Pauline Hanson as one of the key Committee

members. Do you think it's appropriate that she is part of that inquiry given her comments

in the past about the family law courts driving men to domestic violence?



MARLES: Well there are certainly comments that Pauline Hanson has made in this space

which I feel very uncomfortable with. You know we have had the very sad funeral

yesterday of Hannah Clarke and her three children and what occurred to that family is

unimaginable. And there has to be a call to action for all of us, that a woman every week

dying at the hands of somebody, who at one point in their lives said they loved her, is

utterly unacceptable for our nation and these kinds of horrific incidents which ought to be a

moment where we say no more, this must be the end, they recur in our country and until

we deal with this it becomes something which characterises us and it's absolutely essential

that, you know, completely above politics, that we bring to the table all the resources that

we possibly can to make sure that we are ultimately dealing with this issue and bringing an

end to it.



NIELSEN: Richard Marles, thank you for your time.



MARLES: Thanks Annelise.



ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363





