

TRANSCRIPT



Senator James Paterson

Liberal Senator for Victoria



Wednesday 19 August 2020



Sky News: First edition



Subjects: China, UK-AUS free trade, ADF in Victoria



Peter Stefanovic: Welcome back to First edition, good to have you with us this

morning. Well, joining me now is Liberal Senator James Paterson. Senator, good to

see you. Thanks so much for joining us this morning. Before I get to your thoughts

on on an Australia UK free trade deal, I just want to get your opinion on what's going

on with with China again. They're accusing Australia of dumping our wine of them at

a at a cheaper price than their own product. What how are you reading into that?



Senator James Paterson: Peter, it's a frankly inexplicable decision by the Chinese

government to single out Australian wine, which is the second most expensive

imported wine in China, for an anti-dumping investigation. Anti-Dumping is when a

government subsidises a product to be exported at below market rates to another

market presumably to displace say domestic supply or other competitors. The

Australian government is doing the opposite of that. The Australian wine industry is

doing the opposite of that. It's a premium products sold into China. So unfortunately,

we don't think there's any basis to this anti-dumping claim, and the Chinese

government has provided no evidence to support it.



Stefanovic: We spoke to one of the wine industry representatives on our show a

little bit earlier, and he seemed to suggest that perhaps the Australian wine

producers were a victim of our own success, given the free trade deal between

China and Australia, which was primarily which was helped to to kind of prioritise

Australian wine over French wine and that has has worked out to be the case. So in

that sense, perhaps we are a victim of our own success on this front. And and China

may have a reason to do what they're doing.



Paterson: Well, about 37 per cent of all the foreign wine sold in China is Australian

wine. It's 10 percent ahead of our next closest competitor, which is French wine at

27 per cent. So certainly it's been a stunning success for the industry and its a

success that has been driven by the preferences of Chinese consumers who value

Australia's high quality products. And if the Chinese government wants to interfere in

that, to restrict the choices of their consumers then that's a very disappointing thing.



Stefanovic: Do you believe this is about anti-dumping or do you think this is about a

trade war?



Paterson: Well, there's certainly no evidence that the Australian government is

dumping wine or assisting the industry to dump wine. So, you'd have to think that

there are other things at play here, other motivations at play, and that's unfortunate.

We saw during the dispute over barely, that again no evidence at all was provided by

the Chinese government that it was dumping. So any fair minded independent

observer would be hard pressed to conclude it's not some other form of economic

coercion.



Stefanovic: Well, now there's there's fears that this could lead to milk products and

powdered milk. That might be next on the hit list. Is that what you're expecting?



Paterson: Well, I hope that's not the case. Certainly, there's no reports to confirm

that yet Peter. And that would be yet another disappointing decision if that were to

happen. Australian dairy producers don't dump either. Nor do our iron ore producers,

nor do our gas producers, nor do our coal producers. All of them just supply China at

a competitve market rate and it's Chinese businesses and consumers who choose

Australian products because they're high quality, because they're affordable,

because we deliver reliably.



Stefanovic: Is this another reason why we look, we need to look at other trading

relationships, such as the UK and free trade, which is what you've written about

today.



Paterson: When we live in an uncertain world, Peter, our traditional friends and

allies are the ones that we know we can depend on. And, I think it's really exciting

now that the United Kingdom has left the European Union that they can secure a

free trade agreement with Australia. And our challenge is to make the most of that

opportunity. In the first instance, clearly, the United Kingdom wants a quick deal and

we should help that by reducing trade barriers as much as possible and liberalising

movement of people between our countries, maybe with a visa similar to the one of

the E3 visa that we negotiated in the US trade agreement in the early 2000s. But

over time I would like to see that built upon. I'd like to see it much more closely

resemble the free trade and free movement of people that we have the New Zealand

government, which the World Trade Organisation says is one of the best free trade

agreements in the world. And ultimately, I think it would be natural to form a

economic bloc likeminded countries like Canada, New Zealand, UK and Australia,

which is sometimes called the CANZUK agreement which would have unimpeded

trade and unrestricted movement of people save for appropriate security and health

carve outs like we have in the New Zealand arrangement.



Stefanovic: Well, you've got the vaccine announcement from the government today.

Is this an example where where free trade can be worked in?



Paterson: There's increasing degrees of cooperation between like minded countries

in this uncertain world. Josh Frydenberg has led an initiative of the treasurers of the

five eyes nations which is the security alliance, including those four countries plus

the United States, for regular economic discussions and coordination. Free trade and

free movement, alliances on vaccines and scientific advancements are all a natural

thing to do with countries with whom we share a common language, common values,

common legal and political institutions. And in the case of four of those countries, a

common heads of state as well.



Stefanovic: Senator, you chaired a COVID committee yesterday and you had the

head of the defence response into COVID, particularly when it comes to Melbourne.

He maintains, just like the prime minister and the defence minister maintained, that

ADF help was offered. This flies in the face of what the Victorian premier is saying.

What were you thinking at the time when you heard from what the what the

defensive response was saying to you?



Paterson: Well, it's some ways Peter I feel very sorry for the ADF because there's

nothing less comfortable for them than being involved in any way, even

tangentially, to some kind of political dispute. So all that they can do and all that

Lieutenant General John Frewen did yesterday before the committee is get the bare

simple facts out there about what happened, when it happened and how it

happened. And, he made it very clear that the ADF did offer to Victoria support for

the hotel quarantine system, as it did for every other state and territory. And indeed,

New South Wales and Queensland took them up on that offer. And he made it clear

that what they're providing in New South Wales is much broader than what Daniel

Andrews was describing. It's not just ferrying passengers to and from the airport, but

it also includes providing security and concierge services in hotel quarantine itself in

New South Wales. So I think Daniel Andrews has been exposed here having misled

the Victorian Parliament and the Victorian people. I think he needs to urgently clarify,

because it's not a tenable situation to have his evidence out there contradicted by a

completely impartial and independent ADF official.



Stefanovic: But can the ADF actually provide security because it because they don't

have the power to arrest people that the police do?



Paterson: Not in a legal sense, but they assist the police in doing so. And, what

John Frewen told the committee happens in New South Wales in hotel quarantine is

they provide monitoring of behaviour in hotel quarantine. And if someone was trying

to leave hotel quarantine inappropriately or early, they alert the New South Wales

police so they assist in that essentially by being the eyes and the ears. And I think

that would be a very appropriate role for them to play in Victoria as well if and when

we start hotel quarantine again.



Stefanovic: All right. Liberal Senator James Paterson, as always, appreciate your

time this morning. Thanks for joining us.



ENDS

