

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING  MEMBER FOR SYDNEY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS BREAKFAST  TUESDAY, 24 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Possible school closures; Support for workers; Centrelink access  issues

LISA MILLER, HOST: Let's stick with the coronavirus fall out and medical experts say  there's no reason for schools to close, but that's not stopped the confusion for parents.  Children in Victoria and the ACT are now at home but in New South Wales schools remain  open, although the state Premier has recommended parents should keep their children  away. Sydney parent and Shadow Education Minister, Tanya Plibersek, has called for  some clarity and she joins us now from Sydney. Good morning Minister. Thank you for  joining us.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION: Good morning, and I  think that's the key really - parents really do need some clarity about the best advice in  their state. It is very confusing when you've got the Prime Minister and state Premiers  sending different messages.

MILLER: And just to add my own clarity, of course, I addressed you as Minister-

PLIBERSEK: I quite liked it really.

MILLER: That adds to the confusion, doesn't it, that surrounds almost all of this and I  realise that leaders are doing their best. Have you sent your kids to school?

PLIBERSEK: Yeah, I'll be sending my kids to school. They went yesterday and I'll be  sending them today. I know a lot of people don't think of politicians as essential service  workers, but I've got an office that's overwhelmed by people who need help. They need  help with Centrelink. They need help - small businesses need help accessing the benefits  that they are entitled to. We've got Australian citizens stuck overseas that we're trying to  help get back into the country. So I want to be able to help my constituents and I think this  raises a very important issue. We do need to consider more broadly that essential workers  now are the people who are stacking shelves in Coles or Woolies, they are people who are  driving the trucks to get our goods to the supermarkets, they are the people cleaning our  trains. They are a broad range of workers that are keeping us safe and keeping our  economy going in this very difficult time. But I think it is very important to say that parents

are making different choices at this time, and we also need to be thoughtful and supportive  of one another's choices. The most important thing to most parents is their children's  health and their children's education and we're all just struggling to do the best thing for our  kids at the moment. The other thing we need to say very clearly - if your kids are sick,  obviously keep them at home, one hundred percent. There's no question about that. If they  are going to school, schools are going to need help to manage this new environment.  They're going to need help to deliver online learning to kids who are still at home, and we  should be really thanking our teachers, our school staff, our principals, for the work that  they've been doing in this extraordinarily difficult and complicated time.

MILLER: Well, there's talk today in Queensland of teachers going on strike because  they're concerned they are being made to still go to work. Granted that everyone is  stressed and overwhelmed at the moment, but is it a time for strikes?

PLIBERSEK: Look, I think it is clear at this time that the medical advice is that schools are  safe. I had a thorough briefing yesterday from the Deputy Chief Medical Officer, and at this  time the advice is that schools are still safe. It's likely that that will change in coming  months. It's likely that there will be widespread closures of schools for all but essential  workers, but at this time the information is that it's still safe to send kids to school and we  need to be supporting teachers because they are facing extraordinary circumstances  themselves. They're teaching some kids at school. They're teaching some kids at home.  They're not getting clear messages from our political leaders. If our Prime Minister and our  Premiers say different things that is very confusing for everyone.

MILLER: We don't have a lot of time left. I did want to ask you as a senior member of the  Labor Party. What did you make of those massive queues and of the prediction that we  could see two million people on welfare in Australia?

PLIBERSEK: I saw it for myself yesterday as I was walking to work. I walked past the  queue in Redfern and I've never seen anything like it. The Government should surely have  planned better for this. They are unprecedented days, but when you're making a new  benefit available surely having the staff available to help people sign up to the new benefits  and making sure that the computer system doesn't crash is absolutely fundamental. And if  it does crash, for goodness sake, we've got a Minister pretending it was a hacking job. The  fastest way the Government can lose trust of Australians is not to be frank about this stuff.  You need to have a government that takes Australia into its confidence and says 'Yeah,  we're sorry we stuffed up, we didn't have a computer system that was capable of dealing  with the demand' and be upfront in a way like that, instead of what's Stuart Robert did  yesterday which was try and blame someone else for his own mistakes. These are  unprecedented times. It is likely the Government will need to do more. We are very  supportive of the packages that have been introduced already, but we know that there are  still groups who will struggle very much, including small businesses and sole traders in  particular, self-employed people, people in the arts, people in hospitality and tourism - they  are still facing a very bleak time in coming weeks and months and we will be there to  support whatever measures the Government puts in place to make sure money is getting  into households. We also need to look at people who are really vulnerable who are at  home - people who've been living on welfare, who have got compromised health, who  need support to do the shopping to cope with self-isolation. We need to be giving more  support to our community organisations, charities and NGOs to help those particularly  vulnerable people.



MILLER: Tanya Plibersek, thank you. The Shadow Minister for Education.

PLIBERSEK: Thanks.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DANIEL DORAN 0427 464 350









