

THE HON JOSH FRYDENBERG MP  Treasurer

THE HON DAVID LITTLEPROUD MP  Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

Media contact: Annabel Clunies-Ross — Office of the Hon Josh Frydenberg MP — 02 6277 7340  Media contact: Brett Chant — Office of the Hon David Littleproud MP— 0477 744 614

26 August 2020

ACCC PERISHABLE AGRICULTURAL GOODS INQUIRY

The Government will direct the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) to  undertake an inquiry into harmful imbalances of bargaining power between farmers, intermediaries,  including processors, and retailers in the domestic supply chains of perishable agricultural goods in  Australia.

The Government is focussed on ensuring the right domestic policy settings are in place, and is directing  the ACCC to examine the nature of bargaining power in the supply chains for perishable agricultural  goods covering meat (pork, lamb, beef), poultry (chicken meat and eggs), seafood, and horticulture  goods where not already covered by a mandatory industry code.

This inquiry will examine whether imbalances in bargaining relationships exist and the extent to which  they can be addressed through existing regulatory arrangements. The ACCC will be provided the power  to seek evidence, documents and information from businesses within the domestic supply chain to  assess if there is a harmful imbalance of bargaining power occurring.

The ACCC will also examine the effectiveness of the new Dairy Code of Conduct including by  considering options to extend the code across the entire domestic dairy supply chain.

In conducting its inquiry, the ACCC is to have regard to the interests of Australian consumers and how  the impacts of unreasonable bargaining power imbalances in the supply chain can affect them.

The Government is committed to supporting a vibrant and sustainable market-based agricultural sector  that operates for the benefit of consumers. Importantly, in conducting the inquiry the ACCC will take  into account the Government’s long-standing policy that it does not regulate prices along the supply  chain.

We want to ensure that the regulatory framework remains fit for purpose in light of the significant  disruptions caused by the Coronavirus crisis and our strong commitment to growing Australia’s  agricultural sector.

All producers of fresh food - including chicken, beef, lamb, pork, eggs, dairy, seafood, fruit and  vegetables - are encouraged to make a submission to this important inquiry. The ACCC will be  accepting confidential submissions in order to encourage as many parties as possible to provide their  view to the inquiry.

More information is available on the ACCC website. The ACCC will provide a report to the  Government by 30 November 2020.  Ends

