MEDIA RELEASE





15 November 2020



Roads, regions, resilience: ALGA’s Local Roads and Transport  Congress coming to Wagga Wagga

Australia’s premier local roads conference being held in Wagga Wagga NSW this week has  been expanded to address 2020’s biggest events - the Black Summer bushfires and the Covid-19 pandemic.

The profound impacts these two disasters have had on local communities will be a major  focus of the expanded two-day event being convened by the Australian Local Government  Association (ALGA).

How Australia can be made a more resilient and inclusive society post-Covid will also be  canvassed at the Wagga Special Local Roads and Transport Congress.

Deputy Prime Minister Michael McCormack will detail the Federal Government’s Covid-19  measures and its plans to enable rural and regional communities to build back better, while the  National Bushfire Recovery Agency’s Major-General Andrew (Hocks) will provide advice on how  local communities have responded to the most damaging fire in living memory.

Dr Richard Harris, whose heroic role in the Thailand Cave rescue of 2018 was recognised with  the Australian of the Year Award, will deliverer a keynote address.

Some of Australia’s most knowledgeable local infrastructure experts, including Warren Sharpe  (president of the Institute of Public Works Engineering Australasia (NSW), will be at Wagga to  enlighten delegates about what lessons local government can learn from disasters, and how  resilience can be embedded within communities to reduce future risks.

Patty Kinnersly, chief executive of the not-for-profit Our Watch organisation, will launch the  family violence Prevention Toolkit for Local Government, and Federal Local Government  Minister Mark Coulton will announce the 2020 National Award for Local Government as well as  his special Ministers’ Award for Progressive Community Leadership.

ALGA’s newly elected President, Councillor Linda Scott, said local governments were  continuing to go the extra mile on behalf of their communities - even though many are now in  a precarious financial position because of the twin natural disasters.

“We have supported communities and local businesses through the worst of the financial  downturn - partnering with the federal, state and territory governments to deliver significant  support and stimulus measures,” Cr Scott said.

Councils have responded to the initiatives contained in last month’s Federal Budget, including  an additional $1 billion for the Local Roads and Community Infrastructure (LRCI) program,  more Building Better Regions funding, an apprenticeships program, and more funds for

telecommunications blackspots, by rolling out shovel-ready projects that will deliver immediate  as well as long-term benefits.

“Councils are heavily invested in creating a brighter, more sustainable future for their  communities - and this Congress will enable them to deliver that,” Cr Scott said.

Wagga Wagga Mayor Greg Conkey OAM said he looked forward to the Congress.

“This is the largest rural and regional centre in NSW, and we’ll be able to showcase the city to a  wider audience.”

He said the annual Congress enabled local councils to share information and knowledge - and  provided a means for them to lobby state and federal governments concerning the importance  of local roads.

“We control 80 per cent of local roads in Australia, and it is vitally important that we get  sufficient funding to maintain and improve that road system,” he said.

The Congress is being held at the Wagga campus of Charles Sturt University, with online  access for those people who are unable to travel to the NSW Riverina because of Covid-19  restrictions.

ENDS

Available for interview:

Cr Linda Scott, ALGA President.

Media inquiries:

Cameron Ross | 0418 415 649 | 02 6122 9434 | cameron.ross@alga.asn.au















