

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  SYDNEY  MONDAY, 7 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: State borders; vaccine deal.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH:  Thanks for coming.  First and foremost of course our thoughts with Victorians today. The road out of  this may be long. And it may be bumpy, but there is a road out. With our  brothers and sisters, our cousins, our friends in Victoria and they are always  first and foremost in our thoughts during this crisis.

Secondly today the Government has announced an agreement with  AstraZeneca to provide a vaccine for Australia should that vaccine be  successful in clinical trials. This is welcome. This is what the Prime Minister told  Australians he'd done 3 weeks ago when he hadn't yet done it. We welcome  the fact that there is now an agreement for Australia. Australia joins the long list  of countries that have agreements. 18 countries, 51 deals, covering around six  billion doses of various vaccines. It was not right that Australia should be left  out of these arrangements that are being put in place by Governments across  the world. The United States entered its first agreement in March. The United  Kingdom in May. Here we are in September and Australia has entered its first  agreement. The Government will have our support entering into more  agreements. We all hope that the AstraZeneca vaccine is one that works in  clinical trials. It might or it might not. It is positive it is hopeful. But there's some  way to go. And there are other vaccines that work as well as the AstraZeneca  vaccine. It would be better if Australia had access to more than one. So the  Government would have our support if they entered into more agreements with  other companies and with other arrangements around the world to ensure  Australians have access to the best chance of getting a vaccine COVID-19.

This is something the Government should have done a long time ago. This is  something the Government should have done before they incorrectly and

inappropriately announced that had an deal three weeks ago. When they were  concentrating on spin to cover up their lack of action. Nevertheless an  agreement has been entered into today. That is welcome. And we will welcome  more agreements being entered into. I'll take questions on that, first to the room  and then the telephone.

JOURNALIST: When the Prime Minister first announced his vaccine deal in  August, you rubbished it and said the PM wasn’t telling the truth. Will you now  concede that he was?

BOWEN: Well if he was telling the truth he had an agreement, what has he  announced today? I mean what's new? He's announced an agreement today.  Today there's an agreement, three weeks ago there was not.  In fact. The  criticisms that we made have now been vindicated completely. This is  acknowledging that there was no deal three weeks ago. There is an  arrangement now. I recognise that, I welcome that. But it was all spin three  weeks ago, spin this Prime Minister is addicted to.

JOURNALIST: How realistic is it that Australia could have a COVID-19 vaccine  program up and running by Christmas?

BOWEN: Look I've seen some reports that maybe before Christmas. I think  that's optimistic. But you know we all hope so. Certainly if the current timelines  are kept then there is some hope for the first half of next year. There's a lot that  can go wrong and a lot that can go wrong in relation to vaccines. That's why I  make the point that for risk management purposes it would be better if Australia  has more than one agreement to try and get maximum access and indeed  AstraZeneca might work and other vaccines might work as well. The more we  have access to the better.

JOURNALIST: (INAUDIBLE)

BOWEN: I’ve had no communications from the Government.

JOURNALIST: What level of effectiveness does the vaccine need to have  before it should be rolled out?

BOWEN: Well I mean ultimately these things are judged by clinicians and the  TGA in Australia. The effectiveness of vaccines and medicines in Australia is  not done by politicians, not done by doctors. It's done by the TGA and when the  TGA are satisfied they'll tick it off. And that's as it should be in relation to a  vaccine or treatment or anything in this very difficult field. Now there are clinical  trials at advanced levels but you know until it’s been established not only that  it's efficacious for that it's safe, the TGA won’t tick it off. That's appropriate but

we will fully support the independence of the TGA in relation to the vaccine and  other matters.

JOURNALIST: On the 30th of August you on the ABC Insiders. It's now one  and a half weeks since the Government announced the deal on  vaccines (INAUDIBLE)

BOWEN: That was true. That was true and again that has been vindicated  now. There was no deal then. Now I acknowledge there is a deal here. I  acknowledge this is an agreement. If they're done this 3 weeks ago I would  have acknowledged it then. They went out and said they had a deal. Greg Hunt  said in Parliament there is a signed deal last week, it wasn't true. If it was true  then what's he announcing today? That's the point. Again I'll give credit where  it's due. I welcome this agreement but it is the first time we've got an  agreement. Three weeks ago there was not, last week there was not. What  they had was an arrangement in place which was not a deal.

JOURNALIST: (INAUDIBLE)

BOWEN: Thanks Daniel. In relation to mental health. for those who couldn't  hear the question was about the Federal Government’s support for mental  health and economic support in relation to the road map out to Victoria. In  relation to mental health, a vital issue, the Federal Government has extended  the rebates for mental health consultations under Medicare from 10 to 20 for  Victoria. I welcome that. I tick that. I agree with that. I think it should apply  across the country. The mental health implications of this pandemic do not stop  at the Murray river and I can see no valid reason for restricting the increasing in  mental health consultations to Victorians only. Yes it's particularly acute in  Victoria. But this has implications across the board and it should apply across  the country. All Australians should have access to the same number of mental  health consultations under Medicare. Medicare is meant to be universal, it  should apply to all Australians equally. Just very briefly on mental health more  broadly, also the Government should be releasing the Productivity Commission  into mental health and should be responding in the October Budget, two things  they're not doing. Mental health is meant to be a national priority. Not enough is  being done.

In relation to the support packages, economic support packages I don't think  this road map out changes the Labor Party's view. That yes, JobKeeper, of  course there will come a time to see that support change. But the Government  needs to proceed with great caution, with extreme caution in removing support  from the economy at this time given that there is still a long way to go in this  virus, there is a long way to go in the Morrison recession and simply removing  the supports on an unrealistic timeframe could do great economic damage.





Do you have anything else?

JOURNALIST: (INAUDIBLE)

BOWEN: Yes I do. I have full confidence. Let me make this point. I've seen  some Liberals appoint themselves Shadow Chief Health Officer of Victoria this  morning. Every Premier and every Chief Health Officer of the States deserves  the support of every federal politician regardless of partisanship. On behalf of  the Labor Party, I give that support to Victoria just as I give it to New South  Wales and I give it to Tasmania and South Australia with their border closures.  Liberals can try and make a name for themselves beating up on State  Governments but that is not a Team Australia approach. Now in relation to  Victoria I note the statements of the AMA which I think are well put. Doctor  Khorshid has said “The Victorian Government has made necessary decisions  based on sound medical advice and in the best interests of the nation’s health  and the nation's economy” said the President of the AMA and I think that's well  put. I agree with those comments. Of course the Victorian Government is  basing their difficult decisions on the best advice of the State's chief health  officer just as other premiers are doing. And I think it's unfortunate that at every  opportunity when they're under pressure, when they're trying to distract from  their own failings in aged care and other areas Federal Liberals and Nationals  choose to lay into State Labor administrations.

Scott Morrison and Josh Frydenberg called on Annastacia Palaszczuk to open  her borders to Victoria. She was right and they were wrong. When they've  called for schools to be opened and other restrictions to be eased more quickly.  They haven't been vindicated by the passage of time. When they supported  Clive Palmer's court case against Mark McGowan. They were wrong and Mark  McGowan was right. They've got it wrong at multiple turns and I don't think it's  helpful for Federal Liberals whether they be Cabinet Ministers or backbenchers  to be criticising Governments of any persuasion at State level for making  difficult decisions based on the best health advice available.

We have any more questions? All in all done? Okay, thanks for your time.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512









