

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

MELBOURNE

SUNDAY, 8 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Importance of the ABC; Coronavirus; International Women’s Day; Scott

Morrison’s lies; sports rorts saga.



KATE THWAITES, MEMBER FOR JAGAJAGA: Hi, I am Kate Thwaite. I am the Federal

Member for JagaJaga. And we are here today to show our support for the ABC. Now more

than ever we need to support an independent and vibrant ABC. Over this summer, during

the bushfire crisis, the ABC were the ones who were there. There were journalists in every

part, every region, every affected town. And they helped keep people safe. And for those

of us who weren’t in those areas, they helped us know what was going on. But we are

seeing attacks on independent journalism in this country. Just this week, we had AAP say

that it is closing. With the loss of more journalists for all of us. And that means that we are

relying on news from social media on disinformation, on misinformation. While all of this is

happening, this Government is attacking the ABC. They are putting out ideological attacks.

They are cutting their funding, which means we will lose more journalists. So, this is

important to my community. And that is why we are all here to support our ABC. And it is

important to Labor, which is why I am so glad that I am joined by my colleagues, Josh

Burns, Vicki Ward, and of course, Anthony Albanese, to support the ABC.



ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Well, thanks

very much, Kate. And it is great to be back in the northern suburbs of Melbourne. It is good

to be here, not just with Kate Thwaites, but with Josh Burns and with Vicki Ward, the local

state MP for this area. And what we're seeing today is a community activity in support of

the ABC. Australians rely upon the national broadcaster. It is one of our great national

assets. And that's why Governments need to provide the support back to it that it gives to

the community. What we saw this week in Senate Estimates is that it's expected that the

current cuts which are there to the ABC will mean they have to find $105 million a year by

2022. What that means is people losing their jobs. What that means is the ABC's capacity

to provide the level of service that they currently do will be restricted. And what it means

also, of course, is that during periods of crisis, where the country relies upon the ABC, its

resources will be stretched. During the bushfire crisis, what we saw was in many

communities their phone lines went down. They didn't have mobile coverage. The only

thing that they could rely upon for information was their ABC. And that's why it's absolutely

critical that the Government reverses these cuts. This week, we had another example of

the Government's doublespeak where they said there weren't cuts, there just wasn't

increases. Well, the truth is, that we all know that those cuts are there. They're being

maintained by this Government in spite of the very clear commitment that it gave when it

came to office seven years ago, that there would be no cuts to the ABC or SBS. And of

course, with the demise of AAP, which plays a critical role as well getting that information

out to people, the loss of more journalists, we really need to defend our ABC. And the fact

that there is such a big turnout here in West Heidelberg shows the support that this

community, just like other communities, whether they be in our cities, or our regions, or our

rural communities have for our ABC. Happy to take questions.



JOURNALIST: Two Defence Force members have been confirmed to have coronavirus

after a trip to Canberra on February 28th. Do you know if any Labor MPs or staff were on

that flight? If so, were they in a zone where they could be exposed? And have they been

tested?



ALBANESE: Well, no. Given you haven't given me the detail of the flight, which one it was,

it's pretty hard for me to answer that question in terms of detail.



JOURNALIST: You don't have any knowledge of the flight details?



ALBANESE: No. And it is the first I have heard of it. What we need to do is to make sure

that Australians stay calm, wash their hands and have a considered response to this. We

have a very good health system in this country. All the evidence is that overwhelmingly

people who contract this virus will have mild symptoms. But we need to take the medical

advice seriously. If there were these Defence personnel on a flight, it's appropriate that

other people who are on that flight be contacted and informed and get themselves checked

out.



JOURNALIST: Are you concerned that your members and staff could have been exposed

to the coronavirus with the travelling to and from Canberra over the past ten days or so?



ALBANESE: Look, what's been happening is that people will be exposed to this virus.

What we need to do is to not panic about that. What we need to do is to make sure that we

have a considered and sensible response. I've met regularly with the Chief Medical Officer.

That medical advice, it's important that Australians get information out there and that they

respond and receive any check-ups that are required. There is, of course, a hotline that

they can ring and get appropriate advice over the phone. One of the things we need to do

is to make sure that people are able to get the Medicare support from telehealth and that

the Government needs to come to the party on that. Because that's a sensible measure

that would make a practical difference.



JOURNALIST: The Government has secured 54 million face masks. Should this provide

health professionals with some peace of mind?



ALBANESE: Look, the advice that I have is that there are enough face masks available

here in Australia. That has been the advice that I've got from the Chief Medical Officer in

briefings that we've had. What we need to do is to make sure that Australians don't panic.

There's no need for people to be fighting in supermarket aisles about toilet paper. What we

need to do is to have a sensible response to this. Australians are, thank goodness for

Medicare, able to have one of the best health care systems in the world. And that's an

important thing to remind people of.



JOURNALIST: And it is International Women's Day today. Is Australia as a whole doing

enough to promote the cause?



ALBANESE: Well, of course, at International Women's Day today we have a game of

cricket, the World Cup final, at the MCG and that's a good celebration of International

Women's Day. That is one of the things that's being celebrated here today in West

Heidelberg, as well. But, it's an important reminder that whilst there have been gains made,

there's still much more to be done. Women's wages are still much lower than men's wages

across the board. We still have a circumstance whereby we have one woman, on average

dies as a result of a partner or former partner every week. And that's why today, Labor is

renewing our call for a national summit on violence against women and children. It is the

tragedy that occurred with Hannah Clarke and her three children, of course, really was a

devastating incident in Brisbane. But unfortunately, it's not a lone incident. And I believe

that it would be appropriate that we have a national summit and that we hear from those

service providers who support women and children at a time of crisis, to ensure that the

services are there, to ensure that women have somewhere to go to escape violent

relationships with their children. And we need to make sure that there's a comprehensive

plan. And on International Women's Day, it's an opportunity for the Government to actually

come forward with some positive moves when it comes to this. It does require finance. But

it also requires listening to the experts.



JOURNALIST: And just finally, on the previous week of political issues. Anything you sort

of want to get out there?



ALBANESE: Well, this has been a week in Parliament whereby it's been a reminder that

this Government thinks it's above being accountable to the Australian people. Whether it's

the issue of invitations to the White House that were blocked in terms of Freedom of

Information requests on national security grounds. Whether it be the issue of the sports

rorts saga, whereby Bridget McKenzie has said that she did not change the brief that was

dated the 4th of April. But we know that there were changes made on the 11th of April,

both in the morning and at lunchtime. And we need to know who did that. Because the

Prime Minister has said repeatedly that it was the Minister who was the decision maker.

Well, we know the Prime Minister's up to his neck in this scandal. We know that Scott

Morrison's office intervened to change some of the places where the grants were going.

Even after we were in caretaker mode. We need to know who is it that changed the

additional nine grants that were given and the one grant that was taken off. The Minister

says it wasn't her. The Prime Minister refused to answer questions about it at a media

conference. That's not good enough. This Government needs to be accountable and not

just dismiss issues, say that they're the bubble, say that it's just gossip. Which is what

Scott Morrison's form is. Scott Morrison is the Humphrey B. Bear of Australian politics.



Because you get more answers out of Humphrey than you do out of Scott Morrison. And

it's about time that this Prime Minister recognise that he's not above the Australian people

because he won the election. He's accountable to it. And that's why he needs to answer

simple questions with simple answers. We saw how it's possible to do that when Angus

Campbell, the head of the Defence Force, this week was asked a simple question. Did he

ring the Prime Minister to express his displeasure at the abuse of using armed forces in an

ad about the bushfire crisis that was made by Scott Morrison? He just answered yes. Scott

Morrison continues to prevaricate and avoid answering simple questions with simple

answers. Thanks.



JOURNALIST: Obviously there are a few people here today. And what does it say for

grassroots support for media issues in Australia?



ALBANESE: Well, what it says in particular is that there's great support out there for the

ABC. That people recognise the role that it plays. People want media to be able to give

them information. And today, perhaps more important than ever, whereby quite clearly,

some people are getting information that's simply wrong. There is no toilet paper shortage

in this country. What we need is news that people can rely upon. That people trust. People

do trust the ABC. And that's why funding for the ABC is absolutely essential not just in

times of crisis like the bushfire crisis, but also each and every day to inform Australians in

an objective way. The ABC plays that important role. Thanks



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: FIONA SUGDEN 0419 917 016



