Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Cyber Safety and the Arts, Sydney.





THE HON PAUL FLETCHER MP  Minister for Communications, Cyber Safety and the Arts

MEDIA RELEASE

23 November 2020

Arts sector in Victoria set to RISE

In a major boost to the recovery of the Victorian arts sector, the Australian Government has today  announced that 48 projects will share in more than $20 million in funding, under batch one of the  Restart Investment to Sustain and Expand (RISE) Fund.

Grants of between $50,000 and $2 million will begin to flow immediately, supporting arts and  entertainment sector organisations that are seeking to restart, re-imagine or create new cultural and  creative activities.

Minister for Communications, Cyber Safety and the Arts, the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, said the grants  were an important step in securing the long-term sustainability of cultural and creative organisations  across Victoria.

“The arts, creative and entertainment sector not only employs hundreds of thousands of Australians  directly - it also supports employment in hospitality, travel and other areas,” Minister Fletcher said.

“It also brings enjoyment and recreation to audiences - which has never been more important than  right now.

“Our commitment of more than $20 million in grants is an important step in the rejuvenation of  Victoria’s arts sector from COVID-19. We are excited to see money flow to 48 projects, which will  support the creation of more than 13,000 jobs across Victoria.”

Minister Fletcher said that one of the largest grant recipients in Victoria was Melbourne Theatre  Company with nearly $1.2 million.

“This grant will support the MTC to develop three new Australian theatre productions for live and  digital presentation in 2021 and 2022.”

The $75 million RISE program was announced as part of the Government’s $250 million Creative  Economy Support Package to help restart activities such as festivals, concerts, tours and events once  it is safe to do so.

It is anticipated the Fund will create 44,000 jobs across Australia, with benefits to flow on to the  tourism, hospitality, transport and freight sectors.”

A sample of key Victorian projects is attached. The full list of batch one recipients will be announced  in the coming weeks.

Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Cyber Safety and the Arts, Sydney.



Organisation Funding Description

Melbourne Theatre Company

$1,188,149 Three new Australian works

Michael Cassel Group, producers of  Hamilton, Harry Potter and the Cursed  Child and other major international  musicals

$971,895 Harry Potter and the Cursed Child and other major  international musicals

Islamic Museum of Australia

$605,000 To expand the Museum’s digital footprint, delivering  capacity-building for Australian Muslim creatives,  artists and audiences.

Grande Experiences

$705,000 Large-scale multi-sensory experiences, of light, colour,  sound and aroma.

Melbourne International Arts  Festival

$1,480,000 Four large-scale projects.

Melbourne Fringe

$275,000 To deliver safe and viable key festival programs for  independent artists and venues.

Bluey’s Big Play

$1,871,338 For an all-Australian theatrical adaptation of the  EmmyÂ® award-winning children's television series.

Secret Squirrel Productions Unit  Trust  $132,943 An action-packed immersive live experience.  Malthouse Theatre

$550,000 For a flexible performance hub that will deliver a year-round performance.

Castlemaine State Festival

$172,900 To deliver a deliver a COVID-safe festival.





Media contact: Imre Salusinszky | 0432 535 737 | Imre.Salusinszky@communications.gov.au



