



MEDIA RELEASE



29 YEARS TOO LONG TO WAIT FOR PAY EQUALITY

26.11.2020

The latest data from the Workplace Gender Equality Agency shows a persistent  gender pay gap and an alarming decline in employers' efforts to close the gender  pay gap, Greens co-Deputy Leader Senator Larissa Waters said.

“The gender pay gap has dropped a minuscule 0.7% to 20.1% - at this rate, it will  take 29 years to reach pay equality. Women have run out of patience,”

said Senator Waters, Greens Spokesperson on Women and Leader in the Senate.

"Currently, every Australian industry has a gender pay gap in favour of men.  Even  in the female-dominated healthcare and social assistance sector, relied on so  heavily throughout the Covid crisis, a 15.7% gender pay gap persists. In the  construction industry, the gap has increased to 26.1%.

“Alarmingly, half of the employers who are well aware that there is a gender pay  gap in their workplace are choosing to ignore the problem and let inequality persist

under their watch.

“It’s not good enough that only half of big employers actually examine their own  gender pay gap data, and only half who do actually then doing anything about it.

“There is absolutely no good reason for our lack of progress. The only explanation  is sexism.





“We need leadership on this issue. The Government should make action to  address the gender pay gap a prerequisite for eligibility for federal government  contracts and funding.

“We also need private sector employees un-gagged from talking about their pay,  since secrecy can be used to disguise sexist pay inequality.

“It’s heartening progress that over one third of employers surveyed now offer paid

family and domestic violence leave, but we call on the Government to make it  mandatory for all workplaces.

“We are in a domestic violence crisis, and it is critical that the Government steps  up and makes 10 days of paid family and domestic violence leave a workplace  right.

“At the moment, only large employers in the private sector are required to report to  WGEA. The Greens think this should be expanded to include the public sector, to

ensure we are closing the gender pay gap in all Australian workplaces.

“This year’s WGEA data is a warning of what’s to come. If we don’t take action  now, we risk decades of progress hard fought for, but easily lost."

Media Contacts:  WATERS - Justine Landis-Hanley; 0419 626 725



