

NITA GREEN

SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

4CA CAIRNS WITH MURRAY JONES

THURSDAY, 5 NOVEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Morrison Government’s failure to fix North Queensland Insurance

crisis; ACCC’s Northern Australia Insurance Inquiry; US Presidential Election.



MURRAY JONES, HOST: I’ll tell you what compared to so many other places in the world

to be able to kick back while you are going to work and school and to just look at the

mountains. I think we have got it pretty good really.



NITA GREEN, SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND: We do have it very good.



JONES: Bit concerned about what might happen this season. It would be good to see a bit

more rain and of course La Nina. Now one of the things we have talked about for years on

the radio station is really a market failure at the end of the day with respect to insurance

premiums here in Tropical North Queensland. There have been some companies that

have come in which have at least assisted with competition. But at the end of the day it is a

hard one. Governments should possibly not so much get involved in these type of private

business relationships between customers and a private company. But at the end of the

day they promised to do something and something does need to be done, Nita?



GREEN: You are right Murray. They did promise to do something and it was about this

time last year after I was elected to the Senate that I started to ask that same question.

The Federal Government has been promising to fix this problem for a long time, when are

they going to do it?



The ACCC has been looking into this for a couple of years now. They made

recommendations already to the Federal Government. Those recommendations haven’t

been acted on yet. We are expecting to see the final report from the ACCC on November

30 on Northern Australian insurance. That is a good thing, but the Assistant Treasurer

Michael Sukkar and other members of the Federal Government have said that they don’t

want to wait until that report was delivered to get on top of this. We are hitting cyclone

season now, we know it is going to be a destructive one. We are concerned about the

increased level of flooding from La Nina. I’m asking the question again, why hasn’t

something been done before this cyclone season started? Why has it taken another 12

months to deliver on the promise that the Federal Government made that they would do

something to try and improve the cost of insurance in Far North Queensland.



JONES: Well today is the 5th of November. If the report is due out on the 30th they don’t

have a lot of time to do much do they?



GREEN: Well they said they would deliver their response before the final report. And

Michael Sukkar said because this was such an urgent issue. We know there have been

urgent issues this year with Coronavirus. There has have been a lot of things that need to

be taken care of. But I would have to say this is an urgent issue and this should have been

dealt with before the cyclone season has started. I am concerned that there are people in

Far North Queensland right now going into cyclone season who are under-insured or

haven’t even got insurance. It is just so expensive. And when we are looking at rebuilding

and recovering from Coronavirus, what we need is businesses to invest in places in

regional Queensland. And the cost of insurance is a deterrent for businesses. That is what

they tell me. That is what the business groups in Cairns tell me. That this is a number one

issue for them as well. It is not just mums and dads that want to be able to pay for

insurance for their homes. It is also a deterrent for businesses to come and invest in

regional Queensland. So we have got to fix it, otherwise we won’t be able to recover

properly.



JONES: There has been talk about mutuals and as I said there in the preamble - it is

difficult for Governments to get involved and regulate those private transactions to a

degree. I know it is a hard one, but at the end of the day what do you suggest we can

actually do? What is the way around what is really a market failure?



GREEN: The ACCC has made some recommendations around consumer behaviour to

give people more choice around insurance and to make it more clear what you are actually

being insured for so you can make a choice and hopefully bring down the cost of your

insurance. Those recommendations haven’t been acted on yet by the Federal

Government. When I speak to insurers, they are really big on mitigation. And we know

mitigation does help reduce the cost of individual insurance premiums. Unfortunately, the

Federal Government has a $50 million mitigation fund. This is something Labor fought for

really hard last year to make sure that some of the money in the recovery of the bushfires

would be spent on mitigation. That money has not been spent. So we are looking at a $50

million fund sitting there un-spent going into cyclone season, but that mitigation money

could have reduced the cost of insurance in regional Queensland. But now it hasn’t been

spent. It is too late now and the cyclone season is about to start. My concern is the parties

aren’t talking to each other. The insurance bodies quite rightly point out there are issues

around disaster management that make insurance more expensive here. But they need to

come to the party too. I don’t pick favourites and I don’t think the insurance companies

should get off scot free. They need to come to the table as well and help people here. I

think what needs to happen is we have had lots of committees, lots of reports, lots of

roundtables and lots of forums. Someone with political will needs to get on with the job and

do this and the Federal Government has said that they would. They have failed to deliver

on that promise.



JONES: And certainly for strata title. I mean that is a while six pack of issues just on it’s

own. Especially with the arrangement you have with body corporates. That is a real

nightmare for a lot of property owners and places around the state, particularly in the

Tropical North.



Look we have got to keep going. It is an interesting one and I’m looking forward to catching

up with you further, especially as we get closer to the 30th of November and talk a little bit

more about what this report recommends.



Just quickly as we wrap up this morning it has been an amazing night. It has been a

rollercoaster with what is happening in the United States. What are your thoughts about it?



GREEN: It is an extraordinary election. More people have voted than have ever before. So

I think it actually shows that people are engaged with democracy as a politician often we

get told that people do not care about politics and they are not engaged. We have seen a

record turnout in America. But what we have seen now overnight and we were talking

about this before Murray is those postal votes and those early votes are coming through

strongly for Biden. The results aren’t known yet, but it is looking more likely that Joe Biden

will get over the line. From an Australian point of view and putting my Senator hat on, we

know Australia  has a very close relationship with the US and we will respect the decision

of the American people. We just want to see that result come to fruition so that some

stability can be restored. We know that elections are quite divisive, they polarise people. I

would hope eventually a decision can be made so we can get back on the track of working

with our US partners for the betterment of Australian businesses and workers here.



JONES: And that is certainly the case, they are such a strong partner over many years

now. There has been a slow implosion over the last couple of years but it is really coming

to a head now. So hopefully our American friends come out smelling roses, not counting

on it though.



GREEN: It does make you very grateful for our electoral system here in Australia. I have

personally criticised the AEC sometimes in the way they engage with indigenous

communities in the Torres Strait, I think they can do a bit of a better job, but I have so

much respect for the Australian Electoral Commission and the way they run our elections.

And the Australian people too, when we see a result we respect it. So we need to protect

our democracy and protect those institutions. It is very important that we take this moment

to be grateful for what we have got here.



JONES: And thankfully not someone who weaponises his supporters and that really is a

very concerning thing and very distressing to actually see what was said last night.

Anyhow, lets see what the next couple of days bring.



Actually just quickly as we wrap up I think you said as you came in this morning that CNN

has suggested that it was Michigan that may end up going to Biden as well?



GREEN: Just reported now CNN is calling Michigan for the Biden camp. What that means

is the Pennsylvania votes become less important for the Biden campaign but those votes



will continue to be counted for the rest of the week. It could be a few days yet before one of

the campaigns is willing to concede or even to declare victory.



JONES: Well lets just get all those legitimate votes counted. We have known for months

that they would be there and of course the absentees and prepoll ballots as well. Good to

talk to you thanks for your time, Nita Green.



GREEN: Thanks Murray



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JACOB WILSON 0457 961 596





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













