

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



AUSTRALIA IS NOT PULLING ITS WEIGHT IN SEEKING A VACCINE FOR  COVID-19

If we needed a reminder that COVID-19 will be with us until we have a vaccine,  it is coming in loud and clear from Melbourne and, increasingly, NSW.

While there’s no doubt Australia’s world-class researchers are playing a crucial  role in vaccine development, it’s important to ask if the federal government is  doing enough to support them and ensure we can access a vaccine here when  the time comes.

So far the government has invested in only one potential vaccine, at the  University of Queensland.

Its $5m commitment to the UQ project is half that of the Queensland  government and a fraction of what other countries are investing in their own  candidates.

Britain has invested about 25 times as much in Oxford University’s potential  vaccine. Germany has gone further, spending almost $500m to acquire a stake  in German vaccine developer CureVac.

But the bigger problem is that all of Australia’s eggs are in one basket.

The UQ vaccine entered human trials this month and rightly is regarded as one  of the most promising candidates in the world.

But it faces the same uphill battle as every other potential COVID-19 vaccine.

After all, we’ve never successfully immunised people against a coronavirus,  despite sustained efforts on severe acute respiratory syndrome and Middle  East respiratory syndrome.

That’s why there are more than 200 vaccine candidates in development

worldwide, according to the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.  Only a very small proportion of them will be viable. And it’s why other countries  are hedging their bets and investing in a range of potential vaccines. The US —  not otherwise a leader in the global COVID-19 response — has launched a  $14bn effort to develop a vaccine by January. Operation Warp Speed includes  initial investments in more than a dozen potential vaccines, including many  outside the US.

This isn’t philanthropic. Early investments by the US and other countries will  give them priority access if and when vaccines prove successful. Britain and  the US, for example, will have first dibs on hundreds of millions of doses of the  Oxford vaccine.

Investing in multiple projects also recognises that more than one vaccine will be  required, given the challenges of manufacturing and distributing billions of  doses worldwide.

So the government needs to engage and invest urgently in a range of potential  COVID-19 vaccines.

It also needs to plan now for how we will manufacture and distribute enough  doses for all Australians.

Australia is lucky to have CSL, one of the world’s leading vaccine developers.  Depending on the type of vaccine that proves successful, CSL and its vaccines  arm, Seqirus, may be able to manufacture the vaccine here or at least  transform bulk material into individual doses.

But CSL and others will be constrained by global supply issues, including an  ongoing shortage of glass vials.

Other countries are already investing heavily in overcoming such obstacles.

Vaccinating all Australians against the same disease at the same time also will  be an immense challenge. The supply issues that marred this year’s flu vaccine  effort are a cautionary tale.

So the government needs to plan carefully for national distribution, including the  difficult question of who will be vaccinated first. One worthy option would be to  prioritise the health workforce — protecting not only our frontline workers but  also the capacity of our health system and ultimately all Australians.

Farther from home, Australia also needs to play its role in ensuring an equitable  global distribution of COVID-19 vaccines.



While investments by advanced economies are needed to develop vaccines,  they cannot be the only basis on which those vaccines are distributed.

So far, Australia has not pulled its weight in global efforts to ensure that low-income countries have access to eventual vaccines.

In May, the European Commission and its partners around the world pledged  $12bn to the Coronavirus Global Response. The Australian government  pledged just $15m to global efforts — 0.001 per cent of the total.

It also has yet to finalise a contribution to a separate effort led by Gavi, The  Vaccine Alliance. That effort aims to produce two billion vaccine doses by next  year to be distributed to low-income countries and at least one in five people in  contributing countries.

There is an obvious moral imperative for these efforts. But COVID-19 doesn’t  respect national borders, and Australia also has a strong interest in ensuring  that low-income countries in the Pacific and Southeast Asia can access  vaccines.

It’s past time for the government to engage and invest in vaccine development  — at home, in our region and around the world.

Our lives and livelihoods depend on it.

This opinion piece was originally published in The Australian on Tuesday, 28  July 2020.

MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512









