



Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra











TRANSCRIPT

Melbourne, Saturday 22 February 2020

Topics: Coronavirus travel ban exemption for senior high school students

Greg Hunt: …precisely have lost their lives to coronavirus. We also know that tomorrow, 266  people from the third group who have been in quarantine in Australia are set to return home. They  have been at the Howard Springs temporary quarantine facility in Darwin. They came on the  evacuation flight from Wuhan which the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade arranged, in which  Qantas very professionally and thankfully carried out with the support of our AUSMAT crew. What that  has seen is a third successive and successful quarantine operation being completed. There have  been no cases recorded in any of those first three operations. The general population numbers in  Australia remain at 15 that has been stable for some weeks. Ten of those 15 have recovered and  returned home. It is important to advise that precisely as the Chief Medical Officer had anticipated and  as expected, cases have been diagnosed within the new group that have come specifically from the  Diamond Princess. This reaffirms the decision we made not just to conduct an airlift but to ensure that  these people were in supervised quarantine in a separate area within the Howard Springs facility.  There are now six Australians who have been on the Diamond Princess and have been brought to the  quarantine facility in Howard Springs who have been diagnosed with coronavirus. All are being or  have already been repatriated in some cases by medevac to their home states; one to Western  Australia, one to South Australia and today, the four new cases - which brings to a total of six, - will  include two to Victoria and two to Queensland. All are well and in a stable condition but they had been  diagnosed and therefore they've been put into an isolation and containment process before being  medevacked to their hospitals.

As I say, this was both anticipated and forewarned but it also explains the reason we made the  difficult decision to impose a supervised quarantine regime. More broadly, however, all governments  have received advice from the medical experts. The chief health and medical officers of all states,  territories and the Commonwealth. And if I may, the advice received is that COVID-19 has been  contained in Australia with no new cases in the general population in the last week. In addition, the  advice that comes from the medical officers goes on: there has been an apparent slowing in case  numbers in other provinces of Mainland China suggestive of better containment. So in short, what we  have seen is a reduction from over 700 cases a day outside of Hubei across Mainland China, down to  below 70. And this is a very important international development, backed up by what we have seen in  Australia. And so as a consequence of that, the- what is known as the Australian Health Protection  Principals Committee has recommended to the Federal Government and to all of the governments,  that current containment measures need continual review for proportionality and in particular, they  have recommended that the ability of Border Force to provide case by case exemptions be continued,  and that in particular, that should include consideration of Year 11 and 12 secondary school students  from Mainland China, excluding Hubei. And so we have considered that, accepted that advice and





Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

there will be a limited number of cases on a double green-light basis. The Commonwealth has to  approve and each state and territory has to approve. But this advice from the health officials has been  unanimous, it has been accepted by the Commonwealth and the states, and then it will be up to each  individual state to adhere to the circumstances.

So I want to thank our medical experts. Ask the Chief Medical Officer to briefly explain the advice and  the state. And then finally turn over to our two education ministers. Thank you.

Brendan Murphy: Thanks Minister. So as Minister Hunt said, we are confident that if we allow in  a small number of additional people from Mainland China, that’s not going to pose any material  increase in risk to the population. We are already, as you know, allowing in Australian citizens and  permanent residents and the good news in the last few weeks from Mainland China has been that  there have been very, very few exported cases of this disease from Mainland China. The last official  count I saw was only about six and we've certainly seen none in this country. So we think that a small  increase as proposed, is Year 11 and 12 students represent a fairly relatively small number of  students, but if the state and territory chief health officers and public health units are confident that  they can be home isolated for the 14 days - the same conditions that we're requiring for everybody  who's come from Mainland China - that could get them back into the country without posing any  material risk to our population. But it's up to the state and territory health authorities and it’s clearly up  to the schools to want to do that too. So we're not imposing anything, we're saying that this is a  pathway where all- if everything’s ticked, that can go ahead.

Just on the on the situation in- from the people who've come back from the Diamond Princess. As  Minister Hunt said, we now feel very strongly that our proposal, our plan to quarantine those people,  even though many of them felt that they'd had 14 days of proper quarantine on the boat, was  completely justified. It does seem clear that there was some ongoing transmission of the virus on the  boat in those last few days, as we've seen from those six people who have been tested positive over  the last two days. Fortunately, as Minister Hunt said, they remain well and it is one of the most  positive things about this virus that a lot of people do have very mild disease. So I think I'll stop there,  thank you, and hand over Minister Tehan.

Dan Tehan: Thanks Brendan. So just to be very clear, based on the expert medical advice, the  Australian Government in collaboration with state and territory governments will allow on a case by  case basis, Year 11 and Year 12 students from China, outside of Hubei province, to be able to come  to Australia to resume their studies. Now this will be based on a 13 step process. So it is a strict  pathway that we are adopting.

I would like to thank all my counterparts at the state and territory level, all the education ministers at  the state and territory level, who I've been in contact with over the last 24 hours, who have supported  this decision. It is incredibly important that we get some normality back to the international student  market. Now this is a small step that we are taking. As I've said, it is a precautionary step because it  requires a 13 step process. It requires the green-light of the state and territory governments, each  state and territory government. There is no compulsion for state and territory governments to adopt  this, but if they want to, then the Commonwealth Government will work with state and territory  authorities, both education authorities and health authorities, to allow, on a case by case basis, Year  11 and Year 12 Chinese students to return to Australia. We will obviously, based on the medical  advice next week, also then look at international tertiary education students. Now that will be done  next week and will be once again based on the medical expert advice. At this stage, we are looking at  Year 11 and Year 12 students. But the medical advice has said that in a week we could look at what  would happen with tertiary education students but no decision has been taken with regards to tertiary  education students and no decision will be taken until we get the relevant medical advice which would  say steps could be taken.





Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

I’d now like to handover to the Deputy Premier of Victoria and the Victorian Education Minister James  Merlino. And James, can I just thank you for the collaborative way that you have dealt with the  Commonwealth Government since the coronavirus has impacted our international education market.  It is greatly appreciated by the Commonwealth Government and by me in particular, and I thank you  for that.

James Merlino: Well thanks very much Dan, thank you for those comments. And this has  been an issue- a significant international issue and there’s been strong collaboration and cooperation  between the Commonwealth Government and state and territory governments. So I’m really pleased  here, today, to be joining both Greg as Federal Health Minister, Dan Tehan as Federal Education  Minister, in this small but important step forward for our international students.

I want to say every step of the way, every piece of advice that we've given schools, both government  and non-government, has been based on the expert medical advice of both Brendan at a national  level and Victoria's Chief Health Officer, and this is the next step forward in that respect. I'm also  joined by Jill English. Jill is the principal of Strathmore Secondary College which is a fantastic  secondary school here in Melbourne. Has a really strong international student program, some 70  students as part of their international student program. And the announcement that we're making  today impacts on six of those students who currently remain in China. This has been a significant  issue for all our schools in Victoria. We have some 389 VCE students in Mainland China, the highest  of all state and territories; New South Wales I think is around 153 and then there are other state and  territories have a smaller number. But this has been a significant issue raised with me by principals.  Universities have some flexibility in terms of their timelines and what they can change to meet the  needs of international students that are caught up in the coronavirus and the travel restrictions. It's  much more difficult in VCE; every day counts, every week counts. And principals have been saying to  me, as soon as we're able, can we prioritise VCE students? And that's exactly what we're doing  today. It will be as both Greg and Dan said, on a case by case nature. The students will need to be  both screened in China, screened when they arrive in Australia and have 14 days in self isolation. But  it will give the schools much greater ability to engage with those students in terms of their teaching  and learning.

So Jill will be able to answer questions from a on the ground perspective as a school delivering  international education. But from the Victorian Government, this is a welcome step forward. Hopefully  we'll be in a position in the next little while to further enable tertiary international students access, but  this is a small but important step forward.

Greg Hunt: [Indistinct], open to questions.

Question: Can you just clarify - I know you said the numbers for Victoria and New South Wales  for senior school students, but Australia-wide, how many Year 11 and 12 students are in China, are  expected to potentially be eligible for [indistinct]?

Dan Tehan: Well there's some 760 students approximately in China. So we would anticipate that  a large proportion of those might consider to use this step by step exemption, but ultimately, it will be  up to the individual student and of course, individual states and territories wanting to participate in the  strict pathway that we've put in place to enable those students to return to Australia.

Question: And can you just clarify - the total number of coronavirus infections in Australia after  the latest numbers from the Diamond Princess ship. Is it correct, including those people who have  already recovered, is that number now at 21?





Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

Greg Hunt: Twenty-one is the correct figure. That's 15 in the general public, all of whom were  either travellers from or associated with people who had been travelling in Wuhan, and then six who  have been on the Diamond Princess; one from Western Australia, one from South Australia, two from  Queensland and two from Victoria.

Question: And can you just clarify earlier comments about the virus being contained in the  general population of Australia. There’s been a lot of community concern, sadly people avoiding  places like your local Chinatown just because their- of misinformation and people being frightened  about catching it. I guess, how would you reassure those people that this virus is no longer spreading  in mainland Australia?

Greg Hunt: So I think the advice of the medical experts which is written down and published, it’s  publicly available, COVID-19 has been contained in Australia, is the language of the chief health and  medical officers around the country. And so we've been able to do that through immense community  cooperation, cooperation with the states and the work of the federal medical authorities. That isn't to  say that this will always be the case, but we are doing as well as anybody around the world could  hope to do. And against that background, it's safe, as the Victorian Government has said, and as the  Chief Medical Officer has said, to be out in the community. We encourage people to be out in the  community to, whether it's a Chinese restaurant; I was down at Wok on Bay again last night with  Tommy (*) and this time it was the steak and black bean sauce. But, you know, whether it's to visit the  shopping centres in Chadstone and other places that have been suffering or Little Bourke Street. So,  be out there; support your Chinese Australians, support the community and in so doing give yourself  the chance to be really part of the community.

Dan Tehan: I had sizzling pork with Ginger last night, it was really good.

[Laughter]

Question: More broadly, obviously, this is a huge global issue with more than 70-

Greg Hunt: [Interrupts] 77,000.

Question: 70,000 (*) infections. I guess, do you think we’re getting to a point where we’re  reaching the peak- the tail-end of the spread of the virus in a global situation or is that too early to  say?

Greg Hunt: Chief Medical Officer.

Brendan Murphy: So I think that’s too early to say at the moment. So there are some good  signs in China of containment outside of Hubei, but Hubei province is still showing growth and growth  in mortality. But it is locked down at the moment. There are concerns about the size of outbreaks in  some other countries such as Japan, Thailand, Singapore and Korea. They're all countries with pretty  good health systems and they're working very hard to control that. But- so we are still in a stage  where we have to be very cautious about making predictions about containment at the moment. But  as Minister Hunt said, in Australia, we have had no evidence whatsoever of community transmission.  The only people who've transmitted in Australia were a tiny tour group from Wuhan who were in a  bus, a small mini bus together. No one in the Australian community has transmitted this virus. We've  tested thousands and thousands of people in this country. It is completely safe to go out in your  community and I have said many times before, abhor any xenophobia that is being exhibited in some  parts of the community.

Question: [Inaudible question]





Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra



Greg Hunt: So along with Brendan, the Prime Minister and I visited the Doherty Institute here in  Victoria, the first place in the, in the world to grow and share the virus. They're working very closely  with the University of Queensland, so this is an extremely promising development. This breakthrough  on the path to vaccine here in Australia is a world leading development. We should be immensely  proud. Just this week we've announced $2 million to help with the search for a vaccine.

Dan Tehan: Could I just add to that Greg? Sorry.

Greg Hunt: Sure.

Dan Tehan: But- just, can I just commend the University of Queensland for the work that they've  done and it really shows the importance of education and the importance of our international  education sector. The University of Queensland has gone beyond to try and make sure that they can  seek a cure for the virus, put in place a vaccine. They're doing outstanding work. And it shows how  important, once again, education, whether it be at the school sector or at the higher education level is  to our nation.

Question: Has the recent outbreak in South Korea had any influence on this decision?

Greg Hunt: No because this relates to students from Mainland China. What I would do is say this,  that as Brendan and the chief health officers have said, we've seen signs of increasing containment in  Mainland China and that's allowing the world to consider first steps towards normalisation. Our first  job is to keep Australians safe. Our second job is to begin the path of returning to normalisation. And  today we take a first careful, medically advised, cautious step which is about protecting Australians,  but allowing steps back on the path to recovery. Okay.

Dan Tehan: Excellent. I think that’s-

Greg Hunt: There we go. Thank you very much.

Dan Tehan: That’s a great way to end. Cheers.

Question: When will the ban on international tertiary students be reviewed?

Greg Hunt: So the health and medical officers around the country have indicated that later this  week they will conduct a review. We have nothing in terms of medical advice. They’ve signally that  that will be conducted later this week. And then that will be provided to the various governments. And  again, that will depend on the growth and containment outside of Hubei in Mainland China. It’s very  clear, as Brendan said, that in Hubei that is a case in itself where there’s a lot of work still to be done.  But outside of Hubei, in Mainland China, where there has been a very significant reduction in the  number of cases daily, that allowed this decision but it’s also meant that the chief health officers will  on their volition being reviewing later this week and providing advice to all governments.

Okay. Thank you very much.

Dan Tehan:  Thank you.

Greg Hunt: Thanks James.

James Merlino: Thanks Greg.





Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

ENDS

