SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women

SENATOR THE HON LINDA REYNOLDS CSC  Minister for Defence  Senator for Western Australia

MEDIA RELEASE

AUSTRALIA STANDS WITH OUR FIJIAN VUVALE  FOLLOWING TROPICAL CYCLONE YASA

The Australian Government will provide $4.5 million in humanitarian relief to support the  people of Fiji in response to the devastation caused by Tropical Cyclone Yasa.

Additionally, HMAS Adelaide will be deployed to provide immediate assistance to  thousands of Fijians, including many from remote islands, whose homes, schools and  other local infrastructure were damaged or destroyed by the category 5 cyclone.

Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Women, Senator the Hon Marise Payne said  Adelaide will leave Brisbane on 24 December and is expected to arrive in Fiji next week.

“I am grateful to the women and men of the ADF for their swift response to support our  Pacific family at this time of year given how challenging 2020 has been and how much  support the ADF has contributed already,” Minister Payne said.

“This year the Pacific region has endured catastrophic bushfires and tropical cyclones  and the shared challenge of COVID-19, but we always emerge stronger, when we work  together.”

“Importantly, this humanitarian assistance and disaster relief effort will be undertaken in  accordance with COVIDSafe measures to ensure the safety of our Fijian vuvale.”

Minister for Defence, Senator the Hon Linda Reynolds CSC said Adelaide will carry  personnel and equipment to best complement the relief efforts led by the Government of  Fiji.

Date received: 24 December 2020

“Members from the Australian Army’s 6th Engineering Support Regiment from Brisbane  will assist Fijian authorities to clear debris, and repair critical infrastructure and schools,”  Minister Reynolds said.

“As the scale of the destruction in Fiji caused by TC Yasa becomes clear, Australia is  proud to partner with our Fijian vuvale to support their recovery efforts.”

Australia’s $4.5 million package will include:

1. humanitarian relief supplies such as building materials, tents, medical supplies,  solar lighting and hygiene kits  2. education supplies to enable children to return to school  3. support for international and local NGOs and the Fiji Red Cross to aid their work

with affected communities.

Australia has already sent emergency humanitarian supplies to Fiji on two RAAF C-17A  Globemaster flights in the immediate aftermath of the cyclone.

Two RAAF P-8A Poseidon aerial assessment missions have also provided the Fijian  Government with an early picture of the scale of the damage caused by TC Yasa in  remote locations. Imagery from the P-8A has been provided to the Fijian Government.

Supplies replenished by the Australian Government following Tropical Cyclone Harold  earlier this year are already being distributed to some of the hardest hit areas of Vanua  Levu.

Preparations by the Government of Fiji and the Fijian people played a significant role in  limiting casualties, but the task of repairing and rebuilding infrastructure will be  significant.

The Australian Government expresses its support and condolences to the people of Fiji  during this challenging time.

ABOUT HMAS ADELAIDE:

HMAS Adelaide is the second of two Canberra Class Amphibious Assault Ships, the  largest ships ever built for the Royal Australian Navy.

The Canberra Class, also known as a Landing Helicopter Dock (LHD), provides the  Australian Defence Force with one of the most capable and sophisticated air-land-sea  amphibious deployment systems in the world, with the ability to support concurrent  helicopter, landing craft and small boat operations.

With a crew of around 400, the Canberra Class LHDs is capable of carrying up to 1,000  embarked forces and is equipped with primary health care capability to support  embarked personnel.





Media Contacts  David Wroe (Minister Payne): +61 429 531 143  Melanie Ruiz (Minister Payne): +61 427 888 392  Ben Martin (Minister Reynolds): +61 447 219 902  Defence Media: media@defence.gov.au

