

Victoria and New South Wales NDIS participants now



able to claim for personal protective equipment,



including masks



ministers.dss.gov.au



/media-releases/6011



29 July 2020



Minister for the National Disability Insurance Scheme, Stuart Robert, announced



temporary changes to funding arrangements to allow NDIS participants in Victoria and



New South Wales to claim the cost of personal protective equipment (PPE), including



masks.



With community transmission of coronavirus evident in both states and in line with



current health advice, Minister Robert said the Australian Government was acting to



ensure participants more at risk are supported to access PPE and continue to receive



their disability supports.



‘Unfortunately we’ve seen in recent weeks that our battle with COVID-19 is far from



over,’ Minister Robert said.



‘As a result, we have put in place additional temporary measures so participants living



in Victoria and New South Wales, who have face-to-face assisted daily living supports



can flexibly use their existing NDIS funds to cover the cost of the PPE they need to keep



themselves safe, including face masks.



‘We know that participants who receive face-to-face supports may be at higher risk of



transmission, with daily support from their workers regularly involving close physical



contact.



From today, NDIS participants who rely on face-to-face supports and assistance with



their daily living will be able to use an existing support item (Low Cost Disability-



Related Health Consumables) to claim on the cost of PPE for the times their worker is



with them.



In Victoria and NSW, the ability to claim for the cost of PPE will be extended to



providers allowing workers to continue delivering essential disability supports to NDIS



participants.



Participants living in their own home who test positive for COVID-19 and are required



to self-isolate or quarantine will also now be able to claim for related cleaning costs.



Existing measures that provide additional funding for providers of Supported



Independent Living (SIL) where there is a confirmed case of COVID-19, as announced



on 27 April, will also be extended. SIL providers will now also be able to claim for



1/2



higher intensity supports to cover situations where there is a potential COVID-19



positive case of a participant and they are required to self-isolate or quarantine.



Authorised by S. Robert MP, Canberra



‘The health and wellbeing of participants and their support workers has remained the



Government’s priority throughout this pandemic, and it’s important none of us get



complacent,’ Minister Robert said.



‘These measures ensure everyone’s able to do their bit, and follow the public health



guidelines while minimising the risk of spread and protecting each other from the virus.



‘We will continue to monitor the situation and won’t hesitate to implement further



measures if it means protecting our participants and their support workers.’



Today’s announcement is in addition to existing NDIS participant-focused coronavirus



response measures, including offering alternatives for face-to-face planning meetings to



participants, plan extensions for up to 24 months following review and flexible use of



funds to purchase low cost assistive technology.



Further information on funding of PPE can be found at



www.ndis.gov.au



2/2

