





RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS

TUESDAY, 17 MARCH 2020



SUBJECT: Coronavirus



KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: I am joined now by the Deputy Labor Leader and the Shadow

Defence Minister, Richard Marles. Mr Marles thanks very much for your time. Another

climb in the numbers over the last day or so. What do you make of the response that we're

seeing both at the federal and state level to the coronavirus outbreak?



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER: Well, we have seen a climb as you

said, Kieran and people should brace themselves for those numbers becoming larger and

larger. I think the principle here is that whatever we are looking at doing in terms of

reducing social contact, and clearly that is got to be central to the response, the sooner

those measures are taken and in a sense the harder they are taken the better the

outcome. I think when this is all said and done, it would be those countries which acted

quickest and most significantly which will get through this in the best shape. And that's got

to be the principle in terms of how we approach this because you know, why would you let

any given transmission occur if you can stop it. And every extra transmission that does

occur makes the ultimate problem that much harder to solve. So that has to be the

principle upon which we proceed and I'd be urging governments to think about this matter

in those terms.



GILBERT: The National Cabinet is meeting tonight and as we've reported this afternoon

and Andrew Clennell reports, more detail today, it looks certain that the National Cabinet of

the state and federal leaders will be looking to reduce and toughen those social gathering

restrictions- indoor gatherings to less than 100 at the- well that is at the maximum, some

states might even go further than that. Do you welcome that initiative?



MARLES: I think if that's where it goes, I would be welcoming that. I mean these are

important steps to take. I come back to the point that if this was being considered for

example last Friday, why is it taking this amount of time to be implemented? And we got,

we had the really the farcical situation that played out last Friday where a measure was

taken in relation to outdoor gatherings of more than 500 and that was to take place from

Monday, and in the very same press conference the Prime Minister announces that he's

going to go to the footy on Saturday night in a gathering of thousands of people. I mean

none of that makes sense. And the point here is that whatever measures you take, the

sooner they are implemented the better. The proportionate response in a sense isn't the

helpful construct here because what you need to be doing is acting in a way which stops

transmission. Our ultimate goal, Kieran and has to be trying to make sure that this virus

does not significantly take hold within our community because if-



GILBERT: And we have seen this recently, haven’t we. No crowds at major sporting

events.  Huge disruptions in terms of 500 plus gatherings band and now we're hearing

indoor gatherings of less than 100 allowed but not more than 100. These are big steps

already, aren't they? How far do we have to go? Or do you think we should shut down

now?



MARLES: Well I think they are very big steps and they're important steps to be taking. I

think all of these issues need to be on the table, and I think speed is at the centre of this.

That is to state the obvious. The earlier that measures are taken, the bigger and the better

the outcome will be. And that has to be the principle on which these discussions take

place. Now, I'm not sitting in the room and I don't have all the advice at hand, so it's difficult

to get into the specifics of what I think should or shouldn't happen. But the principle on

which these discussions should take place, and the way in which people should be guided

in the decisions that they make has to be; the quicker measures are put in place the better.

And that that has to be the way in which we go about it and it stands to reason that as long

as what you are seeking to do is to stop the transmission of the virus- and that has to be

the basis upon which we go about dealing with this- well than the earlier in the process the

transmissions are stopped, the easier the problem is to solve. And the more that you will

later let it continue- and we started this interview with the fact that the numbers are

climbing and climbing rapidly- well then the bigger the problem is that you ultimately have

to solve at the end of the day.



GILBERT: The other question though, is a big one that a lot of people are considering right

now is the schools issue. The Prime Minister and other leaders around the nation are

adamant that the advice to them is at this point that's not the course of action. The schools

in fact, overseas the evidence suggests there hasn't been a great transmission within

schools because young people are found to have, if they get, it's from older people

wherever they are. What's your take on that discussion? Obviously strong arguments on

both sides of that.



MARLES: Well in countries where there has been the most successful grappling of this

problem, this is an issue which has been considered and in some measures implemented

and to be fair it has been different around the world. I think a few things are really

important to say here; this is something which is being actively considered across the

board, a number of private schools have already made the decision to close their doors.

One of the points that people consistently make in relation to the difficulty of closing

schools is what that would do in relation to those people who work in essential

occupations, particularly in the area of health who have kids in schools. That's a

completely legitimate concern. It's important though, that what we then try to do is think

through that concern; are there ways in which we can solve that problem? Chris Bowen

called for this on the weekend, we've been talking about this a lot. That is an issue where

there needs to be planning now. What steps could be taken in relation to those who are

working in essential occupations, in health but not just health- policing as an example,

emergency services? What planning can be done for them in the event that we are facing

school closures going forward? And clearly this is a matter which is being actively

considered now. Again, that is the kind of planning which needs to be done right now. I

mean, speed is obviously of the essence and this is a major, major health crisis and there

is an urgency about this. And that kind of planning must be done. They can't be scrambling

around that question down the track.



GILBERT: Are you encouraged by some of the developments we've seen from

researchers? I know Professor David Paterson from the University of Queensland and their

research centre, finding some breakthroughs in terms of dealing and responding to

coronavirus via an HIV and malaria drug, two drugs that are already in place and having

quite an impact in terms of curing coronavirus in the cases they've looked at. They want

the test rolled out. Do you know much about that and should we be encouraged by those

developments?



MARLES: Look I don't know the details but I'm certainly encouraged by the reports. And

again it highlights how good Australia is in the sphere of medical research. I mean, that is

an area of expertise in this country and we should all feel proud of that. And obviously

whatever can be done to hasten that effort needs to be done. I think though it's also

important to say, that in the here and now the most significant steps that we can do is to

reduce the ability for this disease to be transmitted, and that goes to the question of social

distancing. And it's in that respect that we have power and agency in government right

now. We hope the treatments and vaccines come online sooner rather than later, but right

now the actions that we can take and go to that sphere. And so we need to be moving

post-haste in relation to that and we come back to the original principle; the sooner that

you take a step the better the ability for that step to have a big impact.



GILBERT: And are you- finally before I let you go, are you worried, what's your thinking

when it comes to this issue of social cohesion? We've seen some quite disturbing scenes

in supermarkets and so on. Obviously everyone's got a camera these days, so if

something happens we know about it. I would suggest they're isolated scenes, some of the

violence and so on. But any situation like that is a worry, isn’t it?



MARLES: It's obviously a worry. I totally understand the anxiety that people feel out there

in the community and in a sense the run on toilet paper was- you know- spoke to that. But

this comes back to another really important issue Kieran, what we ultimately need is

leadership from our government. We need a plan. It can't be about that leadership coming

from the community, although there's been incredible leadership from the

community.  Woolworths is a really good example of this in relation to providing for

designated times for people who are vulnerable- pensioners, those with a disability- to



actually be able to make the provisions they need to buy shopping exclusively in those

times; that's a really good act of community leadership. But why isn't the Government

bringing together all the retailers to try and make that situation across the board? The

ultimate leadership that we need and what people crying out for is from our national

government. They're the ones that need to do that. And, in doing that coming up with a

plan they then need to communicate it with a very consistent and clear message. On

Sunday, we had the farcical situation where it was okay to shake hands on Sunday

morning but it wasn't okay to shake hands on Sunday afternoon. We had the Prime

Minister saying you were going to ban mass gatherings on Monday, but he was going to go

to the footy on Saturday night. I mean, these send really mixed messages and I think only

add to the anxiety which is out there within the community. We need a plan. It needs to be

articulated consistently from a single source and in a very calm way. And that must come

from our National Government, from Scott Morrison and his Government right now. And,

we want to do everything we can to support the Government in being able to implement

that plan. But it must be there.



GILBERT: Richard Marles, as always, appreciate your time. Thanks.



MARLES: Thanks Kieran.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363





