

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister



TRANSCRIPT

INTERVIEW WITH RAY HADLEY, 2GB  THURSDAY 10 DECEMBER 2020



EO&E…

RAY HADLEY: In our governments and in our various medical offices, there have been some hiccups, but  they were screamed at in the early part of this, you’re going to ruin the place, you're locking it down, it's  only a cold. But they stood firm and the man at the charge- leading that charge was Scott Morrison. He's  on the line. Prime Minister, good morning.

PRIME MINISTER: G’Day Ray, how are you?

HADLEY: I'm glad it's nearly over, that’s how I am.

PRIME MINISTER: Hey it was great to be at the police passing out parade for all those cadets who were  sworn in last Friday. It was a tremendous day at the Sydney Cricket Ground. It was just absolutely  wonderful. I know you follow those things as well, closely. I'm very proud of New South Wales’ finest.

HADLEY: Well, of course, both of us have a connection with the police family as they call it.

PRIME MINISTER: We do.

HADLEY: But the thing that Mick Fuller did last Friday for people who haven't heard it, it was a gala. It  wasn't just about, you know, 800, 900 acting constables, probationary constables being inducted. It was  about a celebration of a year where they couldn’t have their families there. A wonderful thing.

PRIME MINISTER: That’s true. It was really good, families bursting with pride as yours and mine always  does when it comes to that issue mate.

HADLEY: Extraordinary year, you couldn't have imagined this time last year, no one could have envisaged  what we were about to confront by the time we got to January, February, March?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah, look, that's true. And it's often at this time of year you get a bit reflective on  where things are at, and you think about a year ago. And that's that's absolutely true. This time last year,  we were dealing obviously with the bushfires and they were escalating. They became very severe,  particularly on the 19th of December. And that’s the day we lost Geoff Keaton and Andrew O'Dwyer, in

particular on that day. And we had a wonderful time to gather together last weekend at Wollondilly and  remember them and Jess and Melissa and their wonderful- Harvey and Charlotte. It was a very special  time. And I know all of those, Darren Nation- if you're listening mate, out there and everyone out at  Horsley Park, we will be thinking of you as we get into that time of commemoration once again.

Ray I've got a problem. The bells are ringing and that means I've got to go to a division. Can I call you back  in a few minutes mate? I’m sorry, it’s a division.

HADLEY: Hey listen- run off! Go! See ya, bye. They’re rung the bell. Oh dear oh dear, these things are set  to try- so they’ve rung the bell and when they ring the bell, even the Prime Minister see- everyone’s got  a boss.

...



HADLEY: The Prime Minister is back with us right now. He's come from the division. He's back on the line.  Prime Minister, good morning again!

PRIME MINISTER: G’Day Ray, sorry about that.

HADLEY: No, no apologies required. These things happen. That's what it's about. And it's happened that  many times over the last 35 years that it's now usual fare.

PRIME MINISTER: Sure.

HADLEY: Good you could come back. Now we had a bit of a yarn, for listeners joining us in Queensland,  about the way that you handled COVID and congratulations to everyone, not just you, but your various  departments and the state departments, we had a few hiccups along the way, but everyone was saying  it, oh, they're going too hard, they’re going too hard, they’re going to ruin the place. And now if we look  where we are compared to other nations, we can’t gloat about people dying, and fewer people dying  here. But by gee, we are at a very strong position economically and also in terms of our nation's health?

PRIME MINISTER: That's true Ray. And I appreciate that. But it's you know, it's been a- my thanks are just  to Australians. I've never felt more proud of Australia than I do as we go into this Christmas Ray. I mean  it's just been the test of tests over the last 12 months and not just obviously COVID, but bushfires, drought,  and floods and so many other challenges to our country and to see confidence at its highest level in a  decade, that's the survey that came out yesterday. That is incredibly encouraging. And that's because  Australians, we’re resilient. I said at the start of the year, we like to think we're strong, well we're going  to find out how strong we are this year. And we did. And and we're, we're strong. And that means we got  through this. We can get through what's coming next. We'll go from strength to strength next year. And  when we say Happy New Year this year, I know we're all going to mean it in a way we never have before.

HADLEY: Vaccine, March, do you think?

PRIME MINISTER: We think a bit earlier, but- hopefully. But that's that's the current timetable. We've put  our effort into a number of different vaccines, 4 in fact, I mean, there's no expectation that all of those  will come off. I mean, that's why you cover yourself across a number of them. But the AstraZeneca vaccine  in particular and the Pfizer vaccine, they're going very well. We're seeing those administered over in the

UK now. I mean, they really have no choice but to do that, given the seriousness of the situation there.  Here in Australia, we will have a front row seat to how that goes and we'll learn from that. But the health,  the health side of this is paramount. And the Therapeutic Goods Administration, they must give its tick  off. And so there's no shortcuts there. And then I've got the states tomorrow, meeting for the last meeting  of National Cabinet tomorrow. I've got them round for dinner tonight. And we can talk about those issues  and more.

HADLEY: Well, we didn't think we'd get back into Queensland before Christmas, I know you holiday  elsewhere, on the south coast I think from time to time. But to think that we've now got all those borders  open- where we were back in August. It's just incredible.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I believed we would. And part of this year. And you're right Ray, of course, there's  been some disagreements. I mean, this whole experience has been without a guidebook for the whole  world. And so the most important thing has been to actually keep everyone together as possible. And  there's been the odd disagreement between states and territories. And they've been significant ones on  occasion, on borders. But you just got to keep saying, let's not forget where we want to get to. And I just  kept laying out in front of everybody, you know, let's get Australia open again, appreciate there are  different circumstances in each state and territory, we’ve got to respect each other's you know,  authorities and responsibilities and take accountability for all of that. But we've got we've got to keep  reminding ourselves where we're going and we get to Christmas and we've got there even in Western  Australia, which I'm thrilled about. And that's great for people in the West who have been cut off from  the rest of Australia for some time. I was on a call the other night and there was a lot of Western  Australians and I said, welcome home, welcome back to Australia. It's great to have you with us.

HADLEY: Now we get to a very difficult thing, and these allegations made against just 19 unknown soldiers  from special forces in Afghanistan. As you'd be aware, I've been speaking to members of, and former  members of the SAS about the impact it has had on them. And it's had a tremendous impact, Prime  Minister, on many men who served with distinction but weren't part of these allegations. Now, yesterday,  your Defence Minister described the allegations as cold blooded murder. I think it's a bit like flying-  throwing petrol on the fire just at the moment where we are. I know that the government, to a certain  extent, has stepped back from perhaps where we're heading with meritorious citation unit awards and all  the rest of it. But we have people's lives in our hands at the moment, Prime Minister, because there are  men who may take their lives, backed on, you know, what's being said about them. And I'm not talking  about those 19 names. I'm talking about a whole range of others.

PRIME MINISTER: And I understand that, Ray. And I think this is a very difficult time with the issues that  have arisen here. And and I've sought to use very careful language on these things. And what's important  is that the many shouldn't be held accountable for the actions of a few. That's an important principle.  Innocent until proven guilty. Very important principle, and what we've set up with the office of the special  investigator and the other processes are very important to protect that. We've got to deal with this. We  can't pretend there's nothing to deal with here. And I think that's also understood. But we've got to do  that sensitively. That's the course we're endeavouring to chart. I know I know people's feelings, more than  that, than feelings- people’s, even sense of identity is understandably linked to these issues. And we have  to proceed very sensitively. And I want to give people, whatever their view on this matter is, my assurance  that I'm going to continue to seek to do that. It's very difficult, Ray. I think people understand that as well.  And we can't we can't reduce this to just some simple solutions. That's not the case. And so look, we've  got some processes set up. I will continue to exercise great caution in the language that I use. We will  continue to greatly respect all of those who have served, all of those who've served, as you know as Prime

Minister one of the first things I do in any presentation I give anywhere in the country, I acknowledge our  veterans and serving men and women. I do that out of deep respect. They've earned that respect through  their own actions in their own service. And that matters a great deal and always must. And I want to  preserve all of that as we work through this difficult issue. It goes to matters that happened some time  ago. Well before, obviously, I became Prime Minister and indeed before I was even a Minister of a  government. And so there's a history here that we just have to deal with and deal with it fairly and  appropriately in accordance with our values and our principles, but most importantly to any veterans who  are out there, there's support available. You are honoured and valued in our community. And and I want  to ensure that you get all the support and respect that you deserve.

HADLEY: Well could I be as bold to suggest that you should talk to the Defence Minister to stop calling  people cold blooded murderers, as she did yesterday. And maybe that would alleviate some of the pain  suffered by people who are dealing with a great deal of pain at the moment in relation to their service of  this country?

PRIME MINISTER: I understand your point Ray. I understand it.

HADLEY: Okay well I take you at your word because I just think that in a normal- we got a young bloke in  Wagga court today charged with terrorism offences or with offences because he's allegedly a right wing  extremist. We've got paedophiles in New South Wales being charged today, no-one - murderers being  charged. No one's pre-empting their guilt until they face a court of law and a jury of their peers. In this  particular case, I feel and very strongly, Prime Minister, I feel that many people have thrown these poor  buggers under a bus. And I feel very strongly about that.

PRIME MINISTER: I understand that and can I assure you, everyone is innocent until proven guilty in this  country. That is one of the values for which our defence forces have served and fought and died. And that  principle will be upheld by me and my government.

HADLEY: OK, well, I take that assurance on board may I wish you and your family and, I don't give a toss  where you go for Christmas to tell you the truth, you know what?

PRIME MINISTER: I'm staying relatively close to home. I can tell you- this year-

HADLEY: If you get on a rocket and go to the moon, you’ll go with my best wishes because you've had a  bugger of a year. You've handled it magnificently.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks Ray.

HADLEY: And we owe you and we owe your wife and your children a great debt of gratitude, because I  know that Jenny and the kids have barely seen you this year. Various quarantine's and the rest of it, they  are also acknowledged in this package. We acknowledge you and without you we'd be in a lot of strife, I  could tell you.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, thanks Ray. That's very kind of you to you and all yours mate, too, and all your  family. You enjoy it, and to all your listeners as well. We haven't spoken as regularly as we once might  have, mate, but hopefully we can do it a bit more next year as well. And and I appreciate your kind wishes.

And I'm looking forward to spending Christmas with Jen and the girls and mum and and my mother in law  as well actually. So I'll be at a house full of women this Christmas. I'll be, I'll be in good company.

HADLEY: Well, we haven’t spoken as regularly for good reason. That's called the virus!

PRIME MINISTER: It is, been a bit busy. Good on you mate.

HADLEY: Thanks mate, all the best. Scott Morrison, the Prime Minister.

[END]

Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

