

JASON CLARE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR REGIONAL SERVICES, LOCAL GOVERNMENT  AND TERRITORIES  MEMBER FOR BLAXLAND



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE   ULTIMO, SYDNEY   SATURDAY, 1 FEBRUARY 2020

SUBJECTS: Sportsrorts, Coronavirus, Cashless Welfare Card.

JASON CLARE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR REGIONAL SERVICES, LOCAL  GOVERNMENT AND TERRITORIES : Thank you for joining me on a red hot  Sydney summer's day. The Australian people are screaming out for leadership.  In a crisis leaders turn up and we've got three crises on our doorstep at the  moment. You’ve got the Coronavirus. You've got the bushfires back threatening  Canberra again and then you've got the scandal over Bridget McKenzie and the  100 million dollars of taxpayers’ money that's clouding this Government.

There’s a cloud of corruption hovering over this Government. The Prime  Minister was too slow to act when it came to bushfires and he's too slow to act  when it comes to sacking Bridget McKenzie. Scott Morrison should have  sacked Bridget McKenzie three weeks ago. It's almost three weeks since we've  had the audit report and only three days until Parliament returns.

Any other Prime Minister would have sacked Bridget McKenzie by now. Think  about it, Bronwyn Bishop got sacked for a five thousand dollar helicopter ride to  a Liberal Party fundraiser. This is one hundred million dollars of taxpayers  money that's been rorted here.

He has all the evidence he needs to sack her now. He’s had it for three weeks.  There's more smoking guns than a Clint Eastwood movie. You've got the Audit  Office report. You've got the colour coded spreadsheet leaked from the  Minister's Office. Now you've got leaked emails showing that the Prime  Minister's Office were involved in this as well, pulling the strings directing the  Minister's Office where to put the money. That's the only reason I can think of  why he hasn't sacked Bridget McKenzie already, because he knows that if he

sacks Bridget McKenzie then who else does he have to sack after that and  where else does this lead. Happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: There are reports that show the Prime Minister's Office had  some direct input in the allocation of sporting grants, will Labor be satisfied with  Bridget McKenzie's resignation? Or should Scott Morrison wear some of the  blame?

CLARE: If Scott Morrison was put on a polygraph this week it would have  blown up. He was asked and answered questions this week about the  involvement of him and his office in this and he said they had no involvement  other than passing on representations. Now the evidence that was on Channel  10 last night indicates that that's not true. The Prime Minister needs to come  clean. He needs to not only sack Bridget McKenzie but he needs to explain  what role his office had in this whole affair. What did he know? When did he  know it? What involvement did they have in this from the start? If you think that  the Prime Minister didn't have any role in a scheme that involved allocating 100  million dollars to marginal seats to win an election then I've got a harbour  bridge I want to sell you.

JOURNALIST: Can Senator McKenzie survive the weekend?

CLARE: Senator McKenzie should have been sacked three weeks ago. The  fact that she's still a minister shows that this Prime Minister is holding the  Australian people in contempt. She should have been sacked three weeks ago.

As I said this is one hundred million dollars of taxpayers’ money that was  allocated to win votes rather than to help local communities. I feel sorry for the  mums and dads that did all the work to put in these applications. They thought  it was a legit process. Turns out the game was rigged from the start.

JOURNALIST: Do you think she can survive the weekend?

CLARE: I would only say this, if she survives, it shows that this Government  has no standards at all. It tells every other Minister in the Government that they  can get away with whatever they like, and it tells the Australian people that this  Government is as dodgy as hell.

JOURNALIST: Does Labor support calls by the Transport Workers Union to  suspend all flights from China?

CLARE: Well look that’s a big call. I heard what the Chief Medical Officer said  about this yesterday. We've got to take practical steps here. The fact is it it'd be  a bit like closing a window when all the other doors are open. If you close off a  direct flight from China to Australia it doesn't stop people flying to another

country and then indirectly to Australia. So the advice from the Chief Medical  Officer makes sense. Let's take practical steps here. This is serious. I can  understand why people are scared. But now's the time for leadership not panic.

JOURNALIST: Australians in Wuhan who want to be part of any wide  evacuation will have to pay a thousand dollars. Do you think that’s fair?

CLARE: Well I would hope that the Government applies a bit of common sense  here. The last thing I'd want to see is people left on the tarmac because they  don't have a thousand bucks in their pocket.

JOURNALIST: Regarding the cashless debit card there are reports today that  the Government is pushing ahead with its plan to roll out the cashless debit  card nationally. What's your response to that?

CLARE: I understand why governments want to help people to manage their  money better. I get that and there's ways to do that. I just don't think this is the  way. Certainly not doing it in a way that makes it compulsory. If they made it  voluntary then that's a different story.

JOURNALIST: What do you think of plans to impose new controls on the card  to help people manage their finances?

CLARE: I think the key point to remember here is where they've rolled this  scheme out before it's applied to everybody on Newstart. Now the stereotype of  a person on Newstart is that they’re some sort of dole bludger surfing on the  coast. That’s just not true. One in four people on Newstart is over the age of 55.  They are our mums and dads and our grandparents. They are people that have  worked their guts out their whole life. They've been thrown on the economic  scrapheap. They can't get another job for love or money.

Now the Government wants to whack this card on them. Punish them. Holding  them in contempt. You know I just don't think this is the right approach. We've  got big challenges in this country. I said before we had three crises on our  doorstep. You've got the virus, you've got the bushfires and then you've got this  corruption scandal. The Government should be focused on all three. When  you've got a crisis leaders turn up. This Prime Minister needs to be focused on  all three of them.

JOURNALIST: What do you think will happen if the card is rolled out  nationally?

CLARE: Well we'll have to see Fiona. The Government has indicated what  their plans are today but there's no detail. We'll wait for more detail when it  comes.





Thanks very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: SCOTT DAVIES 0475 718 360





