

TIM WATTS MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR CYBER SECURITY  MEMBER FOR GELLIBRAND



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  TUESDAY, 27 OCTOBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Sports Rorts; National Integrity Commission.

TIM WATTS, MEMBER FOR GELLIBRAND: Sitting in Question Time yesterday was a  pretty frustrating experience to me. Labor Opposition was holding Scott Morrison to  account for the scandals and rorts that were engulfing his government and he was refusing  to answer questions. It was particularly infuriating that he claimed that he was refusing to  answer questions because he was focused on "the good government of this country". I  don't know what Scott Morrison's definition of good government is, but my definition of  good government doesn't include Sports Rorts. It doesn't include airport rorts. It doesn't  include Cartier watches. The scandals and rorts on this government are up, up, up, and  accountability and responsibility is down, down, down.

I just want Scott Morrison to know that this isn't a political game. When he puts his political  interests and the interests of the Liberal Party ahead of the public interest, real Australians  are the losers. In my electorate, the Williamstown Football Club made an application under  the Sports Rorts program for funding for women's change facilities at Downer Oval. Unlike  many of the clubs that made applications under this program, they actually had women  footy players, and lots of them. It's a community institution. But unfortunately, they weren't  in a marginal seat and they weren't a mate of Scott Morrison or the Liberal Party, so they  didn't get funded under the Sports Rorts program.

Who did get funded? 94 applications with a lower score. Sport Australia recommended the  Williamstown Football Club for funding. The ANAO said that they should have been  funded. Williamstown Football Club wasn't funded, because they weren't mates with Scott  Morrison. I've written to Minister Richard Colbeck asking why they weren't funded, asking  why they weren't funded in the last Federal Budget. I've received no answer at all. This is a  government that always puts its own political interests ahead of the public interest and the  national interest. That's why we need a National Integrity Commission in this country as  soon as possible.

Now Scott Morrison says that he's been too busy to implement a National Integrity  Commission because of COVID-19. Well Scott Morrison wasn't too busy to organise three  separate daggy dad PR stunts at Bunnings during the Victorian lockdown. Prime Minister,  most people go to Bunnings for a snag, not for a photoshoot. This is a Prime Minister who



may be the most political Prime Minister in Australia's history. It's time that he was a Prime  Minister for all Australians, not just Australians in marginal seats or Liberal Party mates. An  Albanese Labor Government will govern for all Australians.

JOURNALIST: What are your thoughts on Helen Haines' Bill that was introduced  yesterday for an Integrity Commission?

WATTS: I really welcome the pressure that Helen Haines and other independent MPs are  putting on this government to establish a National Integrity Commission. We need all the  accountability that we can get on this government. Scott Morrison committed to a National  Integrity Commission in 2018. I don't want to be Robin Williams here but what years is it? It  has been years since this announcement and he has still failed to deliver. So I really  welcome the independents and Helen Haines adding to that accountability. I should also  say that there's another really important accountability story in the papers today. We've  learned that the funding for the Australian National Audit Office - the critical accountability  institution that uncovered the Sports Rorts scandal, that uncovered the airport scandal, that  is a crucial check on the rorts and scandals in this government - has had its funding cut by  20% over the seven years of the Abbott-Turnbull-Morrison Government. The Liberal Party  and Scott Morrison are just allergic to any kind of accountability, and they attack any  institution that has the temerity to hold them to account.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KIERAN INGREY 0432 507 439







