



THE HON KEITH PITT MP

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia

MEDIA RELEASE

27 March 2020

Commitments to major resource projects provide confidence for economic  recovery

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt has welcomed the long term  commitment by some of Australia’s largest mining and upstream petroleum companies to major  resources projects, despite the major economic disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.

“I understand the extremely difficult situation facing companies and workers across the economy  including in the resources and energy sector. Any project delays are deeply regrettable and any  people losing their jobs in the short term is something the Government is working hard to avoid  and minimise - be that direct employees or the numerous contractors and sub-contractors that  work in this sector.” Minister Pitt said.

“We simply can’t afford to lose the skills and knowledge that these workers bring to the country.

“The next few months are going to challenge the industry - just as we can’t lose our skill base, nor  can we afford to lose the companies in the sector that will be critical to leading Australia’s  economic recovery,” Minister Pitt said.

The Government acknowledges the statement by Woodside that it is deferring the final  investment decisions on the Scarborough, Pluto Train 2 and Browse LNG projects until there is  more certainty about global gas demand and the green shoots of an economic recovery. Woodside  has emphasised this is a delay not a cancellation and that these projects as part of the Burrup Hub  are some of the cost competitive LNG investment opportunities in the world.

In a similar vein Santos has announced the deferral of a final investment decision on the Barossa  Offshore Gas Project to backfill Darwin LNG. Again this is a deferral not a cancellation with the  Darwin LNG and Barossa being low cost brownfields projects that can be brought quickly into  development once conditions improve. Other oil and gas companies like Beach and Senex along  with international firms operating in Australia are all closely looking at how best to position  themselves to be there at the end of the crisis.

The Australian Government strongly welcomes the announcement by BHP that it is looking to  employ an additional 1500 workers and contractors at many of its existing sites. “This reflects the  very healthy state of BHP and in particular how iron ore prices have defied expectations and  remained strong during the current pandemic. BHP is showing real confidence in the sector and its  supports for workers is very welcome” Minister Pitt said.

Minister Pitt noted that companies across the resources and energy sector are facing different  challenges and that many are looking to defer capital expenditure and reduce operating costs.

“COVID-19 is an extraordinary challenge which hasn’t been seen for generations - companies  must position themselves to be there at the end of the crisis and be there to lead our economic  recovery and for the long term future of the nation.

“What we can be sure of is that our resources sector is strong and resilient. Australians can be  confident that it will remain a powerhouse of the nation’s economy providing hundreds of  thousands of jobs.” Minister Pitt said.



Media contact: Matt Dunstan 0411 535 072

