

Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA

MEDIA RELEASE

28 September 2020



CONTINUED SUPPORT UNDER PARENTSNEXT

Parents will continue to be supported to plan and prepare for employment by the time their  youngest child reaches school age with a three-year extension of ParentsNext contracts.

Announcing the extension of ParentsNext contracts today, Minister for Employment, Skills,  Small and Family Business, Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash, said ParentsNext continues to  improve the work readiness and employment prospects of participants.

“We recognise that many parents and carers of young children need help to prepare and plan  for a return to employment as their children start school,” Minister Cash said.

“ParentsNext is a pre-employment program that assists eligible parents with young children  to plan their next steps towards study or work.

“The Morrison Government is committed to getting people back into work and rebuilding our  economy from the impact of COVID-19. Successful programs like ParentsNext all have a  role to play to achieve this goal.

Since July 2018, over 133,000 parents started planning for employment with almost 57,000  parents and carers having commenced education and 27,668 having gained employment.

“This contract extension will provide certainty to the sector at a time where COVID-19 has  been disruptive to so many people.”

Minister Cash said that the Government was focussed on supporting more women get back  into the workforce.

“ParentsNext is one of a number of initiatives the Australian Government has in place  designed to boost employment for women, with others including Launch into Work, Mid -Career Checkpoint, and Career Revive,” Minister Cash said.

“The Australian Government is working hard to prepare people for jobs, get people back into  work and to rebuild the economy from the impacts of COVID-19.”

More information about the program is at https://www.employment.gov.au/parentsnext



MEDIA CONTACTS

Guy Creighton - Guy.Creighton@dese.gov.au - 0438 815 302  Brittany Higgins - Brittany.Higgins@dese.gov.au - 0449 171 294

