CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW   SKY NEWS AM AGENDA  MONDAY, 7 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: State borders; Morrison Government’s delay in releasing and  responding to Productivity Commission report on mental health; Scott Morrison’s  failings in aged care.

TOM CONNELL, HOST: To discuss this I'm joined live by Shadow Health Minister Chris  Bowen. Thanks for your time. You were pretty sceptical in the initial heads of  agreement. Does this give you some more confidence?

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Good morning Tom. Yes this is  welcome. This is the Government finally doing what they told Australians they had done  three weeks ago and it means Australia catches up with other countries. There's 18  other countries with 51 deals - advance supply agreements - in place accounting for six  billion doses. So other countries have been way ahead of the game. The United States  signed its first such deal in mid-March, the United Kingdom in mid-May. It's now  September and Australia is signing its first deal. Obviously I welcome that. But the  Government can't pretend that they've been ahead of the pack or at the front of the  queue or anything like that. That's far from the case. And of course I agree with the  Government. While the AstraZeneca vaccine appears to be the most promising or  certainly one of the most promising vaccines under development, it is not guaranteed  that it will proceed to the final stages and so it would be prudent for the Government to  be pursuing other deals and other arrangements as well as they go. The United States  has six of these deals in place, United Kingdom 5 for example. Australia now has one.

CONNELL: Right. Well what about Australia's position on this right now though, I mean  you said they can't say before they're at the head of the queue. Right now we're in as  good a position as any for these particular vaccines. Are there any in particular in the  UK, US you think Australia should be trying to sign up to as well? Any vaccines you  want to list?

BOWEN: Look, I think an appropriate risk management would say it's prudent for the  Government to be looking at other options. Now there are other options there's Johnson  and Johnson out there for example. There's others under development around the world  which may also come to play. It's not just one option. I mean it could be that  AstraZeneca Oxford works and then Johnson and Johnson for example works just a  little while afterwards and there are - the more options we have the better where placed

we shouldn't put all our eggs in one basket. Again, I welcome this development today.  It's basically the Government doing today what they lied about three weeks ago when  they said they had a deal when they didn’t. Now they finally have one. I'm not going to  be churlish. I welcome that but it would be prudent to have other measures in place as  well. We all hope University of Queensland works. We all hope AstraZeneca works but  we do know that vaccines have a 96 per cent failure rate from beginning to end. That  means the vast majority of those vaccines under development around the world will fail  but some will work. We have to maximise our chances of having access to those who  do.

CONNELL: So would you like to see more than what's been signed. Obviously you  can't just sign up to anything but if the Government ends up signing up to five or six and  all of them turn out to fail, you wouldn't be blaming the Government -

BOWEN: No -

CONNELL: As long as due diligence has been done and it's on advice and so on. You  think the more the better in this circumstance?

BOWEN: That's a fair summation, Tom. Nobody can look into the future and have a  crystal ball as to which vaccine is going to work. Certainly to be clear if the AstraZeneca  vaccine doesn't end up working, I won't be complaining that the Government signed the  deal. It's appropriate that they sign the deal to ensure Australians have the best chance  to the vaccines with the best success rate or the best option of succeeding. Now  AstraZeneca is one of those. There's no doubt about that. AstraZeneca/Oxford is one of  those. The University of Queensland is one of those. There are others though that are  also well advanced and it would be prudent for the Government to be pursuing those  options as well. And certainly as you said if one of them - if they don't work out that  would not be something that the Government would be criticised for. On the contrary  they are appropriate measures to put in place as part of prudent risk management at  this point.

CONNELL: Any vaccine you would name is one that should be pursued -

BOWEN: Well, I already named Johnson and Johnson -

CONNELL: As a priority?

BOWEN: Well, I've already mentioned the Johnson and Johnson vaccine as being one  which has some potential. It might work it might not. It might work just a little bit after  AstraZeneca. It might work with greater success -

CONNELL: But when you say that - are you saying that from what you know right now,  that should just be something the Government should go and look at signing up a deal  with Johnson and Johnson as well?

BOWEN: Well the Government should certainly be looking at that seriously and there  are others around the world - Sanofi and others - all of which, I mean, I'm not here to  sort of arbitrate which vaccines will work or not but all of them show some signs of  promise and it would be prudent - the Government would have our support if they also  enter into arrangements with other companies as well as AstraZeneca.

CONNELL: Victorians have learned they're still in curfew and still will be until late  October. At the same time schools mostly shut. Hospitality all shut. The parameter here  for lifting those particular restrictions - fewer than five cases a day over a 14 day  average. That's a very high bar, isn't it?

BOWEN: Well let me make a couple of points, Tom. Certainly on the one hand I can  certainly understand - the Victorians wanting to get out and return to a more normal  lifestyle. I think every Australian looked at our friends, our cousins, our brothers and  sisters in Victoria and they are first and foremost in our thoughts. As well, the Victorian  Premier and Government are right to say that it would be irresponsible to ease too  quickly on some arbitrary timeframe built by some demands for - built on some by some  demands from some for sort of hard deadlines to open at this point regardless of what  the caseload is. They are right to point to the fact that they need to get those caseload  to right down - the new infection rate right down before they can safely open up. But I  think again most Victorians would understand that and I don't think Victorians would like  to see the opening up happen too quickly and see some sort of explosion and then have  to slam the brakes on again for a third time and then that would be the worst possible  result. Now -

CONNELL: Of course that would be the worst. There's got to be a debate about where  we go on this just -

BOWEN: Well I've seen the federal Liberal Party you know line up to put the boot into  Daniel Andrews this morning as a distraction from their own failings. That's very  unfortunate. We've supported all the Premiers. It wasn't that long ago I was on this  show and shows like it asked whether Gladys Berejiklian should be going harder. You  know shouldn't she be more like Dan Andrews and I've said I'm happy to support the  judgment of Premiers based on the best health advice available to them. That's the  constructive approach.

CONNELL: All right let me put one to the Liberal Party criticisms of Daniel Andrews this  morning because the other parameter is fewer than five unknown cases - mystery  cases again over a 14 day period - that's cumulative not daily. Again before that -  Victorians under curfew, schools shut to almost all students, all hospitality businesses  shut. If that were in New South Wales right now, Sydney would be shut down.

BOWEN: Well, Premiers will reach their own judgments based on the best health  advice. And yes, I've seen federal Liberal backbench MPs appoint themselves the  Shadow Chief Health Officer of Victoria this morning. Well they can wax lyrical or they  like. The modelling, the evidence and the advice that goes to Dan Andrews from the

Chief Health Officer and his other advisers is what the Premier should be listening to.  Not the sort of ravings of federal Liberal backbenchers trying to make a name for  themselves or Barnaby Joyce trying to stay in the media. The federal Liberal  Government has made a habit of attacking state Labor governments when they needed  diversion. Whether it's backing Clive Palmer's outrageous court case against Mark  McGowan. I mean actually intervening in the case to support Clive Palmer against Mark  McGowan or whether it is saying that Annastacia Palaszczuk should have opened her  borders to Victoria much earlier. Well she was right and they were wrong. They have a  very poor track record. It's not Team Australia anymore. It's not we're all in it together  anymore. It’s now let's hammer the states - the Labor states only when it suits them.  Well we'll take a different approach. Let me make it very clear. I'm happy to come on  your show and I'm happy to support the decisions by Peter Gutwein and Steven  Marshall to keep their borders shut. I'm happy to support the decisions by Annastacia  Palaszczuk for her border restrictions. I'm happy to support the decisions the Gladys  Berejiklian and I'm happy to support the decisions yes of Dan Andrews because  Premiers are making tough decisions based on all the best advice available to them and  Federal Liberals can come on here and attack state Premiers all they like. I think the  people who will be vindicated by history are those who make the tough but careful and  deliberate decisions based on the best health advice available to them.

CONNELL: Are you saying no matter what decisions are from the Premiers as long as  they come out and say this is based on health advice, here's our decision whether it be  restrictions, borders - you will back it regardless?

BOWEN: Well, it's not my role to second guess the decisions taken by Premiers  regardless of what party they're from - that's right. And others can do that if they want.  As the alternative Health Minister of Australia, I think it's my job to support decision  makers who are making tough decisions. I mean we supported the Federal Government  when they closed our international borders for example which was a controversial  decision at the time. We've supported tough decisions. We've made suggestions about  early in the crisis - earlier decisions to lock down which is also what Gladys Berejiklian  and Dan Andrews pursued and won the day with our support. And they were they were  right then when Scott Morrison was talking about going to the football, Dan Andrews  and Gladys Berejiklian were making the right calls. And the Premiers are accountable to  their states. They're not accountable to me. They're not accountable to Federal Liberal  backbenchers. They're not accountable to other Premiers. They're accountable to their  states for their decisions that they make.

CONNELL: But they’re also accountable - I guess in the short term,  we don't have an  election in Victoria for a long time. Let me ask you this - you say you back the Premiers  based on health advice, do we need to see the health advice? Because health advice  isn't just put these restrictions in place, it gives modelling, there are risk appetites and  so on, don't we need to know what's being fed in here in full detail so everyone can  make up their mind on this well before an election where Premiers - that's the only time  they're actually held accountable?

BOWEN: The more advice that can be made public, the better. And that's been  something we've been pursuing at the federal level through the COVID Committee. We  think there's been a lack of transparency at the federal level. Ultimately the more -

CONNELL: What about the state level?

BOWEN: Well the more evidence the more information that leaders can put out there,  the better. I don't disagree with that.

CONNELL: Are we getting enough out of Victoria right now for example? This is a huge  decision right now - massive impact. Wouldn’t it be better to see more of the health  advice?

BOWEN: Well Tom I have seen a very detailed roadmap come out. I mean Scott  Morrison wants states back to normal by Christmas. Dan Andrews has provided a  roadmap to do so and then the Feds are ripping into him and I saw Scott Morrison and  Josh Frydenberg and Greg Hunt issue a statement last night criticising the Victorian  Government which was quite extraordinary and one of the things that criticised them for  was contact tracing. Well maybe they could concentrate on their own job and getting the  act working. The app's been a dismal failure. So if we're going to start shifting blame  around the Federal Liberals can't have it all their own way. It would be better -

CONNELL: But just doing contact tracing - the Victorian Government has turned down  an offer of Commonwealth assistance for contact tracing. Why would they do that?

BOWEN: Well the offer of Commonwealth assistance primarily came through the app  which hasn't been working. Now again, I don't know the full details -

CONNELL: But this is to do with specific contact tracing. We're not talking about the  app. I understand the criticism of the app and we've heard that before but why -

BOWEN: Well, it’s valid criticism and it’s important criticism - it’s valid and important  criticism, Tom. We were told it was the key to getting out from under the doona. It's  found a very small number of contacts and that's - I'm just calling it as it is. I mean in  New South Wales they use the Opal card -

CONNELL: Sure but that means the more out of the manual contact tracing -

BOWEN: The Opal card for contact tracing - Yeah -

CONNELL: The better -

BOWEN: That’s right. There’s been more pressure on the manual -

CONNELL: So wouldn’t Commonwealth assistance be good in Victoria?

BOWEN: Well Tom, the Commonwealth has made that offer of assistance, I  understand. I understand the Victorians say that would not add considerable value at  this point. Again if the Premier wants to explain that in more detail he can. I'm not here  to second guess decisions made by Premiers one way or another.

CONNELL: We'll see if he does explain it. I should let our viewers know 11am, Daniel  Andrews will be holding his news conference so we'll hear perhaps what he has to say  about that. Chris Bowen, thanks for your time today.

BOWEN: Always a pleasure, Tom.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512

