

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS BREAKFAST  TUESDAY, 7 APRIL 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; Parliament sitting to pass JobKeeper legislation;  constructive role of Labor during coronavirus; coronavirus modelling; transparency  from authorities during coronavirus.

LISA MILLAR, HOST: Labor Leader, Anthony Albanese, has been broadly supportive of  the Government's handling of the coronavirus pandemic, and he joins us now. Good  morning.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Good  morning, Lisa.

MILLAR: Just on this vote tomorrow, it now appears that Labor will support it. What's  made you satisfied? What's put aside the issues that you had?

ALBANESE: Well, it's just our approach on these issues, Lisa. We have been looking for  solutions, not arguments. From the very beginning, we've never been looking for making  the perfect, the enemy of the good. So, we still have issues and we hope to get further  improvements in the legislation. What we've done is just exactly what we did on the first  package where we were concerned about superannuation. We were concerned about  some of the changes that were in there. But we weren't about to play a role that was  anything other than constructive. So, we'll put forward our case, privately as we have, in  the Parliament tomorrow if necessary, put forward some improvements that we think could  be made to the legislation. But it is Labor, remember, that argued for a wage subsidy. It  was dismissed by the Government. We're pleased that they changed their mind and have  recognised that it is absolutely critical that we keep that relationship between employers  and employees during this difficult time.

MILLAR: Something has happened since Sunday when the ACTU boss, Sally McManus,  voiced a lot of concern, especially about the 1.1 million casuals who were going to slip  through the gaps here. So, what is this so-called deal between Christian Porter and Sally  McManus that has been done that appears to now assure that this change will go through  tomorrow?

ALBANESE: No, Lisa, let's be very clear. The changes were always going to go through.

And I said we would support the package one hour after it was announced. So, that was  always our position. We remain concerned that 1.1 million casuals will miss out. We think  that the legislation could be improved by making sure that they're included, so that casuals,  who could have expected to be in work, not people who just don't have a relationship with  work at all, don't miss out.

MILLAR: But they are going to miss out because Christian Porter said that the line has  been drawn.

ALBANESE: I understand that. And we're against that. We were against the super  changes. That doesn't mean that we're going to play a blocking role, Lisa. Because overall,  the benefit of having wage subsidies is too important. So, we'll continue to argue our case.  We've done it privately and publicly. And I don't know, but I'm sure that Sally McManus will  have the same position. What the ACTU has been talking to the Government about is  whether changes need to be made to the Fair Work Act. I understand that there's been an  agreement reached, a middle ground, if you like, where, perhaps, it's that those changes  might be made, but there might be an ongoing role for the commission. Perhaps it could be  some middle ground. We'll wait and see when that's announced. We haven't been a part of  those negotiations. Let's be very clear. The ACTU is not the Australian Labor Party. The  ACTU have had separate negotiations with the Government, of which we haven't been a  party to those discussions.

MILLAR: Can I ask you about the modelling? Can I just confirm, also, what's being  released today? You haven't seen it yet, have you?

ALBANESE: No. No, we haven't, Lisa.

MILLAR: And you've been for it to come earlier. But has there been an argument that it's  not only complicated, but could add to the anxiety and panic? Do you agree with that at  all?

ALBANESE: Look, certainly this is a judgement call. But the Government has now, clearly,  agreed with what we've been saying for some time. That transparency is critical here. We  want the public to trust authorities. We want them to obey the social distancing provisions  which have been brought in, and which Australians, overwhelmingly, are doing with good  will and it is making a difference those changes. But just as we want people to trust  authorities, the authorities have got to trust the public as well. It's a two-way relationship.  And I think it will build trust and will encourage support for the measures that have been  put in by bringing the public with those of us who have more information than others on the  journey. We're all in this together. People are entitled, I think, to know what is informing  Government decisions, whether they be Federal or the state and territory governments.

MILLAR: You talk about transparency being critical. There seems to be growing disquiet  that Parliament isn't sitting again until August, and what kind of scrutiny will there be on all  of this. What could be done, do you think?

ALBANESE: Well, Parliament could continue to sit. That's the first thing, Lisa. Parliaments  around the world are continuing to sit. And that's important. We're a democracy. And in a  democracy, you don't suspend it. It wasn't suspended during the Spanish flu, or World War  I or World War II. This is quite an extraordinary decision that the Government has made.  And I think that Christian Porter, as the leader of the House, his dismissal that Government



ministers have better things to do than sit in Parliament, was a bit breathtaking, frankly, for  someone who holds that office. It can sit in a modified form, of course, as we are  tomorrow. It's showing that tomorrow will be effective, it will be constructive, it will be  Parliament at its best. Partisan interests are put aside, certainly by us, and we'll be acting  in the national interest tomorrow. And I think that people can see that. It can build  confidence. We expect our nurses, our teacher, our public transport worker, our cleaners,  our supermarket workers, to go to work. And I think it's not too much to ask that we do the  same. We certainly will be advocating as well as a Senate Select Committee to oversee  the position that is seeing this very large roll-out of Government funds. We want to make  sure that that is used effectively and that there's proper scrutiny of it. I believe that is best  done through the entire Parliament, but the Government seems to be pretty intransigent on  that issue. And I think that that is unfortunate. Frankly, I think that would do the country  well to see the Parliament constructively, working together in the national interest.

MILLAR: Just finally and briefly if you don't mind Mr Albanese, you've been critical of the  Government previously for not going harder, faster, with its approach on the health side of  things. Are you comfortable with where we're at now? And also, perhaps the police  response to a lot of the physical distancing, a lot of talk this morning about the $1,600 fine  for the L-plater out driving with her mum?

ALBANESE: Well, I think by and large, we have got the balance right now. I was very  concerned particularly that people were going through Sydney Airport with no checks at all,  not even heat testing. I thought that was inadequate. And that was the case up until about  ten days ago. And we know that most of the infections have come from people who have  travelled overseas. So, I think we're right to raise those issues. You look at the debacle of  the Ruby Princess. Bipartisanship doesn't imply silence. And our role is to raise issues, do  it in a constructive way, look for solutions, rather than arguments and that's what we've  done.

MILLAR: Well, long may it continue, then. Anthony Albanese, thank you for your time this  morning.

ALBANESE: Thank you very much, Lisa.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053







