

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  CANBERRA  MONDAY, 23 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; coronavirus stimulus packages; confusion around clear  messaging during the coronavirus issue; Parliament sitting arrangements.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Thanks very  much. Today has seen the Parliament operating in the national interest. Labor has  concerns with this legislation. It is not the legislation that we would have brought before the  Parliament. We are raising those concerns in the form of amendments in the House of  Representatives and the Senate. Measures including superannuation, which we think is  not in the interests of either workers or in the interests of those superannuation funds to be  in a position of either taking cash out of funds at a time when those funds have been  affected by the drop-in share prices, is not in the interests of retirement incomes, nor is it in  the interests of the industry funds themselves who could be forced to sell down assets at  the worst possible time as well. We also are concerned that there is no direct guarantee at  all in this legislation that workers will be kept on. There is no incentive because of the way  that the Government has organised its business support is based upon employees who are  employed in February, that is in the past, not in the present or in the future. And there is no  incentive for workers to be kept on. We also are concerned about some of the income  support payments that people who are on Austudy, Abstudy, and a range of other  payments, won’t receive anything from this package. And we are concerned about the  failure to provide support for particular industries that have been impacted. Industries like  the arts and entertainment industry, for example, have been devastated by the shutdown  of music and entertainment venues around the country. But we will be supporting the  package when it comes to a final vote if our amendments are not successful. We have  foreshadowed that a long period of time in advance. Because we have consistently said  that the sooner we act, the better. Now, we know that the Government from time to time  when it is in a political interest, moves with lighting speed. But at other times, it does not  move at all. And the Government should have been prepared today for the number of  people who tried to access the MyGov website. And the fact is that the minister this  morning suggested that site going down was as a result of a cyber-attack. It was in  Parliament that he conceded that simply wasn't the case, that he just made it up. And the  fact is that this wasn't a cyber-attack. It was an incompetence attack by this Government  and by this minister. The fact that the site went down because it can only deal with 55,000  people. And at nine o'clock this morning, there were many more than that trying to get  information from the Government. This just adds to the record of this minister and of this  Government in failing to prepare where there's not a political imperative involved. What we

actually need during this period, just like dealing with the post-bushfire crisis, is to ensure  that people are actually getting the support that they need. That the Government puts in  place the structures that they need as well to ensure that support can be delivered. Happy  to take questions.

JOURNALIST: During the bushfire crisis Centrelink was setting up mobile offices where  people needed so that people didn't have to queue at offices as we've seen today. Have  you made any suggestions of things along those lines?

ALBANESE: Look, the Government has to more adequately resource Centrelink and the  public sector in general. One of the things that we're seeing during this particular crisis is  that some issues which are general, which we have raised, we are seeing the specific  consequences of them. So, whether that is the casualisation of the workforce that's seeing  so many people laid-off without having conditions and leave entitlements, that don't have  access to the sort of support that permanent workers regard as essential. We're also  seeing the consequences of a Government that's been determined to privatise and  contract out assets. The truth is that the big four accounting firms have got a lot of  Government taxpayers' money over recent years and at the same time basic government  functions have been stripped from their workforce. And Centrelink clearly needs more  people. We saw the Robodebt debacle of what happens when you try to replace people  with machines. And we've seen today, another debacle. And the Government needs to get  on top of this and needs to get on top of this as a matter of urgency.

JOURNALIST: Mr Albanese, just in terms of that process tonight, given the Senate, will  Labor look to pass both legislations in the Senate tonight or to keep the debate going until  tomorrow?

ALBANESE: Look, we expect that the legislation can pass tonight. The Senate, of course,  as you know, as an observer, and as I've observed over many years, it's functioning is a  law unto itself. So, the senators will determine. They have a different culture. We have set  up a system whereby the House of Representatives will pass the stimulus bills by 5PM and  will pass the supply bills by 7:30PM tonight. So, as of 7:30PM, everything that is needed to  be before the Senate will be before the Senate. It's up to them to determine their own  processes. But I'm sure that everyone is cognisant of the fact that we do need to get this  legislation passed. But it's also the case that most of these payments, one of the questions  we just asked in Question Time, some of them off in July, some of them, the deeming rate  changes, for example, don't take into effect until May. And we believe a range of these  payments have been delayed beyond what is appropriate.

JOURNALIST: Just in terms of the amendments that you're looking at. Can you give us  some idea, particularly you have raised concerns about superannuation and are you  looking to get rid of that measure entirely? What would you replace that with?

ALBANESE: Well, we've moved amendments. And it's not beyond the Government's  capacity to provide increased support if they believe that it's necessary for low income  workers. Of course, we know that there are no wage subsidies directly being provided by  this Government. That's another question that we asked in the Parliament. The  Government has said that it's going to come back with further measures. So, they  themselves recognise they will have to expend more money at some time in the future. It is  only, of course, been two weeks since the first stimulus package. And we have another  one that was announced just yesterday. So, we just believe very clearly that the time to  take money out of superannuation isn't just after there's been a market slump. Because the

value of it, the value of it, is just like any other asset. If you sell at the bottom, that doesn't  make good economic sense, whether you're an individual or a corporate entity, or an entity  indeed, like superfunds. So, the concern is that for individuals, the money that they take  out will be of less value because of the circumstances which are there with the decline in  the market. And secondly, that for superfunds, if they're forced to get rid of assets in order  to provide that cash of people wanting to take money out of their funds, then now is not the  time to sell an airport or to sell another asset as well. So, we think this is not a sensible  measure. We have put that to the Government. I hope that the Government see sense and  support our position. If they don't, well, we're not going to stop the whole economic  stimulus package because of that. And consistently, myself as the Leader has said we'll  put forward our arguments, but we won't throw babies out with bath waters if we're not  successful. But it makes no sense. And in fact, one of the things that is of concern is there  was no consultation with the superannuation industry about those measures.

JOURNALIST: Just in terms of the Ruby Princess in Sydney. What concerns does Labor  have about 2,700 passengers being taken off that boat, and more particularly about the  breakdown in relations between the federal and state governments?

ALBANESE: Well, we asked a question about it in Parliament today. And we just got the  blame game. The Prime Minister just blamed New South Wales. There's a pattern there of  him blaming New South Wales and Gladys Berejiklian's Government, whether it be the  bushfire crisis, or whether it be this issue. The truth is that the Federal Government are  responsible for the entry into Australia. And the Government needs to accept some  responsibility for it. Our concern is obvious. The concern that people who were known that  this ship had issues regarding health, and they weren't checks. People were allowed to  disperse right around the country. And now there's an attempt to find where those people  are and who they've had contact with. Just as we remain concerned about mixed  messages. It's one of the themes that we've had. And we've put it forward constructively.  And we've said, repeatedly, I've said to the Prime Minister, now on a number of occasions  in different forums, that the idea that people are still coming into Australia, not getting heat-tested, not getting any test whatsoever, and then dispersing on domestic flights, or in cabs,  or on the train, or in Ubers around the country to self-isolate, they do have to self-isolate  now for 14 days. But in the meantime, they've been to a number of destinations. I raised  this issue last Tuesday when I was at Sydney Domestic Airport. And the Rex Regional  Express lounge was full of people who had got off international flights from places like the  Philippines and the United States. And we're flying to Wagga Wagga, flying to Ballina,  flying to Cooma and Merimbula, and without any heat-testing, or any processes at all. The  Prime Minister, we asked about that today as well, and the Prime Minister said that he was  comfortable with it. I think that one of the issues that we have to get right is sending  consistent messages. And consistent messages are not in my view aided by the idea that  people can arrive in Australia and have no testing whatsoever.

JOURNALIST: What's your position on temporary foreign workers? There are a lot of  people in Australia on working visas. Presumably, if the businesses they're working for  have shut down, a lot of them are going to be left without any form of support. What  advocacy are you doing for them? Is there anything that can be done for them?

ALBANESE: Look, we are very concerned about that issue and I indeed during Question  Time, organised to talk to the acting Immigration Minister this afternoon. I intend to make  contact with him, which he agreed to do across the chamber once this media conference  ends. There are a range of issues. One is income support, including income support for  temporary visa holders, Temporary Protection Visas. And I raised that in my speech in the



Parliament today. Our concern is also over what happens for those who are on temporary  work visas here but can't get home? What happens to them? And I think the Government  needs to come up with a plan to deal with all of those issues. I intend to raise it  constructively with the Immigration Minister this afternoon. Because on both their access,  their capacity to stay in Australia, and those issues, or on the issues of income support, I  think the Government has to deal with them because we know that there are hundreds of  thousands of people, indeed, who will be impacted in one way or another by those issues.

JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister said that for the next six months until the rest of this  year, Parliament will operate on an emergency basis. Have you had any clarity about what  that means? Will there be sittings in May or sittings for the rest of the year?

ALBANESE: Well, look, we had discussions yesterday about this. And we expressed  some concern about the governance proposal. It hasn't been dealt with in the Parliament  yet. The Parliament will be bringing up a timetable, a change this afternoon once that issue  has been dealt with. We are of the view that Parliament as scheduled should continue to  be scheduled. And if there is a need to put off the May sittings, we accept the  Government's argument about the Budget that it is difficult to put together a Budget at this  time. But we do believe that Parliament as scheduled should continue to meet unless it's  not possible to. We don't know what the circumstances will be by the second week of May,  which is when it's due to sit. And so, we of course, would have preferred for that to be  there and for the normal arrangements which are that, the Prime Minister could write to the  Speaker and ask the Parliament not to sit, and then that would occur. What we have got,  though, is the Government intends to not have the May and June sittings to remove them  from the sitting schedule. And for the Parliament to be able to be recalled with the support  and concurrence of not just the Leader of the House, but also the Manager of Opposition  Business, so that there will be proper consultation about parliamentary processes. I am of  the view that Parliament continuing to function as much as possible even in restricted  forms is important. There will also be amendments made to the standing orders, which will  ensure that whereas at the moment there needs to be effectively 76 plus members here  this week, that number would be further reduced so that by changes to the standing orders  about the operation of the absolute majority rule so that the quorum rule, which is in the  constitution and can't be changed, would operate. That is so the Parliament could operate  with under 40 members in the House of Representatives, and with a much smaller number  in the Senate as well. So, we're prepared to cooperate on all of those matters. But we have  put our view clearly to the Government, that Parliament should be functioning if it is  possible in May. It may well be that is not the case. But if it is, then there is work for us to  do. And as the national representatives, we should have input and not just leave it to the  executive Government. We are a democracy. The Prime Minister made a comment during  Question Time about the importance of showing through this crisis that a democracy can  function rather than a less democratic regime which exists in some parts of the world. I  think that is not only important to be done, it's important that it be seen to be done. Thanks  very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053





