

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

TODAY SHOW

FRIDAY, 16 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECTS: National Cabinet being cancelled, Gladys Berejiklian, need

for a federal ICAC, Victoria, New Zealand travel bubble, China and cotton

exports, AFL Preliminary Finals- Brisbane Lions vs. Geelong Cats.



KARL STEFANOVIC, HOST: For more we're joined by Home Affairs Peter

Dutton and Deputy Opposition Leader, Richard Marles. Good morning, guys.

Peter, to you first of all, why on earth can't National Cabinet go ahead?

Don't they have telecommunications in Cairns?



PETER DUTTON, MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: I am not sure, Karl but if

you're going to be stuck anywhere, you may as well be stuck in Cairns, I

suppose. So hopefully the PM will be down here later today. There will be a lot

of people pretty happy to be stuck on the tarmac in Cairns at the moment.



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR

PARTY: That was honest.



STEFANOVIC: The thing is, you were supposed to be talking about all these

people stuck overseas, coming home and what will happen to all of those

people who are overseas at the moment and want to come home?



DUTTON: We want to try and get people back as quickly as possible. And

obviously it's hard because you've got the combination of the two weeks in

hotel quarantine and at the same time a cap on those numbers. We want to

bring people back as quickly as possible. We have worked very closely with the

Northern Territory on the Howard Springs facility, which is a mining

facility, essentially. So, there's the ability to bring bigger numbers back

there. When you combine all of that, we will bring as many people home as we

can. Warnings have been issued since March this year, please don't go

overseas unless you need to.



STEFANOVIC: Okay, Peter, does the Liberal Party have a corruption problem

in New South Wales because it sure looks like it?



DUTTON: No, I don't think you could find anybody more honourable or decent

than Gladys Berejiklian. So, she's obviously had her personal life laid bare

for everybody to see, which would be embarrassing and difficult for her and you

feel very much for her. But is she is a person of great integrity? Absolutely

she is. And she has done a great job in managing COVID for New South

Wales. So I think it's a time frankly for New South Wales to get behind  her.



STEFANOVIC: That is one thing, but there's an awful lot of corruption that

happened underneath her nose and the nose of the Liberal Party.



DUTTON: Karl, I think as we have seen in Queensland, ministers who have

had cosy relationships, secret deals done with unions, etcetera, those have

been referred to in our case in Queensland, the Crime and Misconduct

Commission and ICAC in NSW, that is what they're there for, particularly at a

local government level even in Queensland where a mayor has gone to jail

recently. So that is their job and, if there's corruption, in this day and age

how people think they can get away with being corrupt is beyond

my comprehension and they deserve having the book thrown at them.



STEFANOVIC: Okay. Richard, Labor has had all sorts of dramas in New South

Wales as well. When will politicians learn?



MARLES: Well, I think as Peter said, it's very important that we have measures

in place which deal with questions of corruption of public officials. That is why

we've been arguing for an anti-Corruption Commission at a federal level for

a long time now. The Federal Government have talked about doing it but

haven't done anything about it. But it is really important that these bodies are in

place to make sure not only those in public office are above any sense of

conflict but are seen to be that. So these bodies have a really important role to

play as the one in New South Wales is having right now.



STEFANOVIC: Okay, now to Victoria, there is a High Court challenge

on this afternoon but is Victoria ready to open up, given the

Shepparton problem, Richard?



MARLES: Look, we all hope so. I think everyone in Victoria is looking to

Sunday with a sense of hope and optimism about what might be announced by

the Premier. At the end of the day, these are decisions which have to be made

with the best medical advice in line and that's how the government has gone

about making its decisions up until this point. We have got the numbers

down. And the last couple of days, the numbers have been really encouraging.

It's been a very long, hard road here in Victoria. But, you know, I think everyone

is just aching for some good news on Sunday and we hope that that is

the beginning of a path back to some sense of normality.



STEFANOVIC: Okay. Peter, we are hearing some information coming out of

China this morning; there might be an issue with our cotton farmers and cotton

production and exporting. Have you heard anything along those lines to add to

the list of issues with our produce heading towards China? Have you got an

update for us?



DUTTON: I haven't heard that news this morning, Karl, but obviously the

government is working closely, through Simon Birmingham with- to make sure

we can get the exports into those markets.



STEFANOVIC: Okay. 350 Kiwis arrive a little bit later on today from

New Zealand. I mean this with the greatest of respect but have we got the

Dettol ready?



LAUGHS



MARLES: We all welcome them! You do too, Karl.



STEFANOVIC: No, I'm just jealous as hell. Pete?



DUTTON: My - both - I'm going to get into trouble here; but both of my in-laws are born in New Zealand. Kirilly will quickly point out that she was born in

Perth. But, look, we welcome them. And I think it's a great thing actually. We

have 244 people I think coming today. It would be good if it's two-way but at the

moment it's not. No surprise people want to get out of New Zealand and come

to Australia.



STEFANOVIC: I think Richard Marles wants to say something about that. He

quite liked it.



MARLES: No, I think it's great to have Kiwis here. We like to have our friends

from across the ‘dutch’, who come and see us here. Baby steps. And I hope we

get to go back the other direction as well.



STEFANOVIC: Do you know what, I tell you what is wonderful - seeing you two

guys outside of your team's games areas. We have got the Gabba there behind

you and we have Richard down at Geelong. It's a big game, a big footy game

this weekend. Fellas, let's go to you, Pete. Have you got a little sledge for

Geelong at all?



DUTTON: I haven't got any sledge but the Lions are on fire. So hopefully they

get up, hopefully Richmond goes down. And we will see - it will be a good game

and big weekend. That is the great thing about the Gabba is there is plenty of

traffic-



STEFANOVIC: You can’t hear.



DUTTON: I only get every second word you're saying, Karl. No, I can’t hear

anything.



STEFANOVIC: I know. You have done really well. Richard, before we go,

you have got a ball there. If you've got a ball, we want to see you line up and

kick, for goal. Now, this comes down to the final couple of seconds… Oh wow!

Bury the headline! Bury the headline, look at those legs! Magnificent!



MARLES: Okay. I am here at the cultural heart of our nation; GMHBA.





STEFANOVIC: Yes.



MARLES: You want me to have a go?



STEFANOVIC: Yeah, go on. This is for the Grand Final win, folks.

Richard Marles. If he gets this, he will be Opposition Leader.



LAUGHS



STEFANOVIC: He's got it through for a behind.



MARLES: There you go.



STEFANOVIC: One behind. Good on you, Richard, you’re a great sport.



MARLES: No one was in any danger, I can tell you.



STEFANOVIC: Good on you, you too, Pete. We will see you very soon mate.

Well done with all the traffic noise.



ALLISON LANGDON, HOST: Another five points for the shorts.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.









