

SENATOR JENNY MCALLISTER  SHADOW CABINET SECRETARY  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER TO THE LABOR LEADER IN THE  SENATE

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  CANBERRA  WEDNESDAY 12 FEBRUARY 2020

SUBJECTS: Chaos within the Coalition; coal-fired power stations; Closing the Gap.

JENNY MCALLISTER, SHADOW CABINET SECRETARY: Australians are having a  difficult summer. We’ve had terrible bushfires on the east coast and west coast, we’ve had  serious flooding, we’ve had many in our community worried about the impact of the  coronavirus on themselves or friends and family overseas. There is an overall feeling that  what is needed is clear direction and leadership about the future of our country. The  resumption of Parliament presented an opportunity for Scott Morrison and his team to  provide exactly this. But it has been a disaster. We’ve had, at every turn the self-interest,  particularly in the National Party, overshadow occasions which ought to have been  opportunities for very, very significant demonstrations of the leadership that Australians  crave.

When the Parliament resumed, at the request of Mr Albanese, we scheduled a day to offer  our condolences to those affected by bushfire and our gratitude to those who served to  protect those communities. That was an opportunity for leadership, but instead it was  overshadowed by a National Party spill, the National Party fighting amongst themselves for  the spoils of leadership.

This week an important state visit, from our most important neighbour, and the President of  Indonesia’s visit again overshadowed by National Party fighting, by Llew O’Brien. Now  there is no high point of principle here, this is just about the National Party fighting amongst  themselves for reasons we can’t actually establish form the outside, arguing for a seat at  the table as individuals. Where is the national interest in all of this?

Australians must by scratching their heads, and there is an opportunity for Scott Morrison  to show some leadership but seems paralysed by the division. It is as though he has lost  control of the debate. It is time for Scott Morrison to get a grip on this. Australians are  craving for some direction. It is an uncertain time. The Parliament presents an opportunity.  And if the closing of the gap statement today is overshadowed by further bickering, further  fighting, further arguing amongst members of the National Party, it would be a disgrace.

JOURNALIST: The Closing the Gap report shows that we are failing on almost all of our



targets, what do we need to do?

MCALLISTER: My view is that the involvement of Aboriginal people is setting their own  course is absolutely critical. We will hear today, the Leader of the Government, the Leader  of the Opposition about closing the gap. But the one thing we won’t hear is the Voice of  Aboriginal people. Two years ago Indigenous Australians delivered the Uluru Statement  from the Heart and they offered a clear path forward. They were united in asking for three  things, for a voice to the Parliament, constitutionally enshrined, for a Makarrata  commission and for truth telling. The Government has made almost no progress on any of  these things and has ruled out a constitutionally recognised voice. Why can’t first  Australians have a voice to our Parliament? Labor supports it, the Aboriginal community  are clear about what they want, the Government ought to start listening the Aboriginal  people., I believe that is the only way we will make progress on those targets.

JOURNALIST: Is Labor on the same page in terms of coal fired power stations?

MCALLISTER: Our position is very clear. We do not believe that government should be in  the business of funding coal fired power stations, full stop.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEILA STENNETT 0436 632 388













