Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Cyber Safety and the Arts, Sydney.





THE HON PAUL FLETCHER MP  Minister for Communications, Cyber Safety and the Arts

THE HON MARK COULTON MP  Minister for Regional Health, Regional Communications and Local Government

MEDIA RELEASE

25 March 2020

NBN Co boosts data for rural and regional customers

The Morrison McCormack Government welcomes new initiatives from NBN Co that will provide  more broadband data for Sky Muster satellite customers living in rural and remote Australia.

The initiatives announced today include permanent enhancements to NBN Co’s Sky Muster Plus  offering, and a temporary increase to data allowances for standard Sky Muster plans to support the  increased data needs of rural and regional Australians in response to COVID-19.

Sky Muster Plus enhancements

Launched in August 2019, Sky Muster Plus has until now offered unmetered usage for selected  internet essentials including web browsing, emails and internet banking. From 1 April, unmetered  activities will be significantly expanded to cover all online content and applications, with only two  exclusions - video streaming and VPN traffic - which will continue to be metered.

Other enhancements include the introduction of a new 25GB entry plan offering 25GB of peak data  and 25GB of off-peak data for households with lower data needs that still require the flexibility of  unmetered data, and the option of ‘top up’ data, should customers exhaust their monthly metered data  allowance, which will become available in coming months.

The new features will provide customers with access to more data and offer peace of mind that they  can continue to access the internet month-long without exceeding their monthly data allowance.

These permanent enhancements to the Sky Muster Plus offering have been in development for several  months in line with NBN Co’s commitment to refine its product offering to meet the broadband needs  of regional Australians.

Sky Muster data boost

In addition to the Sky Muster Plus enhancements, NBN Co has also announced satellite broadband  retailers will have temporary access to an additional 45 Gigabytes (GB) of download data for each  standard Sky Muster plan from 31 March.

The additional 45GB will effectively double the average monthly download limits on retail plans  offered by Sky Muster retailers to 90GB, and will provide greater flexibility for regional and remote  Australians to accommodate expected increases in data usage while people implement COVID-19  social distancing measures.

Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Cyber Safety and the Arts, Sydney.



The additional data will initially be available for one month. NBN Co will review demand and  determine the appropriate level of allocation for an additional two months.

Minister for Communications, Cyber Safety and the Arts, the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, welcomed NBN  Co’s commitment to rural and regional Australians, particularly during the challenges arising from  the spread of COVID-19.

“As we all adapt to new ways of living and working to help play our part in slowing the spread of  COVID-19, we anticipate higher than usual internet usage across the NBN, including in regional and  remote areas,” Minister Fletcher said.

“The extra data that NBN Co is making available over the Sky Muster satellites - both permanent  enhancements adding greater flexibility on Sky Muster Plus and the short term data boost on standard  Sky Muster plans - will offer relief to regional and remote communities as their internet needs  change over the coming weeks.

“Under the new Sky Muster Plus offering, approximately 70 per cent of all data use is expected to be  unmetered compared to about 30 per cent under the current plans, with the product also supporting  unmetered usage for education applications and apps such as Skype and FaceTime for the first time.”

Minister for Regional Health, Regional Communications and Local Government, the Hon Mark  Coulton MP, thanked NBN Co for supporting regional Australians in connecting with their loved  ones, essential services and the economy.

“The NBN plays a critically important role in keeping rural and regional Australians connected, and  this is particularly true as we face uncertain times,” Minister Coulton said

“The new measures announced today will undoubtedly help families access the internet for work,  essential government services, education and even entertainment over the coming months.”

Last week, NBN Co also announced retail service providers will have access to up to 40 per cent  more Connectivity Virtual Circuit (CVC) at no additional charge for at least three months. This  applies to all NBN access technologies, including fixed wireless and Sky Muster satellite service.

The capacity boost takes advantage of the flexibility in the NBN to account for changing data usage  patterns, which are expected to result in higher traffic levels during the day and increased activity in  the suburbs as compared to business districts.

NBN Co has also committed to suspend the managed disconnection of legacy copper services to the  70 per cent of regional premises that can access the NBN via fixed line services, and to suspend all  non-essential work on its fixed wireless network to minimise disruptions to services and keep  regional Australians connected.

More than 6.7 million homes and businesses across Australia now have an active NBN connection  and are enjoying the benefits of fast and affordable high-speed broadband.

For more information about the Sky Muster Plus satellite service visit: www.nbnco.com.au

Media contacts:  Minister Fletcher:  Brad Hatch | 0448 162 679 | Brad.Hatch@communications.gov.au  Rebecca Papillo | 0439 892 771 | Rebecca.Papillo@communications.gov.au  Minister Coulton: Steph Nicholls | 0417 314 920 | Steph.Nicholls@regional.gov.au

Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Cyber Safety and the Arts, Sydney.

Additional information

On 16 March 2020, Minister Fletcher convened a virtual roundtable with Australia’s major  telecommunications companies to discuss COVID-19 preparation and planning continuity measures  to support services.

Outcomes of the meeting included establishing a special working group of major carriers, led by  NBN Co, to share relevant information and discuss emerging engineering, security and operational  issues.

The first meeting occurred on 18 March 2020, and a second meeting on 20 March 2020. The group  will continue to meet regularly to monitor and manage network performance.

