

MURRAY WATT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR NORTHERN AUSTRALIA  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DISASTER AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT  LABOR SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  4CC GLADSTONE WITH LAURIE ATLAS  TUESDAY, 17 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: COVID-19; impact on airlines; tourism; NRL; support for  casuals; interest rates.

LAURIE ATLAS, HOST: Senator Murray Watt, Labor Senator for Queensland is a very big  traveller. He's not a huge traveller at the moment because of Covid-19. How you going,  alright?

MURRAY WATT, QUEENSLAND SENATOR: Yeah, good, Laurie. Yes, a little bit  restrictive at the moment isn't it, where you can go and what you can do.

ATLAS: A friend of mine was travelling on a flight from Brisbane to Rockhampton. There  were so few of them on the plane that they had to sit in certain spots so they could actually  balance the thing.

WATT: It's amazing. I had a similar experience last week coming back from Mackay. The  flight I was on would normally be packed and it was probably two thirds full. It's having a  really big impact on the airlines, obviously. And you know, anything to do with travel or  tourism is getting hit. I saw you've got a cruise ship that was supposed to be docking later  this week in Gladstone that looks like it's been turned away. So, yeah, it’s having all sorts  of impacts on people.

ATLAS: Absolutely. Look, there's a lot of scaremongering going around, but there's an  aviation expert who's saying that some - many - of the airlines around the world could be  broke by the end of May.

WATT: Well, hopefully that won't happen. I mean, some airlines around the world run on a  pretty tight margin and probably don't have a lot of reserves. And we have seen other  times in history when airlines have gone under. But certainly I'd be hoping that here in  Australia we can at least maintain the two that we've got. We need some level of  competition in the airline industry. And obviously, you know, it's particularly important for  regional areas, as in so many regional areas the airfares are exorbitant. You can only  imagine how much worse it would get if you were reduced down to one airline. You know,  hopefully, hopefully it will be ok. But yeah, look, I think we're in for a tough ride for some  time to come yet. I think, you know, tourism, airlines, travel, all those industries are really in

the frontline but obviously it seems like it will have an impact on hospitality - all the  restaurants and bars - so we'll wait to see what the Government decides to do there over  the coming days as well.

ATLAS: Which is, I guess, the reason that the head of the NRL, Peter V'Landys, has got  his hand out for money because of the ripple effects, he would say, on various industries.  Do you think that's something the Government should look at, to bail out organisations like  the NRL or not?

WATT: Look, not at this stage. I think the first priority simply has to be trying to support  those small businesses and workers who are under immediate threat -

ATLAS: -I guess he would argue, Peter V'Landys, that there are many small businesses  that would be affected if the NRL couldn't run. And I suppose he's got a reasonable case  there, I don't know.

WATT: And look, I think - we've certainly been calling for the Government to do more to  assist small businesses and their workers, that the stimulus package that's been  announced so far is a good start but we think, you know, there is more that needs to be  done. So if we're talking about the small businesses that spin off the NRL, that might be a  different story. But I don't know that we're quite at a point where we want to be seeing  public funding given to large businesses at this stage and things might change, you know,  let's see how long this goes. But our view is the immediate priority has to be supporting the  small businesses and their workers. I mean, casual workers in these businesses are in a  terrible position as well. They can be laid off, you know, at a moment's notice. And I know  what the Government has said so far is they'll provide access to sickness benefits for  people. But only for those that have to self-isolate. You know, if you're working in a cafe in  the main street of Gladstone, and you get laid off as a casual, at this stage there's no  support provided by the Government. You'd have to wait the usual time before you get  Newstart. So I think there's a few other things that the Government needs to take a look at  before they go bailing out people like the NRL.

ATLAS: It was actually an interesting point that the Leader of the Opposition, obviously  your leader, Anthony Albanese, raised about casualisation, because one of the things that  has come up is that maybe even people in the mining industry, for argument's sake, or  industries here in Gladstone who are on casual type situation, would have no money,  obviously, if they were sick. So they are more likely to go to work sick and that could  possibly be suffering from the symptoms, if you will, of Covid-19. They may not even have  it, but I believe you can still pass it on even if you don't have the symptoms. So that's an  issue, isn't it?

WATT: Absolutely and I think that this is one area that we do need to see the Government  do more. You're right, you know, if you're a casual waiter at a restaurant or working in a  shop as a casual and let's say you might be pulling in $300-$400 a week, if you're lucky a  bit more, then the amount of money that the Government has got on the table for these  people at the moment is far less than that. And so, if you're a casual and you're faced with  having to earn your normal wage, that can pay your bills, or going into self-isolation and  getting much lower benefits from the Government, I think there's a lot of people who are  going to choose to keep on working and keep on getting that money. And all that will do is  put them and their co-workers and their customers at risk. So we think that there is more  that needs to be done there and hopefully the Government will do more. But there is talk of  a second stimulus package being announced by the Government. And I think the needs of



casual workers is pretty high up there in terms of what the Government needs to  announce.

ATLAS: Do you think the Reserve Bank dropping the interest rate again is a good thing?

WATT: Well, all the reports are that they look likely to do that. I think that it's pretty clear  that if we don't take drastic action as a country in terms of our economy, we're in for a very,  very bad time. And so then - obviously the Reserve Bank is an independent board, they'll  do what they want to do. But I think that dropping interest rates further may be necessary.  But we've been saying for a long time that the Government has been leaving it to the  Reserve Bank to do all the heavy lifting to get the economy moving. They've been dropping  interest rates now month after month for quite a long time. And, you know, even back last  year, I remember you and me talking and me saying that we needed to see the  Government bring forward infrastructure projects, do other things to get businesses  investing, to get wages increasing. There were a lot of weaknesses in our economy  already before we hit coronavirus and before we hit the bushfires so I don't have any issue  if the Reserve Bank does decide to drop interest rates, but they shouldn't be left to do all  the work on their own. We do need to see the Government step up. These are times when  we need to see our Government spending money to keep the economy afloat and to keep  people in work.

ATLAS: So you'll be travelling far less over the next couple of months, one would imagine?

WATT: I suspect so, yeah. You know, part of my job that I enjoy is getting out into regional  Queensland, whether it be Gladstone, Mackay, Rocky, Townsville, Mt Isa, you know, when  you're a senator, you're a senator for the whole state. You've got to be able to understand  what's going on everywhere. But at the moment, most of the advice is to limit our travel.  We're still waiting to see what happens with federal parliament next week. We are  scheduled to sit next week. But there's some talk that there might be reduced numbers of  people coming down and we won't be taking staff with us just to minimise the risk. So, it's a  bit of a day-by-day thing at the moment and I think we, like everyone else, is just pretty  keen to get really clear advice from the Government about what you can and can't do.

ATLAS: Yeah. Alright. Good to talk to you. Take care.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TALI ELEY 0448 078 456







