





SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Deputy Leader of the Government in the  Senate Senator for South Australia



TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Interview on 5AA, Mornings, with Leon Byner.        Topics: seafood industry  4/1/2020  10:08AM

Leon Byner: Now, this is a good news story because as you know South Australia is a wonderful food  producer. As a country, as you would know, we produce enough food for 75 million people which means that  we can feed ourselves first - we should - and then when we've got an abundance of extra we can sell that to  the world. Now, you would know that the seafood industry has been under some duress for some time  because, for example, there were a lot of fishers who rang me and said: look, it's not worth our while fishing  for, say, lobster because the ability to export it to other people who would normally buy it - at a premium price  by the way - has been diminished. Well, that's changing because the Federal Government has announced  that hundreds of tonnes of lobster and abalone is going to be flown on emergency freight flights out of  Australia in a $110 million push to stop a massive downturn across the seafood sector.

So let's talk to the Federal Trade Minister, Senator Simon Birmingham. Simon, good morning. Are we going to  ask the normal freight runners to do this? Or are we going to Virgin and Qantas and saying: listen we want to  borrow a few of your aircraft?

Simon Birmingham: Well, good morning Leon. Look, we will be putting out a request for proposals that will  be open to all of those who carry freight. Of course, much of Australia's freight traditionally, in terms of air  freight, goes out in the belly of passenger aircraft that's what's created the real crisis that we've got at present  - that more than 90 per cent of that air freight capacity is now lost because passenger aircrafts no longer  travelling. But Qantas and Virgin do manage some of the freight and logistics so I'm sure they'll be interested  parties in this; and if we can support Australian airlines then we'll be looking to do that.

But the primary objective is, first and foremost, to make sure that our fishers and our farmers are able to get  their high quality, valuable produce back into those export markets and to do so at affordable rates for them to  be able to keep employing Australians and generating export dollars for our country.

Leon Byner: Alright. I need to clarify something because the information - and we're going back some time  when the world was even different as we know it - where some of the first people to give hit for this  coronavirus issue were in fact many of the seafood exporters - they weren't the only ones but that's the sector  we're talking about now. And they made the point that they couldn't get their product to where it needed to go  because the where it needed to go didn't want it or didn't want to take it. Is that the case?

Simon Birmingham: That is but that is a while ago now, Leon. So you're right, at the outset of this crisis,  which of course hit in China first and foremost, China basically locked down their population. Chinese Lunar  New Year celebrations were all cancelled and therefore, Australia's live seafood market and many of our  premium goods that would normally go into the Chinese market at that very busy time of year for their  hospitality sector suddenly had no customers there because nobody was going out to the restaurants and  nobody was purchasing those sorts of premium goods.

We now find a situation where China is actually starting to have normal activity return to a degree as they  have seemingly passed the peak in their country. And yet, because of the loss of air capacity around the  world, we now can't physically get the goods to China or to any of the other markets that we rely upon such as  Japan or the key freight hubs like Singapore and Dubai.





So, this measure is really focusing on making sure that we fill the gap where there is still demand. We’re  obviously we’re not going to be sending Australian food and produce to countries that don't have a demand at  present. But where there is still that demand we want to make sure that our farmers and fishers don’t miss out  on selling their produce just because there aren’t planes flying. We need to get those freight aircraft in the air,  servicing Australian ports so that our farmers don’t miss out.

Leon Byner: Alright. Now, once these aircraft have landed and offloaded their freight, they’re going to bring  things back aren’t they?

Simon Birmingham: That’s our aim, that wherever possible the backhaul - so the goods that are coming to  Australia on these aircraft - will meet the priority medical supplies, protective equipment, pharmaceuticals, the  types of things that we have in high demand at present, that appropriately are high value goods, important  goods and would have a place on a freight aircraft. I want to emphasise, Government’s not intending to pick  up the whole tab for these things. Our farmers and fishers will still have to paying normal commercial rates.

Leon Byner: Which I’m sure they’re more than prepared to do. They just want to be able to get their  product somewhere.

Simon Birmingham: That’s right. They want to know that there will be planes flying and they don’t want the  cost of that to be so prohibitive that it’s not worth them sending their goods. But normal commercial rates,  possibly even at a premium, they’ll happily contribute. Government will then underwrite to an extent the  remaining gap but importantly, we do want to make sure that we're using the capacity to bring things back into  Australia, all the goods that we desperately need at present to make sure that we get all Australians safely  through this pandemic.

Leon Byner: Now, again, I think there's a very basic question here. Do you now, as - I mean you're a very  important minister in the scheme of things and you're a South Australian Minister which is good because  you've got a bit of clout - I want to ask you this question: is there now a recognition by you that there are  certain essentials that it's time we start making ourselves because of what's happened to us with this virus  crisis?

Simon Birmingham: Leon, it is important that we have the capability to be able to step up where  necessary. And our Australian manufacturers have shown some extraordinary capacity just in the last few  weeks of pivoting where necessary - we've had the wonderful story of Bickford’s turning their manufacturing  lines onto hand sanitisers and Detmold there in South Australia as well, now cranking out the protective  equipment. And indeed we sent the army in to help a business in Victoria to convert their operations to be  able to expand - they were already a manufacturer of facemasks, but to be able to expand their capability  quickly and dramatically and we used military engineers to help do that quickly.

So we've demonstrated a capacity but it does firmly show that we need to make sure that we always have that  capability - whether it is to always be manufacturing all of these goods - but certainly to make sure we have  the capability to pivot our manufacturing rapidly and quickly for these essential goods when and where they're  required.

Leon Byner: Where will the majority of these fish exports go? China?

Simon Birmingham: China possibly. Although I'm expecting the first flight probably to head to Japan and  from Japan it may well be that some of it then expands out into Korea, China and across those north Asian  economies. But the Chinese market is one where our fishing industry tells me emphatically that they have  customers, they have demand returning, they just need to find a way to get the product there.

Leon Byner: Alright. So we're starting with seafood but there are probably other places where exporters  want to get into markets. Are they going to get help as well? Or are we just starting with seafood and seeing  what happens?

Simon Birmingham: Seafood, premium meats, horticultural products, and they are all firmly in our line of  sight for support through this mechanisms, so they're all important sectors. They are of course all produce that  needs to be shipped when it's fresh and while it's high quality and that's why- the different markets will no  doubt have different goods on board them as well. So what we send to Dubai may well be quite different to  what we send to Shanghai.

Leon Byner: Alright Minister, thanks for joining us today. That’s the Federal Trade Minister, Simon  Birmingham, just explaining what is a very good initiative to ensure that we can make our exports work.







Media Contacts  Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.

