CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



MICHELLE ROWLAND MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS

MEMBER FOR GREENWAY





PM MUST PULL BACKBENCHER IN LINE OVER HEALTH

MISINFORMATION



The Government’s own experts have again called out Craig Kelly on his false and

dangerous social media rants promoting hydroxychloroquine for COVID-19, yet the Prime

Minister, Health Minister and Communications Minister have yet to utter a word of criticism

against their backbencher.



First it was the nation’s Chief Medical Officers, now the Deputy Chair of the Australian

Communications and Media Authority has said Craig Kelly’s hydroxychloroquine posts

should be removed from social media.



Appearing before the Joint Standing Committee on Electoral Matters, ACMA Deputy Chair

Creina Chapman said that the media regulator has proposed a “graduated system of harm”

for misinformation on digital platforms in Australia.



Ms Chapman said “The most harmful material ... the example of health harm would be

material that we would expect they would take down.”



When asked specifically if she sees Craig Kelly’s social media posts on

hydroxychloroquine as harmful and whether they should be taken down, Ms Chapman

replied “Yes - and I think anybody would.”



Anybody but the Prime Minister it seems.





Scott Morrison talks a big game about keeping Australians safe and holding digital

platforms to account, but is too weak to confront his own backbench MP and Captain’s Call

for the seat of Hughes about spreading harmful health misinformation during a pandemic.



Craig Kelly’s wilful ignorance of science and medicine should be called out for what it is,

and the Prime Minister and Greg Hunt should admonish Kelly for waging war on health

officials and experts who are under immense pressure during this pandemic.



The Government needs to speak to the Australian people with one voice, reassure them

and promote best practise health measures, not allow fringe-dwelling backbenchers to

peddle conspiracy theories.



Labor understands the importance of maintaining public trust in our health institutions,

that’s why we backed the role of the independent Therapeutic Goods Administration in

Parliament, before the Government gagged debate.



Scott Morrison has had opportunity after opportunity to show leadership, but every time

sidesteps the issue.



On 3 August, when asked about Kelly’s Facebook post that Victoria Premier Dan Andrews

should be jailed because hydroxychloroquine is banned in Victoria, Scott Morrison said he

won’t “get into what people talk about on Facebook on a day like this”.



With the health and safety of Australians at stake, it is well past time to get into it.



Anyone but the Prime Minister can see that.



THURSDAY, 17 SEPTEMBER 2020



MEDIA CONTACTS:

THOMAS MCCRUDDEN (BOWEN) 0434 943 840

ADAM BOIDIN (ROWLAND) 0406 009 019



