

MARK DREYFUS  SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL  SHADOW MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM  MEMBER FOR ISAACS





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RADIO NATIONAL BREAKFAST  THURSDAY, 27 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Foreign Interference; Media Freedom; Victorian COVID Powers.

FRAN KELLY, HOST: Journalists who are the targets of police raids will be given new  protections under recommendations made by an important parliamentary inquiry into  media freedoms. The year-long probe by the Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security  was launched after those high-profile raids on the ABC and the home of News Corp’s  Annika Smethurst. Its long-awaited report calls for stricter procedures for the issuing of  warrants on national security grounds, but rejected calls by media organisations they be  allowed to challenge the warrants before they are issued. Mark Dreyfus is the Shadow  Attorney-General and a member of the committee, Mark Dreyfus, welcome back.

MARK DREYFUS, SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL: Good morning Fran.

KELLY: Just before I get to media freedom, these foreign interference laws, the  Government wants to use the External Affairs power to override any agreement struck by  state governments that would be contrary to the national interest. Will Labor support the  legislation when it hits Parliament next week?

DREYFUS: Well we haven't seen it yet but of course managing our relationships with other  countries has always been the Federal Government's job, and of course the Federal  Government should be determining what's in our national interests.

But let's not forget that this is the Government that ticked off the sale of the Port of Darwin  to Chinese interests. This is the Government that includes Marise Payne and Simon  Birmingham who supported the Victorian Memorandum Of Understanding when it was  signed.

KELLY: The Prime Minister’s Office has been in contact to say they never supported that.  There was no endorsement of that plan.

DREYFUS: Well, people can read their interviews at the time and draw their own  conclusions. And let's not forget that this Government signed its own secret Belt and Road  Initiative in 2017. That was Steve Ciobo and the Government should come clean and  explain what that deal with China was all about.



We've made it clear, Labor's made it clear, that we would not sign up at a Federal  Government level to the BRI, which of course is something that this Coalition  Government's already done.

KELLY: If the law was used, for instance, to force Victoria to cancel its Belt and Road deal  with China would you support that? Do you think that agreement shouldn't have been  signed in the first place?

DREYFUS: We think that the Federal Government should be managing our international  relations, and in particular should be working towards a productive relationship with China.  That's been our position for a very long time. It should be this Government's position.

KELLY:  This will change and limit the states’ sovereign powers to sign deals with other  countries about tourism, about science agreements about, you know, infrastructure won’t  it?

DREYFUS: Let's just see what the Government's proposing when we look at the  legislation. Let's see exactly what they want to do, and let's then consider what the  implications are for Australia's economic prosperity and Australia's trade.

KELLY: Okay, on the press freedom issue, the media freedoms report, the committee  made up of Government and Opposition members was unanimous -journalists deserve  more protection under the law, but they can still end up in jail for doing their job. Was this a  missed opportunity to do something more when it comes to public interest journalism?

DREYFUS: Let’s bear in mind that this is a consensus report of six Liberal members of the  Committee and five Labor members of the Committee. We've made it very clear that we  think that more needs to be done to protect press freedom in Australia. And what is striking  about this report is that those six Liberal members of the Committee, are in direct  disagreement with Mr Morrison and Mr Dutton and Mr Porter, all of whom told the  Committee and have said publicly that no change is needed to our laws.

Quite rightly - and I commend those six Liberal members of the Committee for reaching  this conclusion - they’ve concluded as we concluded that there is a need to change our  laws. Our position is that even these recommendations of the Committee, are only a  starting point. The Government should immediately implement all of these  recommendations and it should go further.

KELLY: The most significant change, as I understand it anyway, being recommended is  how warrants are issued. A public interest advocate would be able to make a submission  to the judge issuing the warrant. But would that submission be given equal weight to an  application by police for the warrant for instance? Is there any inherent imbalance there?

DREYFUS: We see this is a way to make sure that the competing interests here of law  enforcement and protecting journalists who are doing their jobs, protecting journalists who  are engaged in public interest journalism, that the best way we think, to balance those  competing interests is to have a public interest advocate at the stage of the application for  the warrant, which we’ve recommended should be before a superior court judge, to raise  the level of the person authorising the warrant. We think that that's a good way to make  sure that the interests of journalism are considered in the process.



But of course, there are competing interests here. No one can shy away from that. What  we're on about here is making sure that there's a process to ensure that the interests of a  free press, the interests of public interest journalism, aren't forgotten in the process.

KELLY: The Committee rejected the call to make warrants contestable, that means they'd  still be issued without notice. Why didn't you support that?

DREYFUS: We accepted that there's a potential prejudice to investigations to the criminal  justice process if there is notice given that a warrant is being sought. And again, there are  competing interests here. We've looked for ways to protect the public interest, and we urge  the Government to make the reforms that this report has recommended, and to go further,  because it is absolutely clear that the interests of a free press are not being protected in  Australia. It's still the situation Fran that an ABC journalist, three years on from the start of  an investigation, is under threat of being charged with a serious criminal offence and being  jailed…

KELLY: That’s true.

DREYFUS: … for simply doing his job.

KELLY: Mark Dreyfus, just finally and briefly, we've only got a minute to the news, but can  I ask you about the bid by the Andrews Government for a 12-month extension to the State  of Emergency in in Victoria. You’re a Victorian, do you see anything to fear from that  extension? Do you agree with Bill Shorten that, you know, people are freaking out about it?

DREYFUS: This measure is needed to make sure that the health emergency is able to be  dealt with decisively, that this highly infectious disease is able to be met by necessary  restrictions. It doesn't mean that the lockdown is being extended for 12 months, it means  that the Victorian Government will have the power necessary to continue restrictions if they  need to. At the moment we're all looking forward to the Stage Four lockdown ending on the  13th of September.

KELLY: Mark Dreyfus, thanks very much for joining us.

DREYFUS: Thanks very much Fran.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHEN SPENCER 0423 596 573









