

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY  DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW   SKY NEWS AFTERNOON AGENDA  TUESDAY, 4 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Scott Morrison’s aged care failures; the Government’s lack of a plan for  COVID-19 and aged care; letter to Gladys Berejiklian about the Ruby Princess  inquiry; Scott Morrison preventing Federal officials from answering questions.

KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: Let’s bring in the Labor Senator Kristina Keneally. The COVID  Committee has been looking at the aged care crisis. It's been an absolute tragedy and  apparently five days it took for St Basil's - the nursing home where we've seen several  deaths - for the information of the COVID outbreak to reach the top medical panel. If the  facility's not passing on the information, how can the Federal authorities be blamed?

KRISTINA KENEALLY, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE AND SHADOW  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Kieran, good afternoon; good afternoon to your  viewers. Today, extraordinary evidence at the COVID Committee when it comes to aged  care and first let's just acknowledge these heartbreaking numbers that came out today  through that committee hearing. And my heart goes out to the family members, to the  residents, and to the workers in aged care who are really struggling with some of these  bad stories. 700 cases of COVID-19 in aged care, Kieran, 370 in hospital. 153 deaths  counting the 11 deaths today. Just extraordinary numbers. Now you talked about the five  days that it took St Basil's to inform authorities about the outbreak there. Listening to that  evidence today I was reminded of Newmarch House here in New South Wales, not just  four months ago, and we had the Commonwealth officials in front of us not long after  Newmarch House; the COVID committee. And today we pretty much have the same thing  Kieran. Poor communication, poor planning when it comes to infection control and  personal protective equipment. The lack of planning, the lack of, really, a solid relationship  between the sector and the level of government that is responsible - and that is the  Commonwealth Government. The buck stops with the Commonwealth Government when it  comes to aged care. And you sat there listening today thinking "we knew about these  challenges four months ago, how is it that we've got to this point where we had this kind of  outbreak at St Basil's and across Victoria?" and the Minister, Richard Colbeck, and the  Prime Minister seem to have complacency and no plan to deal with it.

GILBERT: The point that's been made, though, is that the workforce at St Basils had to be  replaced in full basically, whereas that's not the situation at Newmarch?



KENEALLY: I'm really glad you brought this up Kieran because this was another startling  aspect of the hearing today. The officials before us said they couldn't imagine a  circumstance where they would have to replace an entire workforce. Well, first of all, we're  in the middle of a pandemic. So it's not that hard to imagine, with a highly infectious global  disease in a global pandemic that you might have a circumstance where the whole  workforce would have to be replaced. That clearly, by their own evidence, wasn't part of  their pandemic planning. Secondly, again, what we knew from Newmarch, what we knew  from Earle Haven last year - a different set of circumstances but nonetheless with a whole  workforce had to be replaced - why wasn't there a plan put in place to roster workers and  to have a shift that accommodated so you could keep the workforce separate and manage  the workforce issues in aged care homes so you weren't put in that position. Again, Kieran,  it comes back to the fact that after a Royal Commission, after numerous reports- some  dozen reports in the past three years into aged care- none of these issues were sadly new.  The frustrating thing here I think for family members is that they wouldn't have had much  comfort that the Commonwealth are addressing the issues in aged care.

GILBERT: Now you've written to Premier Berejiklian and this relates to the Special  Commission of Inquiry into the Ruby Princess. You've urged her to give Commissioner  Walker more time. Why is that?

KENEALLY: Well Kieran we've had in the past week some really clear revelations from the  Commonwealth Government, Freedom of Information documents as well as the  Government's own thousand page submission to the Special Commission of Inquiry, where  they buried within that these revelations that it was Australian Border Force and Federal  Agriculture officials onboard the ship that morning. It was Federal officials who gave the  pratique- the approval- for people to disembark the ship. It was Federal officials that did not  have the right health advice in front of them when they made that decision; indeed made  some tragic mistakes when it came to misreading flu tests for COVID tests. But what those  documents also show is that the Commonwealth Government are fighting a legal  summons from the Commissioner of Inquiry, Bret Walker. The Prime Minister said in April  that his Government would "cooperate" fully with the Special Commission of Inquiry but  that is just not the case. They are fighting a legal summons for Federal officials to appear  before Bret Walker; Bret Walker has issued that legal summons. I think, given these  revelations, given these documents that are now in the public domain, it's important that if  we're going to have a comprehensive look at what happened with the Ruby Princess, we  need to understand the responsibilities at both state and federal level and it is not good  enough for the Prime Minister to be blocking Federal officials from appearing in public and  answering the questions that clearly the Commissioner wants to put to them. So this is now  an opportunity for the Premier- who I'm sure shares my view- that we need to get to the  bottom of what happened onboard the Ruby Princess and for her to talk to the Prime  Minister. Ask him to stop fighting that legal summons and to allow the Federal officials to  appear. Because Kieran, let's just be clear here, this Government whether it's age care,  our borders, what happened onboard the Ruby Princess, the COVIDSafe app, all of these  things are Commonwealth responsibilities. The Prime Minister is great at making an  announcement. He's great at getting a headline; he's not very good with the follow through.  And what we see with the app, what we see with the Ruby Princess, what we see with  aged care, is the Commonwealth ducking and weaving and hiding, trying to point the finger  at other people. It's now time with this Special Commission of Inquiry that we hear from  Federal officials.

GILBERT: Deputy Labor Leader in the Senate, Senator Keneally, thank you. We'll talk to



you soon.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110







