

T h e  H o n . D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

Transcript



Sunday 5th April 2020

Interview with Sky News, Kieran Gilbert

Topics: Agricultural Worker Visas, Grey Nomads, Agriculture Trade, Ruby Princess,  Biosecurity

KIERAN GILBERT: Welcome back to the program. Joining me now via Skype is the  Agriculture Minister and Deputy Nationals leader David Littleproud. Minister, thanks so  much for your time. Let’s start with the Government’s response when it comes to visas for  the agricultural sector, because one of the dilemmas right now is we don’t want large  groups, certainly, visitors travelling to the regions, but some of the sectors need the  workers, don’t they? What are you doing in regard to that?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks Kieran, good morning. It is, they’re essential workers to  ensure that we continue to maintain the food security, the continuity to our supply chains  that we require from the farm gate through to the shelves in the supermarket, and we rely  particularly on those holidaymakers and Pacific Islanders on seasonal visas. What we’ve  done is to give them clarity to allow them, if they work in an essential service, which is  agriculture, then they can extend their visas by a further 12 months. This will give certainty  to our primary producers, but also those visa holders, those that are making decisions now  about whether they should return home. Because you’ve got to understand we’ve got a  need right here and now as we get into the citrus season, but also as we get into the end  of the year it will peak again. And we’re down from around 210,000 holidaymakers that  have visas to work down to around 140,000, and obviously we’re going to hit another peak  period and around 30,000 to 40,000 of those will be required to work within the agricultural  sector. So we’re not only thinking about the here and now, we’re thinking about in six to  eight months as well, when there’ll be more demand and the next cohort of backpackers  may not come in and we’ll complement that with the Pacific Islander and seasonal islander  visa programs. So this is about continuity, it’s a common sense approach, but we’re saying  they must self-isolate for 14 days before they get into those communities to give them the  protection that they need, because these communities don’t have the health facilities that  you enjoy in metropolitan Australia. So we’ve got to also do this in a methodical way that  will give them the comfort and protection of this virus spreading.

KIERAN GILBERT: Because one of the other elements that I know you’ve been asked  about this week and I want to get your thoughts on it this morning for our audience, and  that is in relation to grey nomads. Because the advice is those leaving the cities, you can  understand why many would be thinking: let’s get out of the city, let’s get to the bush. But  as you said, your towns and regions and your areas like Warwick, the facilities just aren’t  there in a medical sense are they? If there were to be an outbreak.

Page 2

Transcript





Transcript





DAVID LITTLEPROUD: And that’s exactly right. We just simply don’t have the respirators.  Some of these little communities only have one respirator, and in fact if you’ve got an  outbreak in a little community they would be isolated, we’d have to be transporting them  into capital cities as quickly as we can. That’s why we’re saying only people with essential  needs need to be out in these parts of the world in making sure we keep our food security  there. And that’s why we’re saying that we’re encouraging those that can work to come out  and do it, but those that don’t, it’s been quite clear, the advice is to stay at home. That’s  where you self-isolate. You’re only to go out if you’re part of an essential service.  Agriculture is an essential service, it’s about keeping our nation security underpinned by  our food security, and that’s what is driving this decision. We understand that there’s a lot  of Australians that unfortunately have lost their jobs, but unfortunately a lot of these jobs  are also hundreds if not thousands of kilometres away, and farmers don’t have the luxury  to sit there and hope that Australians may be able to turn up and pick their crops. So it’s  important that we appreciate that as well. These are in far-flung places and they don’t have  the health facilities to support large populations, particularly when they are as acute as  Covid-19.

KIERAN GILBERT: One of the other industries that we know is pivotal to our economy  through this period as well, I know that economists are talking about the need to keep  construction, resources like mining, but obviously agriculture as well remains a key  industry. The Government announced some support for freight for getting supplies into the  region. What’s happening on that front and what do you say to those who might be  arguing: isn’t it time to keep those supplies in Australia in a time of crisis?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, let me put it in simple terms, Kieran. We’re a nation of 25  million people, we produce enough food for 75 million people. This is an opportunity for  Australian agriculture to showcase itself once again on the international stage as not only  producing the best food and fibre in the world but being one of the most reliable suppliers  in the world. And that’s why we’ve stepped in, obviously as international passenger flights  have reduced that means that the cargo that was going underneath their feet has basically  diminished and the cost, the cost of sending your stuff over has just skyrocketed. So we’ve  come in and want to maintain those international markets. Because this is about  profitability to our regional sectors. We oversupply for our own nation. This actually is  underpinning our nation’s economy in many ways at the moment, the agriculture and  mining and resources sector. So it’s important we keep the continuity going, we keep the  money coming into the nation as well as keeping our nation fed. And that’s why we took  the extraordinary steps to put $110 million into a freight subsidy, not to pay for all the  freight but to try and minimise the increasing cost for our producers to continue to send  their produce around the world and continue to be able to take advantage of the free trade  agreements that we put in place. This will make sure that not only we actually get through  this Covid-19, but it also means that it’ll help our economy rebound quicker on the back of  agriculture and resources. This is an important step and will continue to support those  exporting sectors while keeping Australians safe at home, that’s our primary objective.

KIERAN GILBERT: My colleague Andrew Clennell had some breaking news at the top of  the program, that New South Wales Police are expected to launch a criminal investigation  into the management, the Carnival Australia responses as part of the Ruby Princess  debacle. Do you welcome that development if it eventuates as we expect this afternoon?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, obviously if the New South Wales Police are taking steps  towards that then they have information that would lead them to warrant that type of

Page 3

Transcript





Transcript



action, and I would welcome that. I think we live in a fair and just society and it needs to be  transparent, and any investigation that Police and officials make should be backed by any  investigation that’s required. And whatever comes out of it, obviously, I think we’ll wait and  see.

KIERAN GILBERT: Your department’s Biosecurity people have been involved in checking  some of these ships and aircraft and so on. How does a stuff-up like that happen when it’s  now created 10 per cent of all cases in this country came from that ship?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, let me make it clear. The Biosecurity officers that are  involved in any of the actions around Covid-19, none of those personnel have medical  qualifications. They are not medically trained, they do not make medical assessments,  they do not make medical recommendations. These brave men and women put their hand  up to be the first ones to enter, whether it be ships or planes, to go on and to hand out the  messages and to make sure that people understood their responsibilities under Covid-19,  to hand out facemasks where required, and to actually take those that were showing  symptoms and to isolate them into quarantine areas where then state health officials would  then go and treat them. The Biosecurity personnel that were out there have been the ones  that have put their hand up, bravely put their hand up, to be in the front line. They don’t  have any medical expertise, but they’ve done it to serve their nation and to do what they  have been asked to do by those that have the medical degrees and profession that would  give us as a nation the best advice.

KIERAN GILBERT: David Littleproud, Minister for Agriculture and Deputy Nationals leader,  live via Skype from your home in Warwick. I really appreciate your time, thanks.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks mate, great to be with you.

Media contact  Douglas Ferguson, 0455 448 985

