

STEPHEN JONES MP  SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES  MEMBER FOR WHITLAM



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS AFTERNOON BRIEFING  MONDAY, 7 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Victorian roadmap out of lockdown.

PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: Time now for my panel, Shadow Assistant  Treasurer Stephen Jones and Liberal MP Dr Katie Allen. Lovely to have you  back on the panel with me. Katie Ellen, you're back in Melbourne after the  sitting fortnight in Canberra and of course yesterday the Victorian government  revealed its roadmap out of lockdown. What did you make of that roadmap that  the Victorian government announced?

DR KATIE ALLEN MP, MEMBER FOR HIGGINS: Look all I can say Patricia is  I don't think I've had any more phone calls and emails of despair, quite frankly,  than over the weekend and of course the last 24 hours. The good news is the  numbers seem to be better, which is great. But the bad news is it seems that  we've got a very long tail to this lockdown and what I'm hearing from people is  that they hope that the track and tracing will be sorted so that we can have  more positive projections going forward. Because I suspect some of these  projections are based on what’s been a bit of a disaster when it comes to  tracking and tracing here in Victoria.

KARVELAS: I want to bring you in here Stephen, you're in an economic  shadow portfolio and the Prime Minister says he hopes the latest Victorian plan  is a worst-case scenario and a starting point. Should Victoria moved to open  earlier given the devastating economic consequences on the state?

STEPHEN JONES MP, SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER: First thing I  want to say is I got a lot of mates and some relatives down in Victoria, and I  know you're both Victorian residents. I’m feeling your pain. It's terrible that this  is a necessary pain that people have got to go through. On the relationship  between health and economic outcomes, they're intertwined. There is no

sustainable economic recovery without a health recovery, you know people  don't tend to spend up big when they can see people around them are catching  this terrible disease, when they see hospital wards chock-a-block full when they  know that there's a health going on. So the health solution and the economic  solution are as one and that's exactly how it should be. I'll take the advice from  the health experts, if they say we can pull the restrictions up in Victoria and  start to lose them a little earlier, fantastic, I'm sure the Victorians will be  rejoicing a lot more than I will, but you know, we think that's going to be a great  outcome, but the health has got to come first. Nothing would be worse than to  prematurely lift those restrictions and then have to reimpose them. It would be  devastating from a mental health point of view as well, but also an economic  point of view. I think that'll be the end of a lot of businesses.

KARVELAS: Katie Allen, that's the argument that the Victorian government  articulated yesterday in the modelling that if it comes out of those restrictions  too soon there’ll be a third wave and actually Christmas will be cancelled and  didn't quite put it that way but was really the gist of it all. Do you accept that in  the modelling that they have put forward?

ALLEN: Look Patricia, a lot of people, a lot of epidemiologists have been  contacting me about this modelling. I sit on the national health COVID response  committee at the federal level, which has 35 professors that meet twice a week  and discuss all the difference evidence-based with regards to questions that  federal government is grappling with. I would like to see a very similar broad  spectrum set of experts gathered at the Victorian level, because clearly what's  happening now is there's an opening up of a two speed health and economic  response. There's Victoria and then there's all the other jurisdictions and I'd like  to see that the premier's listening to the broad range of epidemiological  expertise here in Victoria. We have probably 50% of medical research expertise  is based in Victoria, and there's a lot of expertise here and there's some  frustration that starting to emerge from the experts themselves. We know  modelling is complex and as the supercomputer said itself through a thousand  models put in they've come up with one response. Now there is a lot of guess  work that goes into predicting where we are going to go with our pandemic  response. And what I would say is that the federal level there's been a pretty  clear and consistent approach which is that we're going for aggressive  suppression, we're not going for elimination, quarantining our external borders  of the most important aspect of what we've done with our public health  response. And then the second thing that's the most important thing is the  tracking and tracing and we're seeing in New South Wales and absolutely  fantastic response by the New South Wales government with regards to, first is  quarantining and secondly, it's COVIDSafe app and directed track and tracing  and keeping on top of this pandemic and we're not seeing that same response  here in Victoria. So I'd like to see more of an evidence-based approach and I  think there's some concerns now about the data that is being shared with us

with regards to the responses. There is a lack of confidence coming from the  people who are contacting me about where we are going with our plan. Now,  that's not to say that the Premier is not doing his very damnedest. I know that  he's working very hard for the people of Victoria. I know he's well-intentioned,  but the along the way there's been some issues with regards to whole of  postcode type testing which was not evidence based. He's not using the  COVIDSafe app, or he hasn't been using it.

KARVELAS: Isn’t that because it hasn't been very effective, the app actually  itself isn’t very effective?

ALLEN: Well, actually if you look to New South Wales, Patricia, there’s actually  been a large number of people who have been traced using the COVIDSafe  app. And if you go, before there was lock down, if you went to local cafes and  restaurants, we're expected to put our name and number down, well, he could  have offered to put your name and number down or to put your COVIDSafe app  down. I mean there could have been a lot more support for the program that  has been rolled out at the federal level. We had 7 million users take up the  COVIDSafe I would like to have seen the tracking and tracing and we do know  that at the Victorian DHHS level there has been some failures with regards to  automation of the tracking with regards to digitalisation of the tracking. It's been  a paper-based response. I'm not hearing every day the premier saying I'm  getting a hundred percent track and tracing going on. I'd like to hear that  number. I'd like to hear that he's going after every case and he's tracking and  tracing every case. That's the number that I'd like to hear and I'm not hearing  that. But I'd also like to hear his response about it being an evidence-based  response with regards to what we're closing down. I'd like to hear where are the  problems. I mean yesterday Jennifer Westacott came out and said she was  unaware that there are any case outbreaks in the businesses, well perhaps  there are but I'm not hearing that data. I'd like to know where the where the  touch points were and where the touch points are with regards to the plan now.  So I'd like more evidence base and I like to hear that from the premier.

KARVELAS: Look the other issue is of course, the economic response. The  Prime Minister was asked about that. He said he wants to see what the  Victorian government offers. Stephen, I want to bring you in here. What do you  think the federal government and the state government should be offering given  the really the very dire economic consequences on ordinary Victorians?

JONES: Yeah, look, I think a couple of things need to be announced by the  government desirably before the October budget statement. The first is an  alignment of the income support with what's actually going on in the economy.  We've got arbitrary dates set at the moment for tapering off that income  support. which aren't attached to anything that's actually happening in the real  world. For example, if we've got public health restrictions such as border

closures, international and other restrictions in place, which are preventing  certain businesses from operating, or operating as normal, then some special  support is needed for those businesses or those areas. So that's about  JobKeeper. Then you've got the JobSeeker arrangements, which are also  designed to taper off and then the additional arrangements closed off at  Christmas time. Frankly when you've got a million people unemployed now,  one and a half million people expected to be unemployed by Christmas, why on  Earth would you say it's a good time to be tapering off income support? I'd also  go further and say, so that's just about maintenance about what's already in the  field, the second thing we need to be looking at is additional suspend and  support by the government. So infrastructure always talked about, yes, we  should be doing it. There should be lots of diversified projects that can be done  in every suburb or every region around the country so it's not all capital city  based, that we're getting out to the areas that are affected. But finally, we've got  to look at some stuff that is actually going to pick up the people who have lost  their jobs in greatest numbers during the government's recession. Let's call  them women, because they're over-represented in that group. Aged care is a  standout but let's not stop there. Let's boost our spending in some of those  areas to ensure that the people who are most affected are the ones who are  get the support that they need.

KARVELAS: Katie Allen, you are a Melbourne-based MP for the Morrison  government. Would you like to see the federal government make more  commitments to support Victorians during this downturn?

ALLEN: Well, I think the first thing to say is that the federal government has  now committed three hundred billion dollars of economic support and combined  together the states and territories have only committed 40 billion dollars. Now of  the JobKeeper commitment, which as we all know is now extended out to  March to provide certainty for businesses, of that 101 billion dollars almost 40  billion dollars is coming to Victoria. It's true that Victoria is going to need more  support though. I don't think there's much doubt about that. I'd like to see the  Victorian government step up its commitment. It is the one that's making  decisions about what is effectively causing almost a suffocation of some of the  businesses I'm hearing from all over Higgins and I'm sure right across Victoria.  Cafes and restaurants are really struggling. They feel a sense of loss of hope  actually, sole traders, gardeners who could be out working in gardens out in the  open air without even any contact with anyone, you know, there's a sort of  dismay about the lack of interest in engaging with business. And yesterday  again, we heard from Jennifer Westacott that, you know, a COVID safe  approach by businesses is something that is being, you know, should be really  engaged with and thought about get businesses back online soon. There's  some really interesting research coming out of places like the US where there  was a couple of hairdressers, for instance, who were COVID positive and they  saw a 137 clients and not one of them infected their clients because they were



using a COVID safe approach. So there are ways to deal with COVID and now  that we're getting the numbers under control and now that we're getting tracking  and tracing under control and now that the federal government is offering and  giving support to the Victorian government, I'm hoping that will move further,  quicker, to lift restrictions on businesses, which will then mean that will have  less economic support that would be required both by the federal and the state  government.

KARVELAS: Well, we'll see. Thank you to both of you for joining me this  afternoon.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: AMY SMITH 0459 846 926









