

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T

Monday 2nd November 2020

Minister Littleproud iv Sky News First Edition

DANICA DE GIORGIO: Well, Australia recorded its first day without a COVID-19 transmission in  nearly five months, but Annastacia Palaszczuk said her election victory show voters backed her  decision to keep the states borders closed to Sydney and Victoria.   Joining me now live is Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management, David  Littleproud. Minister, good morning, thank you for joining me. Annastacia Palaszczuk says that the  result was a vindication of her management of the pandemic. Was it wrong for the Federal  Government to attack Queensland Labor on its stance over borders during the election campaign?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No, it wasn’t. But what the Premier did do well was play on the anxiety of,  particularly, older Queenslanders in getting them to feel as though the only way that they could feel  safe was to locking down hard borders. Now, you can still keep people safe but not lockdown  entire state borders - you can actually do it by having localised lockdowns. And that was our  argument, is back yourself with science rather than going back to parochial politics of using lines  that were put on a map 120 years ago - just simply use science. I mean, New South Wales contact  tracing is exceptional, but we’ve got no cases particularly in central-west New South Wales, and  southern-west New South Wales, and even some parts of Victoria but they’ve chosen not to open  them up until recently. And Victoria, some parts of regional Victoria are still closed to Queensland -  so, how is that predicated on science?   This is what my whole argument has been form the start, is rather than using it as a political  weapon, we need to work together. Federation had a unique opportunity to work together at the  moment to prove that we can get through this pandemic - not only on a health front, but on an  economic front. And instead state borders, the state governments have used it as a political  weapon. And it’s a good business model, because ultimately, the Federal Government, you, the  Australian taxpayer, has to pay for it for their political expedience.

DANICA DE GIORGIO: Is that the hardest part though, is actually getting everybody to work  together? We’ve seen Annastacia Palaszczuk saying that her strategy worked, Mark McGowan  over in Western Australia, he’s released a timeframe to drop that hard border, but he’s certainly  been buoyed by what’s happened in Queensland. The New South Wales Premier, Minister, now  also under pressure to drop that southern border with Victoria. Are you concerned, though, that  National Cabinet’s plan to reopen by Christmas simply may not happen?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I’d hope not. If they’re true to their word and they’re true to the  science, then National Cabinet should back the Prime Minister and get on with the job. But this is  why the Prime Minister was so keen to get a definition of a hotspot, because instead of locking  down entire states from one another, you can lockdown local areas - that’s the smart thing, that’s  the modern federation, that’s the modern thinking of a modern Australia. Rather than going back to  what’s politically expedient and thinking of 120 years ago; that won’t cut it. I mean, this will send us  broke and the states, unfortunately, can use this as a political weapon to make themselves popular  at a local level. But, unfortunately, we have to pay for it. And this is the challenge that we’re trying  to lead, and the Prime Minister’s trying to lead through National Cabinet. And I just say to the

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

premiers, this is a real test of our federation, and an opportunity, but to entrench it is showing that  we can come together as a nation - to forget about lines on a map that were put there 120 years  ago, and work for one another and work for our country.

DANICA DE GIORGIO: Minister, let’s take a look at the Queensland election result - Annastacia  Palaszczuk, of course, re-elected for another term. What are the key lessons from this election for  the Federal Government?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah. I think Andrew Clennell nailed this on Saturday night; I think  Palaszczuk did a great job on playing on that anxiety. It was a COVID election, she’s won under  the cover of COVID. And she’s taken away, particularly One Nation voters, who felt afraid. In times  of crisis, people revert back to their incumbency of the government that’s there looking after them.  Now, we can’t take it for granted at a federal level, because ultimately we’re the ones that are  cutting the cheques to pay for all this at the moment, and while the states play on populism, we’ve  got to pay the bills. And this is going to be a real challenge for us, particularly as we transition the  economy away from JobKeeper and JobSeeker.   So we got to make sure that we pull the right economic levers to create jobs. Because ultimately, in  13-14 months when we’re going up for an election, people will judge us - not on keeping them safe  on the health front, but whether they’ve got a job or whether they got a prospect of a job, and  whether the economy looks as though its moving in the right direction. Now we’re pulling the right  levers for that, but you can’t take that for granted, and I think that’s our big challenge as we head  into the next 13-14 months before our elections, is the Australian public will judge us on what we’ve  done and what we’re going to do for them in the future, whereas the states have been able to get  away with just being assessed on their health response.

DANICA DE GIORGIO: Deb Frecklington, during her speech on Saturday night, she declared that  she would continue as LNP leader. Do you think that she should? Is she the right person to  continue in the job?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well the only people who get a say on that are the parliamentary members  of the state Queensland Party - so they’ll obviously have that conversation in the coming days. And  as I understand, I spoke to Deb Frecklington yesterday, my understanding is that she’ll call a party  room meeting as soon as some of these seats are clear, and obviously then whether there’s a spill  motion. As I understand it, the convention is that all positions are spilled after an election lost - as it  is in the federal level. After every election we spill the positions and obviously the leader can put  their hand up, but that’s a determination for those members of parliament that have been elected  on Saturday.

DANICA DE GIORGIO: Let’s move on now to a matter that’s arisen in the last day, in regards to  the exportation of lobsters. Have Australia been able to resolve the issue with custom clearances  for lobsters entering China?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Not yet. We’re working through our Beijing officials, my Department and  the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade - but we have serious concerns about this. They are  effectively saying that they wish to test up to 50 per cent of rock lobsters that come in for heavy  metals. Now, we contest quite clearly that there is already arrangements within Australia to do  tests to make sure the product we send is of the highest class in the world. And the other issue that  we have serious concern about is that Australia has been singled out on this - there has been no  other nation that is exporting rock lobster into China that has been asked to do this, so we’ve  asked for clarification because Australia ultimately is a fair country. We live by the rules of WTO,  and we expect those countries that we trade with to do the same. So we’re expecting clarification  from Chinese officials today, and my officials and DFAT officials in Beijing are working through that  as we speak.

DANICA DE GIORGIO: You’ve asked for clarification, but have you or Simon Birmingham actually  been able to get in touch with the Chinese counterparts at all?

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No, I haven’t. And in fact I wrote to the Chinese- my Chinese counterpart  only in the last couple of weeks when there was commentary coming out of China that they were  telling importers of cotton not to take it from Australian mills - so I asked for that clarification, I  haven’t had a response from my Chinese official. But my door is always open, my phone is always  on, and we’ll continue to try and engage with Chinese officials because the best way to deal with  the misunderstanding or any disagreement is to have dialogue. But there has to be someone to  have the maturity, to have the leadership to put their hand out first, and I know Simon Birmingham  and I continue to do that and we are prepared to do that. Because while China is an important  trading partner, we also have created many other markets where our produce can go to, and we’d  like to continue on with the relationship and the arrangements we’ve had. But obviously, our  producers will look to other markets into the future if it becomes too risky.

DANICA DE GIORGIO: Now, a tricky situation. Minister David Littleproud, thank you for joining me  this morning.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks for having me.



Media contact  0455 448 985

