

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER

JIM CHALMERS MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR RANKIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  BRISBANE  FRIDAY, 13 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Economic stimulus for COVID-19; coronavirus; impact of coronavirus  on casual employees; mass gatherings; calls for Parliament to resume as soon as  possible.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Thanks for  joining us. Australia, like the rest of the world, is currently undergoing a health emergency  as a result of the coronavirus. This represents a challenge for all of us. For Government  decision makers. For private companies and business interests. But most importantly, for  the community as well. We believe that the Government has been too slow at getting out  the public information campaign. They were very quick during the bushfire crisis to have  ads up with the muzak going, the full Defence Forces in shot. But on this campaign, it has  been too slow. They need to do better. The public need clear information based upon the  expert medical advice. There is no doubt that major events that are held have serious  implications in a health environment like this. There is news, just come through, that both  the Grand Prix and the 1-day cricket match at the SCG will be spectator-free. Organisers  of major events need to seek urgent medical advice on the best way of protecting the  community, including whether the event should be postponed or made spectator-free. But  it's also urgent that the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee, made up of  Commonwealth and State Chief Medical Officers, provide the latest information and advice  to all Australians. This is absolutely critical. And I believe it is what Australians are asking  for. So, this has to continue to be seen through the health policy prism. The most important  thing is keeping Australians as safe as possible. It is the case that with proper precautions,  with good public policy, we can minimise the impact. Which is why over issues like major  events, or whether it be the issue of travel restrictions, we should be taking the best  possible advice, putting health first, but making sure as well that there is a sensible way  through this. It's also the case that this will have an economic response. Because the  implications of the coronavirus mean less economic activity. And that's why we have been  positive about the Government's announcement that they made yesterday. And we said we  will be in constructive. We do believe that the economy was very flat last year. And we  were calling throughout the second half of last year for measures, including the business

investment measures. We were calling for a bring-forward of stage 2 of the tax cuts. We  were calling for a bring-forward of infrastructure investment. So, it's not surprising that we  regard measures such as payments to welfare recipients, to pensioners, as being a  positive thing that will stimulate the economy whilst providing support for those people. It  remains to be seen whether it is large enough and timely enough to see us through these  issues. But it is important that it be done quickly.

And that's why this morning I have written to the Prime Minister asking him to recall  Parliament next week, rather than wait for the week after. Parliament should resume next  Tuesday, after the Party rooms have a chance to consider any legislation next Monday.  Labor will expedite any passage of legislation through both Houses of Parliament and  there won't be any procedural issues raised by us with the normal notice that has to be  given to the Houses of Parliament for legislation to be introduced and then debated. We, of  course, want to want to examine the legislation to see if improvements can be made, but  we want to be constructive about that. We want to examine measures such as the issues  regarding the casual workforce and whether further measures can be given to provide  support there and for low-income earners. We want to examine the billion dollars that's  announced for the fund for regional communities, to make sure that the sort of rorts that we  have seen in the sports rorts and other activities don’t occur as well. But, we will be  constructive. The Shadow Treasurer, Jim, has been constructive throughout this as well. I  will ask him to comment on the economic measures.

JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: Thanks very much, Anthony. There is a  genuine sense of urgency here to give people more information about the health aspects;  to clarify and update the advice on mass events; and also to make sure that the stimulus  measures get out the door and into the hands of workers, pensioners, and businesses as  soon as possible. We need to get the Parliament back to consider these measures, so that  we can expedite them and give these stimulus measures every chance of doing the good  in the economy that they are supposed to do. We have been supportive, responsible and  constructive throughout this period, because we understand that Australians are anxious  about the health aspects and the economic aspects. People are worried about their  superannuation when they see what's happening on the stock market. People are worried  about their job security. Casuals are worried about the absence of sick leave and what that  means for difficult decisions that they have to make about staying home if they are unwell.  Our overriding objective here is to do what we can to inject a sense of urgency. These are  serious and challenging times in the economy. The measures which were announced  yesterday are worthy of our support. They are not perfect. There are deficiencies. We will  point those out and do what we can to pressure the Government to improve them. Whether  it be on casuals, on some clarity and transparency around the billion-dollar fund, or on  guarantees that workers will benefit from the billions of dollars which are being provided to  businesses right around Australia. Our approach is defined by urgency. That's why the  Parliament needs to come back. That's why we need to get this support out the door and  into the economy. It desperately needs it now. It's why we need to update the information  and the advice so that Australians can get through this difficult period together. We will  continue to play a constructive role in that. That's why Anthony's suggestion today to bring  the Parliament back as soon as possible is so important.

ALBANESE: Thanks. I should tell people that Chris Bowen will be standing up in Sydney  shortly in a couple of hours to update on health issues in particular. But we're happy to  take questions.

JOURNALIST: What would have been different with the stimulus if Labor was in

Government?

CHALMERS: We think the measures around casual and sick leave are insufficient. Tony  Burke has had more to say about this this morning. We want to make sure that if casual  workers are unwell, they stay home. No Australian worker should have to choose between  doing the right thing by their colleagues and being able to work and feed themselves. This  $40 a day payment that the Government is proposing may not be a sufficient incentive for  people to stay at home. That concerns us. We said that yesterday. We are saying that  again today. There are issues in the way that that support has been developed. We need  clarity around the billion-dollar fund. The Government doesn't have a great record with  funds and allocating them in an effective and transparent way. We need to see how they  intend to go about providing that. We want to see support for tourism companies. I was in  Cairns and Townsville talking about many of these issues with tourism providers and all of  the associated sectors. We want to see that support out the door. But it needs to be done  well. It remains to be seen whether what the Government is proposing is big enough or will  be deployed quickly enough to prevent job losses, to prevent business closures, and to  prevent a deeper downturn in the economy. If what the Government is proposing turns out  to be insufficient, they should come back to the table and do more in a timely fashion. They  should be working on those options right now so that if it does become obvious that what  they have proposed is not sufficient to deal with these serious economic challenges, they  can do more.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) than before the GFC, is the recession now a foregone  conclusion?

CHALMERS: It remains to be seen how deep the impact of this Coronavirus outbreak will  be on the economy. Clearly there will be an impact. The response that the Government  announced will be helpful, but we don't yet know just how helpful it will be. The test the  Prime Minister has set for himself on the stimulus package is will it prevent job losses? Will  it prevent business closures? Will it prevent a deeper downturn in the economy? It would  have been good yesterday for the Government to provide an updated assessment of what  they think the economy will do in the absence of stimulus, and with the stimulus package  being announced, so that we can judge it against that benchmark. They haven't provided  updated numbers on the economy or on the Budget. It would be helpful if they did.

JOURNALIST: Given there isn’t a big surplus, like there was pre-GFC, and there isn't as  much room to move with the Reserve Bank, can the Government be blamed if we do fall  into recession? They don't have as many options?

CHALMERS: Australians have been tested before in significant moments like this and they  passed the test under Labor's leadership with flying colours during the Global Financial  Crisis. Every Australian should be proud of what we achieved together under Labor during  that period. There are similarities and there are differences now. The issue of casuals and  sick leave wasn't an issue during the Global Financial Crisis. There are some similarities  too. The main similarity is this is a serious economic event which warrants a serious  economic response. You are right that the starting point is different in a number of ways.  We've already had interest rates cut to 0.5 per cent, which is a sixth of what they were  during the worst of the Global Financial Crisis, let alone at the beginning of the crisis.  Unemployment is much higher now under the Liberals than it was under Labor at the start  of the GFC. The fact that they have more than doubled debt over the last seven years is an  issue too in the Budget. As Anthony mentioned before, the economy was not travelling as  well as we would have liked it to be before the fires and the virus hit. We had slowing

quarterly growth, below average annual growth, business investment had gone backwards  three quarters in a row, productivity went backwards, wages were stagnant. For all these  reasons there are a different set of challenges this time around. They warrant a substantial  response. We will play a constructive role in that being implemented. If it isn't enough, the  Government should do more.

ALBANESE: It is worth pointing out as well, I think, that the Reserve Bank itself, the  Governor and the economists, were saying last year that monetary policy couldn't do all  the heavy lifting. They were calling for fiscal policy last year and they were calling for an  increased infrastructure investment. The Government ignored those calls. Why did they do  that? Because they were obsessed with their ‘back in black’ rhetoric, saying, they said it  was already achieved, ‘back in black, back on track’. What we know is that the economy  was tracking back at the end of last year and was never in the black. So, whilst in LNP  rooms there's crockery being smashed, those little porcelain mugs, in order to wipe those  statements from history, they deserve to be judged on their own hubris. Because one of  the things that I have consistently said is that since the May election this Government has  been complacent. And they have been engaged in a victory lap. They haven't had a  positive agenda going forward. We have just had four weeks of Parliamentary sitting where  we spent day after day talking on the Appropriations Bills because there were no  legislations of substance. A Government that is complacent in today's world, the rest of the  world moves past us. This is a Government that doesn't have a positive agenda for the  future. And that's one of the reasons why we start this issue of dealing with this in a much  weaker position than we should have been.

JOURNALIST: Should the Melbourne Grand Prix have been cancelled all together?

ALBANESE: That's a decision for the experts. One of the things that we're saying here  today is that we need much greater clarity of these issues from, that's why we have said  the body that brings together the Commonwealth and the state Chief Health Officers, Chief  Medical Officers, different titles in different states, should be making clear what the position  is on the basis of health. And that should be the priority, rather than politicians trying to up  the stakes and make decisions. They shouldn't be political decisions, they should be health  decisions. If it is OK for events to go ahead, there is obviously an economic interest in  events happening. There is a cost to cancelling events. There is a cost to there being no  spectators at the Grand Prix this weekend. But no economic benefit is worth a health cost.  And that's why we need to listen to the experts.

JOURNALIST: Your own MP, Mike Freelander, raised concerns about mass gatherings  and given the F1 decision and the cricket decision, is it now time to cancel spectators at  other events like football matches?

ALBANESE: I was with Mike Freelander, standing next to him, when he made those  comments when we were in Blacktown at the medical centre. He made that in the context,  he was concerned about the slow health response. The centre that we were at was telling  us that they were running out of masks and personal protective equipment, and that they'd  run out in the next 24 hours. They were struggling to keep up. What we know is that many  people have struggled to get tests who have symptoms. There are people waiting at Royal  Prince Alfred Hospital in my part of the world, hundreds of people, waiting in queues, with  other people who they suspect might be suffering, only to be told unless they had been to  China or South Korea or any of the target nations, they weren't eligible for testing. That's  not good enough. And we need to be far quicker as rolling out the support, including  testing. Far quicker at rolling out the public information campaign. And we need the

decisions over issues like major events to be made on the basis of expert advice and a  clarity out there for people over whether events go ahead, either without spectators, or  whether they go ahead at all.

JOURNALIST: Do you think that the Government has an obligation to be transparent  about what modelling it has on the effects of the coronavirus, when we're expected to  experience a peak and those kinds of things?

ALBANESE: Yes. Look, public information helps create public confidence. That is why it is  a good thing to be transparent about both the health aspects, so people can be clear.  Because quite clearly the response that we've seen from members of the public over toilet  paper and other issues shows people are anxious. It shows people are concerned. They  are not quite sure what to do in response to these issues. And that's why it is, this is an  issue of leadership. I think that leadership should be from the health experts as well.  Politicians should be giving that support to the experts to say, ‘You tell us what is  necessary’, because while Dr Chalmers is, indeed, a doctor, he's not a medical doctor.  What we need is the experts to be giving us that advice and for that advice to be  transparent. That will build public confidence. At the moment I think there is a great deal of  anxiety out there. And that, of course, has an economic consequence in itself. It will have  implications for the success of the stimulus. Because if people aren't confident, they won't  be going out and spending money.

JOURNALIST: In the Government's defence there have been daily press conferences  updating people. The Prime Minister addressed the nation last night. So, couldn't they fairly  say, ‘We have given information’?

ALBANESE: The public information campaign, my understanding is that it has now begun.  Compare that when the Prime Minister made an announcement that there was a national  response on bushfires and you can draw your own conclusions.

JOURNALIST: What did you make of the Prime Minister’s address last night?

ALBANESE: To be honest, I was on a plane from Mackay to here in Brisbane. So, I have  seen a transcript, but I haven't seen the visuals of it. But it's a good thing that the Prime  Minister has an address to the nation. I will be having a reply. My understanding is that's  been negotiated out in accordance with precedent on Sunday.

JOURNALIST: Just on the economic stimulus, should that $750 payment have been made  available to more people? It's been made available to 6 million people. Do you think it  should have been made to more people?

CHALMERS: One of the issues that we have been very clear on is that the Government  needs a contingency if it turns out that what they announced yesterday wasn't enough to  build a floor under confidence, to protect jobs to, protect businesses and to get the place  growing again. So, clearly those sorts of options should be on the table. As Anthony said  last night, there are a range of alternatives and additional measures that could be  considered here. Whether it be additional support for low-income earners, whether it be  support for local governments or infrastructure, whether it be getting the casual workers  and paid sick leave thing right. There are additional measures which should be under  consideration. Because at some point it may become obvious to the Government that what  they have done has been helpful, but not helpful enough. If that's the case, they need to do  more.





ALBANESE: Last one.

JOURNALIST: Should the states be doing more to add to the stimulus?

CHALMERS: The States have been already doing some good work on this front. I want to  commend Premier Palaszczuk, in particular. I was in Townsville and Cairns talking to  businesses who said the local councils and the State Government had come to the party  and provided fee relief and all kinds of concessions to help businesses get through a very  difficult period. At that time, the absence was leadership from the Federal Government.  They have made some announcements in the last day or so but more things will be  considered today during discussions with the Premiers at the Council of Australian  Governments. That is appropriate. Every level of government needs to be seeing what  they can do here to support workers in particular, but employers and communities as well  who have been heavily reliant on parts of the economy which have been the hardest hit.  I'm confident they are doing that. No doubt we will hear more about that at the conclusion  of COAG.

ALBANESE: Thanks very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053









