

JOSH WILSON MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT

MEMBER FOR FREMANTLE





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC NEWS WEEKEND BREAKFAST

SATURDAY, 12 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Victorian lockdown; border restrictions; Juukan Gorge.



FAUZIAH IBRAHIM, HOST: Let’s bring in our pollie panel now, with Liberal MP

Tim Wilson who joins us from Melbourne. Labor MP Josh Wilson joins us now

from Perth. Tim, if I could start with you, now you have really taken issue with

Victoria's curfew from 9 p.m. to 5 a.m. You've written to the Australian Human

Rights Commission to look into whether the curfews were a violation of

people's rights and freedoms. Given this is a pandemic, a very serious

pandemic it's a bit extreme isn't it to call in the Human Rights Commission?



TIM WILSON: Not at all. The reality is the state government put forward that

the curfew was necessary to protect public health and to make sure the best

interests of Victorians. The Chief Health Officer came and said it wasn't

required, we then were told it was on the basis of a police order to maintain

public order and the police came out and said ‘no, we didn’t request it either’.

The simple reality is we need to make sure that measures are necessary,

sustainable to maintain public confidence, and when they're not they should go.

That's why regional Victoria was so angry. That's why people increasingly in

Victoria are angry because they realise that there are measures in place that

are not necessary, not justified, and have been sold to us on a deception.



KATHRYN ROBINSON, HOST: Tim whilst the Victorian Chief Health Officer

Brett Sutton wasn't consulted on the curfew, but when asked about it on radio

he said he hadn't really had time to reflect on it but that it had probably been

useful.  Shouldn't we take that on board?



TIM WILSON: Well there are lots of things that are useful, it’s whether it's

necessary. I don't think, politely, people in New South Wales, and I'm sure Josh

will get his chance, understand what it's like to be in Victoria where you're

locked in your home essentially 23 hours a day, where we're restricted to

moving five kilometres. Now people are prepared to take proportionate

necessary measures to stop the spread of COVID-19.  What we're not

prepared to do is have measures introduced on deception and measures

introduced that are not necessary that significantly curtail people's capacity to

go about their lives.



IBRAHIM: Josh Wilson, if I could bring you into this conversation as well. Dan

Andrews has really been criticised over the issue of the curfew in particular.

What is the Labor Party's gauge of how Dan Andrews is performing as a Labor

Premier.



JOSH WILSON: Well the gauge has to be the results. I mean a month ago

there were 750 infections a day, I think today it's under 40.  And there were

nearly 8000 Victorians infected, today it's around 1300. So, the actions being

taken by Premier Dan Andrews, and the people of Victoria showing an

enormous amount of discipline and forbearance, have been successful in

dealing with this second wave. And we know what this virus is like when it gets

off the leash. Lots of people get sick very quickly; some of them will have

lasting health consequences; some of them won't survive. So, you know you

look at the whole package.  I hear what Tim’s saying, of course we want

restrictions to ease as soon as possible and we want measures to be

necessary measures, but we're not in a situation of perfect knowledge. This is a

virus that none of us have ever seen before and I think the leadership in

Victoria, Premier Dan Andrews, his other ministers, and all the agencies

involved, and the people of Victoria, are doing a fantastic job.  And that's good

for Victorians and it's good for all of us and I pay tribute to the people who've

taken on sacrifices. We are seeing, I think unfortunately, at the national level, a

sort of a game where the federal leadership, the Prime Minister and other

ministers, are looking each and every day for a Labor Premier that they can

attack for restrictions. We don't hear about Tasmania or South Australia or New

South Wales.  It's always Mark McGowan or Annastacia Palaszczuk or Dan

Andrews. I don't think that is national leadership.



ROBINSON: Well Josh let's talk about that because obviously these

relationships are being thrust into the spotlight with respect to the borders.

Scott Morrison says, or has said this week, that Australia is at risk of losing its

humanity with respect to a case of a young 26-year-old woman who was denied

permission to attend her dad's funeral. She was allowed to visit her father after

that. Mathias Cormann has used even stronger words - cold-hearted, harsh,

nasty. Do you think we should be seeing more compassion from our state

leaders and health officers when it comes to borders?



JOSH WILSON: We always want to see compassion. But what's the main

game? We've got this never seen before virus that is a killer. When it gets loose

it's like wildfire - people get sick in really high numbers really fast; it gets into

aged care, and it takes away our loved ones. If we don't respond with

appropriate measures, we see rising infections, some of those people are going

to end up with lifelong health consequences, and we see more and more

funerals. So that's the main game.



ROBINSON: But I guess, sorry to interrupt, the issue has been is that there is a

perception that some people have been given exceptions, say movie stars, AFL

hierarchy and others haven't.



JOSH WILSON: Well there's a system in place that is being applied rigorously

across Australia. People draw contrast between individual cases - which are

heartbreaking, and I have enormous sympathy for the young woman in

Queensland and for her family - but there are no shortage of those cases, and

local members like myself and Tim around the country we know of cases like

that at both ends of the spectrum involving people who are having babies and

can't be with their family, people who are losing loved ones who can't be with

their family. But if we pick a single example and we decide to go on radio in

order to have a crack at the premier of Queensland on one day, and the

Premier of Victoria on the other day, I think you can see what feeds that. And I

don't think that helps build confidence - the kind of confidence that Tim is

talking about, which we have to have in the measures that are being taken.



IBRAHIM: Tim, I wonder if perhaps at the start of all of this we just should not

have even entertained this special exemption issue, as Kath said, you know

AFL stars are able to move across borders, celebrities Hollywood stars are able

to go into state borders without even quarantining as well. Should we have just

done away with a special exemption and perhaps consider compassionate

exemptions instead?



TIM WILSON: Well I think it's always difficult to get the balance right in these

measures, but I do think it needs to be justified when measures are taken to

give people special privileges to operate outside the law. Now the reality is I

think when you see a family member who's got a loved one on the other side of

a border dying, you know there are proper and proportionate measures that can

be taken to make sure they protect everybody's interests. But as a blanket

proposition, look, you know, I had to go and quarantine in Canberra for two

weeks, I'm going to have to do it the end of next week for exactly the same

reason, to protect the public health and interests of the people of the ACT. So, I

think you've got to have a compelling case to adjust the rules and recognise

that.



ROBINSON: Tim, is it a bit rich that we've got the federal government at odds

with the state leaders for closing their borders when we've got thousands of

Australians overseas unable to get home, there’s a report in The Guardian

today saying Peter Dutton's Border Force approved Tom Hanks’ return to

Australia.



TIM WILSON: This is why I believe that we need to have rules that are tested

and proportionate. Now of course if somebody needs to come back home then

they have to do it to through the same processes around quarantining and the

like, and I've been outspoken in saying I think we need to provide the pathway

for Australians to return home. But the tragedy, the reality of why it's so difficult

to get Australians home at the moment is because the Victorian Government

has shut down Melbourne Airport, shut down the second busiest pathway to get

back into our country, shut down hotel quarantine, and if we want to address

the issues around getting Australians overseas home we've got to get

Melbourne airport open.



IBRAHIM: We want to move on now to another headline that really made the

headlines, I suppose, this week and that is the expulsion of Rio Tinto’s top

executives, the CEO and two top executives.  Well they’ve resigned over the

destruction of the Juukan Gorge caves in the Pilbara. Josh, what is in place

though to ensure that mining companies don't make this same mistake over

again?



JOSH WILSON: Well, we don't have an effective national protection framework

for Indigenous cultural heritage so we need to get on and fix that. The Western

Australian Government is changing the state laws, and that's welcome. But

what we haven't seen in this case so far is accountability from the government.

We know there were failures in the minister's office. The Minister for the

Environment Susan Ley was contacted by the traditional owners before the

blast. That call was ignored. They were not responded to. The Department

wasn't engaged to provide advice to the traditional owners. Now that's a failure,

and that needs to be acknowledged if we're going to improve our system. And

there's a larger failure too because, at the Commonwealth level, the Aboriginal

Torres Strait Islander Heritage Protection Act is not effective and it's not

sufficient. The government knows that because its own strategy documents -

the Heritage Strategy of 2015, the Northern Australia White Paper - they both

said we've got to review and reform this act. And in fact, at one point the

government committed to doing that by the end of 2017. But it hasn't

happened. So, there were those two failures - in the minister's office and

systemically. Those things need to be fixed if we're to be sure that we don't lose

Indigenous cultural heritage of immeasurable value.



ROBINSON: And just briefly and finally, we're almost out of time. Tim, do you

think that there is scope for the federal government to be more involved in

Aboriginal heritage protection or do you think that agreements made under the

Native Title system should be the basis for managing Aboriginal cultural

heritage?



TIM WILSON: I believe that the First Peoples should be able to take control



and manage the cultural sites, Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander cultural sites, of

the country are Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders that have native title

claims. Now, can there be more done to fix up federal law? I'm sure that is

right. As Josh has admitted himself there are errors and shortcomings in state

law, so this is a tragedy. It's something that we need to address and fix to make

sure that isn't repeated because traditional owners and custodians of cultural

sites should be protected.



IBRAHIM: Tim Wilson and Josh Wilson, unfortunately we're going to have to

leave it there. Thank you so much for joining Weekend Breakfast this morning.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATHARINE LONGLEY 0419 092 979





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













