





THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP  MINISTER FOR POPULATION, CITIES AND URBAN  INFRASTRUCTURE



ANDREW HASTIE MP  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR CANNING



THE HON MARK MCGOWAN MLA  PREMIER OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA

THE HON RITA SAFFIOTI MLA  WA MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT



TONY BUTI MLA

STATE MEMBER FOR ARMADALE





MEDIA RELEASE





METRONET Byford Rail Extension procurement now underway

Request for Proposals are now being sought from industry to start work on the METRONET  Byford Rail Extension.

The Byford extension involves the construction of approximately 8km of new track and a new  station at Byford, about 400m north of Abernethy Road and south of Evans Way. It will include  a bus interchange and up to 600 parking bays.

Armadale Station will also be expanded with longer platforms for six-car trains, a new  Australind platform and an extended pedestrian overpass. The bus interchange will be  redeveloped into a modern facility with better access to the station.

Premier Mark McGowan said the METRONET Byford Rail Extension was one of his  government’s key election commitments to create closer transport links for the growing Byford  area.

“We’re getting on with the job of delivering METRONET across local communities with seven  projects under construction and several more now moving into the procurement phase to  create thousands of local jobs and opportunities for local businesses,” Mr McGowan said.

“METRONET is supporting the Western Australian economy through COVID-19, and big builds  like these, as part of the Building for Tomorrow program, create lasting infrastructure and spur  on further developments in our growing communities and town centres.”

Federal Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure Alan Tudge said today’s  METRONET developments means jobs for hard-working West Australians and financial  stimulus for the WA economy.

“All along the Morrison Government have said that METRONET will re-shape Perth and that  transformation is underway,” Mr Tudge said.

“It means jobs right now and critical, targeted infrastructure for generations to come.”

Transport Minister Rita Saffioti said works would commence on the extension in November.

“Works will commence later this year with the removal of the Thomas Road level crossing  which will create more than 300 local jobs,” Ms Saffioti said.

“The extension of the Armadale Line to Byford, along with the planned Tonkin Highway  extension to Mundijong, will provide more transport options for residents in Perth’s south-eastern corridor.”

Federal Member for Canning Andrew Hastie said many people in Byford were looking forward  to having their suburb connected via rail.

“The Byford Rail extension will change the way people in Byford live and work,” he said.

“It will create more opportunities for local workers, students and businesses.

“The community in Byford has waited many years for the construction of this station. We  committed to building the station back in 2018, so I’m very excited to see it progressing to the  next stage.”

State Member for Armadale Tony Buti said the new extension also meant upgrades to the  Armadale Train Station.

“These upgrades will improve safety and access while also helping to facilitate the extension of  the line to Byford,” he said.

“Our local community has been waiting for this project for many years and I’m pleased to see it  is full steam ahead for these works.”

To help facilitate the rail line, the Thomas Road level crossing will be replaced with a road-over-rail bridge with works to commence in late 2020, supporting more than 330 jobs.

The concept design phase for the Byford Rail Extension Project is now underway and once  complete the main construction contract is expected to be awarded in mid-2021.

[ENDS]

Media Contact:  Mr Tudge - Michael Bennett 0434 782 923  Ms Saffioti - Caitlin Goddard 0437 234 249



