



Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra





THE HON DAN TEHAN MP  Minister for Education

MEDIA RELEASE

12 February 2020

Update on the education sector’s response to coronavirus

Minister for Education Dan Tehan said he was impressed by how the Australian education  sector was working with the Government to minimise the impacts of the coronavirus after the  latest round of sector updates today.

On Monday, the Departments of Education, Home Affairs, Border Security and the Chief  Medical Officer’s Office provided updates to 39 university vice chancellors about the  Government’s response to the coronavirus. Last night Mr Tehan met with Universities  Australia and today the Global Reputation Taskforce convened a meeting.

“The safety of Australians is our Government’s number one priority,” Mr Tehan said.

“We are also focussed on minimising the impact of the virus on our international students  and ensuring they have options to continue their education. Just as importantly, we  acknowledge that international students are part of our community - they are our friends, our  neighbours, our colleagues and our classmates and this situation is impacting on them  personally.

“We all want things to return to normal as soon as possible and until then we are all working  on solutions that will minimise the impact of the virus on Australia and all our students.

“Our Government has maintained an open and continuous communications channel with the  sector as we all work together to minimise disruption to students and the sector. We have  updated the sector on the latest information on the virus, the support available for providers  including opportunities through regulation flexibility, the Government’s approach to visa  issues, our communications strategy to the international sector and the mental health  support available to students.

“Australian government officials have been discussing with the Chinese embassy options to  help students affected by travel restrictions continue their studies. Requirements to support  distance learning options are being refined through consultation. Website access and  English online services are being considered as part of that conversation.

“The Government provides regular updates for students and the education sector on its  website and has established a dedicated email and hotline - international.students@dese.gov.au or 1300 981 621 (8am to 8pm AEDST Monday to  Friday).”

ENDS

Media contact: Tehan: Byron Vale 02 6277 7350 | minister.media@education.gov.au

