JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES

MEMBER FOR HUNTER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SUNRISE

MONDAY, 3 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Victoria in stage four lockdown; Paid Pandemic Leave.



NATALIE BARR, HOST: Melbourne is now in stage four lockdown for the next six weeks

after Premier Daniel Andrews declared a state of disaster due to the ongoing Coronavirus

pandemic.



DAVID KOCH, HOST: Under the new restrictions, Melbourne residents are only allowed to

shop and exercise within five kilometers of their homes, and a curfew is in place from 8pm

every night. Let's bring in Nationals MP, Barnaby Joyce, and Shadow Resources Minister,

Joel Fitzgibbon - morning to both. Barnaby, such extreme restrictions; do you think it was

the right call?



BARNABY JOYCE, MEMBER FOR NEW ENGLAND: Well, it's going to have extreme

economic consequences and, Kochie, I think people have got to realise that we've planned

for stage three lock down not stage four. This is a total shutdown of the economy, and it's

going to be dramatic. I wish that they could do it without shutting down businesses. I just

don't know how we're going to pay for all this. It's, it's out of control. And I think Mr Andrews

has to ask himself a few questions, ask whether he's up to the job, and we also have to

understand now that the costs, which were exceptional, have just got worse. And

personally, I'd be trying to keep businesses open. I just don't think we can afford this

anymore.



BARR: Yes, so many people are going to be so hurt by this, Joel. It's an absolute disaster,

isn't it? Stage four, you know, how are people going to get through this? Would of we have

been better to follow New Zealand's lead from the start and do this earlier, rather than sort

of, you know, do stage three for the six weeks and then added on?



JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: Indeed, Nat, Victoria has now been

declared a disaster zone, and it's a terrible situation. I agree with Barnaby, it's going to

have a significant impact on our economy. And I feel for all those who are, again, in the

lockdown, we speak to them every day on the phone. I have a daughter living in

Melbourne, and she's somewhat shattered by the fact that they're facing this lockdown

once again. I think the important thing here is that we continue to follow the best expert

advice. In relative terms, we are still doing best against most of the world - other countries.

And I think if we stick to the advice, and the advice obviously is the lockdown is necessary,

we do that. We'll get through this.



KOCH: Since March, Labor has been calling for the Federal Government to provide paid

pandemic leave for vulnerable workers to ensure they remain home when sick. And Daniel

Andrews has been saying that one of the reasons why the virus has got out of control is

that some people reckon they just can't afford to isolate and take time off. Barnaby,

shouldn't we have introduced this right from the start?



JOYCE: Well, I suppose if you had unlimited funds, you can do all sorts of things, Kochie.

But we're borrowing this money. It's not ours; we're borrowing it from overseas. And if you

want to keep borrowing money, well, you have to expect at some stage you're going to pay

it back and people are going to start looking at how are we going to pay it back? They're

going to ask the question, has Australia ever paid down any of this debt, ever in the last,

you know, decade or so. And if we borrow further money, put it on top of what we've got,

then the economic ramifications will only be exacerbated. So, we've got to be cautious

about how much further money we borrow. There's no point saying oh we will get a trillion

dollars and then something magical will happen or stop. If you got to a trillion dollars, the

trajectory means it's going to go higher than a trillion dollars and who has the plan, who

has said this is how we'll pay it off? So pandemic payments would be great, but if you limit

it.



KOCH: Ok to be fair, our debt isn't as high as most countries overseas and we're only

paying 0.8 per cent interest on it. So, the money is really cheap.



JOYCE: But... but both those will change, Kochie, you know that, you've been around

longer than me. Yeah, of course interest rates will go up - of course interest rates will go

up.



KOCH: No they won't. We've got a triple A credit rating. They are not going up for years.



JOYCE: Well, did anyone who planned that this will be the lowest interest rates five years

ago in history in the history of mankind? Did anybody plan about this in 10 years ago? You

can't. I remember when Telecom bonds were at 17 per cent, you know it too. And you have

to look at your short term money rates. You have to look at whether George Soros knows

what he's doing it. He's planning on interest rates going up.



KOCH: Hang on, that's a totally different environment. Anyhow, we can talk about interest

rates a bit later.



BARR: Joel, who should pay for this?



FITZGIBBON: Well, I agree with those who say that we should have zero tolerance for

those who do the wrong thing. But at the same time, we all have to recognise that unlike

those of us who are in this conversation this morning, some people just don't have the

means to stay at home from work. So, there's got to be some form of assistance. And I

remind Barnaby that if we hadn't wasted so much money paying people, for example, three

times what they were earning previously, prior to COVID-19, we'd have more money to go

around and to support these people. But we do need more support and of course, if we do

less - that is spend less - government revenues will further fall and the unemployment

queues will rise further and that will have a bigger impact on the budget than doing

something smart now.



BARR: Well, it's good. Hindsight is good because if Dan Andrews had bought the army

and the police in like every other state had we wouldn't be in this mess to start with. So we

can all, you know, look at hindsight - thank you very much.



KOCH: And we've got the Treasurer coming up just after seven o'clock, so we will put a lot

of those concerns to him. Thank you, gents





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641



