





SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Finance  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Leader of the Government in the Senate

Senator for South Australia

TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Interview on 5AA Breakfast with David Penberthy and Will Goodings.   Topics: Australia-China trade relationship, US elections  11/06/2020  07:08AM

David Penberthy: There's more than a degree of consternation in some of South Australia's biggest  export industries about repercussions about how we’re threatened and are being followed through on by the  Chinese government due to the fact Australia saw fit to lead an international campaign to investigate the  origins of coronavirus. You would have thought pretty inoffensive thing to have asked, to have done, given not  only has it killed millions of people around the world, but it has killed economies right around the world as well.  That said, there were threats in the early stages that this would mean bad things for Australian export  markets. And the reality has been that we're seeing that now play out.

The latest, that the China Alcoholic Drinks Association asked the Chinese Ministry of Commerce to impose  retrospective tariffs on Australian wines. Wine makers have also heard from Chinese importers that an  informal message has been sent from authorities asking them to stop importing several Australian goods,  including wine, from November 6. It's not just wine, though - the multi-billion-dollar copper mining sector is  also concerned there were reports it could be a target, along with sugar, timber, barley, coal, lobsters. The  lobster industry in the South East is watching this closely, they have concerns that they could be next. Senator  Simon Birmingham joins us. Minister, good morning to you.

Simon Birmingham: Hello guys. It's good to be with you.

David Penberthy: What's your assessment of this as the Federal Minister for Trade? How serious do  you think China is about attacking these sectors of our economy?

Simon Birmingham: Well, the ongoing reports that we're getting from industry and a range of different  news sources are deeply troubling, and there's no denying or getting away from that fact. There's a lot of  inconsistency in what we see and hear as well - Chinese official government statements denying any  coordinated effort being taken against Australia, they deny any discriminatory actions that are being taken.  But that doesn't seem to be what industry is seeing and hearing at present. And ultimately the proof will be in  the pudding. If there are no such discriminatory actions in place, then we should be able to resolve the issues  that some of our seafood producers have found in terms of the clearance through customs, which should not  see a disruption to our wine exports to China. So we hope that the Chinese government is true to its word and  that these issues can be resolved, but there's no denying the fact that the range and extent of concerns that  industry are hearing is deeply troubling.

David Penberthy: Some of the accusations against Australian industry and the role the Federal  Government plays in supporting them has been absolutely outrageous. I mean, one of them was the  suggestion there’s been dumping in the wine industry, which is the exact opposite way in which that industry  works. If some of these spurious claims end up resulting in tariffs or some other form of trade protection,  what's the mechanism by which that can be addressed? Does the WTO have a role to play here?

Simon Birmingham: So ultimately, if China goes down the path with the wine industry as they have with  our barley industry of applying dumping duties or anti-dumping duties, and claiming falsely that there are  extensive subsidies in those sectors, then yes, we can proceed through to the World Trade Organization with



a dispute there. We’ve undertaken WTO disputes with some of our closest friends and partners that are like  Canada and India, and so there would be nothing exceptional about us doing that with China - and we do  reserve all our rights in that regard. Some of the other issues that we're facing are a little trickier in terms of  the fact that there's an opaqueness to some of the issues that are being raised. The industry claims that  buyers are I think we're being told not to purchase Australian goods, and, you know, that sort of coercive  action by another country in interfering in the private arrangement between businesses would be another level  of concern and that's why we pleasingly note that China denies such actions have taken place. And we will be  monitoring what happens in terms of those trade flows very closely to hopefully see that they live up to their  word.

David Penberthy: Senator, do you think that, philosophically, we need to have a broader think as a  nation about whether we are too overly dependent on a country whose system of government and manner of  behaviour doesn't exactly gel with ours? And start looking for different trade partners?

Simon Birmingham: We as a government have sought to open as many doors as we possibly can for  Australian businesses, and that's why we've done trade deals not just with China over the last seven years,  but also Japan, Korea, Indonesia, through the trans-Pacific partnership with Vietnam, Canada, Mexico - why  we’re pursuing agreements with the EU and the UK and have a comprehensive economic strategy for our  engagement with India. So, it’s all about giving Australian businesses, the maximum number of choices.

Now, who business chooses to trade with, these are commercial transactions, as they should be, and  businesses choose where they find sellers and or buyers and who they sell to. And I guess though, what we  would see this year with the range of issues that we’re talking about, is the risk profile has changed  dramatically for many Australian businesses. That the constant stream, it seems, of concerning, troubling  administrative or other decisions being taken in China, heightens the risk for Australian businesses in terms of  trading there and putting too many eggs in one basket, potentially, for some big businesses or sectors. And a  business decision is always a balance between risk and reward. For some the reward of what is the largest  market in our region will no doubt remain great enough; but, for others, the risk of these sorts of disruptions,  I’m sure, we’ll see them look at any of the other opportunities, be it Indonesia or India or get-  or further afield,  that our Government sought to open up for them.

David Penberthy: Where is India? That feels like it’s a realistic opportunity at the moment. We’ve  engaged on a military level with them, increased capacity with the QUAD, the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue  with Japan and the United States in recent months. Can we fast track that agreement? Because, as far as I  can see, it’s currently still in negotiation?

Simon Birmingham: Relations with India are indeed very strong - India is being hard hit by COVID, as  many other parts of the world are, and so they have enormous challenges in their systems right now. It's  correct that we don't have a formal free trade agreement with India, and we probably won't see one of those  for a little while. I hope that we can find an avenue for a breakthrough there, but India is challenging in terms  of FTA negotiations, but they are absolutely open to deepening other areas of economic cooperation.

And so, during the course of this year Prime Minister Morrison and Prime Minister Modi signed what's known  as the Comprehensive Strategic Partnership Agreement between our two countries, that includes  commitments to deepen cooperation in areas such as critical minerals, resources - they’re types of things that  support lithium batteries and other critical minerals that go into phones and technologies and so on. So, we're  really exploring opportunities to deepen the economic cooperation with India and working to a range of  strategies that, even if we can't get to the point of an FTA, hopefully we can manage to secure growth in that  market by many other means. And we've seen that paying dividends in the last few years with quite strong  growth in trade with India across a whole range of categories.

David Penberthy: The leader of our most important ally has alleged that there is voter fraud, and that  the US elections have been somehow tampered with. As a Minister of the Australian Government, do you  have concerns about the manner in which elections have been conducted in the US?

Simon Birmingham: Look, I have confidence in America's systems, and their democracy, to withstand any  of the challenges that come about during an election environment. I have no doubt that elections will be  conducted and counted fairly, and that the democratic will of the American people will ultimately be what we  see upheld. And whether that involves legal challenges or not, we will end up with the President, I'm sure, who  reflects what the majority opinion in the US is as a result of votes cast freely and fairly. And that's what we  should all see.

Earlier this morning I saw some footage of the greatest president, perhaps, that America never had - the late  John McCain - a wonderful, wonderful man, and I saw footage of his concessional speech when he conceded



to Barack Obama. And I think we can all that hope that that, at the end of this very fraught election period,  whoever the loser is, is able to muster the type of strength of character and goodwill to be able to repeat some  of those very admirable sentiments that John McCain did when he lost and acknowledged Obama's success.

David Penberthy: Is there anything in the likely losers past behaviour that makes you optimistic that that  might occur?

Simon Birmingham: Well, I won't go so far as to predict the final outcome, I just won’t do that.

David Penberthy: Well, just to round out the discussion, Senator, because I mean, the election is having  interesting implications for the conversation that we we've had you on about this morning. One of the first  things that President Trump did when he won back in 2016 was pull out of the Trans-Pacific Partnership, and  it was seen as a withdrawal from our part of the world in an economic sense. Is there the prospect of  renegotiating American participation to that Agreement should there be a change of Government in the US?

Simon Birmingham: Look, I would always hold out some hope there, but probably not a great hope that it  would be an early priority. We will encourage whoever wins the US election to continue to deepen investment  and trade ties with us and our region. The US is, in fact, Australia's number one investment partner. So, in  terms of the flow of investment both from another country into Australia and from Australia into another  country, the US is a standout there. And so, it's a crucial economic partner as well as an ally in other, in other  ways. The Trans-Pacific Partnership, we do see expansion opportunities for countries like Thailand, the  United Kingdom are interested in joining the TPP. We’d warmly welcome the US back to the table, but I  wouldn't necessarily expect that to be in early order for whatever administration we get post-January.

David Penberthy: Good stuff. Senator Simon Birmingham, the Federal Minister for Trade and also  Finance. Thanks for joining us this morning on 5AA.

Simon Birmingham: Thanks so much guys.

END

Media Contacts  Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.

