Australian College of Nursing

Advancing nurse leadership

IMMEDIATE RELEASE

MEDIA RELEASE

6 October 2020

COVID and aged care rightly dominate Budget, but opportunities missed

The Australian College of Nursing believes tonight's Budget had to focus on the key issues facing health care in  2020-21, but while it ramps up funding for priority areas such as COVID, aged care and preventive health, it

has missed opportunities to effectively address these challenges.

"COVID and aged care have dominated the health agenda this year and will continue to do so into 2021,"

Australian College of Nursing CEO, Adjunct Professor Kylie Ward FACN said. "While we welcome the funding

announced tonight, we are concerned that in some instances the impact of enabling nurses to practice to their

full scope continues to be overlooked."

The Australian College of Nursing commended the decision to extend the successful telehealth items and the

$10.8 million over five years announced last week to enhance the skills and competencies of Enrolled Nurses

and Registered Nurses working in aged care. This will be achieved by expanding ACN's Scholarship Program

and establishing an Aged Care Transition to Practice Program to help graduate nurses transition to the aged

care workforce, and to establish a skills development program for nurses and personal care workers working in

residential aged care.

"Building capability in aged care was a main recommendation of our pre-Budget submission and we are

pleased the Government has continued to recognise how important it is to strengthen our aged care

workforce," Adjunct Professor Ward said.

"The additional home care packages are welcome, but we need to ensure we have the workforce capacity to

deliver on this promise.

"Tonight's Budget provides funding for those parts of the health care system where there is the most

disadvantage and need, including mental health, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health, rural and remote

health care and preventive health.

"However, until the Government and the health care system enables Australia's 385,000 nurses to be fully

utilised, gaps will continue to exist.

"For example, the Budget includes additional funding for mental health support to help those impacted during

COVID. Australia has a workforce of specialised mental health nurses. If they were able to provide care to the

full scope of their practice and without having to be tethered to a medical practitioner for funding, our

workforce capacity and patient outcomes would quickly improve.

"Similarly, in preventive health and rural health. Nurses provide a significant proportion, if not the bulk, of

ongoing care for people with chronic conditions and who live in parts of Australia with poor access to doctors.

Canberra  P0 Box 219, Deakin West ACT 2600  freecall 1800 061 660 (charges apply to mobile phones)  t02 6283 3400 I f 02 6282 3565

www.acn.edu.au

Australian College of Nursing Ltd  ABN 48 154 924 642

Australian College of Nursing

Advancing nurse leadership

"Giving nurses and allied health professionals a greater role in the delivery of multidisciplinary, team based

primary care under the Stronger Rural Health Strategy is a first step. ACN would have liked to see more

initiatives like the $1.2 million for a nurse operated community health outreach program on Kangaroo Island.

"This year more than ever we have been faced with challenges that require innovative responses, and an

investment in advanced practice nurses would have gone a long way to contribute to accessible and equitable

health care in Australia."

-ENDS-

For interviews contact: Kristen Connell, 0400 054 227.

Notes to Editors:

The Australian College of Nursing (ACN) is the national professional organisation for all nurses and its aim is to

ensure that the Australian community receives quality nursing care now and in the future. ACN is a

membership organisation with members in all states and territories, health care settings and nursing

specialties. ACN is also the Australian member of the International Council of Nurses headquartered in Geneva.

An organisation not afraid to challenge industry issues affecting the nursing profession or Australia's health

care, ACN is a well-connected and educated national body that drives change with people of influence to

enhance the delivery of health services to the Australian community. ACN's membership includes nurses in

roles of influence, including senior nurses, organisational leaders, academics and researchers.

Social media channels: Facebook :https://www.facebook.com/acnursing   Twitter : https://twitter.com/acn  tweet  Linkedln : http://www.linkedin.com/company/australian-college-of-nursing

Instagram : https://www.instagram.com/acn  nursing

Canberra  P0 Box 219, Deakin West ACT 2600  freecall 1800 061 660 (charges apply to mobile phones)  t02 6283 3400 I f 02 6282 3565

www.acn.edu.au

Australian College of Nursing Ltd  ABN 48 154 924 642

