CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



BILL SHORTEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT SERVICES

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE

SCHEME

MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

MELBOURNE

TUESDAY, 24 NOVEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: NSW-VIC border reopening;Thanking Victorian healthcare

workers; Vaccines; Qantas requiring proof of vaccination for international

travel; Australia-Chinese relations; Mathias Cormann’s campaign for

OECD position; Doha airport scandal.



BILL SHORTEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT

SERVICES: Good Morning everybody, it's great to have Shadow Minister for

Health, Chris Bowen, visiting my electorate of Maribyrnong, more importantly

talking to the leadership and meeting staff of Cohealth. Cohealth is a

remarkable community medical health, medical service. They employ 1000

health staff and support staff at 34 locations. Cohealth has been crucial in

Victoria's victory over COVID-19. They supported thousands of patients who

had a diagnosis of COVID-19. Cohealth managed to support thousands of staff

without one of their own staff members getting infected with COVID. A great

record they should be very proud of it. I'd now like to invite Chris Bowen, who

has prioritised visiting Melbourne as soon as he possibly could, invite him to

say a few words about the Shadow health policies, and I hand over to Chris

now.



CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks very much, Bill.

Thanks for having us here today. As I said yesterday on landing in Melbourne,

Melbourne has always been one of the world's great cities. It's proven it is the

world's most resilient city, which is a tribute to every Melburnian and every

Victorian. But it's also the case that Melbourne and Victoria have been well

served by some great institutions, by public health, by Cohealth here, and other

very, very important public health institutions.



It's also true that Victoria has been well served by science and this morning I

visited the Burnett Institute, and met with the head of the Doherty Institute as

well with Josh Burns, talking about the latest developments in research on

COVID-19 vaccines and immunity and also the work that goes on in research

more broadly. Yesterday I was at St. Vincent's Hospital in Melbourne thanking

the health workers for their magnificent effort in helping Victoria through as they

risked their lives, the orderlies, the cooks, the cleaners, risked their lives to

keep the St Vincent's Hospital and all the hospitals open and functioning and

running through the crisis.



So as Bill said, it's been important to come and thank the health workers of

Victoria as soon as it was legal for me to do so on behalf of the Opposition, and

to talk to the healthcare workers, the leaders of the healthcare community

about the lessons from COVID-19. And we were just talking about some of

those inside with the leadership of Cohealth, about the importance of

community standards and protections, not only during the pandemic but on the

other side, as we strengthen those institutions even further, as we work to

ensure that we don't just look back on 2020 as a period of sadness, that we

look back on 2020 as a period in which we were reminded of the importance of

our institutions, our public health, our focus on what causes ill health in the

community, whether it be debt and insecurity, insecure work casualization,

whether it be the high levels of indebtedness in the community, all those things

are important as we come out of 2020 and look towards a better, stronger,

healthier community here in Victoria, and across the country.



I’m sure Bill and I are happy to take your questions.



JOURNALIST:  Do you think the government has made the right call in

investing heavily in the AstraZeneca vaccine and (inaudible) Melbourne?



BOWEN: We've supported the Government's efforts in a bipartisan fashion with

AstraZeneca as we have with the University of Queensland, as we have with

Pfizer. The only point I've made is it would be better that we had even more

arrangements in place. World's best practice is to have five or six contracts in

place with various vaccine providers, we have four, because we don't know

which vaccine will come to the fore most quickly and most effectively. So it's

important that we spread our risk as a nation. But I certainly support the

government's efforts with AstraZeneca. There's good news overnight from

AstraZeneca as there has been with some of the other vaccines under

development. There is some way to go. We don't yet know which vaccine will

be delivered first, or with the most effectiveness but it's important that Australia

has maximum access to those vaccines and whichever vaccine is most

effective, and earliest.



JOURNALIST:  Qantas has come out saying that they'll be requiring

international travellers to prove that they’re vaccinated before they're able to

board flights. Do you think that's a good idea? And do you think the

Government should be involved in enforcing that kind of thing?



BOWEN: Well, the vaccine won't be mandatory as a matter of law. That's now

a bipartisan position. The Prime Minister did sort of toy with making the vaccine

mandatory, but he dropped that decision. That's the case in relation to the law

and government policy. I completely understand where Qantas is coming from,

they want to ensure the safety of their passengers. We want to see

international travel as soon as it's safe to do so and the vaccine will be an

important part of that and I think Qantas deserves the bipartisan support of all

involved in the efforts they take to ensure the health and safety of their

passengers and, importantly, their staff.



JOURNALIST:  Do you think they should do the same thing on domestic routes

as well?



BOWEN: Ultimately, that's a matter for Qantas but, and other airlines, of

course, but whatever efforts they take to ensure the health and safety of the

staff and passengers I'm sure would receive broad community support.



JOURNALIST:  What about people with medical reasons who can’t have a

vaccine, would you support measures to protect those people from being

turned away?



BOWEN: There should always be sensible checks and balances in place and

I'm sure Qantas will take those matters into consideration.



JOURNALIST:  What about if other industries? Do you think they should follow

suit?



BOWEN: Ultimately, it's a metaphor, each employer and each service provider

but we all want to see, I mean, you know, the vast majority of the Parliament

and the community want to see the vaccine available for Australians and,

importantly, the vaccine administered to as many Australians as possible

because, you know, vaccines don’t save lives, vaccinations save lives. And the

development in the vaccine is very encouraging but until and unless it's been

widely distributed through Australia, and there’s been a high take up, its only

half the battle. We've got to get the vaccine developed, sure, but then

distributed and administered across the country.



JOURNALIST:  Under current law, should it be legal for businesses be able to

exclude people from their services…



BOWEN: That’s a matter for businesses and government to work through both

State and Federal. Do we have some questions on the phone?



JOURNALIST:  I just got one more. Do you think it’s appropriate for Mathias

Cormann to be ferried around on an RAF jet to campaign for his OECD job

costing taxpayers potentially tens of thousands of dollars?



BOWEN: Let me just do with that in a couple of parts. The question was about

Mathias Cormann’s use of the VIP jet. Just a couple of fundamental points. The

Labor Party has constructively supported Mr. Cormann's nomination for the

OECD position. We've shown a greater maturity and willingness to put the

national interests first than the Government has. They had the opportunity to

support an Australian for Secretary General of the United Nations and they

squibbed it. That was a very big mistake on behalf of the Liberal National

Government. When you see an Australian, a qualified Australian, available for

an international position, you should support that Australian. That's what the

Liberal Party should have done for Kevin Rudd. That's what the Labor Party

has done for Mathias Cormann, we have shown a much more mature and

responsible approach.



Now in relation to the use of the VIP jet. That's a matter for the government to

justify and explain. I'm not aware of all the details. I’d simply make this point. It's

also the case as what they should be supporting Mr. Cormann's nomination,

they should also be making every effort to get every Australian citizen overseas

home safely and as soon as possible.



Okay, we're going to go to the phone. I think Johno was first.



JOURNALIST:  The Chinese embassy last weekend handed 9 News a list of

14 grievances it has with the Australian Government including foreign

investment decisions, the decision to ban Huaweii from the 5G network, foreign

interference legislation and the calling for an international independent inquiry

into the COVID19 coronavirus. What would you sacrifice on that list to try and

improve relations with Beijing?



BOWEN: Well, John, thanks for your question. I'm not sure accept the premise

of the last bit. I’d simply make this point; every Australian Government should

put Australian values and Australia interests first, in relations with China in

relation to our dealings with any country around the world. Our values are what

should drive our foreign policy accompanied by our interests. We also want

good and respectful, mutually respectful relations with China and, indeed, with

every country, wherever that's possible. Now, there will be differences from

time to time. We've supported the government's calls for an inquiry into COVID-19. We've made the point that it may have been handled more diplomatically, it

might have been better if there's more diplomatic outreach, before it was

announced on a Sunday morning TV show by the Foreign Minister, and might

have been better that there was interaction with China and indeed with other

countries to ensure support for that inquiry. But that's a matter of form and

process, not a disagreement of substance that Australia should have put that

inquiry forward. So it's not in Australia's interests to in any way economically

decouple from China but nor should we ever put our values or our interests

behind those relations or any demands from any country. Australia's interests

must come first, it's incumbent on the Government to do whatever is possible to

ensure respectful relationships with China, and indeed, more broadly across

our region but they should always be driven by our interests and our values.



JOURNALIST:  Is there anything on this wish list that you would change? If you

were in the position of Government you would be willing to change to open

dialog again with Beijing at a Ministerial level?



BOWEN: Again as I've indicated, Johnno, we've indicated bipartisan support

for the Government's position on the inquiry on South China Sea, and indeed,

by and large on foreign investment decisions. So we would be guarded by our

interest and our values at every turn.



SHORTEN: I’m just going to add..



BOWEN: Sure, Bill is going to add.



SHORTEN: Not on your question, Johnno, but just on Qantas. Maribyrnong is

an aviation electorate, thousands of people in this electorate earn their living

through the aviation industry. Alan Joyce is on the money, we should make

sure that people have the vaccine before they go overseas, you know Qantas is

$2 billion down courtesy of COVID-19, thousands of jobs have been lost, small

businesses have been smashed. And of course, most tragically, hundreds of

people have died. So simple message: You don't have to travel overseas, if you

don't want to have the vaccine, then don't worry about going overseas. But

we're not going to go into another third wave merely because some people

have some cranky views about being anti-vaxxer. So a very simple message to

some of the anti-vaxxer brigade, it's not compulsory to go overseas. No

vaccine, no air ticket.



BOWEN: Any other questions on the phone?



JOURNALIST:  Just back on Mathias Cormann, how much do you expect

would be budgeted for a campaign like this? The figure seems extraordinary for

people who don’t travel on these aircrafts.



BOWEN: Thanks for the question Tegan. I certainly understand your point but

not being aware of all the details and Mr. Cormann’s flights and the

arrangements in place, I simply reiterate the point; it's appropriate that Australia

support his candidacy would have been appropriate for Australia support the

Mr. Rudd’s candidacy for an even more important position. As important as

Secretary General the OECD is and it is an important position, Secretary

General, the United Nations is even more important, would have been good to

have an Australian in that role. Now, in terms of the details of the cost to Mr.

Cormann's travel. I'm not aware of all the details. I'm not in a position to judge.

It's up to the Government to explain and justify those costs. And Bill’s going to

add.



SHORTEN: At the end of the day, Mr. Cormann trying to promote Australia I

don’t know it’s a disaster, but I wouldn't mind Scott Morrison, for every flight

that Mathias Cormann gets flying around Europe, how about you bring home

another thousand Aussies before Christmas? I think the end of the day

Australians don't mind Australians doing well overseas. We've got thousands of

Australian men, women and children who want to come home. I just wish Scott

Morrison would spend as much time worrying about them as perhaps Mathias

Cormann getting some votes in Europe.



JOURNALIST:  Qatari Authorities have charged several police officers in the

evasive search scandal at Doha airport last month, what's your reaction to that?



BOWEN: Well, obviously, this was a terrible event. To be very brutally frank

Australian citizens were violated. It was shameful. It was disgusting and it was

deeply concerning. And it was right and proper that Australia take the very

strongest representations on behalf of its citizens. We were concerned at the

time that enough was being done by the Prime Minister and the Foreign

Minister, not enough support was being given to those Australian citizens and

the representations weren't being made strongly enough and we retain those

concerns. But without going into obviously the legal details that are occurring in

a foreign country if people have been charged and people will be held to

account then that is very welcome on behalf of those Australian citizens who

were violated, that is welcome.



JOURNALIST:  Qatar hasn't yet handed over the investigation into the incident.

How do you think that the Australian Government should be responding?



BOWEN: Well, the Australian Government should be responding in the

strongest possible terms. The Prime Minister should be talking to his

counterpart, the Foreign Minister should be talking to her counterpart and DFAT

should be talking to the victims in relation to this and ensuring they are given

every piece of information that is possibly given and based on the last evidence

that we saw out of Senate Estimates, nowhere near enough of that was

happening.



Anything else on the phone?



All in all done? Great, Thanks for your time, thanks everyone.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ELIZA MITCHELL 0413 410 931



