

Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA

MEDIA RELEASE

4 April 2020

NEW VISA TO SUPPORT AUSTRLIALAN FARMERS

The Morrison Government has created a new visa extending the stay of critical seasonal  workers to ensure the agricultural sector has the labour force it needs.

Seasonal Worker Programme and Pacific Labour Scheme workers will have visa conditions  relaxed and be given an option to extend their stay for up to one year.

Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business Senator Michaelia Cash said  this change would bring much needed certainty for employers and workers alike.

“This visa will ensure that farmers and workers have the confidence to perform their  important work helping to ensure the supply of fresh food to Australians,” Minister Cash  said.

“This is a difficult period for everyone and this is a common sense change to support  employers, seasonal workers, and our agricultural sector during the many challenges we are  facing across the economy due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

“Our rural and regional communities will continue to benefit, with these workers addressing  acute labour requirements across the sector and ensuring fresh produce continues to be  supplied to shops and supermarkets across the country.”

Any extensions will be subject to Seasonal Worker approved employers engaging with the  Department of Education, Skills and Employment on labour market testing to ensure  Australian jobseekers are given the opportunity to work.

The same conditions under the Seasonal Worker Programme and Pacific Labour Scheme visa  arrangements, including employer sponsorship, will be carried over to the new visa  arrangements, continuing the link with the agricultural sector.

“For those who come to the end of their placement and can’t return home, my department,  working with Approved Employer, can help them move to a new placement, if they agree, to  meet the labour demand of farmers.

“We will work closely with Approved Employers to implement these measures to ensure  employers can access the workers they need.”

MEDIA CONTACTS  Guy Creighton - Guy.Creighton@employment.gov.au - 0438 815 302  Brittany Higgins - Brittany.higgins@employment.gov.au - 0449 171 294



