

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

Media contact: Douglas Ferguson, 0455 448 985

Thursday 19th March 2020

ABC NEWS BREAKFAST

LISA MILLAR: Well, returning to the impact of coronavirus on Australia the Federal  Agriculture Minister David Littleproud joins us now from his electorate in South East  Queensland.

Good morning, Minister. Thank you for joining us. Can we go straight to the news that's  come out of the UK? Boris Johnson closing schools there. Is the Government worried that  that will cause more confusion here in Australia?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No, I think the Prime Minister has been very clear on this. We take  the advice of the Chief Medical Officer in Australia and he has been quite clear about this,  that the best medical advice is we should keep schools open and we'll continue to do that.  And the Prime Minister has been very, very forthright in showing the leadership of what we  expect and we will continue to take our advice from the Chief Medical Officer.

LISA MILLAR: Why is it so important?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well obviously the Chief Medical Officer believes that minimising  the infection that can happen and spread of it is better than maintaining the schools  otherwise the social dislocation happens when children aren't at schools and spread  throughout the community - in fact, some have to go to stay with their grandparents  because their parents work. We have to think through the practicalities of this, and that's  what our Chief Medical Officer has provided. We will stick to that advice. We have been  clear from the very beginning that we take our advice from them and we'll predicate our  decisions off his advice and that of the other chief medical officers around the country.

LISA MILLAR: Just shows you how fraught this is when the Prime Minister and the  Education Minister have to intervene and speak to the Catholic Archbishop himself,  Anthony Fisher, in New South Wales to plead with him not to allow the Catholic diocese to  close their schools.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well that's leadership, and that's what the Prime Minister and the  Education Minister has shown, that we are privy to the advice of the Chief Medical Officer  and then obviously we make that advice known to the education leaders, to ask them to  adhere to it. It's in the betterment of the whole society that they do that, and the Prime  Minister, Education Minister, Health Minister, and Chief Medical Officer have been  forward-leaning in this. And we thank those educational facilities that have listened to the  advice of the Chief Medical Officer and the Prime Minister.

Transcript



Transcript

LISA MILLAR: What can you say to Australians who are clearly concerned that there's an  issue with food supply when they're still seeing empty supermarket shelves?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, they are the ones that are causing this. They should take  great pride and comfort that Australian agriculture has provided us with one of the safest  and most secure food supplies in the world. And the reality is we produce enough food for  75 million people, we are just 25 million people. So there is no risk of us having any issues  around food security.

The only pressure that is being put on those supply chains are from people themselves -  from the stupidity of the people themselves. They need to take a deep breath, have a cold  shower and understand that if they shop normally, then the shelves will be stocked  normally. But when you have people rushing to supermarkets, putting pressure on  supermarkets to stock those shelves quickly because of panic-buying then that obviously  means that shelves are empty - that is just common sense. All I ask people is to use two  words: common sense.

LISA MILLAR: There's real concerns today though from the $60 billion agriculture industry  about the seasonal workforce - the people who actually get the food from the land into  those supermarkets. What are you going to do there when most of it is backpackers and  foreign visitors?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, the Immigration Minister and I have already had  conversations around this. There are over 140,000 backpackers already in the country and  the Immigration Minister has already taken pre-emptive steps around letting international  students be able to work in supermarkets to stock those shelves.

So we'll be agile and we'll work with industry. In fact I hooked up with all industry leaders  yesterday to ensure that we act swiftly with this and we give them confidence. And we are  confident that with some minor tweaking of visas, visa conditions, that we'll be able to  provide that continuity of supply - and that will be from the farmgate right through to the  supermarket.

And there still is an export market that we're continuing to make sure that we can keep  those lines open. Because this is an opportunity for Australia on a world stage to again  prove that not only do we have the world-best produce but we are a stable partner in being  able to supply that.

LISA MILLAR: So the tweaking means you're likely to extend, for example, the working  holiday visas?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, there's a number of opportunities that sit there that the  Immigration Minister and I are working through now and in fact they've been worked up.  And after consultation with industry yesterday we'll continue to have that dialogue and act  swiftly to provide that confidence to the industry that we can secure that continuity of work,  workforce supply and that will happen very quickly.

LISA MILLAR: Minister just finally, as people are waking up this morning and absorbing  the latest news - 475 people dead in Italy, the Dow closing another 6% down - there's so  much concern. What's your message to Australians this morning as this crisis unfolds?

Transcript



Transcript

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well stay calm and listen to the medical advice. Our Chief Medical  Officer has provided the best advice in the world to the Australian Government from the  very start. We have led the way in terms of slowing access to our borders from Chinese  students to start with and in fact we were criticised for that.

We've been forward-leaning because we have taken the best advice from the Chief  Medical Officer, so we'll continue to do that. But we all have a responsibility to play. And if  we do that in a calm, methodical way, we will get through this. And we will get it through  this not only in a health sense, but also in economic sense.

And it's important that we look after one another, not only in a health provision but also in  terms of economic - supporting those businesses out there, spending a quid with them will  go a long way to making sure that our recovery is a lot quicker from this.

LISA MILLAR: David Littleproud, thank you.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks for having me.



























