JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC TASMANIA

FRIDAY, 9 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Morrison Government failures in aged care; 2020 Budget; Labor’s plan for

energy; Labor’s plan for childcare.



LEON COMPTON, HOST: Julie Collins is the Shadow Aged Care Minister, Julie Collins, good

morning to you.



JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS: Good morning Leon

and to your listeners.



COMPTON: I don't think either party mentioned any reform or support for primary health care,

which in Tasmania is perhaps the biggest issue that locals face. Why didn't you mention it last

night?



COLLINS: Well, of course, Labor mentioned a centre for disease control, which we're the only

OECD country that currently doesn't have one because we need that coordinated in a

pandemic. What we found, of course, was during our recent months, particularly in aged care,

was there wasn't a comprehensive plan for aged care from the Federal Government. So a

centre for disease control, I think, would be a useful start here in Australia. And we know that

the pandemic drills that are run haven't been run for many years under this Government. The

last one was run under the Gillard Government.



COMPTON: That doesn't necessarily directly connect, though, to what's happening in our

hospital systems, and neither party seem to want to deal with that. Why have you put it in the

too hard basket ?



COLLINS: No well, I think what we're trying to do is focus on COVID-19 and a response to that

in the health system and trying to deal with the consequences of that. We saw investment in

mental health, which Labor has supported and called for. We've been calling for a long time,

particularly for the mental health care plans, to move from 10 to 20 consultations. So we were

pleased to see that in the Budget because we had been campaigning on that for many, many

months.



COMPTON: But when it comes to critical mental health care and 20 appointments to see a

psychologist are important, but it won't necessarily save lives. What about the access to

psychiatrists in critical care situations that are so desperately needed in those stories that we

see of people presenting to emergency and needing help?



COLLINS: Yeah, they are really difficult issues. They are state government issues. And the

state government should have a proper plan for dealing with mental health in Tasmania. But

we also have the Federal Government sitting on the Productivity Commission report into how

to reform mental health in Australia, more broadly Leon. The Government has had that report

since July and has not released it publicly. Labor did call on the Federal Government to

release it and to indeed fund it in this year's Budget, and they haven't done either of those

things.



COMPTON: So what's happening with primary health reform at the moment, that relationship

that is somewhat broken between the states and the federal government that sees cost shifting

and so on. Previous prime ministers and opposition leaders have said they would make it a

priority, but it feels like it's fallen off the agenda. Has it been put in the too hard basket, Julie

Collins?



COLLINS: It's a very difficult thing to do from opposition when there are currently health care

agreements in place to be blunt about it, Leon. This current federal government already has

health care agreements in place with state and territory governments right across the country.

We had a different plan, as you would be aware, prior to the 2019 election. We are some way

off from the next election. And as I've said, our focus has been on COVID-19 and the recovery.

And what we saw, of course, in the Budget on Tuesday night that we tried to address last night

was that we will have a trillion dollars of debt in Australia and far too many Australians left

behind. And that was our concern and Anthony Albanese is concerned and he addressed

some of those issues in the budget reply last night.



COMPTON: Directly to your shadow portfolio responsibilities, the federal government, Josh

Frydenberg announced $1.6 billion dollars for 23,000 additional home care places, that's

nationally. What will that mean for the home care package waiting list in Tasmania? How many

Tasmanians will get packages now that wouldn't have otherwise until that was announced?



COLLINS: Well, that's a very good question, Leon, and one that the Government should be

able to answer but I don't think can. I feel very sorry for those older Australians, particularly

here in Tasmania. About 2,000 of them that are currently sitting on the homecare waitlist,

particularly those that are waiting for the high level, level four packages, because the mean

wait time at the moment is three years. And we've said clearly that we don't think the

Government's done enough on home care. The interim report of the Royal Commission is now

12 months old. It’s very first recommendation was for the Government to fix this and the

Government didn't do enough in our view.



COMPTON: Is it your policy to fully fund aged care places?



COLLINS: What we've done is, is we've put out an eight point plan that the federal government

should do immediately to deal with COVID and the current situation whilst we wait for the

Royal Commission's recommendations in February. Number one of those was more staff for

residential aged care, because sadly, we've seen far too many people die in residential aged

care. Number two was to fix the home care waitlists. When you've got over 100,000 older

Australians waiting, 23,000 is not enough. Labor is not in Government today. We can't fix it

today, only the federal government can. And we have said that they need to fix it and what

they did was not enough.



COMPTON: What we've learnt is about how low paid so many people who work in aged care

and in particularly in those home care settings actually are. What specifically is your policy,

Julie Collins, to make sure that people want to go into careers in this area, that the jobs there

are better paid?



COLLINS: This is a really serious issue, and the federal government has had a task force

report on workforce sitting on its desk now for two years, Leon. We've been very critical about

the time it's taken the Government to deal with this. There's been a Senate committee report to

say that we need to have career pathways. We expect the Royal Commission will make some

recommendations about registration of workers, about minimum qualifications, and about

career pathways for people working in aged care, it can't happen soon enough.



COMPTON: Will it also make recommendations about pay?



COLLINS: We don't know about what it will do about pay for staff, but we've clearly said there

aren't enough aged care staff and they're not paid enough and the federal government needs

to do more and do it quickly. The fact that it sat on this workforce report for two years is not

good enough.



COMPTON: So people will ask, is it reasonable for you to have a policy about how much

people who work in aged care settings and particularly in delivering home care, we could

extend that to childcare, actually get paid? If we want more people, good people in the sector,

they should be paid better and they should have more permanence in their work.



COLLINS: Well we're obviously not in government. We're in the middle of a pandemic and a

recession, the first recession in nearly 30 years, Leon. And what we did last night, we set out a

vision for where we want to head. That's what Anthony Albanese did, including some

substantial increases in childcare funding. What we think the Government needs to do is to act

now. We've got an eight point plan in terms of aged care. And we have said that the rest of it

should wait till the Royal Commission's report, which is coming in February next year. And

what we expect is the federal government to respond and respond very, very quickly to that

report prior to the next election. What the Government doesn't do between now and then,

Labor will have a look at and we'll be very clear about what our policies are prior to the

election.



COMPTON: It was an interesting experience for me watching the Budget delivered on

Tuesday night with someone in grade six. And looking at her and thinking about what the

future looks like, how will you repay the debt that is being accrued in dealing with the problems

of the present and left to the young people of the future to actually pay down debt?



COLLINS: That's what we talked about last night about having a productivity increase. What

we need to do is we need to manufacture things here in Australia. We need to increase

productivity so that we grow the pie, Leon. We need to grow the economy to try and deal with

some of the debt. What we haven't seen from this Government, of course, is a plan to do that.

They've now had eight years of deficits. That is the truth of it. We were already in trouble prior

to COVID-19 and the pandemic. We are now in a recession. The current Government doesn't

have a plan to pay back the debt. So, you know, we are in opposition at the moment. We had a

visionary statement about increasing productivity and getting people back into work, about

manufacturing stuff back in Australia.



COMPTON: You went to the last election with lots of visionary statements and the public voted

the Liberal Party back in. Do you not think it's incumbent on you to talk about your strategy for

paying down this debt in the long term?



COLLINS: Labor will be very clear about what our policies are in the lead up to the next

election. We have said and we have been consistent. We are the only party that has been

consistent in terms of debt and deficit, unlike the current government, where we have seen

them criticise Labor for doing the very thing they're doing now during the global financial crisis,

where we actually spent to keep Australia out of a recession, we were successful. There were

30 years without a recession in Australia. This Government is the one that's put us in a

recession and this Government needs to find a way out of it.



COMPTON: Don't you acknowledge that it's COVID-19 that put us in a recession?



COLLINS: We were already in trouble before COVID-19.



COMPTON: True but no party globally, rather no country globally isn't dealing with recessional

situations.



COLLINS: We absolutely accept it's had a significant impact, Leon. And that's why we want to

get Australians back to work. That's why we came up with a visionary plan last night to try and

get as many Australians back into work as possible. That's why we're supporting some of the

Government's measures.



COMPTON: What's your visionary plan for what the Newstart rate should be? At the moment,

we don't know what it's going to be from the 1st of January. It could drop back to where it was

at $40 a week. What is your plan for what rate it should stay at?



COLLINS: The Budget, of course, actually says it is going to drop back. The Budget doesn't

have any funding from one January for an increase in Newstart or JobSeeker as it's now

called. What we're going to see is that we've got over a million unemployed Australians,

another 160,000 by Christmas before this date. Over 928,000 of a million are not eligible for

the wage subsidy that the Government announced on Tuesday night. So there are just too

many Australians that are going to be left behind on this. We have clearly said that we cannot

go back to what it was. We've been very clear about that. We do not have the resources of

government, to work out from opposition what that rate should be at this point in time. The

Government has those resources. They're in government, they've made a decision to increase

it and for that cut off to be December. It's up to the government to say what it needs to be from

1January. And frankly, I think it's pretty cruel of the Government to not tell people prior to

Christmas. I mean, these people are making decisions.



COMPTON: What do you think it should be?



COLLINS: Well, I don't think it can go back to what it was, Leon.



COMPTON: So that's what Bridget Archer is quoted in today's Examiner newspaper as saying

as well. Your opponent, the member for Bass, what do you think it should be?



COLLINS: Well, she's a member of the Government. She's got access to all of the government

information about the interactions with the tax and transfer system. She's got information to,

you know, decisions that the Government might make about how much extra they can borrow.

They're not things I have from opposition.



COMPTON: On mornings around Tasmania. Mark, the painter asks a question, which I'll  distil

for you? Why did the majority of sensible people says Mark, the painter from the north west of

the state, listening this morning. Why is it Julie Collins, the majority of sensible people voted for

the Coalition at the last federal election?



COLLINS: Well, I think Leon, we didn't communicate our plans clearly enough with the

electorate and I have said that in the past. I feel that we let Tasmanians and Australians down

by not clearly communicating what our plans were. I think that a lot of people were scared

about Labor's large reform agenda. We were trying to do too much, too quickly, and I don't

think we communicated it well enough.



COMPTON: So let's talk about some of the reforms you did talk about last night. How would

the reform of the transmission system in Australia, so your proposal to make it and I can't find

the exact quote, but a reform of the electricity grid, basically the system operated by Tas

networks in Australia, in Tasmania. How would that reform be good for Tasmanians?



COLLINS: What we want to do is we want to set up a fund to work with the private sector and

with state owned companies in terms of the transmission grid and about getting an up to 21st

century standard. It could do things like fund interconnectors, Leon. It could do things like

improve the existing transmission systems and those connections around the country. And the

reason we want to do this is so that, what we get is the cleanest possible energy at the

cheapest possible price for all Australians. We know that because of, you know, different

systems, some private entities, some state governments owning the various bits, what we want

to do is connect it back up properly so that we can make sure we get the best energy

solutions.



COMPTON: And very briefly, because we're heading towards news in about 60 seconds, can

you explain how your childcare policy would work for my parent, listening to me or grandparent

dropping their child off at childcare this morning?



COLLINS: Yeah so what we want to do is we want to remove the cap. We want to increase the

childcare rebate to 90 per cent for all families earning $80,000 or less, household income. And

indeed, what will happen is, is that 97 per cent of families will be better off between $600 and

more than $2,000 a year, better off under Labor's plan for childcare. The taper rate will start at

$80,000 and go up to family household incomes of I think it's $530,000. So what we want to do

is increase the rebate so it'll be in pocket for most Australian families, 97 per cent of them of

$600 to more than $2,000 dollars a year back in your pocket.



COMPTON: Appreciate you coming in this morning. Thank you for that.



COLLINS: Thanks, Leon.



ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119

