AUSMIN 2020 Global Health Security   • Joint Statement

29 July 2020 Minister for Foreign Affairs, The Hon Marise Payne MP

COVID-19 has highlighted the importance of global health security to our national  and security interests.

As part of the 2020 Australia-United States Ministerial Consultations (AUSMIN), our  two countries have agreed on an AUSMIN Global Health Security Statement, which  commits us to strengthening our health cooperation in the Indo-Pacific in 2020 and  beyond.

Together, we will help build Indo-Pacific partner capacity in biosecurity, biosafety and  bio-surveillance to prevent, detect and respond to infectious disease outbreaks and  reduce the risk of future pandemics.

We will work with countries in the region to improve hygiene conditions, and  mitigate zoonotic disease and pandemic risks associated with wildlife wet markets.  We will also work to strengthen public health emergency operations centres in  selected partner countries, such as Laos, Cambodia and Myanmar.

Our partnership plays a significant role in improving and advancing health security  across the Indo-Pacific region.

The Statement, which has been developed by the Department of Foreign Affairs and  Trade and the United States Department of State, builds on Australia's Health  Security Initiative for the Indo-Pacific region, and the United States' Global Health  Security Strategy.

Australia and the United States will continue to work with the Coalition for Epidemic  Preparedness Innovations (CEPI) to accelerate the development and distribution of  vaccines, and Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, to improve vaccine access in the world's  poorest countries.

In addition to the immense health and social impact, the IMF has projected that the  COVID-19 pandemic will cost the world US$9 trillion dollars over the next two years.  Australia remains committed to participation in regional and global health forums,  including with the United States.

More than ever before, both Australia and the United States recognise the need for  concrete action and leadership to support global health security in our region.

The full text of the statement can be found here.

Media enquiries

• Minister's office: (02) 6277 7500

• DFAT Media Liaison: (02) 6261 1555



