

SENATOR TIM AYRES  SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2NZ RADIO INVERELL  MONDAY, 16 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Rugby league; Coronavirus; Economic effects of coronavirus.

MONTE IRVINE, HOST: I’ve been joined on the phone for our weekly chat with New South  Wales Labor Senator Tim Ayres. Good morning Senator, how are you this morning?

SENATOR TIM AYRES, SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES: Oh I’m good Monty, I’m  standing in the rain out the back of Merriwa, which I understand Merriwa is in the seat of  New England now. I’m in your local Federal Seat. Spending the day in Merriwa, very good  to be out of Sydney.

HOST: Well you’ve got to have a good start to your Monday and I’ve just collated all the  details for Round One of the 2NZ tipping competition and you’re out in front - you’re  leading with 7. You picked 7 right this week, straight off the bat.

AYRES: That is a very good start to the week. I tell you what; it’s good to lead early. I  wouldn’t pay too much attention to week to week results, it’s going to be a hard thing to  stay in front, I think.

HOST: It is, now I suppose we look forward to this weekend of football - the crowds  weren’t there because of the coronavirus. Now there’s talk of the season actually being  cancelled, even the Warriors are talking about pulling out from the competition altogether.

So the coronavirus is pretty much what everyone is talking about, it’s all the top stories on  the news. Senator, do you feel that what is being put in place by the Federal Government  is sufficient, or do you think it needs to go further? Or do you think it’s too much?

AYRES: Well there’s got to be some very difficult decisions. First of all with the rugby  league, we are entering a season that looked like it was going to be an absolutely terrific  season of rugby league. Very difficult decisions for rugby league administrators and  administrators of the other sports. They’ll be engaging with the Chief Medical Officer -  making sure that they get the best medical advice to make decisions for the future of the  game.

It is clear that last week the government announced that from Monday, today, that  gatherings of over 500 were going to be banned, essentially. That rules out rugby league  games, the game is going to try and limp along with just having administrators and club

officials attending the games. Pretty strange for a rugby league team, two rugby league  teams, to be a pretty hot contest with absolutely no crowd. Really tough decisions for the  rugby league administrators and for all the other sports.

HOST: Senator just with that, why Monday, why not immediately?

AYRES: Well it’s a good question, only the Prime Minister and the Federal Government  could answer that question. Plenty of people were asking over the weekend were asking:  why is Monday the day? If this is the advice, why aren’t we following the advice now?  There are going to be plenty of questions - there are contradictory bits of advice out there  in the public.

What the Commonwealth government has to achieve here, in public health terms, is to try  and reduce the number of infections to flatten the curve of infections, to make sure that our  public health facilities, our aged care facilities, can deal with the number of cases. That is  the big challenge here, is to make sure that we look after the health and safety of all  Australians.

So you can expect that the situation will evolve, but it is very important that there is  absolutely clear advice going out to the public, that there’s clear co-ordination with  organisations from health infrastructure and the hospitals, to the rugby league to public  schools to the universities, to workplaces. That everybody is getting the same message  and that we are doing everything we can to make sure that we deal effectively with this big  public health challenge.

HOST: Now something else that has come out this morning, I was listening earlier to our  Sydney affiliate, and the airlines and travel insurance aren’t covering what’s happening  with COVID 19 - do you think that should change> Should the government be putting  pressure on these businesses to say ‘Hey, it’s not right that you’re not letting people do  this.’

AYRES: Well there are going to be people in very tough situations. I know that many  Australians have got holidays planned, family events planned, that they have put  significant amounts of money into. Families that are doing it tough, allocating money to do  something with their family that are now in real uncertainty.

We’re also going to have to think about the future of airlines and all of the businesses that  are around the tourist industry. Areas of the country, regional economies like Far North  Queensland, for example, are in dire trouble and need a clear plan from the Federal  government to make sure that people can trade through what looks like it is going to be  many months before the tourism industry gets back up off the mat.

There’ll be very big challenges for the economy in this, and very big challenges for public  health and safety. And what we need to see from the Federal Government is clarity and a  plan for both of those spheres.

We have had now eight weeks to prepare for the coronavirus, the spread of COVID 19.  You can see that infection rates will start to pick up and pick up exponentially over time.  And that means that the Commonwealth government has to do its job, but all of us have to  play our part as well. And that means, back to basics on personal health and hygiene,  making sure that we’re washing our hands, being sensible with our contact with other  people and making sure that we follow the advice of the medical authorities.



HOST: You did mention before the economy and the impact this is happening on the  economy. And it is huge; I mean we have seen so much money wiped off the stock  exchange both globally and locally. I mean, for myself, I’ve watched my own  superannuation go down thousands of dollars in the last couple of days just last week. The  government did release a stimulus package if you like, to try and help the economy along.  Do you think it’s gone far enough, and do you really think this is going to be the first of  many prop ups that the government is going to have to use?

AYRES: Well the first thing to say, I suppose, is that the economy was in dire shape over  the course of the last half of last year, so we had a sluggish economy, wages going  backwards, real structural problems, labour productivity continuing to fall. Sluggish growth  rates, real challenges in the economy anyway.

This external shock presents some real challenges. Now it is, in some respects, it is a  different scenario to the one the Rudd government faced in 2008-2009-2010 with the  Global Financial Crisis. I suppose the response over time by the Federal Government is  going to be measured against that benchmark. Whether the government went hard, went  early, went straight out to households and made sure that we maintained the only OECD to  stay out of recession.

Now Labor will go to the Federal Parliament next week. Labor is going to be constructive  and support good measures and I saw the leader of the Labor Party, over the course of the  weekend, say that he believed that the stimulus package was a good start. But we are  facing very difficult times and we are going to have to make sure that the Federal  Government does its bit to keep this country out of recession. We’ve done it before; we  should be able to, with the right policy mix and the right determination, do it again.

HOST: So basically what you’re saying is, when Labor goes there next week, you’re ready  to work with the government to make sure that the economy is in the best shape coming  out the other side of this pandemic.

AYRES: We are not going to play politics with the stimulus or with the COVID 19 public  health response. We are going to be asking questions. It is a big problem that we still  haven’t got an effective answer for a third of the workforce, Australian casual employees,  who don’t get access to sick leave if they are stood down. The government has provided a  cut in the waiting period for people accessing the sickness benefit - essentially the same  rate as the Newstart payment, but that does mean that many casual employees who live  week to week to pay their rent or their mortgage or to put food on the table are going to be  faced with very difficult personal choices. And that is not in the public health interest to  have that huge part of the Australian workforce that has been forced onto casual wages -  no job security - to be put into that position when we are facing this public health crisis.

So we will be asking questions about issues like that that go to the merits and the  substance but we will not be playing politics with questions around the stimulus package or  around the public health response. It’s just too important for Australia and too important for  our economy and too important for our public health.

HOST: Talking about that, not just the casual employees that can be impacted by this, but  the full time workers. Now not all of them have the full amount of sick leave, they have two  weeks of sick leave or whatever. They may have to use it all up in one hit. Do you think  that there is something maybe put in place for the government to say ‘Look, if you’ve got a



workforce that is going to be on sick leave because of this, they have to be self-isolated  because of this, that we will subsidise you paying them additional sick leave over and  above their normal sick leave.’ Do you think that is a good solution for the government to  look at?

AYRES: Well I’m not going to propose individual policy measures here on the program,  Monty, we’re really just pointing out and have been pointing out over the course of the last  week that there has is a group of workers who have no sick leave at all. I agree with you in  that there are those who have low sick leave balance who will be put in a very tough  position if they are required to self-isolate.

There are other challenges coming up in the economy as well. There are businesses that  for all sorts of reasons will be pushed to the edge of whether or not they are able to  operate. The government needs to have a strategy for all of those businesses. In the  manufacturing industry, businesses that have intermediate goods that they import from  China that they use to manufacture Australian products. The tourism industry, higher  education, where universities are reliant to a very significant extent on income from  overseas students, sectors right across the economy that will be facing a very significant  challenge over the coming weeks and months.

And the Commonwealth government needs to be doing its bit to make sure that Australia  trades through this temporary problem, and that we don’t lose capacity. You know, in a  recession people lose their jobs, we saw this in the recession in the 1990s, many, many  people, particularly people over the age of 45 - never worked again. Many people who  lose their jobs, good jobs, in a recession, are going to casual and impermanent work  afterwards, going to worse jobs and never get a decent job again. We just can’t afford for  Australians to be put in that position.

We got the country through the Global Financial Crisis and largely maintained good jobs  across the economy; we can’t afford to let that happen again to working Australians and to  small and medium sized businesses, and to big businesses across the economy. We need  to make sure that we maintain that capability and that we’re ready on the other side to  compete and to continue to lift our game and make sure that we are providing good jobs  across the economy.

HOST: Certainly, Senator unfortunately we are out of time. Thank you so much for your  time this morning and having a chat to us. I look forward to talking to you next Monday.

AYRES: Good on you Monty, talk to you next week.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JOE MCKENZIE 0431 377 319





