BILL SHORTEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT SERVICES

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE SCHEME

MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  TODAY SHOW  TUESDAY, 15 DECEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: China’s plans to block Australian coal; Labor to lay out climate goals; limiting  screen time for our kids; end of the Eddie McGuire era at Collingwood.

SYLVIA JEFFREYS, HOST: There's another crushing blow to our export industry this morning,  China appearing to confirm a block on Aussie coal imports worth a staggering 14 billion dollars a  year to our economy. It is the latest twist in the worsening trade war with Beijing, and to discuss, I'm  joined by the Shadow Minister for Government Services, Bill Shorten and Triple M’s Gus Worland,  good morning to you both. Bill, you first - Aussie coal blocked indefinitely from entering China. That's  a dramatic escalation, isn't it? How do we respond now?

BILL SHORTEN, MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG: Oh, well, I expect the Morrison Government's  going to appeal to the World Trade Organisation who help arbitrate in trade disputes. I just think that  we've just got to buckle up for the long haul, don't we? I think it is important to remember that China  is pursuing a pretty tough attitude with a range of countries from Denmark through to India, through  to Australia. So perhaps you can't do it with coal, but one thing we can do is we can buy a bit more  Australian this Christmas when we're in the shopping aisles for our wine to seafood. But I just think  we've got to buckle up and go the distance.

JEFFREYS: Iron ore is our saving grace at the moment, isn't it?

SHORTEN: Yeah, well, the demand for iron ore is enormous, and no doubt China may complain  about the price, but they still keep buying it. I think what we have to do is diversify our markets, try  and improve relations with China, but we've also got to, I think, stand on our own two feet more and  not just be a country who deals with one customer. We’ve just got to try and right our relationship  with China, but also stand on our own two feet.

JEFFREYS: Gus, are we being too soft, do you think?

GUS WORLAND, TRIPLE M: I think at times we probably have been. But this is an opportunity, like  Bill said, to put a line in the sand and say, righto, we've got more customers than just you and we've  got to stick up for ourselves. But, you know, they've been so dominant for so long and we've  probably let them walk over us a little bit over that time. So, time for us to do a little bit of thinking,  2020 is throwing so many curveballs at us. This is just another one the Government have to sort out  early in 2021.

JEFFREYS: Exposed our weakness, hasn't it? Let's move on now to another issue of global  importance, and that's tackling climate change. Reports today Labor leader Anthony Albanese is  ready to commit to a medium-term target to reduce emissions, putting the nation on track to be  carbon neutral by 2050. Bill, do you support this?

SHORTEN: Yeah, I do think we should be at zero net emissions by 2050. Here's an interesting fact,  that 70 per cent of our trading partners, the farmers, every state and territory government in Australia  has already agreed to that. So, as we develop our policy, I think it's important that we plan for the  future.

JEFFREYS: Do you support the medium-term target, though?

SHORTEN: Well, obviously, if you if you're at one spot now in 2020 and you're at another spot in  2050, you have to pass through some medium term targets, the policy will become clearer the closer  we get to the election.

JEFFREYS: So it's essential to have a medium-term target.

SHORTEN: I don't see how you can't, but, you know, we've got a long, hot summer coming up,  we've got extreme weather events. And I just think that the more that we start thinking about the  future, the better we will be.

JEFFREYS: Gus, this could upset the right faction of the Labor Party, though. Do you think it can  afford that at a time like this?

WORLAND: It's a tough time for them at the moment, isn't it? But, yeah, I think Bill's absolutely right.  To get to the high point, you've got to go through a medium point. We've got to be bullish. I mean,  this country in particular, what we go through with our weather and what we're going through even at  the moment in Sydney this morning, it’s meant to be the middle of summer and it's freezing cold and  raining. It's going to be that way for a little while. You know, it’s about time we took this really  seriously. We've got to be bullish about it. And I like the fact that we've got some targets or at least  having a crack at the rest of the world. Are they taking it seriously as we are? I hope they are.

JEFFREYS: Bill, 30 seconds ago, we're talking about the importance of iron ore and coal to our  economy. How do you balance that

SHORTEN: In terms of climate, listen, it's hard. I think what we have to do is convince Australians  that if you're going to pursue policies which tackle climate, it's not at the expense of ordinary  people's jobs. So that's one of the lessons I take out of the last election, that people have got to see  where they fit in. And if they feel forgotten, well, then that's a problem for you when you're trying to  advance the case on climate. You've got to remember that we've got to hang on to jobs as well.

JEFFREYS: Now, I want to ask you about something a little closer to home. It's something that  every parent will dread, especially as we come into the school holiday period. How to limit your kid's  screen time. We've got a special report on this coming up this morning. Laying bare the huge  challenges facing parents and some smart solutions, too, including a little bit of tough love. Bill, your  kids are a little bit older these days, but you must have been through it. Any tips that you can pass  on?

SHORTEN: Oh, I was going to say, if you guys have got any tips, I'll take some notes. My youngest  one now is 10 and so, gee when they want to get on the screen, they're more inventive than a group  of POWs trying to escape the Germans in World War Two. I mean, during COVID, my little girl is not  up yet, so I can say this, she’d be on the screen doing the schoolroom teaching, but was playing  games with her buddies in the class. So, I think last night I got the ultimatum that if I wanted her off  the screen, I'd have to listen to her read aloud. And she's a very good reader aloud, I can assure  you, last night.

JEFFREYS: Very good. It is such a big issue. Every parent is grappling with it. What's your  experience in your house?

WORLAND: Yeah, I mean, we've got a 20 year old and 19 year old and the nearly 18 year old. And  we just put a line in the sand about five years ago. My wife's from England. She's a schoolteacher.  Tough love, you mentioned that. We just said, right. As soon as you get home, it goes into this  basket and mum and dad put their phones in the basket as well. They then got powered up in that  basket. They got one hour after dinner and that was it. No phones in the bedrooms. And you had to  put your phone back out again at night time. And we actually bought into alarm clocks rather than  using your alarm for the phone, because, of course, they use that as an excuse to have it on all  night. You know, or have music playing or whatever. So, yeah, I've caught my kids with multiple  devices multiple times with all these apps open and stuff. It's the worst thing for them. We've never  been more connected. Yet never actually know how to have a proper conversation. So tough love, a  little bit of parenting.

JEFFREYS: Well, let us know your thoughts at home. We'd love to know your experiences, too. And  just before we go, Bill, I have to ask you about your beloved Collingwood. Eddie McGuire, standing  down as president at the end of next season. I don't think anyone saw this coming except for  probably his wife, Carla. He got pretty emotional talking about it last night. How are you feeling about  the end of the Eddie era?

SHORTEN: Oh, it is an end of an era. He's been great for the club since 1998. He's given his  supporters, including me, a flag. It'd be really good if the club could reward him in his final year next  year with the flag. I mean, after all, Richmond won 2020, but was 2020 really a footy season this  year? I dunno. But 2021…

JEFFREYS: It's the toughest season to ever win, extra points to the Tigers this year, I would have  thought.

SHORTEN: He's a giant. He's been a giant. He is a giant. He's a very good fellow. Great for the  game. Great for the club.

JEFFREYS: It’ll be 23 years in that job, so I'm sure there are a lot of emotions amongst his fans this  morning. Bill and Gus, thank you both so much for joining us. And if we don't chat to you again, have  a very merry Christmas season.

SHORTEN: Likewise, see you Gussy.

WORLAND: Merry Christmas to you guys.

ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM HOULIHAN 0438 366 400

