









SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate  Senator for South Australia







THE HON EVA LAWLER MLA  Acting Minister for Tourism, Sport and Culture

MEDIA RELEASE



22 February 2020

Boosting Australia’s tourism to Asia

300 qualified Aussie Specialist travel agents from across Asia will descend upon Australia’s Top  End when Darwin plays host to Tourism Australia’s Corroboree Asia event in 2020.

Federal Tourism Minister Simon Birmingham, together with the Northern Territory Acting  Minister for Tourism Eva Lawler, today announced that Darwin would host the important trade  event, which will see more than 100 Australian tourism businesses meet with travel sellers from  key Asian markets.

Minister Birmingham said the major tourism event would provide an opportunity for passionate  Aussie Specialist agents to gain a better understanding of Australia’s world -class tourism  products.

“Australia’s proximity to Asia combined with a growing middle class across the region and  increasingly competitive airfares has helped to fuel much of the growth in international arrivals  and spend to Australia in recent years,” said Minister Birmingham

“Corroboree Asia will provide an essential platform for Aussie tourism businesses to directly  connect with frontline travel sellers from key Asian markets and demonstrate to them first hand  why they should continue to promote our incredible tourism offerings.

“Qualified Aussie specialist agents from China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Japan, Korea, India,  Malaysia, Indonesia and Singapore will take part in training workshops and first -hand  experiences to boost their knowledge so they can best sell Australia to their customers.

“Events such as this will play an important role in the recovery of our tourism industry following  the bushfires and coronavirus crises, by showcasing that Australia continues to offer exceptional  world-class tourism experiences.”





Acting Minister for Tourism, Sport and Culture Eva Lawler reiterated that the Territory  Government is also working intensely to minimise the impacts of the bushfires and the  coronavirus outbreak.

“Securing Corroboree Asia in Darwin this year will be a major coup for the Territory, as it is the  first time the Northern Territory will be showcased to all Asian regions at once.

“For Darwin to be hosting up to 550 tourism delegates sends a clear message that the Territory  is united with the rest of Australia and welcomes international visitors.”

Corroboree Asia is delivered by Tourism Australia in partnership with Tourism Northern Territory  and Singapore Airlines from Monday 23 to Thursday 27 August 2020.

For further information on Corroboree Asia 2020 visit:  www.tourism.australia.com/corroboreeasia2020

Media Contacts  Benn Ayre: +61 428 342 325 (BIRMINGHAM)  Lisa Sennett +61 436 929 858 (LAWLER)

