

JULIAN HILL MP

DEPUTY CHAIR, JOINT COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS AND AUDITS  MEMBER FOR BRUCE



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW   PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  TUESDAY, 8 DECEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Sports Rorts Grants; Senator McKenzie; Regional Jobs Rorts Grants; New  Grants Rule that Ministers must follow the Rules!; Auditor-General; Audit Committee;  National Integrity Commission; Industrial Relations reform (part-time and casual  workers).

JULIAN HILL, DEPUTY CHAIR, JOINT COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT;  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BRUCE: Yesterday, in the shadow of question time - you know  the bit where all the journalists go off and digest what happened - the Government quietly  tabled a report by a Government controlled Committee, the powerful Public Accounts and  Audit Committee, at the end of a year-long inquiry into their own grants programs.

Unbelievably, in the quiet, sober and stately language the Audit Committee tends to use -  they’re not the most exciting of reports I do admit - but the Government MPs that control this  committee skewered and slammed their own Ministers for their rorts and waste and  maladministration of grant programs.

The inquiry looked at the $100 million Sports Grants Program and the $222 million Regional  Jobs Rorts Program. We took a year having a deep look at these programs and some of the  issues that arose and made a series of recommendations for change.

Now, on the Spots Rorts Program, even the Government controlled Committee had to admit  the administration of the program did not meet public and community expectations. And  astoundingly, the Government MPs had to call into question the entire legal basis of what  Bridget McKenzie did in handing out those grants.

The government-controlled Audit Committee has ordered that Sport Australia needs to get  legal advice and come back to the Committee, within six months, and explain themselves.  What was the legal basis for this program? How did the Minister have the power? And, looking  ahead, what changes will be made to make sure these questions don’t arise again?

The Government controlled Committee also had to admit favouritism to Government MPs, to  Liberal MPs and astoundingly to Liberal candidates. I mean, who can forget at the last  election, we had Liberal candidates - not even MPs but Liberal candidates - running around  with big cheques announcing things with taxpayer funds.

Government MPs were told about things weeks before other MPs in the Parliament, and the  report has recommended we need to look at new rules and guidelines to make sure all MPs  have a fair crack at advocating for their community.

Now, of course the Sports Rorts Program, because of the industrial scale pork-barrelling by  Minister McKenzie - and of course, the Prime Minister’s Office was up in to its neck in it  because of the colour coded spreadsheets -  The Sports Rorts Program overshadowed, to  some degree in the public mind, the $220 million Regional Jobs Program.

This was a program that handed out $220 million in funds to largely Liberal and National

electorates across the country in a secretive process. So, the Government’s own MPs had to  call out the use of Ministerial Panels - where three Ministers go into a room, they shut the  door with no one else there, no one to see what they’re up to - and the now deputy PM was a  member of this infamous ministerial panel.

In this case, they kept no records of their meetings and why they made the decisions they did.  In come the recommendations from the Department, saying: “here’s what we think the worthy  projects are,” and out come a different set of recommendations and decisions from the  Ministers.

They funded an ineligible project. A project worth $5.5 million. When we got to the bottom of it  - the Department didn’t want to tell us but we found out - when we got to the bottom of it, we  found out it was a $5.5 million project in the Member for Wide Bay’s electorate to a Liberal and  National Party donor. It wasn’t even eligible for a grant, and yet they got $5.5 million.

The Government’s own MPs have had to say: “this is not acceptable, we have to change the  rules or remind Ministers that they actually have to keep notes of our own meetings.” They  have to account for why they hand out taxpayer funds and they have to declare their conflicts  of interest. We don’t know whether those conflicts were ever declared in that room.

And finally, perhaps my favourite Yes Minister style recommendation - you’d think it was funny  if it weren’t such a farce - is that the Government’s own MPs have said: “well, we have to  remind Ministers that the rules actually apply to them.” So, they’ve proposed adding a new  section, a new rule, a new principle to the grants rules that apply to all Ministers across the  Commonwealth, that says: “adherence to published guidelines: Ministers actually have to  follow the rules, just like everyone else.’

So, I think what this scandal, this report brings home is the importance of the Auditor-General.  Taxpayers across Australia would never know the industrial scale of rorting and pork-barrelling  that had gone on with these programs if the Auditor-General had not been resourced to do his  work.

So, I call on the Government - yet again - to reverse their budget cuts to the Auditor-General.  Since they were elected, 22.1% in real terms has been cut from the Auditor-General’s budget.  This means we are less likely to know in the future if this Government is rorting its own  programs.

It also brings home the need for a National Integrity Commission, so that when serious issues  are identified through this kind of work, there’s somewhere to go with the power and the teeth  to investigate Ministers in this Government.

JOURNALIST: Where are we going with this, in the future? The average voter wants to get rid  of pork-barrelling once and for all, but it seems to stick with us through the ages. What’s the  solution so no Government when they’re in power has the incentive to distribute these dodgy  grants to marginal seats to keep them in power?

HILL: Two words: transparency and accountability. If you shine light on what’s happening, you  tend to get better behaviour in any human system. And government is no different.

What this report calls for and what Labor has been calling for, is transparency. The  Government should come clean on what the process was, why the Minister decided to hand  out money to a different of projects to those which were recommended - we still have no list of  who the applicants even were.

So, the recommendations from this Committee really go to improving transparency and  accountability. Like I said, Ministers, when they go into a room, have the right to make  decisions. I agree with that. Even as a member of the Opposition, I accept that Ministers are  democratically elected, and they have the right to make these decisions.

But they have to be able to account for them. That’s the key. They can’t just go into a room  and spit out a set of decisions and not actually write down why and explain themselves. If this  Government was forced to explain itself, then I’d hope we’d get less partisan, less biased

decisions, and waste far less taxpayer funds than we’ve seen under this pork-barrelling  Government.

JOURNALIST: But given the power of Ministers, what’s to stop - suppose Labor wins the next  election - what’s to stop Labor Ministers then going and doing the same process, and having  the roles reversed with Liberal MPs saying exactly the same thing? Average voters feel that  this issue just never seems to be fixed.

HILL: Well, the report by the Auditor-General, in evidence to the Committee - we talked about  this issue with Ministerial Panels - and people were asked, ‘Well, is this normal?’ and the  evidence that we got was ‘no, Ministerial Panels in the past accounted for their decisions.’

So, I think it is unbelievable you have to have a new role in the guidelines - a new rule for this  set of Ministers - that says: “well you’ve actually got to follow the rules.” But, if you follow the  rules and write down why you’re making a decision and what the criteria are in a transparent  way, then we should be able to get better decisions.

Labor did not stand accused of running into a room and hiding their decisions. People can  agree or decisions that are made. That’s fair enough. But you’ve got to be able to account for  them, and account for the expenditure of taxpayer funds - that’s the key.

JOURNALIST: There’s more industrial reform being flagged today by the Government, this  time for part-time workers, removing some overtime - not quite a penalty rate - but extra  overtime rules there. What’s your take on that?

HILL: Well, I represent one of the most socio-economically disadvantaged electorates in  Melbourne. I love my community. But there are tens of thousands of people who rely on part-time work, on casual work, on insecure work, just to Band-Aid and sticky tape together  something approximating an income to get through the week.

So, these kinds of changes and reforms may sound academic to many of the Government  Members who represent wealthy electorates, but they’re real life and death for people in my  community.

We haven’t seen the detail of these changes, and obviously we’ll have to study them - and I’ll  leave the detail to Tony Burke and people who have lead responsibility. But I would say, that if  COVID-19 and the pandemic has taught us one thing, it’s that insecure work and casualisation  has gone way too far in this country. I mean, who knew - sick leave has a purpose! Sick leave  has a purpose in this country!

The inability of people in my community to get basic financial products - to be able to access  loans because of this insecure casualisation that has gone on, and what I would call the evil  use of labour hire firms.

And this is not something that is just happening with QANTAS workers and outsourcing, and  big companies mining companies. I was up in QLD and heard from workers about the extent  of casualisation and the use of labour hire companies there.

This has been led by the Government. We have tens of thousands of so called ‘permanent  casuals’ employed through labour hire firms. I mean, it’s just a nonsense. The government is  setting the culture for this casualisation and outsourcing, and they need to actually bring these  jobs back in.

We need to have a debate about insourcing jobs in the public sector, to set the tone. This stuff  has gone way too far and is part of a much bigger debate.

I just wish the Government was honest about what they’re doing; instead of saying they’re  trying to decrease casualisation when what they’re doing is making it easier. They’re going to  make it more difficult for people in insecure work - the people I represent.

JOURNALIST: On the part time proposal, wouldn’t that see people who can’t get enough  hours and who perhaps want more, able to agree that: “ok we’ll accept the typical rate for a



part-time worker, and we’ll be able to get more hours” which is exactly what the Labor Party  wants?

HILL: Look, I haven’t seen the detail of the proposals as I said, and I’ll leave comment on that  to Tony Burke. But, it’s funny isn’t it that you get little bits and pieces dropped through  favourite newspapers on what they say they’re up to? We haven’t seen legislation, and we’ll  consider legislation if and when it’s introduced in the normal way.

But the point that I’ve made is that casualisation in our society has gone too far. Sick leave  has a purpose, and I think the Government needs to look seriously at this issue and  understand how it impacts everyday Australian who simply want more work, and more secure  work.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: CAM GREEN 0406 507 727





