

TONY BURKE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ARTS  MANAGER OF OPPOSITION BUSINESS  MEMBER FOR WATSON



MINISTER FLETCHER HOLDING UP ARTS FUNDING

The struggling arts and entertainment sector could be forced to wait until  November for emergency funding to start flowing after revelations Arts Minister  Paul Fletcher is sitting on draft guidelines for grants and loans.

More than six weeks after the Morrison Government announced it’s much-delayed arts package on June 25, not a single dollar of support has yet gone to  those who desperately need it.

And now we know why.

Stephen Arnott from the Office of the Arts has confirmed his team has  submitted the draft guidelines for the grants and loans programs to Minister  Fletcher - but the Minister still has not approved them.

While the sector is desperately waiting for help the guidelines are sitting on the  minister’s desk just waiting for his signature.

Under Labor questioning at the COVID-19 committee, Mr Arnott also said that  once the Minister does approve the guidelines it will take another eight to 12  weeks until money finally starts flowing.

That means that even if Minister Fletcher approves these guidelines first thing  on Monday morning - and he should - it could take until November before  anyone gets any money. That is eight months after this crisis began and this  entire sector was almost completely shut down.

The Government was dragged kicking and screaming into announcing a  package for the arts after stubbornly insisting - for more than 100 days - that  there was no need for it. And now six weeks after they supposedly saw sense,  artists and entertainers still have no idea whether they will even be eligible to



apply for help.

This is typical of this Government: the delivery never matches the  announcement, the reality never matches the promise.

Australia’s arts and entertainment sector workers deserve better than this. They  are the makers, keepers and producers of Australian stories, and they have  helped us to get through this crisis.

The situation has become even more dire with the second lockdown in Victoria  - which is hitting Victorian creators hard but also having knock-on effects for  the arts community across the country.

It took more than 100 days for the Morrison government to finally act on the  desperate calls from the sector for help. How many more days will they have to  wait to get the support they were promised?

FRIDAY, 7 AUGUST 2020

MEDIA CONTACT: ADAM GARTRELL 0427 008 525









