PETA MURPHY MP

MEMBER FOR DUNKLEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS AM AGENDA

WEDNESDAY, 12 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Victoria; Federal Parliament; ADF; Hotel Quarantine; Aged Care.



TOM CONNELL, HOST: Let's go to my first guests of the day, though, from the Liberal

Party MP Tim Wilson, from Labor we've got Peta Murphy along. Thanks both for your time.

I suppose it's always a little bit of a battle sometimes as politicians to appear like normal

members of society, if I can put it that way, and you've both been out there experiencing

what everyone else is out there in isolation. Tim, we've got some pictures of you, I know

setting up an exercise bike, doing a bit to make sure people aren't out and about in

Melbourne at the moment. And for you, Peta Murphy, I guess the trickiest part about

lockdown has been all those dogs running around your house.



PETA MURPHY, MEMBER FOR DUNKLEY: You saw the video?



CONNELL: We did see the video.



MURPHY: My husband is going to kill me now.



CONNELL: So what's it been like, Peta? You're isolating in Canberra, in Melbourne sorry,

before heading to Canberra. So what's life been like there?



MURPHY: Yeah, I'm in Frankston. Look, obviously we were in stage four before I went into

self-quarantine, so there was only an hour a day exercise that each of us could take

outside. I think the hardest hit has been the two puppies that you just saw on the video,

they’re seven months old, Bert and Ernie and they don't get their two hours of walking a

day between myself and Rod.



But I'm really keen to make it clear, whilst it's a little bit difficult for me to do my job, other

people obviously have it so much harder than either Tim or I do right now, getting through

isolation, home schooling, having lost a job, dealing with mental health and disabilities. So

I wouldn't want anyone to think that we're putting out any great complaints about what we

have to do in order to represent our communities.



CONNELL: Tim, for people that don't follow you on social media, in particular on

Facebook, your favourite hashtag or saying is ‘the future is going to be awesome’, I'm just

wondering, surely it's not all that futuristic to be having to isolate and come physically to

Parliament. Does this get your mind ticking about online capabilities for our federal

parliament?



TIM WILSON, MEMBER FOR GOLDSTEIN: Well, of course, we can always have online

capability. I am a bit of a traditionalist. (Poor audio). We should be coming to parliament,

It's important for the institution and I think it's kind of the lifeblood of it. But I just want to

stress, as Peta, there are so many people out there doing it tough for so many people, as

Peta rightly outlined, have lost jobs or are dealing with home schooling while trying to work

and they face enormous challenges at these times (Poor audio).



CONNELL: It certainly is, and, you know, I’ll add to that, we’re certainly not complaining

about our situation right now in Canberra, that's for sure. Peta, some pretty explosive

testimony yesterday, a claim from Daniel Andrews around hotel quarantine, and this is

such a huge part of the outbreak right now - that there was no formal offer from the ADF in

terms of assistance with hotel quarantine. Linda Reynolds, the defence minister, has given

details of multiple occasions when there was an offer and they were told there was no

need for public facing roles in quarantine in terms of ADF assistance. This isn't a great look

for the premier. He seems to be sort of trying to play semantics here. What did you think of

this?



MURPHY: I think this is absolutely the wrong time for political tit for tat and point scoring. I

think we've got a premier who is working clearly day and night. How many days in a row

has he stood up now and done press conferences? It's got to be at least 40. And we've got

a federal government that's also working hard. But we've got a premier and a state

government that trying to get us through this current wave. There will be a time, just like

there will be a time to deal with the Ruby Princess, the failures in aged care, the under

performance of the COVID Safe App, there will be time to deal with what happened with

hotel quarantine.



But my community don't want to see a political tit for tat. They absolutely don't. They just

want to see me out there or in here working as hard as I can to help them get through the

current crisis.



CONNELL: But doesn't that all fold into, when he was giving answers yesterday to say,

well, you know, there wasn't a formal offer and then clarification coming from someone in

the Victorian government, well perhaps it went through the department instead of straight

to the premier, that allows this whole political football game to continue?



MURPHY: Look, I think there's clearly been some mistakes made. And the premier has

said that a number of times. He accepts that there's been mistakes made. And I'm sure

that this inquiry, the parliamentary inquiry, the independent judicial inquiry that's been set

up, the federal government deciding to do a review of quarantine across the country. I'm

sure that there'll be answers that will come out of that. But I know that people in my

community are sitting there every day waiting to hear about the numbers and tragically the

deaths and trying to get through day to day and that they don't I don't want to see

politicians taking potshots at each other. They really don't.



CONNELL: What do you think of that, Tim? A few of your colleagues in Victoria have, I

suppose, taken off the kid gloves in the past few days and wanted to call out the Andrews

government a bit more? Is that something you agree with?



WILSON: Well, nobody is engaging in tit for tat. (Poor audio) These are not minor errors, it

led to an outbreak, brought the State to a standstill and is now a drag on the nation, and

what people want, including myself, is accountability and actual accountability and to make

sure that the mistakes aren't repeated because they're very serious. It's not just the hotel

quarantine in terms of whether the ADF was invited, they were, offers were made by the

federal government consistently. It’s easy to go back and look at the premier’s own press

release, he clearly says that the ADF will be involved in and then they chose not to take up

those options. (Poor audio) Nobody can really come to terms or tell the public what

happened, why it happened, we have the Department of Health and Human Services

commissioning and setting up our hotel quarantine but they don't seem to even know

who’s been running it. We have the premier saying one thing to the parliamentary

committee, we have the federal government clearly with evidence turning around and

exposing that to be untrue. It’s starting to look like a cover up and that corrodes public

confidence. And that's the critical thing. We need public confidence to achieve the

outcomes for the people of Victoria.



CONNELL: What about the Ruby Princess inquiry? I just want to ask this of you, Tim

Wilson. So two public officials, Commonwealth officials, are being shielded from answering

questions at this inquiry. The inquiry's read their submissions, they want to ask them

questions, the Commonwealth is saying no. How can that be justified?



WILSON: (Poor audio) The critical thing is to make sure that there is proper evidence

provided that has been provided in the same way that parliamentary committees should be

able to hear evidence of ministers and getting information on the public record for exactly

the same purpose as is the case in Victoria



MURPHY: I think Tim should be careful talking about cover ups.



CONNELL: The two public officials have made the submissions. Crucial to this as well,

one of them from the federal Agriculture Department, for example, that seems to be crucial

to this whole issue. Submission's made the inquiry said, we want to ask you questions on

the stand and the answer is no. Surely you'd want more, you're talking about cover ups on

one side, Tim Wilson, shouldn't these people be giving evidence in person?



WILSON: That the evidence should be provided, that's exactly what I believe in Victoria

and that's exactly what I believe in the case of New South Wales. Now, it's not actually that

common that state and federal governments investigate each other. What we know in this

case, this was a Victorian government program run by the Victorian government, they

refused to accept assistance from the federal government. And the focus on, in the

Victorian case is on the conduct of the Victorian Department of Human Services and the

other government departments that have responsibility for this in the same way, that in the

case of the Ruby Princess in New South Wales. The New South Wales government has

then been brought before an inquiry in a similar way.



CONNELL: All right, I'm still not quite sure why the people can't give evidence, but

anyway. Peta, if I can ask you about a pretty disturbing report this morning, the Victorian

Department of Health and Human Services refusing to take some people with COVID-19 at

nursing homes that test positive to hospital. What's happening here? I mean, one of the

accounts here is they're saying, what are they saving the beds for? This is what the beds

are for. What do you make of this?



MURPHY: We are seeing so many disturbing reports coming out of the aged care system.

And of course, we have to remember that we were seeing so many disturbing reports

coming out of the aged care system before COVID. That’s why there’s a Royal

Commission. And we’re also hearing, of course, that at the Royal Commission that the

federal government had no plan for how to deal with aged care and COVID,

notwithstanding, that we had seen other countries and from Newmarch how terribly

devastating it can be. The first thing is, obviously, to say to those people who have lost

loved ones or whose loved ones are sick - we are all thinking of them and our hearts go

out to them, but obviously there are dire problems in the aged care system and they have

to be addressed.



Tim talks about transparency and answering questions, well there’s a senate COVID

inquiry happening and there’s some serious answers to be given about St Basil’s and what

the government knew and when they knew it. We have to keep on top of this issue.



CONNELL: To put that to Tim on aged care, we’re hearing advice to the federal

government in April from an expert to deploy defence personnel as part of a rapid

response plans, so advice given in April and not taken up. Would that have been better in

hindsight?



WILSON: (Poor audio) The tragedy is that the aged care outbreak that has occurred in

Victoria has come as a result of community transmission which can be linked back to the

hotel quarantine incident but also the transmission that occurred in our public hospitals. In

particular in the case of aged care, we’re talking about the most vulnerable Australians

who aren’t necessarily in the position to take care of themselves. And every time there has

been an issue, the Commonwealth has stepped and provided assistance as required.

Including, things like access to PPE and other measures to make sure we can help those

providers care to the most vulnerable Australians.





CONNELL: We’ve run out of time, Tim Wilson, Peta Murphy, thanks for your time today,

we’ll see you in Canberra soon.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DYLAN STEED 0400 615 862



