UNOFFICIAL





The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP   PARKHURST, QLD  WEDNESDAY 14 OCTOBER 2020



EO&E…

THE HON. MICHELLE LANDRY, MEMBER FOR CAPRICORNIA: Well, it's wonderful to be at SMW today with  the Prime Minister and also our LNP candidates here. We've got Tracy Newitt, Tony Hopkins and Adrian  de Groot. And I must thank Jack and his team. It's been wonderful to go through and meet all these  amazing apprentices and the workers that are here. And industries like this are the backbone in  Capricornia, but also the backbone of this nation. And the Prime Minister's been up here talking to us  about the Budget and there are some very, very good measures in the Budget. It's something that always  jumps out at me is the instant asset write off. So we previously had a $150,000 limit on that now and now  the sky's the limit, basically. So businesses like this can purchase machinery, vehicles, coffee shops can  buy things. They can buy new vehicles, machinery. It's just a great way for small, medium-sized businesses  to move ahead. So we've been talking to a lot of businesses also over at Hastings yesterday about the  apprentices they have over there. And the Coalition Government is very focused on getting more people,  particularly the under 35s, into the workforce. So we will continue to sell that message. It's a great  message and it's a way to move our nation forward. Thank you.

PRIME MINISTER: Thank you very much, Michelle. Well, Jack, thank you and to all your team here for  allowing us to come here today and see this amazing place in action. And Michelle and the whole LNP  team here in central Queensland, I want to thank you for the great work you're doing. It's great to be here  in Rockhampton. It's great to be here where we'll be putting in a new stadium. Thanks to all of those who  advocated so strongly, but particularly, as always to you, Michelle, a great advocate for Rockhampton and  central Queensland. The Rookwood Weir Beef Week, our support for Beef Week. I mean, Michelle has  been such a tireless advocate for this region and I know her LNP team here from Keppel all the way  through to Rocky, Tony and Tracy. We wish you all the best for a few weeks time from here.

I want to send out a special shout out, though, before we begin, Michelle, to Beryl. She's down in Brisbane.  Her daughter Natalie works here. She's a boilermaker. She's finished her apprenticeship and she loves  working here and I know you've had a tough week down there, Beryl, she's told me, and you've been in  hospital. And Natalie sends all the best and she really just wanted to send her best wishes. Natalie, who  has autism here, and she's got an apprenticeship, she's finished it. She's got a trade, she's working here,

and she's doing a fantastic job. Like Curtis, who's also on a similar programme, and he's training right now.  There are so many apprentices that have come through this incredible business. And as you can see from  the size of the machinery they deal with, Jack, it's a huge business in more ways than one, dealing with  huge challenges. And I met Pete over here in the workshop over here. He's just come back from the mines.  He's 60. He's coming back and sharing his experience from out in those mines with the young people here  who are training up. They'll go out in those mines, too, and they'll learn a lot from him and what they need  to do on the tools here to make sure everything's done safely.

Well, in Australia today, we're more confident. We're more confident because of the Budget. The figures  that have come out today shows that there are more optimists than pessimists in Australia about our  economy and that is a key turning point and that is exactly what our Budget has been designed to do.  When the Treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, gave the Budget address a week ago, he stood up and he gave the  nation confidence in our future that we are going to come out of this COVID-19 recession, that we have  the economic plan to bring us out of this COVID-19 recession. And we're seeing that in businesses here,  whether it's in central Queensland or around the country. Our plan has been about giving people the  confidence to bring decisions forward. As Michelle just said, the immediate expensing of all capital  equipment, all the machinery you see around there, all the upgrades that need to be done, all the new  technology, all the new equipment, all the new vehicles, all of this immediately expensed. The ability to  write off COVID losses in this year against previous tax paid, all giving businesses the confidence to go out  and invest and hire. Our JobMaker hiring credit, I was talking to local businesses about that this morning.  Our initiative for apprenticeships, our initiatives for training under JobTrainer,  all designed to get people  moving again, to get people into jobs, ensuring they have the skills to be part of the great Australian  recovery from this COVID-19 recession.

Another part of our plan has been to bring forward those tax cuts. Every worker on this site got a tax cut  last Friday, and I can tell you, every worker also gets a tax cut from our stage three tax cuts as well that  we legislated after the last election. Everyone earning over $45,000 will pay less tax. Those under $45,000  got the tax cuts now, they got them first. But to be only having to pay a maximum of 30 cents in the dollar  for the vast majority of workers in this country, 94 per cent of workers paying no more than 30 cents in  the dollar. That's our tax plan. I took it to the last election. Australians backed me on it and we legislated  in the Parliament. Now, the Labor Party want to pull the rug from under that. There's no surprise in that.  They've had 18 months to work out what their position was on tax. The tax policies they took to the last  election were rejected by the Australian people. The hit on retirees. The hit on mum and dads investors.  The hit on workers and who they would make pay higher taxes. They're still holding onto it, 18 months. If  you can't work out 18 months after an election or thereabouts that they were dud policies, you never will,  and you'll never be able to believe anything they say on taxes going forward.

But we're focused on the positive. We're focused on giving Australians the opportunity to move ahead,  particularly here in central Queensland. And Michelle, I want to thank you for your great advocacy and  your great leadership within the Coalition as well. I know Michael McCormack will be coming through as  well. It's a great Coalition partnership, getting a lot done for Australia. But today I'm particularly pleased  to see that the Budget that the Treasurer handed down has been the Budget Australia needs, and it's  given them the confidence and the confidence that will lead to them hiring more people, greater job  certainty and a much more optimistic spirit about where we're heading in the future. Happy to take some  questions.

JOURNALIST: Obviously it is just a few weeks out from the Queensland state election, a little bit of I guess  good timing to come to Queensland. I guess why are you here in Queensland touring now?



PRIME MINISTER: To explain what the Budget means for central Queensland. I mean, here we made the  announcement in the Budget that we're putting $23 million into the Rockhampton Stadium and that's not  just an important piece of sporting infrastructure, it's an important piece of community infrastructure. It's  cultural infrastructure, tourism infrastructure, and that will be important to the region for the jobs alone  that it creates when it comes to building that stadium on top of last year's Budget, which saw so much  invested in central Queensland. From the ring road to all the many other projects that have been  important to our future here in central Queensland. So after every Budget, I take the opportunity to get  out and talk to people on the ground about how they see the Budget, answer questions about how the  Budget works. I was talking to businesses here this morning when they heard us say we're putting in  additional supports to employ more Australians, we were able to talk this morning and answer questions  about the job hiring credit that applies to everyone under the age of 35. And let me tell you why. In this  country, since we hit the pit of the COVID recession, for workers under the age of 35, they got hit the  hardest. Employment for those under 35 fell by 6.2 per cent. Now, for the rest of those over the age of  35, it fell by 1.7 per cent. Their hours reduced by about 8.5 per cent just to a little over 2.3 per cent  compared to those over 35. The youth unemployment rate in this country is twice what it is for the rest  of the country. And I know and I want to congratulate you, Jack, on this. You know, like I do and Michelle  knows and the team knows that you want young Australians to start out their working life in jobs. Jack  gets them here on the end of a broom when they're at school. And when they leave school, they come  here and they go into a traineeship or an apprenticeship. They understand how important the job is. I  want young Australians to understand that. I want them to leave school and go into jobs and be job ready  and be job hungry. If you start your working life on the dole, then you're more likely to stay on it. And  that's why it's so important this recession, that we get young people back into work. I don't want them  wasting a life on welfare. I don't want them to be dependent on that if they can avoid it. There are many  in our community who sadly have to rely on that and need our help and that safety net will always be  there for them. But for those who can get into a job, I want them to, and it's so important to get that right  from the beginning.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you visited Hastings Deering yesterday and did they mention to you that  they, along with hundreds of homes and businesses and schools, would be the beneficiaries of the South  Rockhampton flood levy project that Rocky Council is struggling to get money from the government to  build to flood proof south Rockhampton?

PRIME MINISTER: That's not a topic we discussed yesterday or was raised with me, but Michelle, do you  want to talk about that?

THE HON. MICHELLE LANDRY, MEMBER FOR CAPRICORNIA: I can talk about that. So Rockhampton  Regional Council made the decision yesterday that there was $50 million sitting in basically in limbo  because they do need about another $110 million to get the Rockhampton levee bank up and going. So  the decision was made to use those funds to actually get some projects going out at the airport to actually  get the economy going further, more quickly. So what we have said to them and I have spoken to the  Deputy Prime Minister's office about this, is that after the election, the three levels of government sit  down and discuss it. Because, you know, the Premier made a $45 million commitment yesterday down at  Bundaberg. She certainly hasn't made that in Rockhampton. So it is very important. It is something that is  certainly still on my radar, but it's something that we need to discuss and see how the costs can get pulled  down. Because the original cost of that was $60 million, it went up to $120 million, and now it's sitting at  about $190 million. So there's a lot of extra add ons that the state government have put into that. So, you  know, we're keen to have a frank discussion about this after the election.



JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, new data has emerged showing rising childcare costs are crippling families  in regional and rural Queensland, specifically, for example, out in the Central Highlands. It's one of the  highest costs that families go through. There was no announcement in your Budget [inaudible]. Do you  have any future plans in regards to help struggling parents with that?

PRIME MINISTER: Parents pay tax and all parents got tax cuts. It's not just workers that get a tax cut. It's  workers’ families who get tax cuts to ensure that they can deal with not just cost pressures in the areas  you've mentioned, but in so many other areas. It's important to ensure that Australians keep more of  what they earn. And our focus has always been able to ensure Australians can do that. But it's also why  we provide $9.2 billion worth of support, particularly to low to middle income families. Childcare is an  important need that Australian families have. We know that. That's why we invest $9.2 billion. That's why  we changed the way childcare works in this country and after we did that, childcare costs across the  country, according to the Australian Bureau of Statistics, actually fell by over 3 per cent. And on top of  that, female workforce participation rose to record levels. And the gender pay gap fell to record lows. And  so we understand the importance of childcare. But we also understand the need to be fair and means test  these benefits. These are important payments to support low and middle income families. And we've  targeted those rebates, those support payments that are there to help low and middle income families  with their childcare costs. And we'll keep doing that. We actually increased the payments to those on low  or middle incomes before the COVID-19 recession. And that's why we saw more women get into jobs.  That's why we saw labour force participation rise to record levels. That's why we saw the gender pay gap  reduced to record lows. And what I'm excited about on the other side of this COVID-19 recession is that  we see Australians get more confident and that they know Australian, the Australian government has their  back. You know, there's only one assumption I make in this Budget, and it's an assumption about the  hardworking nature of Australians and the commitment of Australian businesses to have a go and put  people on and train them and train young people like Curtis and Natalie here, like we see in this amazing  business. That's the assumption I make, and I think it's a pretty good assumption.

JOURNALIST: I have a question about tax cuts-

PRIME MINISTER: Sure.

JOURNALIST: Given the debate around stage three tax cuts, what salary does the government consider to  be high income? Can you give us a figure?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I don't consider someone to be earning just over $45,000 to be on a high income.  I don't. And that's why we're giving people on those incomes a tax cut as part of stage 3. I don't know  what the Labor Party thinks a high income is, but I can tell you we're standing here in Rockhampton and I  remember when Bill Shorten went to the last election, he went up to Gladstone and he talked to people  up there and he wouldn't tell them the truth, that he was going to not go ahead with the tax cuts that we  took to that election. In fact, he just front out lied to them. And, you know, he was talking about people  who work in the heavy industry sectors of this country. And for a period of time, many of these workers  they’ll go out and work on the mines. It's hard work, you’re away from your families. It's fly in and it’s fly  out. And you do earn a bit more when you're doing that. But I tell you what, you put a bit of it away, too.  And I don't think they should be penalised and treated like they’re some merchant banker in Sydney.  They're not, they're hardworking people working out on mines and difficult parts of the country. I think  they deserve a tax cut. I think they deserve to take more of what they earn. I think businesses who work  hard and do well should be able to keep more of what they earn so they can employ more people, take

on more apprentices. You know, the best businesses in this country, I mean, this business started out from  the most, humblest of beginnings. And look what it is now because they decided to have a go. And you've  got to put incentive back into the scheme. And that's why Australians are more confident with our Budget.

JOURNALIST: Labor has suggested it would repeal stage three of income tax cuts, why not bring them  forward?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, we've brought forward stage two at this point. We've legislated stage three. I  mean, Anthony Albanese and the Labor Party are just reheating what Bill Shorten took to the last election.  And so, once again, they're saying they want to put up taxes. And what we know is every time the Labor  Party says they want to spend more, you also know they're going to want to tax you more. It's been 18  months or thereabouts since the last election and they still can't bring themselves to admit that it was a  mistake to attack the savings of self-funded retirees with their retirees tax. They still can't say that there'd  be so many people- I remember here, Michelle, at the last election. You know, there are more people who  own an investment property here in this city than in my electorate in Sydney? And that's because they’re  people who are working hard here, putting away a dollar for themselves and providing for their own  future. Now Labor at the last election wanted to tax them more too, they wanted to tax retirees more.  They wanted to tax workers more. And 18 months and they still can't work out that that was a dud deal  for Australians. And, you know, if they can't work it out by now, you can't trust them at the next election.

JOURNALIST: Just on GKI, I saw you were at Yeppoon last night with Capricorn Enterprises, Mary Caroll-

PRIME MINISTER: Yep.

JOURNALIST: Did she mention the vital importance of the federal government coming to the table with  some money to revitalise Great Keppel Island, with undersea power and water, help with the breakwater,  the airstrip, to bring 1,500 tourists and flood this region - 1,500 jobs and flood this region with tourists?

PRIME MINISTER: I'll let Michelle add further to my answer. But, you know, this is why this election on  the 31st of October is so important. We're really keen to get on do things and have been despite, you  know, a lot of delays in trying to push the state government to get moving on everything from Rookwood  Weir, which has been you know, a frustrating process. Now, thankfully, I got to say, largely due to  Michelle's persistence and doggedness, that project is going to start later this year. It should have started  a lot sooner than that. But I'm looking forward, I hope to get the opportunity to work with a Frecklington  LNP government here in Queensland, which means we can just get on with so many more things. We need  a state government that can take the initiative on the very issues you're talking about. These are state  government things that need to get sorted. And we're happy to sort of get involved where we can as we  have on so many projects. I mean, the stadium is a good example. Rookwood Weir is another, Beef Week  is another. I mean, we understand, as Michelle does, the importance of these initiatives. But you've got  to have a partner who gets it. And it's been really pushing it uphill on so many of these projects. And when  it comes to Great Keppel, I mean, so much, if not all of that has to do with decisions that state governments  have to make. And that's why whether it's Adrian or Tracey, or Tony here, you'll have people who, you  know, can be part of the future of Rockhampton and the broader central Queensland districts. Michelle  did you want to add anything to that?

THE HON. MICHELLE LANDRY, MEMBER FOR CAPRICORNIA: Yes, yes thank you. So with regards to Great  Keppel Island, we've had a lot of negotiations with obviously Capricorn Enterprise and also the developers  there. But it would be actually good to get the truth out of the state government with this. As we know,

at the last state election, $25 million was promised for the underground power and water. That was never  going to be enough. I have never, ever seen a proper business case on this. You know, the Member for  Keppel is very good at saying straight after the election, oh where’s the federal government's money?  Well, you know, you need to show us the business case for that. Now, she's pulled their money for the  underground power and water, is going to build pathways and a jetty that's not approved and all the rest  of it. So we're still no further on with that. So Adrian, behind me here as the candidate for Keppel has  committed $25 million as well. And once the election is, state election is over and, you know, God willing  that we get an LNP government in here, we will sit down with the stakeholders and talk about this sensibly.  And from what I'm hearing, the contract that has been given to Altum by the state government is  unsignable. Some of the conditions in it are very, very vague. They're not good for them. And so I think  that we need to look at this sensibly. You know I've had the conversations with the deputy prime minister,  they've spoken to them, Simon Birmingham’s office, Keith Pitt, to talk about this. And it's something, you  know I live at Yeppoon so I want it to go ahead. But it's got to be done sensibly and not with hysterics that  we see from the member for Keppel.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister. More than one million Australians have sought mental health treatment  since the start of the pandemic, does this statistic concern you? And should the government do more to  help Victorians specifically?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, that statistic does concern me, and that's why we have done more. That's why  we've we're spending $5.6 billion dollars a year on mental health. And one of my most regular phone calls  to people in Melbourne is to Patrick McGorry, who is well known together with the Howard government  at the time for founding HeadSpace. We’ve opened new centres, we’ve made telehealth available for  mental health, we’ve increased support to kids helpline to beyondblue to Lifeline and in particular to  Headspace, 15 clinics have been opened. Ruth Vine, who is the deputy chief medical officer for the  Commonwealth, she was appointed specifically to focus on mental health. The telehealth initiatives alone,  hundreds of millions of dollars, I've been committed to ensuring that people can gain access to that mental  health support by telehealth. And I want to commend the work that Greg Hunt has done as health  minister. I mean, there has been an absolute open door, whether it's been Pat or anyone else who's come  forward and said, we need this support, we need that support, not just in Victoria, but acutely in Victoria,  but around the country. We've been able to do that. And we have seen those services used. We've seen  very significant increases, particularly amongst the Victorians who have been accessing those additional  services. And I'm pleased that we're able to get those services in place. And I can tell you, every single  time they've been in contact with me or Greg, we've taken those requests and we've actioned them.

I remember one morning I spoke to Pat McGorry and by the end of the day, the money was on its way.  And so those who work in providing support in the mental health area know that my ears couldn't be  larger to their concerns and our actions couldn't be greater. And whatever help is needed there we have  been quick to provide it and we will continue to provide it. And that's just for now. I mean, there are a  number of further decisions that will have to be made here. I appointed the first national suicide  prevention advisor to the Prime Minister. Christine will deliver her final report to me later this year. We  have the Productivity Commission report on mental health, which we will soon be releasing, and we'll be  able to release that with responses. There's the Victorian Royal Commission into mental health. I was, we  weren’t talking about this today but I was talking to Premier Andrews early this morning from here. And  he and I have had many discussions about the need to work together to respond to that royal commission.  Victorians are doing it incredibly tough and Melburnians the toughest of them all. And I know because I  get the feedback, you know, you see me here in Queensland today or in South Australia or in the ACT or  in Sydney. And you're saying, look, I'd like to go to Bunnings, too. I'd like to be able to go out and spend

time with my family. And I want you to be able to have that opportunity. We all do, but we know you're  under incredible pressure and that's why we've delivered that mental health support. And we'll continue  to. The support we've delivered for mental health, I have no doubt, has saved lives in Melbourne. I have  absolutely no doubt about it. And we are going to keep saving lives.

JOURNALIST: [inaudible] a big problem here has been workforce casualisation, miners are asking the  federal government to withdraw from the high court case, what’s your comment on that?

PRIME MINISTER: One of the key issues that we put on the table when I brought the unions together with  the employers as part of the JobMaker programme to look at the ways that we could make it easier for  people to get into work, was the issue of casualisation. And it is an important issue. And I know in the  mining industry and the mining services industry, I know it's an important issue and we've listened to that.  And we need to get certainty. We need to get resolution here. And both the case itself and the work that  is being done by the Attorney-General, and Minister for Industrial Relations, Christian Porter, has made  some really good progress. So I think we're getting close to some good solutions there. The level of  casualisation across the workforce, it is actually not true to say that it's increased. It's about the same as  has been for a long time. But that doesn't mean it's not an important issue. It is an important issue. People  should have security in their employment, particularly, particularly when they're basically acting as a full  time employee. Casuals will always have a role in the workforce, always have. But when they're fair  dinkum casuals and when people are fair dinkum full time employed, the system needs to reflect that.  And that's what the Attorney-General has been working with the unions and with the employers to  achieve, so we’ve got a little bit more of a distance to travel on that.

But I want to assure all of those, particularly up in, regional Queensland, where I know this is a big issue.  George Christensen, as well as Michelle and Phil Thompson and the whole team and Kenny Wyatt in  particular, and of course, Warren Entsch right up the top end have all consistently been raising this with  me and the Treasurer and the Attorney-General, that's why we actually put this process in place, to get  agreement between employers and the employees advocates, the unions to get some certainty into this  space.

But the certainty I welcome today, though, is that these confidence levels in the survey that was released  today, a record bounce, that's what this country needed. It needed a Budget that was going to give  Australians confidence, whether here in Rockhampton or down in Richmond in Victoria or wherever it  happens to be in the country. And Josh Frydenberg has delivered that Budget. It has been the shot in the  arm that Australians need. Now, we've just got to get on with it. And when we get back to parliament,  we've already passed the tax cuts we'll put through the rest of the legislation. And I think Australians have  a very simple message from today is let the government get on with the Budget, let them pass the Budget,  let them get that support out there where it's needed. Let's get on with it. They're certainly doing it here,  certainly doing it here at SMW, Jack and I want to thank you again for being able to join you here at- and  I wish you all the best and again, get well soon Beryl. Cheers. Thank you.

[ENDS]

Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

