

JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  HOBART  MONDAY, 17 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Victoria nursing home outbreaks; Scott Morrison’s refusal to listen to  the Royal Commission into aged care.

JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS: I just want to start  by acknowledging the sad news that we are hearing out of Victoria today about the  significant number of deaths, again more deaths in aged care facilities in Victoria. And my  heart goes out to every single person who has lost a loved one during COVID. Particularly  those families who have loved ones in aged care facilities. Some who are not getting news  in a timely way as they should. And I know it's been a very difficult few weeks for some of  those families and their loved ones in some of these facilities in Victoria.

Last week, we heard the Royal Commission into Aged Care say how the Federal  Government was unprepared and should have been better prepared for what we're seeing  in aged care outbreaks in Victoria. Prime Minister Morrison on Friday said that he was  deeply sorry for the days that we fell short. We should no longer be falling short. The Prime  Minister had a report about what happened in the first New South Wales outbreak at  Dorothy Henderson Lodge in the middle of April. They have had since the middle of April to  not fall short, to be ready for what is happening in Victoria.

What the Prime Minister needs to do is to commit, to responding to Commissioner  Pagone's suggestion of a national coordination centre. We are very pleased that the Prime  Minister is implementing response centres in every state and territory. But we also need  that national co-ordination to ensure that when outbreaks happen in other states and  territories that we are in front of it, not always responding behind the eight ball. Too many  people have been let down by the system. The Prime Minister and the Federal  Government seems to always be behind the eight ball. The Prime Minister, Scott Morrison  and his government need to get in front of this. They need to be ready. They should have  been ready, and they weren't ready.

The Prime Minister has had Professor Pollaers' inquiry into workforce and has known that  workforce has been an issue for two years. There were fourteen recommendations, none  of them have been fully implemented two years on. Why is everything taking so long to

respond to when it comes to aged care in Australia? The Prime Minister and his  government need to do better. Too many Australians' lives are on the line and are counting  on him to do better.

JOURNALIST: Do you think it's tenable to have the State and Commonwealth  Government overlapping in their responsible for the sector?

COLLINS: Well the state and federal government needed to have worked out who was  responsible for what when these things happened months ago. That's what the outbreaks  in NSW told the Federal Government. When they drew up a protocol with New South  Wales, our first response was why is there not one with every state and territory in  Australia? The Commonwealth has sole responsibility for aged care. It needs to lead on  aged care, it needs to ensure that older Australians are getting the care they need, day in -  day out, in facilities in Australia no matter where they are. That is actually the Prime  Minister's job.

JOURNALIST: Do you think one government should be made responsible for the sector  wholly?

COLLINS: Well the Prime Minister and the Federal Government is responsible for aged  care. It is the Prime Minister's job to ensure that older Australians no matter where they live  in this country are getting the best possible care.

JOURNALIST: But do you think they only should have responsibility rather than sharing  responsibility with the state?

COLLINS: The Federal Government is in charge of aged care. It regulates aged care, it  funds aged care. It has the legislation that determines the quality of care we get in  Australia. If things are not working, if systems are not working, the Federal Government is  ultimately responsible for this. And it should have response centres in every state and  territory and a national coordinating centre as suggested by Commissioner Pagone to deal  with any of the interjurisdictional issues.

JOURNALIST: You mentioned national coordination there, what does that look like?

COLLINS: A national coordination centre has been suggested by Commissioner Pagone,  the Government's own Royal Commissioner. And for the Government not to actually  implement what its own Royal Commission is suggesting needs to be done to ensure that  the aged sector is prepared today, I think speaks volumes. I'm not sure why the Prime  Minister hasn't committed immediately to establishing the national coordination centre. It  can work with states and territories, it can look at what workforces are available to assist  where you have big breakouts across the states and territories. You can coordinate the  different teams across Australia to ensure that we get people where they need to be to  provide the care.

JOURNALIST: At the national next national cabinet meeting leaders are going to be  aiming to coordinate a rapid response. What would you like to see come out of that? What  would that look like?

COLLINS: I wrote to the Prime Minister in late July asking for this to occur. I'm very  pleased that this Friday they're going to have a discussion but again it seems to be too



little, too late from the Prime Minister. Why are we always behind the eight ball? Why are  we not ahead of this?

JOURNALIST: Today there's been reports of staff being constantly confronted by  distressing scenes. They're overworked and I guess things are a bit out of control. What  needs to be done in terms of staff and making sure they're able to care for these people?

COLLINS: Well the Prime Minister and his Government were alerted to the fact that aged  care facilities could lose 70 - 80 per cent of their staff back in April. That's when the  Government got its first report telling them that this is likely to occur in the facilities that  have an outbreak. There have been numerous times in various meetings where we have  asked and called on the Government to ensure that there was a sufficient surge workforce,  to ensure that the situation where you have residents who are not getting medication, who  are not getting their meals on time who are not getting their basic rights and care needs  attended to daily wouldn't be in this situation. And these stories are heartbreaking, they're  heartbreaking for the individuals, they're heartbreaking for loved ones, and they're  heartbreaking I think for most of the Australian community to see this is still happening in  Australia today.

JOURNALIST: Recently we had Brendan Murphy at the Royal Commission say that  deaths in aged care, it's two-thirds of the nation and it's just a mere representation of the  fact that the general population there's been quite a low death toll. And to say anything  else is pejorative. What do you say to that?

COLLINS: Why weren't we better prepared? Why prior to the outbreaks in Victoria had  only one in five aged care workers had the necessary training in infection control and how  to put on protective equipment. Why are we still today getting stories of residents being left  without the care they need? It's because we were not ready and we did not listen and did  not adhere to what happened and what we were told we needed to be prepared for.

JOURNALIST: How do you feel about readiness here in Tasmania if there were to be a  second outbreak, do you feel like we are well prepared here?

COLLINS: I would be very concerned, I know that many providers in Tasmania think  they're ready but providers across the country have said that before and then when the  reality of a COVID-19 outbreak occurs in their facility, I think everybody realises that they  were not ready. What I'm saying to the state and Federal Government, the Federal  Government is solely responsible here is, be ready.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119









