ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



AMANDA RISHWORTH MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION AND DEVELOPMENT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR YOUTH

MEMBER FOR KINGSTON



EMMA MCBRIDE MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR MENTAL HEALTH

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR CARERS

MEMBER FOR DOBELL





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  OURIMBAH  FRIDAY, 13 NOVEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Labor’s Working Families Childcare Boost; importance of early childhood  education; Budget Reply; economic recovery; Chifley report on childcare; coronavirus  vaccines; climate change; relationships between staff and politicians; net zero emissions by  2050; bushfire recovery.

EMMA MCBRIDE, MEMBER FOR DOBELL: Good afternoon. I'm Emma McBride, the Federal  Member for Dobell. This NAIDOC week I'd like to begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of  the land on which we meet, the Darkinjung people, and to pay my respects to elders past, present  and emerging. Today I'm delighted to welcome back to The Coast the Labor Leader, Anthony  Albanese, Amanda Rishworth, our Shadow Minister for Early Childhood Education, and joining us  today is Brett Gale from Chifley. Thank you to Chris and Rosanne for making us so welcome at KU  Ourimbah Preschool and Children's Centre. When Anthony said he wanted to come to The Coast, I  said he had to come here, because I've been so impressed by the quality of early education that you  offer to young people and the support to their families.

We're here at KU Ourimbah Preschool today because a parent, Sarah, wrote to me about the quality  of early learning here and her concerns that working families who have been hard hit by COVID,  especially families with kids in care who are struggling to balance the budget in regional coastal  communities like ours, with tens of thousands of young families, many with parents commuting. It's  been really, really tough. Unemployment and underemployment is having a big impact more so on  women. Underemployment of women in some parts of our community has increased to 34 per cent.

Before COVID, the Central Coast had one of the highest rates. To talk more about Labor's plan to  support working families and particularly women, I'm so pleased to welcome Labor Leader, Anthony  Albanese. Thank you so much, Anthony.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Thank you. Thank you  very much, Emma. And I do want to thank the staff here at KU Preschool and Childcare Centre here  in Ourimbah. And I in particular want to thank the kids. The children were really welcoming this  morning. And what we saw was the benefit firsthand, once again, every time I go into an early  learning centre, what I see is dedicated staff making a difference. We know that in the first five years  of life 90 per cent of brain development occurs. And we see that here, this wonderful centre, where  the children get to wander around the grounds here of the campus. They get to look at the flora and  the fauna, including, we had a very detailed discussion about moss with a very young person. And  they were really conscious about learning and making sure that children really benefit. I do want to  say thank you to all early childhood educators out there who are making such an enormous  difference to the future of our country. And that's why today's report from Chifley Research Centre is  so important, about investing in early childhood learning. What the report says is that compared with  the OECD average of 18 per cent of costs being borne by families, in Australia that figure is 37 per  cent. We learned from Senate Estimate process after the Budget that childcare costs are expected  to increase in Australia in the coming year by 5.3 per cent. Now we know that inflation is negligible.  We know that wages aren't going up. So, a 5.3 per cent hit to living standards will just further  exacerbate the problem that Labor's investment is aimed at fixing. Labor's commitment to remove  the cap on the subsidy, to lift the subsidy up to 90 per cent and improved the tapering so that 97 per  cent of families will be better off, will make an enormous difference. And that's why we regard this as  an absolute priority and why it was the centrepiece of our Budget Reply. Furthermore, we know that  if you're about growing the economy as part of the recovery, then you've got to actually have  economic reform. And we know that the three Ps behind economic growth are all covered by this  policy. Participation is the first P. And what it's about is improving women's participation in the  workforce. The fact is that it's extraordinary that in 2020, we still have a disincentive for second  earners, usually women, to work a fourth or fifth day. It also improves productivity. Because if people  are able to work full-time and able to get that support, then productivity will be lifted, because people  will be able to fully participate in the workforce and careers will be able to be built. And too often,  companies lose that experience and are not able to get it back. And the third, of course, the third P is  population. And we know that when families are weighing up when they might have a first child or  another child, then they weigh up the economic costs. And this will make a difference to population  as well. So, this is sound policy. It's good economic reform. It's good for children. It's good for  families. It's good for our economy. And that's why now, more than a month after my Budget Reply,  the Government needs to do more than just simply say that everything's all okay and that there's  nothing to see here when it comes to childcare costs. Because families out there know, in  communities like this on the Central Coast, that this is a real inhibitor to them fully participating in the  workforce. And I'd ask Amanda to say a few words. And I just want to thank Brett and Chifley for the  work that they've done on this report.

AMANDA RISHWORTH, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION AND  DEVELOPMENT: Well, thank you. It's so wonderful to be here. And I'd like to thank Rosanne and  her team of wonderful educators for showing us today what quality really looks like in the early  years. Quality in learning, quality in the experience that the child gets. And importantly, I think it's fair  to say, making sure that the children are at the centre of the learning experience. And that was  really, really special. And I just like to thank them for the work that they've done for many, many  years. But also, particularly during this COVID period. It's been a very difficult time for educators, the

anxiety, they kept turning up to work, looking after children, supporting families. And I think it's really  important we acknowledge that at the same time as keeping quality education up. And as Anthony  said, Labor has seen the early years as critically important. We believe that the early years deserves  investment. That's exactly what the Chifley report says. This report says that it is worth investing in  the early years. We should be investing in the early years. And that's what Labor has announced.  We've announced, as Anthony has outlined, in particular, some more support for families, a  smoother taper rate, an increase in the subsidy and removal of the annual cap. But Labor has also  announced that we want to make sure that money goes back into family's pockets. And one of the  key elements of the Chifley report is that at the moment, there isn't transparency across the system  in where the money goes. That's an important point. And that we need to make sure that the money  that we put into the system is driving quality, is supporting paying educators and is going into  developing the best services possible. So, the report clearly demonstrates that we need more  transparency and a better understanding of the cost drivers. That is why Labor has said that part of  our policy will get the ACCC to have a careful look into the fee structure to make sure that our  support, our significant increase in support for families, goes into quality education and as support  for families directly. That's what we want to see. Because that will give not only children the best  start to life, it will give family support and it will make sure that we are driving the economy forward.  And I have to say, this Chifley report adds to the growing evidence that this area is so critical to  tackle, whether it is in supporting families, whether it is in growing businesses, whether it's growing  the economy, this is a win-win-win policy, and something I'm proud to be advocating. And I am going  to introduce Brett now from the Chifley. Normally I'm the last one. So, welcome Brett.

BRETT GALE, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF CHIFLEY RESEARCH CENTRE: Thank you, Amanda.  And thanks to Emma and thank you Albo for launching this report. It's great to have the Labor team  here with us launching this really important report because early childhood care and education is  one of those areas that is actually really easy in public policy to put on the backburner. That's  because most people, the only time they actually focus on this issue, is when they themselves have  small children and they're going through this. And so, it's easy to forget it. And once it is out of mind,  it is out of sight. But it's great that the Labor team actually gets it. And that's why it was so heartening  to see the policies that Amanda and Albo launched the other week, that really will do a lot to help  people struggling with childcare fees and getting people back into the workforce. Because what we  do know is that it's in our long-term economic and social future for Australia that depends on getting  the best quality start to education for our youngest Australians. And we also know that Australia's  economic recovery from COVID-19 depends on an affordable and accessible early childhood sector  that will get people back into work quicker. So, it really is heartening the changes that Labor's  announced that they will do if they get into office. That's what we're trying to do here with our launch  of this policy brief today is really take that national conversation to the next step, to take it further.  And what the report calls on is for us to begin treating early childhood education as another  important plank in the full education continuum. From preschool all the way through to university.  And it encourages us to draw on what we know works well in the school system and apply it to early  childhood education. For instance, what we see, clearly see in the data, is that quality matters. And  quality, as Amanda has alluded to, is a function of where we choose to spend our money. And what  the data shows us, unequivocally, is that those centres that spend a higher proportion of total  expenditure on educators have higher quality education and care outcomes. And that's really  important. And there is a stark divide, we find, in the data between not-for-profits, and for-profits,  those that are ploughing their resources back into educators. And it's not just wages for educators,  it's training, it's career paths, it's skilling-up educators. And that is the most important thing that we've  drawn out of this study that we've done. So, what we would really love to see is our early years  education sector as equally in focus on universality and on quality as our school system is. And to

that end, we recommend three actions in our report. Greater transparency from providers as to their  spending on service quality. Greater investment in a skilled and stable workforce, with more  investment in educators’ time and careers. And using the lessons from our school system to build a  fit-for-purpose model for universal ECEC provision. So, it's great that the Labor team have taken this  seriously and are willing to have a think about what we're recommending here. I would urge all policy  makers across Australia to do the same, because for too long, we've let our youngest people down.  And now it should stop, and we should push forward. Thank you.

ALBANESE: Well, thanks very much, Brett. Can I also before taking questions say this; Brett Gale  will be finishing up at a Chifley at the end of this week. This has been something that he wanted to  have concluded and released. And he's done a fantastic job as the Executive Director of the Chifley  Research Centre. And has made a major contribution towards policy debate in this country. And I  wish you well, Brett, for your future. Happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: Mr Albanese, the Government says it has 134 million doses of vaccine candidates.  Are you comfortable the Government has enough of the vaccine?

ALBANESE: Well, it's good that the Government has stepped up its deal-making with regard to  vaccines. The Government now has four deals with potential vaccines. And that is a vast  improvement on where it was just a short time ago. But best practice indicates around the world that  best practice is five or six. So, we'd like to see the Government pursue further deals. We also think  that it is important that Australia is able to help our Pacific neighbours in particular. We have a  leadership role in this region. And the distribution of vaccines, should one be successful, and all of  us hope that there is a breakthrough, is an important priority. There is no more important priority, not  just for Australia, but for our region.

JOURNALIST: Will Mark Butler remain as your Shadow Climate Change and Energy Minister?

ALBANESE: Yes.

JOURNALIST: And do you plan to shift Mr Butler to end the deadlock of people like Joel Fitzgibbon?

ALBANESE: I think my answer was pretty clear. Yes, Mark Butler will remain as our Climate  Change and Energy spokesperson. Mark Butler is doing a fantastic job in that role. There's no one  who knows more about this area than Mark Butler. It's a critical area for the Labor Party. And the  Labor Party understands that action on climate change will do three things. It will create jobs, it will  lower emissions, but it will also lower energy prices. And that will have a boost for manufacturing and  a boost for our industry.

JOURNALIST: You mentioned the other night that Labor supports the Ministerial Code of Conduct  introduced by Malcolm Turnbull. What does that mean in terms of relationships within Labor?

ALBANESE: I'm just not sure specifically what you're asking?

JOURNALIST: Are you outlawing all relationships between politicians and their staff, including  backbenchers?

ALBANESE: Well, we are saying, and I issued a statement yesterday, I don't believe, and Labor  doesn't believe, we had a Shadow Cabinet meeting yesterday, and released a statement after that,

we don't believe it's appropriate that Members of Parliament, whether they be House of Reps  members or Senators, have personal relations with their own stuff.

JOURNALIST: When did you introduce that?

ALBANESE: We announced just after 2018 in March, after Malcolm Turnbull made that  announcement, Bill Shorten, made an announcement supportive of the principles. We also  developed in 2018 our own procedures around a sexual harassment and bullying policy. That  applies not just in terms of within the Parliament, but is a broader policy as well, about conduct of  members of our Party. And indeed, action was taken. There was a complaint against a staff member  earlier this year that was resolved to the satisfaction of the woman involved. And that was reported  on publicly.

JOURNALIST: The Government will adopt the Bushfire Royal Commission recommendations. Does  that satisfy you?

ALBANESE: Well, the Government needs to more than just make announcements. This is a  Government that established a $4 billion fund, an Emergency Response Fund, to deal with not just  the aftermath of bushfires, cyclones, floods, but also for mitigation. And that's $200 million each  year, $150 million for recovery, $50 million for mitigation. They haven't spent a dollar of it. And the  first year is gone. That was last financial year. They took money from education in order to create  that fund, and then haven't spent a dollar. This a Government that is all about the announcement  and never about the delivery. Always there for the photo-op, never there for the follow-up. And there  are people who've lost their homes around New South Wales, but around other places as well, who  lost their homes over the bushfire season that we saw with catastrophic consequences last year,  who are still living in caravans. And indeed, there is one person, at least, affected this week in Kristy  McBain's electorate of Eden-Monaro, where there was a concentration from the Government for a  brief period of time while there was a by-election, who lost their homes, were living in a caravan, and  with the flooding that occurred in the last fortnight, then had their caravan flooded. These are  circumstances in 2020 that just aren't good enough. So, what I want to see from the Government  isn't just announcements, I want to see delivery and action on the ground. And that's what the  victims of the bushfire season deserve. And it's what they should expect. And it's what they should  receive.

JOURNALIST: You've been pushing the Government to have more ambitious climate targets. But  do you acknowledge that's not a recommendation of the report and heard from climate change  experts as well?

ALBANESE: Well, we support zero net emissions by 2050. Along with the National Farmers  Federation, the Business Council of Australia, Australian Industry Group, every state and territory  government, Labor and Liberal, Santos, BHP, Qantas, the Commonwealth Bank, ANZ. Major  industry across the board all support it. The Government doesn't. All of our major trading partners,  the United States under the Biden administration, Japan, South Korea, the United Kingdom, Europe,  all support zero net emissions by 2050. And indeed today, there's a report from the Bureau of  Meteorology that identifies that the bushfire seasons will be more extreme in the future and  recognises that climate change isn't something about the future, that it's here. It's having an impact.  This is the Bureau of Meteorology. This is science. And one of the reasons why we've got through  the issue of COVID better than most countries is that the Government, and governments in terms of  state governments, have all listened to the medical advice. They've listened to the science. That's a

good idea on everything, to listen to the science. And the science on climate change is very clear.  Thanks.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053

