

JASON CLARE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR REGIONAL SERVICES, LOCAL GOVERNMENT  AND TERRITORIES  MEMBER FOR BLAXLAND



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC WEEKEND BREAKFAST  SATURDAY, 28 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus, Queensland Elections, Rent Assistance

FAUZIAH IBRAHIM: Well, let's stay with the coronavirus situation within  Australia and we’ll turn now to our pollie panel.

JOHANNA NICHOLSON: We’re joined this morning by Liberal MP Andrew  Laming who joins us from Cleveland in Queensland and we’re also joined by  the Shadow Minister for Housing, Homelessness and Regional Services, Jason  Clare. Thank you both for joining us this morning. Good morning to both of you.

Let’s stick with the government flagging details about this third economic  stimulus. And we heard the Prime Minister say yesterday that the intention was  to put the economy into hibernation. But at this stage we don't have any details  about what that exactly means. Andrew Laming, can you give us here and any  people who are watching, particularly those in business any clarity on what  hibernating means?

ANDREW LAMING: Well it’s a new concept, it's the word of 2020.  It's just  replaced social distancing as the word everyone’s using. Look if you don’t need  to leave the house then you shouldn’t and anything that can be put off is  basically non-essential. So up until now we’ve seen reductions in a few sectors,  but people forget that even now, about 80% of our economy is rolling along as  normal. Our imports, our exports, pretty much all of our industry outside of  major cities. Gotta make sure here, just because cafes are closed, the  economy isn’t and what the Prime Minister is doing is very judiciously shutting  down the elements of non-essential travel where people are likely to break  social distancing. That will be the challenge, nothing else. I think that  Australians have really got how serious this is in the last 48 hours, particularly  where we're seeing America leading in cases and we've gone over half a

million worldwide. There's been a big shift in the last 48.

IBRAHIM: Jason Clare, I want to pick up on this issue of the word of the year.  You know we’ve got hibernating; we’ve got social distancing - it's confusing.  Why aren’t politicians just coming out to say that we’re going to put the  economy on hold for now, this is what’s going to happen, you need to keep  your distance, physical distance, rather than social distancing?

JASON CLARE: I think people want simple messages and the simple message  is stay at home. If you don’t need to go out stay at home. The more people that  stay at home the fewer people will die. We're fighting a virus here that has the  potential to kill thousands and thousands of Australians. And Andrew is right,  more and more Australians are getting the message. You see it at the shops,  you see it in the streets, people are starting to keep their distance. I had to  Google what social distancing was a couple of weeks ago. We all know what it  is now. But messages need to be short, sharp, and simple. The key message  that our leaders need to give to everyone across the country is stay at home. If  you don’t need to go out, don’t got out. Because if you do then you run the risk  of catching the virus, spreading it to more people, and the risk of more and  more people dying.

IBRAHIM: Andrew Laming, you're in Queensland at the moment. I wonder,  though, is the government giving mixed messages here? You know we’re being  told keep your distance and yet the Queensland local council is going ahead.  Although - you know they say it’s very safe there, people are going to be  keeping their distance, bring your own pen. Still New South Wales decided to  suspend its own elections here as well, shouldn’t Queensland be doing the  same thing?

LAMING: That’s a very good question. There are plenty of public servants  being paid to maintain distancing at elections. You're way safer voting today in  Queensland then you are popping down to the supermarket on the way home  and buying a litre of milk and pausing at the register. So, I'm reminding  everyone, this is just about how close you are to people for how long. For the  elections, you’re walking in there, pausing for a few minutes, grabbing a  sanitised pen, putting a mark on a bit of paper and then that pen is sterilised  and reused. So, there is no concern with voting. What we need to understand  here is at the moment in New South Wales, one in 5,000 people have the  disease. Queensland, one in 10,000. But I just want to say two things. The first  is that eight days ago Queensland had the same number of cases as we had  yesterday. This is not exponential but all of our measures do have a one-week  lag time before they work. And in answer to Jason’s question, if we shut stuff  down, we still have essential services running and we’ve heard these two  service providers in the Northern Territory, in an Indigenous community, is  exactly why if we shut this economy down, we will still have this disease

spreading, and we will still have it at the end of the shutdown. It is not the  answer.

NICHOLSON: Although Andrew Laming, you make that comparison with going  to the supermarkets, but people actually need to go to the supermarkets to buy  the food in order to survive. I’m not sure whether local council elections are a  survival issue. And we’ve heard from one Queenslander who says he’s a bad  asthmatic, he will not be voting today. Why are we gathering at election booths  today during a pandemic? He said, Fine me, it’s just not worth it!”

LAMING: So, there's a cohort of people who just hate voting right and there  going to make this case with glee….

NICHOLSON: I really don’t think you should belittle the person here. He says  he is a bad asthmatic. He is not just hating voting. He’s fearful for his health.

LAMING: Yes, well then, he can phone up and ask for an exception on the  grounds of health. But everyone else, primarily people who hate voting and are  jumping on this bandwagon to derail a perfectly safe process. And you can’t  comment on safety unless you have public health training and you’ve been  there. Like the tens of thousands of people who went out of their way and  spend three minutes on their way home to vote. And at the same time, if going  to an IGA is essential, then so is maintaining a democratic process. So, we've  got to keep our heads screwed on here, the last thing we want is hysteria from  comments on social media about people worried about their health, most of  whom on social media don't have a significant health issue at all. So, I’m being  quite firm about this, retaining some normality around essential activity is  absolutely fine and if we’re worried about supermarkets or voting then we’ve  got an alternative to all of those - both home delivery if you want food and  voting on the phone if you want to vote.

IBRAHIM: Jason Clare you know recently, we had this thing about the Ruby  Princess, we’ve heard this thing about the cruise ships. Passengers  disembarking and just being let out into the community, free but being told, very  severely, you need to self-isolate, you need to do this. Of course, now we’re  seeing more and more cases out of the Ruby Princess and out of the other  cruise ships as well. There seems to have been a breakdown in  communication. We saw the Australian Border Force blaming the state health  department, we saw the port authority saying we had nothing to do with this, we  saw airport security saying, well, we weren't consulted about this sort of stuff as  well. Is there a breakdown in communication, are government departments just  not coordinating and why?

CLARE: I think that Australians who are watching this don't really care who's  responsible for this. They just want it fixed. This cruise ship thing is a disaster. 1

in 10 people in New South Wales who have got the virus are linked back to this  cruise ship and people being allowed to get off the ship without being tested.  Already a number of people that we’re on that cruise ship have died. And  there's a real risk that more people will die because they got the virus from  people that were allowed off that ship without being tested.  Now, there's  obviously stresses and strains here between the State Government of NSW  and the Federal Government. But I think people who are watching ABC 24 here  aren't interested in a blame game, you know, who's responsible, which  department, which level of government.  They just expect their leaders to fix  this. We've got to make sure it never happens again. I backed what the Prime  Minister did yesterday, putting people into quarantine when they get off a plane  or get off a ship, that was the right thing to do, frankly should have happened  weeks ago.

NICHOLSON: I also want to touch on with the third stimulus package that we  are expecting from the government. Jason, I will get your thoughts in a moment  because this is your area. Andrew Laming, are we expecting to see some more  rent assistance, whether that be for renters, residential renters, for landlords, or  also business owners who are trying to meet their rental repayments?

LAMING: That’s clearly the missing link at the moment isn’t it? Because  fundamentally anyone can stop simply stop paying and blame COVID-19 and  we’re seeing real uncertainty both for renters but also for those that are leasing  commercial areas. This is probably a smaller number of people that are more  brutally affected by a common-sense relationship that they need to have with  their landlord. And obviously you need two parties to be reasonable in this  process and when there’s no laws you can guarantee one of those parties will  be more opportunistic. So, I’m encouraged that some shopping centres are  simply giving a rent holiday to their tenants for up to 6 months here in  Queensland.  But I'm asking everyone to use common sense and good faith  negotiations in their conversations. But if we can't, then it gonna have to be  legislation to absolutely make it clear and certain that businesses can start up  again, keep in mind, please, that half of the population or more have  unchanged income through this process. We’ve got around 20% as public  servants, another 20% that are salaried under companies that are continuing to  operate. Now those people have no excuse. They’re mugs if they don’t pay  their rent. So, we’re expecting that those who can pull their weight should do it  and that includes many of us watching today.

NICHOLSON: Jason Clare, you are the Shadow Minister for Housing,  Homelessness and Regional Services, what do you make of that answer?

CLARE: Well a lot of what Andrew said is right but there will be some people  who can’t. All of those people that are in those queues out the door at  Centrelink, snaking around the corner.  These are people who have lost their



jobs. They also people that are worried that they may not be able to pay the  rent, that they make not be able to keep the home that they live in. Our home is  our castle and in the next few months it is going to be our fortress. More and  more Australians are being told to stay at home, but you can’t stay at home if  you don’t have one, if you get evicted. So, what I think we need to do is what  the Poms have done last week, what New Zealand did this week, what  Tasmania legislated for on Wednesday night - and that is a freeze on evictions.

If people can pay, of course, they should keep paying. But there will be some  people who can’t and in the midst of a health crisis you don’t want to throw  people out onto the street. There needs to be flexibility so that they can pay  later. But it’s very important that we also protect and look after landlords and  homeowners here. They rely on that rent to be able to put food on the table,  pay the bills, pay the mortgage. Banks have done the right thing with mortgage  deferrals. But we might need more help from governments in terms of land tax  relief here, to make sure that we’re all pulling together. We used the term at the  start about hibernation, this is more like a coma - the economy is being pushed  into a coma. We’ve got to make sure we keep businesses on life support so  they can spring back to life afterwards. We’ve also got to make sure that in the  midst of all of this we don’t have people thrown onto the street and lose their  home that they otherwise would have if not for this virus.

NICHOLSON: Labor's Jason Clare and Liberal Andrew Laming thank you both  for joining us this morning.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: SCOTT DAVIES 0419 546 197





