Support for child care providers in COVID-19 lockdown ministers.dese.gov.au/tehan/support-child-care-providers-covid-19-lockdown

The Morrison Government will provide an estimated $6 million to support working Victorian families impacted by the COVID-19 lockdown and help them access care outside school hours care.

The Government will pay eligible Outside School Hours Care (OSHC) services in Metropolitan Melbourne and the Mitchell Shire 15 per cent of their revenue, backdated to 20 July 2020.

This payment will be in addition to the existing 25 per cent Transition Payment, as well as the Child Care Subsidy, already provided to child care services by the Morrison Government.

Minister for Education Dan Tehan said the additional payment would support the continued viability of services to provide care for Victorian families.

"We are taking action to ensure Victorian families can still access care as we deal with the current COVID-19 lockdown," Mr Tehan said.

"Our support will help more than 880 OSHC services to keep their doors open and their staff employed.

"It will help working families and vulnerable and disadvantaged children to continue to access outside school hours care, relieving pressure on essential workers, who will be reassured their children are being cared for while they do their important work.

"When the lockdowns were announced, our Government acted swiftly to provide certainty to impacted Victorian families by waiving the child care gap fee for children not attending care.

"Parents in Victoria also continue to benefit from the gap fee waiver and the flexible arrangements we have put in place for children who are absent due to COVID-related reasons."

Eligible OSHC providers in Metropolitan Melbourne and the Mitchell Shire will be contacted by the Department of Education, Skills and Employment in the week beginning Monday (3 August 2020) about the Additional Viability Support Payment.

Providers who can show that attendance has dropped to 40 per cent or less, compared with their reference period, will be able to accept the offer and receive the new 15 per cent lump sum payment for eight weeks.

Further information will be provided in the coming days, including on the department’s 1/2

Dan Tehan Minister for Education 30 July 2020



website: https://www.dese.gov.au/covid-19/childcare



Providers in Metropolitan Melbourne and the Mitchell Shire can contact the CCS



Helpdesk for further information on 1300 667 276.



2/2

