

AMANDA RISHWORTH MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION AND

DEVELOPMENT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR YOUTH

MEMBER FOR KINGSTON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE

WEDNESDAY, 2 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Early Childhood Educators Day; early educators and JobKeeper; Tony

Abbott; China.



AMANDA RISHWORTH, Shadow Minister for Early Childhood Education and

Development: Today is Early Educators Day, an opportunity to celebrate early educators

right around the country. However, what the Government has done to early educators is

prematurely, six weeks ago, ripped them off JobKeeper. The only workers in the country to

have JobKeeper ripped away. Now the Prime Minister gave them a “jobs guarantee” - well

that jobs guarantee has fallen through. We’re hearing of hundreds of educators who are

being stood down, losing hours and income in Victoria. Now the Government washed their

hands and said “job done, the pandemic was over”, and then Victoria hit and they were not

prepared.



We have the national accounts coming out, we will see a very dire situation for our

economy. This is the worst time to be ripping JobKeeper away from large, female

dominated industries like early educators. Early educators have been there through this

pandemic, caring for children every single day. And we know that this pandemic is not

over, we know that there still could certainly be situations where we have lockdowns and

people put out of work. But of course the Government had no plan for that in Victoria,

they’d already said the job was done, and now we have hundreds of educators without

work, having their hours cut.



If this is the guarantee that the Prime Minister gives, well heaven forbid for the rest of the

country, because his guarantee on anything to do with jobs is not worth the paper it’s

written on. He has betrayed early educators, and if he doesn’t get a jobs plan, he’s going to

betray all workers in this country.



JOURNALIST: These changes to JobKeeper kicking early educators off, did that have to

be legislated or was that the Government’s decision alone?



RISHWORTH: That was one hundred per cent the Government’s decision alone to take

early educators off JobKeeper. And it was their responsibility, because they thought the job

was done. The Minister himself said occupancy is up to 75 per cent now in early learning

centres, the package has done its job, and then Victoria hit. And through stubbornness or

just neglect, they failed to act properly to restore JobKeeper. As a result we are seeing

educators - I’ve had stories of women who have been employed for 18, 20 years, stood

down during this pandemic in Victoria.



So it was poorly planned by the Government, poorly executed. And of course what we’re

asking of the Government is if they truly respected early educators, which they often say

they do, then they would restore JobKeeper and ensure those women have pay coming in.



JOURNALIST: Economic figures are out today which will show sort of the trough of the

crisis, Australia is hopefully going to come back. Would you think those early educators are

going to be the ones left behind in the recovery?



RISHWORTH: Look at the moment there are many that are struggling to buy food. They

are choosing to have to now line up at Centrelink, after they cared for children during the

first wave of the pandemic. When everyone else was told to stay home, they went out and

cared for children in an environment where you cannot socially distance, and then the

Government ripped JobKeeper off them. So I am very concerned for them right now, and

as we recover I am very concerned that it’s going to be harder for them to get a job. So



they will be left behind, but I am worried about many, many workers that could be left

behind as a result of this Government’s lack of a plan for jobs.



JOURNALIST: Last night Tony Abbott said lockdowns have been a dictatorship in this

COVID-19, do you agree with Mr Abbott?



RISHWORTH: Mr Abbott loves a headline doesn’t he, he loves a headline because he has

relevance deprivation disorder I think. This is a Prime Minister who got kicked out by his

own party, and now is showing a lack of sensitivity and lack of understanding about why it

is important to control the health crisis. If you don’t control the health crisis then you have

people die, and you also cannot get the economy back on track. So look I’m sure Mr

Abbott when he’s feeling irrelevant does like to weigh in on some of these issues, but quite

frankly I think he’s out of touch and most people would be shrugging their shoulders and

suggesting he goes back to wherever he is in the UK.



JOURNALIST: And just finally China has said if Australia doesn’t resolve its trade dispute

with Beijing, we could end up being the white trash of Asia, similar to the Singapore PM’s

comments many years ago. That’s not really a way to treat an equal trading partner is it?



RISHWORTH: It’s obviously a difficult time in the Australia-China relationship. What

Australia has got to do and what the Government has got to do is make sure that we are

engaging with China, but also asserting our national interest, our national interest is

incredibly important. But I think the key here is that disengagement from China won’t work,

so we’ve got to continue to engage, the Government should continue to engage with

China, but always be standing up for our national interest.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JEMMA SLEVEC 0405 752 923





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











