



THE HON ANDREW GEE MP  Minister for Decentralisation and Regional Education   Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Investment   Federal Member for Calare



STATEMENT

11 August 2020

Nationals Position on the Job-Ready Graduates Package

In June this year, I initiated a series of Regional University Roundtables consultations with country  universities and key sector stakeholders to inform The Nationals’ party room position on the  proposed tertiary education reforms (Job-Ready Graduates Package).

The Nationals party room met on Monday, 10 August 2020 and has now adopted the following  policy positions in relation to the proposed Job-Ready Graduates Package legislation scheduled to  come before the Parliament in the 2020 Spring session.

Grandfathering

In response to concerns raised by country university Chancellors and Vice-Chancellors about the  implementation of grandfathering arrangements for students enrolled prior to 1 January 2021, The  Nationals will be seeking the proposed 1 January 2024 grandfathering measure be extended  indefinitely.

This will mean that no student enrolled in a course of study prior to 1 January 2021 will pay a  higher Student Contribution Amount (SCA).

The Nationals have agreed that this change will ensure that part-time and online students, many of  whom take over three years to complete their studies due to balancing work and family  commitments, will not be disadvantaged. Many of these students reside in country areas.

Funding of social work, behavioural science and mental health studies

Given country Australia has been devastated by bushfires, floods, drought and the COVID-19  pandemic it is critical that regional communities have easy access to mental health services and  support.

The proposed reforms in their current state, recommend that a number of social work, behavioural  science and mental health disciplines be classified in the humanities cluster, which is the highest  paying cluster for students. We believe this would only serve to further to increase the  maldistribution of mental health workers in country Australia. It also has the potential to impact  women and mature students looking to upskill and move into higher paid jobs.

The Regional University Roundtables revealed this to be a glaring and potentially detrimental  design flaw in the proposed Job-Ready Graduates Package.

2019 Graduate Outcomes data shows that demand for mental health support, such as social work  is 10 per cent higher in regional and remote communities - we need more country graduates to  meet this demand.

Country people deserve the same access to mental health support as those in the cities. It’s a  fundamental issue of equality. That is why, The Nationals believe that social work, behavioural  science and mental health disciplines should be removed from the humanities funding cluster and  be realigned with allied health studies. The Nationals will be seeking a change to the current   Job-Ready Graduates Package funding clusters. We intend to fix this design deficiency.

Tertiary Access Payment

The Nationals are concerned that the current design of the Tertiary Access Payment (TAP) will  encourage country kids to leave their communities and move to the cities to study. This could  result in a loss of enrolments for country universities which are already operating in thin and lean  markets.

The Nationals will be seeking changes to the design of the TAP to ensure that this measure is  targeted at supporting country students as well as country universities.

The Nationals’ policy position, agreed upon yesterday, has been reached following extensive  consultations with a broad range of education sector representatives. Their feedback is important  and the path forward is now clear in delivering policy certainty for the sector.

I look forward to working with my Coalition colleagues to ensure that all of the measures agreed to  by The Nationals are incorporated into the legislation as it proceeds to the Parliament.



Media Contact: Gabi Phipps 0400 917 405, Gabrielle.Phipps@dfat.gov.au



