SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY

DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS NEWS DAY

THURSDAY, 3 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Arrest of Ballarat woman; a plan to help 23,000 #strandedAussies

overseas get home; new stillbirth legislation introduced today; censure of the

hopeless Aged Care Minister Richard Colbeck; Kim Carr.



ASHLEIGH GILLON, HOST: It's a busy day in the Parliament of course. Joining us live

now is the Shadow Home Affairs Minister Kristina Keneally. Senator, appreciate your time.

I am going to get to some of your portfolio issues in a moment. But first, I would like your

view on one of our top stories today and a story that is one of those water cooler stories

around the nation. What was your reaction after seeing that viral video of the arrest of the

pregnant Ballarat woman yesterday?



KRISTINA KENEALLY, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE AND SHADOW

MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Good afternoon, Ashley. This video is obviously very

difficult to watch. And particularly if you are a parent or you yourself have been a pregnant

mother, as many people watching would have been, you know, and clearly a distressing

situation. But what I do know from my time as a Premier, is that the police often have to go

into difficult circumstances and make difficult decisions. And really, I don't think it benefits

anyone in the community if there is armchair commentary being provided. And so I think

it's appropriate, and I welcome the fact, that the Victorian police have stepped up today to

answer questions about what is clearly a very distressing situation for this family.

GILLON: We have seen quite a bit of criticism from some quarters that some of the state

Premiers of having the powers given to them in the pandemic go to their heads. What do

you make of that sort of criticism as a former state Premier? Do you think there has been

some overreach going on when it comes to increasing police powers and the border issue

for example?



KENEALLY: Let's be clear that our state Premiers are responsible for the health and

wellbeing of their residents. They run the health systems, they are responsible to ensure

that the health system continues to function and that residents stay as healthy as possible.

And what I have seen right across Australia is state Premiers of both Liberal and Labor

stripes, following the medical advice, listening to the experts, putting in place the measures

they feel are necessary to protect their populations. And what we saw earlier in the week

Ashleigh, is a clear indication that the public in those states as quite supportive of those

measures.



GILLON: Do you fear that arrests like the one that we've just been talking about only

strengthen the resolve of anti-lockdown movements, people who would like to be taken to

the streets protesting these lockdowns?



KENEALLY: What I would say to everyone in the community is we need now, more than

ever, to be following the medical advice, to be following the restrictions that are in place.

These things are being done in order to protect the health and wellbeing of everyone, but

particularly for vulnerable older people who are most susceptible to coronavirus and are

quite susceptible to some of the most significant and worst outcomes including death. And,

you know, what we have seen in the Senate this afternoon is the Senate take a decision to

censure the Aged Care minister Richard Colbeck Because of his failure to deal with the

coronavirus outbreak in our aged care homes. Now, quite frankly, we should never have

been in a circumstance where aged care workers only had one glove all day for infection

control, where we go into this pandemic, with aged care residents already in a state of

neglect, as the Royal Commission found. And where we now are in a circumstance where

the Aged Care Minister ignored the warnings from the northern hemisphere, ignored the

warnings of Newmarch house and Dorothy Henderson Lodge in New South Wales early

on, and allowed this virus, this deadly virus for older Australians to take hold in residential

aged care.



GILLON: There are still thousands of Australians overseas who do want to get home. If

you were the Minister, what would your approach be? Would you be scrapping the caps on

numbers returning entirely? Wouldn't that be dangerous in terms of an influx stretching our

quarantine and our health systems?



KENEALLY: Ashleigh there are 23,000 Australians right now stranded overseas in the

middle of a global pandemic. These are people who have been trying to come home and

have been unable to do so. They're unable to do so because of the caps that Scott

Morrison announced some eight weeks ago. They're unable to do so because airlines are

price gouging, they're unable to do so because the quarantine capacity isn't in place. Now

everything that happens at our borders, quarantine, international arrival numbers, being

able to cross the border freely as is the right of an Australian citizen. This is all a federal

Government responsibility. It is now beyond time in the middle of this global pandemic,

where we have 23,000 Australians stranded overseas trying to come home, for the

Morison Government to have a plan to do this. Today in the Senate, Senator Wong and I

will be calling on the Government, we're asking the Senate to support our proposition to

the Government, that they work immediately to increase the cap to allow stranded

Australians to come home. Let's not forget, early on they put in place the capacity to bring

home people from Wuhan and to put them into quarantine run by the Commonwealth

Government. That can happen now. They should also be considering the range of options

available to them, including chartering flights to go to places like Britain and India and the

Philippines and Lebanon to bring stranded Australians home.



GILLON: What would your policy be in terms of lifting that cap? You said you'd like to lift

the cap? What numbers are you looking at? What would be a safe number in your view?



KENEALLY: What we are saying is that there is the capacity within the Commonwealth

Government to be able to bring people home where they are stranded overseas. These

are Australian citizens. These are people who have a right to come back to the country by

right of being Australian citizens. And so what we are calling on the Government to do is to

act urgently to bring these 23,000 Australians home. This is not an ongoing lifting of the

cap. This is a request, a demand, a heartfelt demand from Australians who are separated

from their loved ones right now. From those Australians who are stranded overseas, that

the Commonwealth Government get a plan in place to be able to bring them home to put

them into quarantine...



GILLON: But Senator the system couldn't handle 23,000 Australians arriving in the next

few days. I mean, that just would, they wouldn't be able to cope well...



KENEALLY: Quite frankly, Ashleigh, quite frankly, Ashleigh, it doesn't need to be in the

next three days. But the Government don't even have a plan in place. It has been eight

weeks since they announced the caps. It has been since March some of these people

have been trying to come home. The Government has failed for months now to have a

plan. What we are saying is get a plan in place to enable these 23,000 stranded

Australians to 1. Make their way back to Australia without being price gouged by airlines

and 2. To be able to quarantine in order to ensure that their return is safe. After six months

of this this pandemic where people have been, I have people who have contacted my

office who have been trying since March to get home from various places around the world

and have been unable to do so. Eight weeks after the cap has been announced, there's

been no plan from this Government to do its most basic function - look out for Australians

who are stranded overseas and enable them to come home in the middle of a global

pandemic that has deadly consequences.



GILLON: Kristina Keneally I do want to ask you we've seen stillbirth laws introduced into

the House today. It will see parents of stillborn babies allowed to take up to a year off work

to grieve their child under these new workplace entitlements. This is something I know it's

very close to your heart, something you've worked towards for a long time now. How does

it feel to finally get to this point for you?



KENEALLY: This is an important step forward. It is a part of the recommendations

Ashleigh from the Senate inquiry into stillbirth that Labor established. And one of the most

important things about this step that we're seeing today is that parents of stillborn babies

will be acknowledged as parents. You know, I think many of your viewers may be aware

that I myself am the mother of a stillborn baby, Caroline, some two decades ago, and quite

sadly, so little has changed in 20 years. We haven't seen a reduction in the rate of stillbirth

and we have still seen attitudes, sadly from some employers, that the mother or the father

of a stillborn baby isn't a parent. We heard heartbreaking stories in the Senate that a

mother was being asked to return to work, required to return to work, after just 11 days of

giving birth after her stillborn baby. You know, this is a big step forward. There's so much

more to be done in this space, particularly about bringing down the rate of stillbirth but I do

welcome this change.





GILLON: And just lastly, and with very different tone here, I'm wondering if you've had a

chat with your colleague Kim Carr. It looks like he was having a snooze yesterday in

Parliament while you were you were speaking. You were boring your colleague were you?



KENEALLY: You know what I got to say here is, yes, Senator Carr fell asleep. But quite

frankly, Senator Carr has a bad back first of all, and secondly, Senator Carr fell asleep

during a motion that was about Richard Colbeck's performance as Aged Care Minister.

Senator Carr might be asleep but I tell you what, he's a lot better off than those 462 people

who have died in aged care under this Minister. So let's not get distracted by all the

commentary and the tittering around when the real issue is this. The real issue is this.

Richard Colbeck has let a crisis develop in aged care. He has failed, as the Royal

Commission itself has noted, to have a plan in place. He has presided over a system of

neglect, where people had open sores with ants in their wounds, where people had

maggots in their mouths where people were malnourished and physically abused. We see

today the News Corp reports - horrible stories of abuse. That is the real issue here. The

Senate has just censured Richard Colbeck. It is now time for the Prime Minister to sack

Richard Colbeck.



GILLON: That was quite the segue Kristina Keneally. There's been plenty of coverage as

you know here on Sky News and the aged crisis and something we will be looking at

closely as we continue to see the debate surrounding that issue. Thank you for your time.

Thanks for joining us live there from Canberra.



KENEALLY: Thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110



