

PETA MURPHY MP  MEMBER FOR DUNKLEY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW   SKY NEWS AM AGENDA  MONDAY, 2 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; Centrelink & Medicare; Bushfire payments.

HOST: Welcome back. We’re joined in the studio by Labor MP Peta Murphy. Peta, thank  you for your time.

PETA MURPHY, MEMBER FOR DUNKLEY: Thank you very much for having me.

HOST: Now coronavirus, it has had a huge impact on the Australian economy so far, more  than really anyone predicted and so it does look like the Budget surplus might be in doubt  at this point. But aren’t we in a pretty good position with the government putting in these  corporate tax cuts, putting in a personal income, tax cuts, to be able to deal with this?

MURPHY: Well, you would think so, but as you know, I mean, Labor we’ve been saying for  a while now the economy is actually floundering. You know, economic growth has been  slowing, under-employment, wage stagnation, the people across Australia and in my  electorate everyday who are saying we cannot keep up with the cost of living. We’ve been  calling for the government to deal with that even before the impact of the coronavirus and  the bushfires. So, you know, they need to actually put some measures in place rather than  making announcements, which we all know, Scott Morrison is very good at, but it’s not  what you say, it’s what you do.

HOST: What form do you think that economic stimulus should take?

MURPHY: Well we’ve been talking about things for a while like bringing the second  tranche of the tax cuts forward, Newstart needs to be raised, actually spending the money  on infrastructure and developing and delivering infrastructure projects, rather than again,  announcing them. In my electorate of Dunkley there was about $68 million worth of road  and car parking fully budgeted apparently, announcements made before the election and  we’ve seen and heard nothing about it since. Actually deliver those, and that will bring  about some stimulus.

HOST: So you think it would be worth going into debt to pay for stimulus?

MURPHY: I think, that you can bring in stimulus without necessarily going into debt, and  the government needs to take the responsible measures that should be taken to get the  economy going again regardless of whether or not we’ve got the crises, which we do have,

from the bushfires and the coronavirus.

HOST: How do you do that though, because the money has to come from somewhere?

MURPHY: Well it does, and that’s the point of being in government and being able to  actually make decisions and look after people. But we’ve got a federal government at the  moment headed by Scott Morrison, that if they have to choose between politics and  people, he chooses politics every time, and it’s not about announcements it’s about  delivering.

HOST: But you’d have to cut it from somewhere, like, you’d have to cut another service to  pay for it if you’re not going to go into debt because we’ve already got a razor-thin surplus  as it is at this point.

MURPHY: Well we’ve got a government that is cutting, and again as I say they choose  politics over people. I mean we’ve got the Minister for Government Services, who in my  electorate is becoming known as the Minster for Cutting Government Services. You know,  secretly shutting down Medicare and Centrelink clinics without any consultation with the  community. And the one in Mornington, that’s actually in Greg Hunt, the Minister for  Health’s electorate, apparently without even telling his Cabinet colleague. Vulnerable  people are being damaged. So, this is government that is happy to cut where people are  vulnerable, but apparently is not willing to take important stimulus measures that need to  be taken.

HOST: So the government’s perspective on that’s been that they are putting more  resources in, they’re just centralising the services and they’re trying to put more things  online and on phone call services to try and make it more accessible that way, what’s the  issue with that?

MURPHY: Well I just wonder whether the people that are making these decisions, the  Minister and others, actually ever talk to their constituents about how long they’re sitting on  the phone trying to contact their Centrelink office. If they’ve ever talked to an 85 year-old  person who doesn’t know how to access MyGov and can’t do it themselves. In Mornington,  which is going to be shut down in a matter of weeks, community groups estimate that  there’s up to 800 people a week who go in for face-to-face services. My electorate office  has been told about an elderly woman in her eighties that was told by Mornington  Centrelink she had to go in to get a form signed and stood in line for three hours. And what  the government is now saying, well either she has to get online or she has to get on a bus  which can take up to 45 minutes to get to Frankston Centrelink in my electorate which is so  overwhelmed already that people are avoiding going there because of the long delays.  That’s just not good enough.

HOST: Now, the other topic that has raised quite a bit of discussion around the subsidies  around programs for people who’ve been impacted by bushfires. The Sydney Morning  Herald’s reporting that only 108 of the 654 grants have been approved. In New South  Wales, 4 of 92 concessional loans have been approved. Now, is it unfair to put this on the  Federal Government though, this response really needs to be done at a state level.

MURPHY: I don’t think it is. I think Scott Morrison and his government should have learnt  from what happened over summer where he kept trying to say it wasn’t his responsibility.  He’s very, very good at making announcements and very, very bad at actually delivering.  People in New South Wales, people across Australia, they don’t want to hear Federal



politicians and state politicians arguing about whose responsibility it is. They just want the  help that’s been promised to them to be delivered. So David Littleproud and Scott Morrison  just need to actually roll up their sleeves and get in and make sure people who need it get  the measures that are needed. They need to bring forward a proper package of bushfire  relief measures. And don’t come up with excuses; just make sure they’re delivered.

HOST: Peta Murphy, thanks for your time.

MURPHY: Thank you very much for having me.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DYLAN STEED 0400 615 862









