

The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au

2 April 2020



REGIONAL AUSTRALIANS MUST GET LOWER PRICES AT THE  BOWSER

COVID-19 is having a significant impact on the Australian economy and every motorist in regional  Australia deserves price relief during the pandemic.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Regional Development Michael  McCormack welcomed the strong rhetoric of Chairman Rod Simms and the Australian Competition  and Consumer Commission (ACCC) in tackling this issue.

“With world oil prices plummeting to just over $20 per barrel, regional, rural and remote Australians  must receive the benefits of lower prices at the bowser,” Mr McCormack said.

“I am pleased the ACCC has said fuel prices above 130 cents per litre are inappropriate and they are  closely monitoring the situation.

“The Federal Government will continue to watch the actions of fuel retailers in regional areas very  closely and we encourage the community to name and shame retailers doing the wrong thing.

“Too often, regional motorists bear the brunt of higher fuel prices and I’m making it clear the  Government expects retailers to make things right and pass savings on immediately.”

The Federal Government will ensure the ACCC continues to apply pressure to retailers to adjust  prices at the bowser in line with movements in international oil prices.

Local competition is important, especially in regional areas, with the action of one retailer often  leading to others following. The Government is calling on all retailers to step up, be industry leaders  and play their part in making sure regional Australia gets to the other side of the pandemic.

Motorists should follow pricing apps and take advice from motoring bodies including the RACQ and  NRMA for advice on when and where to fill up most cheaply.

Ends.

Unleaded 91  111.9c per litre (Bowen Hills QLD - 3km from  Brisbane CBD)  145.9c per litre (Bourke NSW - 757km from  Sydney CBD)  164.9c per litre (Middlemount QLD - 887km from  Brisbane CBD)

Diesel  113.9c per litre (Riverwood NSW - 26km from  Sydney CBD)  139.9c per litre (Mackay QLD - 631km from  Brisbane CBD)  146.9c per litre (Narromine NSW - 433km from  Sydney CBD)



Media: Mr McCormack - Dean Shachar 0418 202 860

