STEPHEN JONES MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES

MEMBER FOR WHITLAM

E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC NEWS AFTERNOON LIVE

MONDAY, 24 FEBRUARY 2020

SUBJECTS: Labor's commitment to net zero emissions by 2050; Family

violence; Bettina Arndt; Coronavirus.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: Joining me on my panel is Shadow Minister for

Financial Services, Stephen Jones and Liberal Senator James Patterson.

Welcome to both of you. I want to start with you Stephen, why is Labour

revealing its 2050 emissions reduction target before a 2030 target many years

before, I mean that is a long time away, shouldn't you be telling us what you're

going to do before that?

JONES: I think people have got to get a good sense of what we stand for. After

the summer that we've just been through I think, collectively, Australia is asking

for some direction and we, as an alternative government, feel obliged to say

well we're going to give some direction, this is what we know the country has to

do. We agree with every state Liberal Premier, in fact every Premier around the

country and 73 other countries around the world and the major emitting

companies here in Australia including Qantas, BHP and Santos, we agree with

them. We're going to have a long-term target. In your introduction you said why

don't we go to a 2030 target first and I want to respond to that. The fact is

there's a couple of big things that are going to happen this year. We've got the

renegotiation of the Paris Treaty, a big, international conference, at the end of

the year. We want to see what the near-term objectives are of those

international conferences. We also want to see what the Government is going

to do to see what additional spadework is going to be left for an alternative

Labor Government. Maybe the Government is going to adopt Labor's policies

and makes the job more bipartisan and easy. We think is very important that we

set long-term objectives, particularly for regions like mine. We’ve got high-manufacturing, we've got a coal mining industry in my region. We need a tong-term direction and a vision about how we're going to transform things between

now and then.

KARVELAS: James Patterson, your Liberal colleague Dave Sharma says the

world needs to get towards net zero emissions by the second half of the

century. Do you agree?

SENATOR JAMES PATERSTON: I think that voters should be very sceptical

of any politician, including me and my colleagues in my parliamentary party, in

the Liberal and National parties, who tell you what is going to happen in 30

years’ time.

KARVELAS: No, no, no, no, no, no, no. I have to interrupt, it’s not about telling

us what will happen, it’s not crystal ball stuff. It's saying if I'm elected, this is

what I want to happen, this is my intention. That's the question.

PATERSON: Exactly right, Patricia, They are asking voters to judge them on

something that won't happen for 30 years time when they will no longer be in

the Parliament. They'll be off in a retirement home somewhere if they're lucky

enjoying their years away. We can't be assessed on something that far out and

it's just silly to think that we should be judged by that. What we should be

judged by is things that we can deliver in the much shorter-term because you

can hold us to account if we don't achieve those commitments and you should.

But don't listen to us when we say in 30 to 40 to 50 years time this is what we'll

be able to achieve. It's just nonsensical.



KARVELAS: But the question is about setting the target in the first place, and

of course you'll be judged, so it's about intention right? Do you intend for a zero

net carbon future for this country? Is that your intention?



PATERSON: But Patricia, think about how much technology has evolved over

the last 30 years 1990 was 30 years ago, when there were virtually no mobile

phones, virtually no one had the Internet and some people had fax machines. If

someone had told you then what they would promise the country would

achieve, or the government would achieve, by this year, rightly they wouldn't

have been taken seriously and think about all the changes happen in that time.

The next 30 years are going to be the same again. So don't assess us on

meaningless, open-ended commitments over such a long period of time. Hold

us to account on things we can actually have a chance to deliver on in the

shorter-term.



KARVELAS: So you don't think you can deliver on reducing emissions

dramatically, given the science says that you have to?



PATERSON: Let's say that Anthony Albanese wins the next election and has a

very long term as Prime Minister. Even he will have no prospect of getting

anywhere near close to 2050 as Prime Minister. So, no, he can't deliver on

something in 2050. What he could deliver on, if he wins the next election, is

something that in 2030, which is much closer, and of course, that's what he's

unwilling to commit to an unwilling to say. I think we should be very sceptical of

a politician who can't tell you what will happen in 10 years, but can absolutely

tell you what should happen in 30 years.



KARVELAS: Stephen, it's a reasonable question that Labor is giving us a test,

which is that far away, but can't really outline something on the way there

because it's the thing with the zero net emissions you need to be reducing,

reducing, reducing to actually make that deadline. I know you've already

answered the question in relation to Glasgow, what the world might do and

what the Government might do, but isn't it just really a sort of promise that's

fairly meaningless without all of the meat on the bone?



JONES: Firstly, we didn't pull this number out of thin air. This is the number

that Australia agreed to, that every serious scientist, that every Premier around

Australia and all the major companies agree is the number we have to reach by

2050, if we are not going to have catastrophic climate change. So we didn't pull

it out him out of the air. We said well, that's the place where I've got to get

to,what do we need to do to get there. To James’ point, we do this all the time,

we do it in defence policy. We are purchasing defence platforms today, whether

they’re submarines, whether they’re fighter aircraft, whether they're frigates,

which will have a 20, 30, 40 year life span. We do it when we build a dam. We

don't build a dam and say we're building this dam for the needs of the next

three years. We do it because we know what the needs are going to be over

the next 50 years. If we know what we're going to have to do in 50 years’ time,

it's incumbent upon us, it's responsible for us to say Australia, honestly, this is

what we have got to do and we've got to get on that path. Otherwise, the rest of

the world is going to leave us behind and we will be doing a massive disservice

to our kids.



KARVELAS: I just want to talk about the minute's silence at that Parliament

observed the issues around family violence, obviously in the wake of this

horrendous murder of three children and a woman. There are a broader

implications, of course, in terms of this nation's work on reducing domestic

violence and taking it seriously. James, I want to start with you. Do you think

this issue needs to be treated the same way, for instance, terrorism is treated,

that it needs to be elevated a national level and then needs to be bigger

investments and law reform?



PATERSON: I think we can pretty safely say, Patricia, that what we have been

doing collectively, governments state and federal, Liberal and Labor, over the

last few years has not been successful. That's not to discount the best

endeavours and best intentions of everyone involved in this policy space, which

is very complex and not straightforward. But clearly if women and children are

still being killed in their homes by their husbands and fathers, then that's

unacceptable and policy needs to change until that's no longer the case. So we

should be open-minded to any and all good ideas and suggestions as to how

we achieve it and we should take it extremely seriously at the highest levels.



KARVELS: Stephen Jones.



JONES: Firstly, I want to say we saw the best of Parliament in the first 15

minutes of Question Time and probably the worst of Parliament in the hour that

followed that. But I think it was a unifying moment. I think the Prime Minister

was, very genuinely, expressing the views of the Australian people and

certainly the Parliament and Anthony Albanese in his reply. I think this is an

opportunity for us to revisit some of the things that have been done over the

last six or seven years. Whether it's cuts to legal aid services or cuts to

emergency housing services. Not only to restore but understand where we

have to take that further because it's one thing to say, we all are abhor family

violence, we do, it's also important for us as leaders in this place to lead by

example. There's some practical things we can do as well, restoring legal aid

services, putting in place emergency housing and other services for people who

need to get out of a bad situation and get their life back on track. I think all of

those things need to be looked at.



KARVELAS: James, there has been a lot of controversy about Bettina Arndt

and whether she should be stripped of her Australia Day honour in the wake of

some controversial comments she made online. Some of your colleagues have

said she should be stripped of the honour. Of course, it's done independently,

but is it your view should be?



PATERSON: I think it's appropriate that the Australia Day Council, which hands

out the awards, is considering it and they're doing so on the basis that

honourees shouldn't bring the whole process into disrepute. I think that's the

right criteria to assess any person against. I don't think generally we should

have a political views test for honourees, they come from a wide variety of

backgrounds and opinions and perspectives. But if they are becoming a real

source of distraction and if the discrediting the awards and I think that need to

be looked at very carefully.



KARVELAS: And in her case, is that what she's doing?



PATERSON: I'm not going to pre-empt the Australia Day Council, but I should

just say, very clearly, I completely disagree with the sentiment she's expressed

about the very tragic death of this young Brisbane family.



KARVELAS: And in that case, we all know they're independent, but your

colleagues say and they've written to the Council some of them, and said this

should happen. Do you think she should be stripped to the honour, given the

importance of this issue and the message that it sends?



PATERSON: Well, most of my colleagues have just asked at the Australia Day

Council assess it and I think that's the right thing to do. I don't think politicians

should make the call about whether people should or should not receive these

awards. They are independent of politics and I think that's a good thing.  I'll

have great confidence and faith that the Australia Day Council will carefully

assess this and make the right decision.



KARVELAS:  Stephen Jones, what are your reflections on this?



JONES: As a general point of principle I think James is right. Australia Day

Awards have to have the respect and confidence of the Australian people, they

should be independent of the political process. Sometimes they just get it so

wrong and sometimes the awardee is just so out of step with the Australian

values and what ordinary Australian people think about a set of situations that

we just got a call it and I'm calling it. She shouldn’t have got the award and the

comments that she made, after that terrible tragedy in Queensland a couple of

days ago with the murder of a young woman her family, just confirmed my view,

it’s totally inappropriate. It should be removed.



KARVELAS: Just before I let you go, some brief comments on coronavirus and

of course more developments today in relation to the way Italy is responding,

Japan the outbreak there. Clearly this is escalating in other places across the

world. First to you James, and you've had some strong comments, Senator, to

make about the way China is handling this. Should we be cautious about

relaxing bans of people coming from China?



PATERSON: Yes, we should be extremely cautious, Patricia, particularly in



light of the news that South Korea, Japan, Italy and Iran are suffering quite

severe outbreaks. I think the Australian Government should be extremely

cautious about any further lifting of restrictions until the medical evidence is

very clear that it's safe. I think the Australian people have to be aware that this

is about to become, potentially, a very serious, very global pandemic and we

will take the best medical advice and take the strongest steps necessary to

protect the Australian people.



KARVELAS: What are your reflections Stephen Jones, because clearly there

was a small cohort of students who were given an exemption, do you think

there should be wider exemptions?



JONES: Point number one, we've got to take the advice of the medical experts

and the Chief Medical Officer and our science agencies. On the point of our

dealings with China, this is exactly the circumstance in which we need to have

good, open, honest and trustful dialogue with our counterparts in China. I don't

think megaphone-diplomacy, through politicians such as myself, is going to add

to that. If anything, it will detract from it. We need have great relations and

honest communications with all of our near neighbours, including China.

They've done, I think, a pretty good job of the way they've been dealing with it

in country to date and I don't want to say anything that's going to interfere with

our ability to respond and respond appropriately.



KARVELAS: Thank you to both of you. Good luck getting through Parliament

sitting over the next couple weeks.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: AMY SMITH 0459 846 926





