





TRANSCRIPT

Senator James Paterson

Liberal Senator for Victoria

Wednesday 26 February 2020

ABC News: Capital Hill

Subjects: Budget surplus, coronavirus, 2050 target

Jane Norman: Well, joining me for the Wednesday panel is Liberal Senator James Paterson and  Labor Senator Deb O'Neill. Thank you for joining me.



Senator Deb O'Neil: Nice to be with you Jane.



Norman: We'll start with you. So the coronavirus knock on effects are being felt really far and wide  in the economy. We've seen a sell off on the share market, the construction industry is already  saying that it is feeling the effects. Are we at risk of a recession here?



O'Neil: Well, one thing I think we should be very concerned about is the capacity of the government  to deal with that if that eventuality should become part of the Australian economy. Because we saw  during the summer that when a crisis hits this country, the prime minister is not only missing in  action, but there is no preparedness. And that's what concerns me about the current government  and whatever might be coming down the line.



Norman: It does sound like from what we're hearing from Greg Hunt, from Scott Morrison, putting  aside the criticism over his handling, initial handling of the bushfires, but when it comes to the  Coronavirus that there are plans in place, at least if a pandemic is is declared.



O'Neil: So I think we need to separate those two things out. Dr Brendan Murphy and I know  that  Minister Hunt have just given a press conference and, you know, we stand ready as the  alternative party of government to work very carefully with the government to make sure that  Australians are protected. But this is a government that has failed the economy. They they've been  elected on a promise of jobs and growth. They've delivered neither. In fact, the economy has been





tanking. And we've been telling them for a very, very long time that they need to put some stimulus  into the economy. We've given them a suite of options, you know, increase Newstart, increase  incentives to business, bring forward part of stage two of the tax cuts, bring forward infrastructure  spending. And I can tell you from my travels around New South Wales that there's a $200 million  investment that's needed to connect Wellington to Dubbo. There people are crying out in the  country for this government to invest and they have ignored all that. They're sitting on their hands  just like before the summer when they said, look, there's no there's no emergency here. It'll be fine.  This government simply doesn't understand that proper leadership involves planning and they are  letting the economy down. And it's their fault that I don't think the ACDC track will come true. The  Back in black and they're trying to pedal away from that despite the treasurer's claims, what'd he  say, 'tonight, I announced the budget is back in black and Australia is back on track.' Well, that's the  test they set themselves.



Norman: James Paterson,  right of reply here. Should the government be looking at stimulus  measures, given that already the government seems to be walking away from the surplus, it only  looks like things might be getting worse from here?



Paterson: Jane, I think we should take at least one deep breath and wait at least 30 seconds before  we jump into the partisan attacks on the government when we're actually facing quite a serious  challenge here. And I think what most of you viewers and most Australians want to know is to be  reassured that the plans that we have are in place and that if the coronavirus does become more  serious, as it looks like it could, that we're able to respond to that. I actually think, Deb's done a bit  of a disservice there by raising the prospect that we don't have those plans in place, that we're not  well equipped to do that. That's actually not true at all. And I think you just saw -



O'Neil: I agree the health the health area is one area where, you know, you've just been very good  press conference. That is not what's in debate. It's about whether the economy is prepared on your  watch. I want to be very, very clear about that that.



Paterson: I appreciate that you clarified that, because I think Australian people should be reassured  that although this is a very serious global challenge, if it does come more to our shores, that we will  be very well equipped to respond to it. We are a very sophisticated, very rich, 21st century economy.  We've got an outstanding health system and we have been planning for weeks now what should  happen if it gets to our shores. So Australians can be reassured about that. Yes, it may also have a  significant effect on the economy. And these are what some economists sometimes refer to as a  black swan event. There the sort of things that you can't ever predict or anticipate, you know that  they might happen, but you don't know what what will happen, when it will happen or how severe  that impact will be. And the only thing that we can do to prepare for those things is to be as fiscally  prudent and conservative as we can, so that if that time comes and if the government needs to step  in, it has the capacity to do so. What would be irresponsible would have been in the past to have  been fiscally loose and reckless and then not been as well equipped as we are today to respond.







Norman: Clearly, the situation has changed since last year's budget. You've got to adapt to the  change. So when it comes to stimulus, is this saying the government should be seriously considering  investing more in infrastructure or, as Deb mentioned, possible rise in the Newstart allowance?



Paterson: I think that's a bit premature. We're not yet at that point. And at the moment, Treasury is  doing some really sophisticated modelling, trying to anticipate what the impact will be. But actually,  of course, you just need more information before you can be confident about that. So I think the  government should just be as it is already calmly and watch and wait and see and evaluate the  events as they take hold.



Norman: Okay, well looking at the practicalities of the coronavirus outbreak. We know that at the  moment there's a travel ban on anybody coming from mainland China, given we know this virus is  spreading. Deb, do you think that there's any merit in extending the travel ban to other countries?



O'Neil: Look, I think that we're politicians here sitting with you a journalist in a studio in Canberra. I  think that Dr Brendan Murphy has proven his metal already in the way that it's been managed so far.  And I think that we should be listening very carefully to considered advice around our practical  action. So I'm guided by the experts in this. And I I do believe that we have great medical capacity in  this country and we have amazing leadership in the medical field. They're the ones who know. And I  think we should follow their advice. And I think it's very important for Australians that we operate  that particular part of the challenge in an entirely bipartisan way. People need to be reassured that  their physical health and safety. The economy. That's an entirely different matter. That's and we've  been discussing that somewhat already.



Norman: And James Paterson, do you have a view on the travel ban? Do you think it's likely that it  will be extended or is it spreading to so many countries now that the travel ban is really ineffective?



Paterson: Well, the government acted quicker than almost any other country in the world and has  put in place tougher restrictions than almost any other country in the world. And that's one of the  reasons why, despite the fact that Australia has extraordinary exposure to China, that we've actually  had extra incredibly few cases of coronavirus. Some of the other countries who've been impacted  are actually far less directly impacted in relations with China than we are but they've had many  higher cases. I think we should leave all options open and leave all options on the table. And if the  medical advice indicates that some of these third countries, which now appear to becoming quite  hot spots for transmission of the virus, need to be quarantined as well, then I think we should do  that.



Norman: Now, just back on the budget surplus issue, this is an issue that is very political. I don't  think a lot of voters really, you know, decide their futures depending on a surplus. But the coalition  was so critical of Labor for promising a surplus and then not delivering it. Isn't that effectively what  your government is now doing if indeed the surplus is not delivered?







Paterson: Jane, I'm a budget surplus hard-liner. I think almost in every circumstances we should  deliver a budget surplus or at least strive to do so. And I think over the last 15 years, both parties  should have done more to deliver more budget surpluses than we have. But even I recognise that  when you have in a row three fairly unprecedented crises in terms of an ongoing severe drought,  major bushfires and now coronavirus that something's are going to come under serious strain and  the budget is clearly one of those.



O'Neil: What about the GFC?



Norman: Yeah what about the GFC? Sorry, I don't want to make Labor's point but it is a fair point.



O'Neil: What about the GFC, the one that didn't exist according to the Liberal Party.



Norman: Yeah, I mean, that's a good point, isn't it, that Labor also had an economic shock that  nobody could really predict?



Paterson: That's right. But Labor made decisions in response to that economic shock that we were  very critical of at the time. We think they went far too hard and too fast on stimulus. It was  excessive. And that contributed to the budget deterioration and it prevented them from returning  the budget to surplus more quickly than they could have. That was an option available to them. And  they deserve to be held to account for the decisions that they made. And I expect that we will  equally be held to account for the decisions that we will make over the coming months.



O'Neil: We were the only economy that didn't go into recession.



Paterson: That's not quite right.



O'Neil: So that was a a black swan event of the kind you were describing before. And the  government has continued to deny it. So, do you know, it according to the Liberal mantra, it doesn't  matter what's going on in the world. You must deliver a surplus. And if you've already declared that,

you've got one and I will repeat the treasurer's words 'tonight I announce the budget is back in black'  excuse me, and 'Australia is back on track'. Like I'm nearly choking on the words because that was a  serious misrepresentation of the reality then. It's it's a perfect example of Mr Morrison's magic  marketing words. And he campaigned on the back of that, which is not the case. And now that the  government think that they might be in trouble in May in delivering that surplus, the test that they  set themselves, the claim that they made, they'd already achieved. We are seeing backpedalling that  would make them eligible for a competition if it was at an Olympic level.







Norman: Yeah, well, we'll find out in May what the final budget figures are, but moving on from  budget. The other big topic that has been dominating this week is energy emissions policy. James  Paterson, I wanted to ask you about your former leader, Malcolm Turnbull's comments. He wants  parliamentary 'stop the false debate', in his words, that a 'target of net zero emissions by 2050 is  optional'. Is it inevitable that we are going to adopt these target as a country?



Paterson: I don't think it's necessarily inevitable. And all I can note when it comes to Malcolm  Turnbull's post-political pronouncements is that they are quite different to what he was saying when  he was prime minister, when he was here in the building. The kind of rhetoric that he is espousing  on climate change now is much more radical than it was before. In fact, in his support for a green  new deal, which was originally proposed by a radical left Democrat in the United States and is  supported here in Australia by Adam Bandt, he's not only out of step with the Liberal Party, but he's  out of step with the Labor party as well, and has a position to the furthest on the political left.



Norman: All right. Well, that's your commentary on Malcolm Turnbull's post-political career. But the  2050 target. There does seem to be a split between the Liberal Party and the National Party. The  Liberals are keeping their options open as far as the prime minister's rhetoric is concerned, but the  Nationals have come out very strongly against it. Should the government be adopting this as a target  when your representatives go to Glasgow at the end of the year?



Paterson: My view is that the most important targets are ones that we can actually deliver on and  actually be measured on, and be held to account by the voting public. And they are our short and  medium term targets, and I think so -



O'Neil: Like the surplus.



Paterson: - is particularly important is the 2030 target. Now, anyone in this building, particularly  those in Labor party who are absolutely sure they can tell you what should happen by 2050, but will  not be drawn on what should happen by 2030, I don't think should be taken very seriously.



Norman: True. But you are in government, so you are the ones that are accountable at this time. But  the 2050 target, are you, are you saying that the government should be wary of adopting that longer  term target?



Paterson: My view is, as I said, I think our short term and medium term targets out to 2030 are much  more important priority than 2050.







Norman: Alright, well Deb O'Neil we know that Labor has locked in behind this target, which was  actually an election promise of Labor's. But the party, as we saw with last year's election, has always  had this challenge in having an ambitious climate change policy while also trying to stand up for the  blue collar workers. And that was, you know, I think one of the results the election campaign showed  that. So are people in your electorate worried about this kind of climate change policy, like how do  allay those concerns?



O'Neil: Well, ask anybody who watched what happened over the summer, are they concerned about  climate change? The Australian people have had the worst summer on record. I fear further mental  health impact of what we've experienced there has been an awakening because there was no one  getting in the way of the truth. People saw the reality. I was at the Gundagai show, just not last week  in the weekend before speaking with locals who want a transition to great energy that provides jobs  where they live. They understand that something has to be done about climate change. They're  managing the aftermath of trying to keep their farms going while they were fighting fires. So  Australian people have woken up to it. I think James critique of his own former leader and the  announcement of the gap between what they said, what what their leader, what his leader said in  government and what he actually said after gives an indication that this is a government that plays  with the truth, they play with a narrative. Well 2050 as a target is a reality for 73 countries.



Norman: And is that many people in the electorate raising concern about it.



O'Neil: They're not concerned they're not concerned about a number in 2050. They're not  concerned about the debate about what should happen. They're sick of the debate. They're sick of  10 years of being told by this government that they've got it all in control. They know this  government doesn't have a plan. They know that the summer happened. They know that  something's got to happen and they don't trust the Liberal National Party.



Norman: I mean, I guess you look at last year's election, though, and it appears that climate change  is an issue that people are worried about but doesn't necessarily shift votes. Do you think that has  changed now?



O'Neil: Look, I think the magic marketing words of the prime minister are falling apart. We're seeing  that with, you know, that claim by Mr Frydenberg. Now, the government actually going to they  slipped that one out by accident. Now they're going to be held to account. And and I think they're  going to fail that they have failed the Australian people. We know that we need to do something.  People are telling me all the time as I move across the country, in particular across the state of New  South Wales, they're crying out for leadership. 73 countries around the world have figured this out.  The problem with the Liberal National Party, who've been in charge of this country for three terms  and seven years, is they still want to play a game. But we cannot continue to play games with  people's lives that cost lives over the summer. We cannot continue this nonsense.







Norman: Okay. Deb O'Neil, James Paterson, unfortunately we've run out of time. Thank you both for  joining me today.



ENDS



