

JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

FIVEAA MORNINGS WITH LEON BYNER

THURSDAY, 22 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECT: Morrison Government failures in aged care.



LEON BYNER, HOST:  Let's talk to the Shadow Ageing Minister, Julie Collins.

Julie, thanks for joining us today.



Julie Collins, Shadow Minister for Ageing and Seniors: Thanks Leon, and

to your listeners, good morning.



BYNER: It's good to get you on too because these things and there's more to

come and I'll get you to expand on it. But these are things which already have

come up, the Aged Care Royal Commission. So it seems that whatever

oversight is there, it's just not doing the job, doesn't it?



COLLINS: It does indeed, Leon. And I think that the results of that survey and

the evidence before the Royal Commission has been quite alarming for many

Australians. When you've got just one quarter of residents in residential aged

care or receiving home care that feel their needs are actually being met by the

system, we clearly have a really serious problem. And that's not to diminish the

hard work being done by so many workers in the aged care system who are

doing their very best day in, day out. But there's simply not enough resources in

the system, that's become very clear by the Royal Commission. I mean, you've

got one in five people in residential aged care have experienced substandard

care. And that's what the evidence of the Royal Commission has heard. So we

clearly have an issue. I've said for a long time that the new regulator that the

Government combined, the Complaints Commission and the Quality and Safety

Commission together to form the new regulator, I've said for a long time that I'm

concerned it doesn't have enough powers or the right resources to do what it's

being asked to do.



BYNER: If you give an organisation such as the Aged Care Quality

Commission oversight, there's no point in having it if in finding deficiencies you

can't act on it?



COLLINS: Absolutely, that's my concern. I am concerned about the lack of

transparency around, you know, the regulator and particularly during the

COVID period. Obviously they stopped doing physical site inspections for three

months and they didn't tell anybody for another three months that they'd

actually done that. And this was at a time when many facilities in Australia were

in lockdown and visitors were not allowed into some of these facilities. And as

we've talked about before, some of these visits are the family relative who have

been in every day providing additional support and care for their loved ones. So

it has been a very concerning time. And I think our regulator didn't do enough

during that period would be my view. And I think clearly the Government isn't

listening enough to the Royal Commission, its own Royal Commission. I mean,

it talks about how it called this Royal Commission. The truth is, is that its had a

number of reports sitting on its desk, but ignored for a long period of time. The

Royal Commission came up and, you know, it had been just discussed. And, of

course, the Labor Party was thinking about the Royal Commission and what we

might do. And then the Four Corners report came on the ABC and suddenly

two days later or two days before sorry, the Government called the Royal

Commission. It was pressured into it, that is the truth of it. The Government was

pressured into the Royal Commission. The Government now needs to listen to

the Royal Commission's recommendations.



BYNER: Okay, what recommendations are out there right now that you would

advocate need to be taken up immediately?



COLLINS: So the interim report, the Government received October last year

and the very first recommendation there was to fix the home care waitlist, which

I heard you talking about before.



BYNER: Yes.



COLLINS: Two years ago there was over 100,000 Australians sitting on that

list. Today, there are still over 100,000 older Australians sitting on that wait list.

In the Budget, just two weeks ago, the Government said we're going to fund

23,000 packages. That doesn't clear 100,000 older Australians waiting. I know

that in your state of South Australia, for instance, there's about 6,500 people

waiting without an interim package. That is, they're not getting any package at

all.



BYNER: What are they supposed to do?



COLLINS: It's incredible, isn't it. Exactly. So what's happening is is that they're

getting what should be early intervention support, the Commonwealth Home

Support Program and/or they're relying on family and friends.



BYNER: Now, yesterday, Richard Colbeck said if they're not getting what they

need, there is the early intervention program. But are you telling me that they're

not getting that either?



COLLINS: Well, in some cases, there aren't enough, there's not enough of

those or funding for that program to deliver the demand. That is the truth, but

particularly in regional areas across the country. Some of the Commonwealth

Home Support providers don't have any further capacity.



BYNER: So when people ring this program, as they'll sometimes do from all

over SA or even into Victoria, where can we send them to?



COLLINS: Absolutely. This is a really serious issue. We're doing everything we

can, obviously, to put pressure on the Government to deal with the home care

waitlists. The Royal Commission today is having its last two days of hearings

before its final recommendations in February, has done some draft

recommendations that are out today. And one of those draft recommendations

that we don't know whether this will be a final recommendation, but it says the

Government should clear the home care wait list by 31 December next year.



BYNER: Well, that would be a real help, wouldn't it?



COLLINS: Well, the bottom line is that older Australians, we have 30,000 older

Australians in the last three years die waiting for their home care package.



BYNER: That's awful.



COLLINS: We had another 30,000 go into hospital or into residential care.



BYNER: So if we were a little bit better, in fact, much better at delivering these

home services, they wouldn't have the next expense and have to go into an

institution, would they?



COLLINS: Go into hospital or residential aged care.



BYNER: Absolutely.



COLLINS: Yeah, that's right. But it's also about giving people some choice. A

lot of older Australians will make a decision that they don't want to go into

residential care and you know, that is viable for some older Australians to

remain at home and they should be allowed to do that.



BYNER: So what's, Julie, from your numbers, what proportion of people are

waiting? You've said 100,000, which is a lot of people in Australia, 6,000 in SA,

more than that. So what's the average waiting time? How long have they been

waiting for?



COLLINS: It depends on what level package you are and are assessed as

needing, so level one is the lowest level, level two, three and level four. The

highest level, level 4 package is about $50,000 a year. And that should provide

somebody with around 9, 10 hours of personal care a week. So that waiting

time for a level four package at the moment, the Productivity Commission, has

said that the mean time for that, that is the time that most people wait, is well

over two years and close to three.



BYNER: Two years and close to three.



COLLINS: And what do you say to a person in their 90s who has a terminal

illness who is popped on a level four, needing a level four, and they have to

wait that period of time? It's just unacceptable in Australia today. I mean, when

you've got the Government that, we've now got a trillion dollars of debt, we had

$98 billion in new spending in the Budget, but this has not been dealt with.



BYNER: All right. So two years, nearly three wait for level four. What's the

average wait for level one?



COLLINS: It's 6 to 12 months



BYNER: Even for level 1?



COLLINS: Yep.



BYNER: And this is because, so the reason this even came up is because

callers rang this program and you'd be aware of this.



COLLINS: Yes.



BYNER: Who said, to those who called to get help, there's no money. So that's

true is it? That seems to be the case?



COLLINS: Well, they're limited to how many packages are available. So at the

moment, I think there's about 165,000 packages that the Government fund and

that is capped until these new packages come into the market. So by the end of

this financial year, there should be 184,000 packages. And the Government

currently has in the Budget that it will stay that way for the next four years.

There'll be no more packages unless they announce further ones in the Budget

next year.





BYNER: No doubt you're going to make a lot of noise about this.



COLLINS: Well, we certainly are, but also the community and the Royal

Commission, I think, is doing a good job of highlighting the fact that the

Government hasn't responded sufficiently to its interim report, I mean it's quite

extraordinary for a Royal Commission to actually have interim

recommendations and it thought that these things were so serious that it

needed to do that. A year later, we still have over 100,000 older people waiting.

The Government is clearly not doing its job. And the Royal Commission heard,

despite all the announcements we get from the Government, that if the

Government hadn't announced anything new in the Budget last fortnight, that

there would only be actually 300 new packages by 2024 if the Government

hadn't put any more packages in. Because what they were doing is bringing

forward you know, packages that were in the forward estimates but weren't

actually creating new packages.



BYNER: I'd like to keep well in touch with you on this. You're cool with that?



COLLINS: I'm absolutely happy to do that. The other recommendations the

Royal Commission does have out are obviously, in relation to COVID-19, that

require urgent action. And the Government needs to report on those

recommendations to the Parliament by 1 December.



BYNER: Alright, we'll watch this closely. That's the Shadow Ageing Minister,

Julie Collins.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119



