



Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra





THE HON DAN TEHAN MP  Minister for Education  Member for Wannon

MEDIA RELEASE

24 November 2020

First sod turned on hydrogen research facility

Minister for Education Dan Tehan said world-leading hydrogen research would be taking  place in Wannon as he turned the first sod on the construction of a hydrogen research facility  at Deakin University.

“The Hydrogen Training Testbed at the Hycel Technology Hub in Victoria will enable Deakin  University to increase the industry application of hydrogen research,” Mr Tehan said.

“The Government committed $2 million over two years to the Hycel Technology Hub to  support research and education in regional Australia, and to develop our hydrogen research  capabilities.

“The work will increase efficiency in hydrogen production, storage and use, which will  positively impact Australia’s energy industry.

“The project is consistent with the National Hydrogen Strategy and is an outstanding  example of the benefits of strong links between industry and universities.

“It involves research collaboration between government, higher education and industry  partners, including the City of Warrnambool and Australian Pipelines and Gas Association  and Energy Networks Association, and is part of our Government’s plan to invest in ideas  and innovation in areas of national interest to help power Australia’s economic recovery from  COVID-19.

“This investment in research will complement the additional $1 billion for university research  and $157 million for research infrastructure announced in the 2020 Budget.”

The facility will work alongside a Future Fuels Cooperative Research Centre project  investigating hydrogen compatibility in the reticulated gas network, one of the first steps to  transition Deakin’s Warrnambool campus to 100 per cent hydrogen. The research will  support the wider transition of existing natural gas networks for homes and businesses to  hydrogen.

Earlier this year, the Government also committed $300 million to establish the Advancing  Hydrogen Fund to support the growth of a clean, innovative, competitive and safe Australian  hydrogen industry.

ENDS

Media contact:  Tehan: Lauren Fitzpatrick 02 6277 7350 | minister.tehan.media@dese.gov.au

