



PROTECTED: CABINET







SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women

MEDIA RELEASE

06 October 2020

2020-21 BUDGET: SUPPORTING WOMEN

The Morrison Government is continuing to support women through the COVID-19  pandemic as part of our Economic Recovery Plan for Australia.

The 2020-21 Budget includes a range of measures to create more jobs for women, give  them greater choice about their lives and allow them to build financial security for  themselves and their families as we recover from the COVID-19 pandemic.

The Government is delivering the 2020 Women’s Economic Security Statement to  increase women’s workforce participation, improve earning potential and enhance  economic independence.

Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Women, Senator the Hon Marise Payne, says  “Before the COVID-19 pandemic hit us, women’s workforce participation had reached a  record high, and the gender pay gap was at a record low.”

“As we navigate our way out of a health and economic crisis, it is critical that women play a  central role in our recovery,” Minister Payne said.

The Morrison Government will invest $50 million in the Women@Work Program to help  restore and exceed the pre-COVID-19 record levels of women’s workforce participation.  Women@Work expands the existing Women’s Leadership and Development Program to  create jobs and employment opportunities for women, including women from diverse  backgrounds.

Key components of Women@Work will be delivered in partnership with organisations that  operate proven, high impact projects to support women’s economic security. Master  Builders Australia’s Women Building Australia program will be expanded to support more  women into the male-dominated building and construction industry.

The innovative Academy for Enterprising Girls program will also be expanded to give girls  and young women across Australia, particularly in rural and regional communities, the  skills and opportunities to start their own businesses in the digital economy.

The Government is also investing in Respect@Work to address and prevent workplace  sexual harassment in Australia. Sexual harassment is a barrier to women’s workforce  participation, particularly for women working in male-dominated fields. The Government is

PROTECTED: CABINET



PROTECTED: CABINET

committed to eradicating it from Australian workplaces. This measure will provide funding  for new tools and training to support workers and employers to create safe workplaces for  everyone.

This builds on the Government’s existing commitment to women’s safety. On 29 March  2020, the Government announced a $150 million domestic violence support package as  part of our COVID-19 response. This package is in addition to the $340.7 million the  Commonwealth had already invested in initiatives under the Fourth Action Plan of  the National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children 2010-2022. Since  2013, the Government has invested over $1 billion to prevent and respond to violence  against women and their children.

“When women feel safe and valued, they are able to participate fully in civic, social and  economic life,” Minister Payne said.

“This government is working hard to lift women’s economic security, but government  cannot do it alone. We must continue to work to remove barriers and create more  opportunities to help women realise their potential for themselves and for Australia.”

A further $35.9 million will be invested in the Boosting Female Founders Initiative to  support up to 282 additional start-ups and 4,300 women entrepreneurs. This initiative will  also create a new service to provide access to expert mentoring and advice for women  entrepreneurs.

In addition to the Government’s record levels of funding in child care which is forecast to  be approximately $9 billion in the 2020-21 financial year, we are also providing a range of  supports for families that have been impacted by COVID-19.

The Paid Parental Leave (PPL) work test period will be temporarily extended to 20 months  (600 days) to ensure that parents whose employment has been impacted by COVID-19  are supported and that women can remain connected to the workforce. This measure will  assist parents in meeting work test provisions if their employment has been affected by  COVID-19. This measure is estimated to allow about 9,000 mothers to regain eligibility for  Parental Leave Pay.

In recognition of the challenges that disadvantaged families are facing as a result of  COVID-19, the Government is investing a further $24.7 million in the ParentsNext program  to allow disadvantaged job-seeking parents able to access more streamlined and  extended services that will help them re-enter the workforce.

The Government is also providing $14.5 million to extend and expand several existing  Women in STEM programs, including the Women in STEM and Entrepreneurship (WISE)  Grants Program, the Girls in STEM Toolkit, and the Women in STEM Ambassador role.  This measure will support extra projects led by business, industry and the community to  increase women’s participation in STEM, as well as supporting girls and women to gain  the skills and capabilities needed to access these jobs of the future.

New STEM industry cadetships and advanced apprenticeships for women are also being  funded to assist 500 women into STEM careers. We are investing $25.1 million to support  women to study and complete a STEM qualification through this new program.

This package builds on the 2018 Women’s Economic Security Statement and  complements the wide range of existing Government supports, including JobTrainer. It will  support women into jobs now and help drive economic growth in the future.

PROTECTED: CABINET



PROTECTED: CABINET

Media Contact  David Wroe: +61 429 531 143  Melanie Ruiz: +61 427 888 392



Authorised by Senator the Hon Marise Payne, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Women, Australia.

