





THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP  MINISTER FOR POPULATION, CITIES AND URBAN  INFRASTRUCTURE



VINCE CONNELLY MP  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR STIRLING



CELIA HAMMOND MP  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR CURTIN



THE HON MARK MCGOWAN MLA  PREMIER OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA

THE HON RITA SAFFIOTI MLA  WA MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT







MEDIA RELEASE

The Hon Alan Tudge MP, Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure   ASHTON, VICTORIA



Thursday, 20 August 2020

GROUND-BREAKING MILESTONE ON STEPHENSON AVENUE EXTENSION

Work has begun on the $125 million Stephenson Avenue Extension project in the City of  Stirling.

The jointly-funded project will extend Stephenson Avenue from Scarborough Beach Road to  Cedric Street and will include a new freeway interchange.

Local Osborne Park contractor Densford Civil Pty has been engaged to deliver Stage 1 of the  work. It is expected that 800 jobs will be created across both stages of the project.

Expressions of interest from industry to deliver stage two are now open with applications  closing on September 2, 2020.

Western Australian Premier Mark McGowan said he was pleased to see another key State  Government election commitment reach an important milestone.

“Getting these works underway to extend Stephenson Avenue from Scarborough Beach Road  through to Cedric Street and the Mitchell Freeway, in Stirling, is about creating a pipeline of  jobs, making the daily commute easier for residents and workers, and delivering what we said  we would,” Mr McGowan said.

“Once completed, the project will connect the commercial business areas and provide better  access to Mitchell Freeway, Scarborough Beach Road and Cedric Street along with unlocking  private investment and jobs in a key CBD hub outside of Perth.

“This is just one of our major road infrastructure projects being fast-tracked as part of WA’s  post-COVID recovery journey to help rebuild the State stronger than ever.”

Federal Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure Alan Tudge said across Perth  and WA there was unprecedented infrastructure activity underway supporting WA’s post-COVID economic recovery.

“The Stephenson Avenue Extension project is part of a wider transformation of Perth’s roads  that will provide local business, residents and commercial enterprises with an improved  transport network,” Mr Tudge said.

“The Morrison Government has invested billions of dollars into key WA infrastructure that is  helping create and support local jobs.”

Western Australian Transport Minister Rita Saffioti said the McGowan Government was  committed to working with industry to support local businesses and create more local jobs.

“We estimate this project alone will support 800 jobs and complements other investments in  transport infrastructure including the Mitchell Freeway southbound widening works from Cedric  Street to Vincent Street and the extension of the Mitchell Freeway north to Alkimos,” Ms  Saffioti said.

“This project will also better connect pedestrians and cyclists to Stirling Station through the  construction of a principal shared path.”

Federal Member for Stirling Vince Connelly said the project will be constructed in two phases,  with Phase 1 to be delivered by the City of Stirling and Phase 2 by Main Roads WA.

“When complete, the project will extend Stephenson Avenue from Scarborough Beach Road to  Cedric Street and will include a new freeway interchange,” Mr Connelly said.

Federal Member for Curtin Celia Hammond said expressions of interest from industry to deliver  Phase 2 are now open with applications closing on September 2, 2020.

“Once completed, benefits include improving productivity for commercial vehicles, as well as  supporting economic and social development in and around the Stirling City Centre,”  Ms Hammond said.

City of Stirling Mayor Mark Irwin said the City was eager to start construction on the pivotal  project.

“Reaching this significant milestone is the result of years of planning, with contributions from all  tiers of government and a shared goal to improve this area,” Cr Irwin said.

“The Stephenson Avenue Extension is a key element of our vision for the Stirling City Centre  and once complete, it will provide an important connection and facilitate further public and  private infrastructure projects to activate the area.”

The $125 million Stephenson Avenue Extension project is jointly funded by the Australian and  the Western Australian governments, which are committing $65 million and $60 million  respectively.

[ENDS]

Media Contact:  Mr McGowan - Lannie Le-Patterson 0419 698 504   Mr Tudge - Michael Bennett 0434 782 923  Ms Saffioti - Caitlin Goddard 0437 234 249  Mr Connelly - Electoral Office (08) 9344 2373  Ms Hammond - Electoral Office (08) 9388 0288  Cr Irwin - (08) 9205 8502



