

BILL SHORTEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT SERVICES    SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE  SCHEME   MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  TODAY SHOW  TUESDAY, 31 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Government JobKeeper package; Coronavirus; Bunnings

ALLY LANGDON, HOST: For billions of Aussie workers, the PM announcing a 130 billion  dollar wage subsidy to save jobs threatened by coronavirus. To discuss, I'm joined by  Shadow Minister for Government Services Bill Shorten and Triple M’s Gus Worland. Good  morning, gentlemen.

BILL SHORTEN, MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG: Good morning Ally. Good morning  Gus.

LANGDON: So Bill I’m going to go to you first, because as soon as this was announced,  our sharemarket surged yesterday, reporting its best day ever. Do you share the optimism  of the markets over this latest rescue package?

SHORTEN: Listen it sounds good. I know Labor has said that we should have wages  subsidies and they're doing that all around the world. But this will make the viewers happy  because the Labor guy’s not going to bag the government. Good on them. We’ll have to  study the detail to make sure the casuals are getting looked after. I think it is a step in the  right direction and it will come as a tremendous mental relief for a whole lot of people. I’d  like to put a plug in for the disability workforce. They do a great job and are an essential  service.

LANGDON: Yeah, absolutely. And in this time of unity Bill do you think the Prime Minister's  doing a good job?

SHORTEN: I think on this one. Yeah I think we are getting there. This morning is not the  morning for being churlish. I'm happy that workers are being looked after. I mean we’ve got  to remember the sole traders and the small businesses, but this is a step in the right  direction. On the surface, we'll have to study the detail, I think they're going to need to  bring parliament back next week or as soon as possible. But the idea that we're going to  help people at work, that must be a tremendous mental comfort for a lot of Australians.

LANGDON: And I think that's it provided a bit of hope yesterday. I mean this is six million  jobs that we’re potentially talking about it is huge isn’t it?

GUS WORLAND, TRIPLE M: It sure is, Ally. And it's just so wonderful to hear Bill talk  about that this morning and be so positive. I don’t think the PM necessarily has nailed it  down absolutely everything over the last couple of months. But what a tough job it's been  for him. And I think he's now rallied in that particular case. Like Bill said, mentally for  people that we've been out of control, we haven't been sure what's happening. There's so  much going on that we're not sure about. Now, at least we can put a line in the sand that  said, at least that's there. And it's this is the guy who tip my hat to our leaders in  government. And I tip my hat to Bill for being so positive as well, because this is not about  politics. This is about real people's lives.

LANGDON: And don’t you find, and I put this to both of you. What I think a lot of people  are really liked and what we're seeing, you know, with national cabinet. You’ve got all the  Premiers from the states and territories and the Prime Minister in there, both sides of  politics. Is that there really does seem to be a sense of cohesion and that we are in this  together? Would you agree Bill?

SHORTEN: Yeah, I think that give out leader Anthony Albanese a guernsey in the team.  But at a time like this, this is unprecedented. The aim is to get the best out of people. I  mean, Labor's said, you know, go hard, go early and that hasn't always been the strategy.  But today, when I think about up to 6 million people who've got a better chance staying at  work, their employers and companies being able to ensure cash flow. Well, you know, this  is what Labor’s been calling for but it on the surface, it looks a good thing. And I just think  about all the shop assistants, all the essential workers all the people in the companies and  at least this is good news in a time when the news seems to be quite bad.

LANGDON: Now, something else I wanted to talk to you both about this morning because  there are wildly different stories coming from the government's hotel quarantine scheme.  Overseas arrivals spend two weeks confined to hotel rooms. Now, as we're seeing some of  them are five-star others aren't quite so luxurious. Gus do you have sympathy for those  who are complaining?

WORLAND: I suppose I have a little bit of sympathy for some parts of it, but at the end of  the day, let's look at this situation we’ve got. This is as Bill said, unprecedented global  drama and we're totally out of control at the moment in the world. So a couple of weeks  anywhere, a luxury hotel is probably better than most. I know it's going to be ideal. It's not  what they wanted, but no one one's getting what they want at the moment. So I reckon it's  time to give yourself a bit of an uppercut if you are complaining too much. I think it's all  about understanding the bigger picture and just getting on. It's only 14 days. My wife's  been quarantined for 13 days after coming back from Japan. She’s got windows and she  can walk out on a balcony but still, you know, she’s still keeping in contact with people. I  think we have to just get a grip and realise that it’s only 14 days and just get on with it.

LANGDON: Have you ever given yourself an uppercut?

WORLAND: All the time, regularly.

LANGDON: Bill?

SHORTEN: You mean the uppercut or the hotel? I'm lucky to be in politics -  there’s others



who give you the uppercut. But in terms of the 14 days, it's better being here than being  overseas. As an MP I've got constituents who are stuck in other parts of the world. So just  perhaps you know if you’re you are thinking you’r a bit hard done by there are people who  just want to get home to Australia. But 14 days, cabin fever, small room, you’ve got the  kids, you got your beloved life partner. I got a little bit of sympathy for people are getting  cabin fever after 14 days. I mean, it's better than being somewhere else in the world.  Listen, I'm just at home and I found that my ideas of a home office and a regular  schedule  ... I did not know there were so many outstanding chores at home!

LANGDON: This is why we need Bunnings to stay open Bill so Chloe can keep sending  you off to the shops so you can do all those jobs around the house.

SHORTEN: Essential services: Bunnings and Dan Murphys!

LANGDON: But we see in every crisis that it really does bring out the best and it brings out  the worst in people. Bill, can I ask you, what has made you angry this week and what has  lifted your spirits?

SHORTEN: Tell you what I couldn't believe when I saw it is I went on eBay there are  profiteers trying to sell Glen20 for 50 bucks. You know, there should be a rule against this  profiteering. You know, we all complain about the people hoarding the toilet paper, but  Glen 20 is used to spray the surface, not that I work with Glen 20 but it’s used to spray  surfaces. I cannot believe we’ve got rogues and scallywags, there should be a law against  people selling far above this. And the tech giants like eBay they should just clamp down on  this. This is bloody outrageous.

LANGDON: Yeah they need to be named and shamed those people, I reckon. Gus how  about yourself?

WORLAND: Look, I've just decided, guys, to be as positive as possible over this period. It  got me so angry the toilet paper stuff, and then also the hand sanitizer. The fact you can't  get it and the fact that people are hoarding. I'm just really focussed in on the fact that  community have come together. And I think the great Aussie spirit overall is being good.  There's always gonna be ratbags. There is always gonna be people that let us down.  But as a general rule, again, like we have seen with all the mother nature stuff, with the  droughts and the fires and the floods, we have come together pretty well as a  nation. So I'm just going to stay positive Ally.

LANGDON: And I saw a beautiful suggestion yesterday as someone wrote in and said that  why don't we get some of our young people, our school kids, to write letters to our veterans  because of course we’re not celebrating Anzac Day or recognising Anzac Day this year so  I thought that was a beautiful touch too. Gentlemen always lovely to talk to you both.  Thanks for joining us this morning. Stay safe.

SHORTEN: Thanks, cheerio.

WORLAND: Thanks, Ally.

ENDS  MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM HOULIHAN 0438 366 400



