



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

Senator Claire Chandler  Senator for Tasmania



The Hon Michael Ferguson MP  Tasmanian Minister for State Growth  Tasmanian Minister for Science and Technology   Tasmanian Minister for Infrastructure and Transport

Tasmanian Minister for Finance



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au

17 November 2020

FUNDING SECURED FOR TASMAN HIGHWAY CAUSEWAYS

With the Australian Government committing $150 million and the Tasmanian Government adding an  additional $37 million, the duplication of the Tasman Highway causeways and McGees Bridge is now  fully funded.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said following this announcement, preliminary works are expected to start in the coming  weeks, with major construction on the first component due to begin in early 2021.

“The duplication of the causeways will deliver two lanes in each direction, with an additional bridge  next to McGees Bridge and a 2.5-metre-wide shared pathway,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“When complete, there will be a continuous four-lane highway between Hobart and Sorell.

“The Australian Government continues to roll out these types of nation-building projects across  Australia under our $110 billion infrastructure investment program, which is laying the foundations  for economic recovery following COVID-19.”

Tasmanian Minister for Infrastructure and Transport Michael Ferguson said environmental  investigations, design and community consultation on the duplication of the causeways will progress  throughout 2021. Construction is expected to begin in 2023 and be completed in 2025.

“The South East Traffic Solution is jointly funded by the Tasmanian and Australian governments as  part of the Roads of Strategic Importance program,” Minister Ferguson said.

“It consists of a suite of improvements on the Tasman Highway between the Hobart Airport and  Sorell, as well as on the Arthur Highway, south of Iron Creek Bridge.

“This is another part of our plan to improve safety and travel time reliability on our roads for  Tasmanians and visitors.”

Senator for Tasmania Claire Chandler said the joint investment into this major infrastructure project  was an example of how the Federal Liberal-National and Tasmanian Liberal Governments were  working together to deliver better outcomes for Tasmanians.

“This is a route which is beyond its current capacity and causes traffic to frequently come to a  standstill around peak times. With the area continuing to grow and attract more families, it’s vital  that we invest now to provide a highway which reduces the amount of time families in Sorell and the  Southern Beaches spend sitting in traffic.

“This is a critical piece of work for the future of the region and that’s why the Morrison Government  is investing $150 million for the duplication of the causeways on top of our existing investment in the  full Sorell traffic corridor upgrade.”

The first South East Traffic Solution project, the Arthur Highway overtaking lane, was completed in  February 2020. Early site preparation works have been completed at the Hobart Airport Interchange,  with major construction expected to commence this week following the RMPAT decision to uphold  the planning approval.

More information on the program is available at www.transport.tas.gov.au/road/projects.

Ends.

Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Jo Williamson 0418 475 668 | Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Minister Ferguson - Carly Dolan 0437 925 010  Senator Chandler - (03) 6260 2018

