

ANDREW LEIGH MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR TREASURY  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR CHARITIES  MEMBER FOR FENNER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC SYDNEY BREAKFAST  THURSDAY, 19 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Economic stimulus; charities affected by coronavirus; the Reserve  Bank.

WENDY HARMER, HOST: This is very timely that we are speaking to Andrew Leigh.  Andrew Leigh is a former economist and he’s Shadow Assistant Minister for Treasury and  Charities. And I guess that he's been keeping his eye on the bailout packages, the stimulus  that's been offered, this brand new tranche of measures that are supposed to be released  tomorrow that are coming from the government to try and deal with this economic crisis.  We welcome him to the program. Hello, Andrew.

ANDREW LEIGH, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR TREASURY AND  CHARITIES: G’day, Wendy. Great to be with you.

HARMER: Now we are expecting something quite interesting to come tomorrow. We are,  we have been told - this is the that the drop - that a central feature of the soon to be  announced package will be something called a, well a survival package for those who are  without jobs. A temporary wage.

LEIGH: I'm pleased that the government's recognised that last week's package wasn't  enough. When you look at its scale compared to other countries, I think that becomes  pretty clear. It was less than 1 per cent of GDP. The New Zealanders, for example, have  just unveiled a stimulus package worth around four per cent of national income. People  need to remember that this is a temporary shock and there's no reason that anyone ought  to be pushed to the breadline, to be losing their job, have their business go bust because  of a virus for which we'll have a vaccine within a year or two. This is exactly why we have  governments, exactly why fiscal policy was developed, in order to help get us all through  temporary shocks like this one.

HARMER: All right. So this is not a universal basic wage, of course. We know that people  are very much divided about that. But it has been recommended that this kind of wage  could be used in times of pandemic.

LEIGH: It certainly makes some sense to me. The best measures at this time, Wendy, are  those which reduce the transmission of the virus, which have both a good economic

benefit but also a good public health benefit. Sweden, for example, has announced that the  government will assume responsibility for all sick leave payments for April and May.  There's been calls by ACOSS to pause face by face to face reporting for welfare recipients,  which I think makes some economic and public health sense. Countries around the world  are also looking at whether they can put some of the surplus labour into hospital  construction. Whether or not we'll need those temporary hospital beds, we can't be sure,  but it seems a sensible measure that ticks both the economic and the health boxes.

ROBBIE BUCK, HOST: Okay. This $17 billion that the federal government put up last  week is in addition to the $2.3 billion stimulus package that we've seen from the state  government and Gladys Berejiklian. Tell us where, from your perspective, where is the  best place to hit the Australian economy to try and maintain the economy ticking over that  perhaps is different to the UK or New Zealand or other countries?

LEIGH: Well Robbie, I worry very much about the invisible Australians, people who don't  have high powered lobbyists and access to the front page of the newspapers. So I think  any package needs to make sure that it looks after pensioners, people with disabilities, the  homeless, and Indigenous Australians.

BUCK: But to be fair, that $17.6 billion, it is going to include welfare payments, one off  cash payments.

LEIGH: That’s right. So I'm not saying that these people have been completely left out, but  I think there's always a risk at times like this that it's the powerful voices that get first dibs.  So for example, charities-  which employ around a million people, contribute 8 per cent of  GDP - have been excluded from the business payments. Weneed to remember that  charities have seen a massive drop off in their donations and they're also part of the  frontline in responding. So if somebody is being forced to self-isolate, they can't go out and  get groceries, who do they turn to first? It's like to be a local charity. We need to make sure  that our charities are looked after at a time like this.

HARMER: Andrew, the banks. This is an interesting one. A few of our listeners have said  ‘well, can we please have mortgage breaks? Could we have a reduction in credit card  fees?’ Tell us how the banks are coming to the party or otherwise, as you see it.

LEIGH: I’ve had a number of conversations with senior people in the banks about what  they're doing. I think there's a recognition that they have a responsibility to step up. They  play a unique role in the financial system, and when you look around the world you can  see significant action that’s being taken in other countries. In Germany, they're calling it the  bazooka - they're extending unlimited credit to all firms at reasonably low interest rates.  There's been a suggestion by Bruce Chapman that that should be done through some sort  of a revenue-contingent model - effectively HECS-for-firms - which recognises that then  firms wouldn't need to repay until their incomes went up past a certain threshold, which we  can do through the business activity statements. So we need to be thinking as creatively  as possible about how to tackle this, and aware that this is a temporary shock and there's  no need to make the hit any harder than it has to be.

HARMER: Now, I know that you being from the Labor Party - we’re speaking with Andrew  Leigh, who is the Shadow Assistant Minister for Treasury and Charities - you probably  haven't been at the table during these discussions, Andrew. Is that a disappointment?

LEIGH: I think it would have been a time in which you would have been possible to form a



cabinet of national unity. The Prime Minister's gone instead for a weekly telephone hook-up with the states and territories. That's useful, but all the wisdom doesn't reside on one  side of the political fence. So it would have been nice to be brought in there, but we're  happy contributing ideas through public debate through channels such as this. We think  that there's a range of useful proposals being put forward by the ACTU, by ACOSS, by a  number of the peak bodies around.

HARMER: Yes. And now just finally, we're looking perhaps today at the Reserve Bank of  Australia expecting to cut the cash rate by another 25 basis points to 0.25 per cent.  Thoughts on that?

LEIGH: It’s well beyond time the Reserve Bank cut the rate to 0.25 per cent, and it'll be  interesting to see what they do on the quantitative easing side. Their counterpart banks  around the world have already moved pretty decisively and in many cases with measures  which are encouraging banks to engage in additional lending. So for example, the Bank of  England's facility says that for banks that provide additional credit to small businesses,  they'll get better treatment from the central bank. And that's a creative way of ensuring also  that cash flows where it needs to be.

HARMER: All right. We’ll we wait to see what the government comes up with tomorrow.  But thanks for those thoughts this morning, Andrew.

LEIGH: Thanks so much for the conversation.

HARMER: Thanks. Andrew Leigh, former economist and Shadow Assistant Minister for  Treasury and Charities.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHANIE ANDERSON 0431 344 056





