Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.







The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health

The Hon. Nola Marino MP  Assistant Minister for Regional Development and Territories  Federal Member for Forrest

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

10 November 2020

Government launches enhanced headspace in Busselton

Young people in Busselton and surrounds will now have easier access to mental health  services with the opening of an expanded headspace satellite service this week.

As part of the Australian Government’s $111.3 million funding commitment to expanding the  headspace network, additional ongoing funding has been provided to upgrade the service  from an outpost to a permanent satellite service.

The new service is located at 7 Harris Road, Busselton.

Minister for Health, Greg Hunt, said young people have been affected significantly by the  impacts of COVID-19, and access to mental health services and support was more important  than ever.

“There are more pressures on young people today than ever before and the expansion of  headspace will be vitally important in providing services in Busselton,” Minister Hunt said.

“I am committed to ensuring young Australians can get information, advice, counselling or  treatment, when and where they need it.”

Member for Forrest, Nola Marino, welcomed the announcement, and said, “I want our young  people in Busselton to know they are not alone on their journey.”

“headspace is here to deliver quality frontline support and ensure the best possible care for  people who are at risk,” Mrs Marino said.

“We know intervention at the earliest possible stage is important to reduce the duration and  impact of mental illness, so I encourage young people in our community to reach out for the  help they need.”

The headspace program aims to improve access for young people aged 12 to 25 years who  have, or are at risk of, mental illness.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





One in four people aged 16 to 24 experiences some form of mental illness every year, and  three-quarters of all mental illness manifests in people under the age of 25.

headspace offers early intervention services across four key areas - mental health, related  physical health, social and vocational support, and alcohol and other drug use.

Services provide tailored and holistic mental health support, working closely with young  people at a crucial time in their lives to help get them back on track and strengthen their  ability to manage their mental health in the future.

Services are co-designed with young people to ensure they are relevant, accessible and highly  effective.

The Government continues to demonstrate its firm commitment to the mental health and  wellbeing of all Australians, providing a record investment in mental health services and  support of an estimated $5.7 billion this year alone.

The headspace service has been commissioned by the Western Australia Primary Health  Alliance and is designed to meet the needs of young people in Busselton.

ENDS

