TERRI BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT AND WATER

MEMBER FOR GRIFFITH





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

THURSDAY, 8 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECTS: The Morrison recession; Federal Budget; Trillion dollar debt; The

Morrison Government’s failure to invest in childcare, aged care and social housing;

Budget impact on women; Domestic and family violence; Homelessness; Budget

reply.



TERRI BUTLER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT AND WATER: Well,

unfortunately, what we've seen from the Scott Morrison budget is no plan for the Morrison

recession. The budget unfortunately, completely failed Australian women.



It had very little of interest for Australian women whatsoever. And we're seeing that play

out now as women across Australia, incredible women are criticizing this budget for its

failure to support Australian women.



There was no plan for social housing in this budget. There was no plan for aged care in

this budget. And there was no plan for childcare in this budget.



It's a real shame that the Morrison Government squibbed the opportunity for reform. I think

that people are going to be really disappointed that they've managed to rack up a trillion

dollars in debt and have nothing to show for the Australian people.



This Morrison recession means that Australians are calling out the jobs and they are

calling out for reform. I'm really looking forward to tonight’s budget reply, from our leader,

Anthony Albanese.





Anthony will set out a vision for Australia. He'll be about serious reform that will improve

our economy and improve the lives of Australians. So I'm really looking forward to tonight's

reply and I know Australians will be too.



JOURNALIST: Terri there has been an increase in domestic violence during the COVID

period because of the isolation, Do you think more money should be spent towards

(inaudible).



BUTLER: It's really obvious that one of the things that happens when you fail to support

social housing, is that you fail to support the availability of stock for people to use when

they are fleeing domestic and family violence. And of course, Australians would know that

domestic and family violence is one of the biggest causes, if not the biggest cause of

homelessness amongst women and one of the biggest causes of homelessness full stop.



So when this government fails to deal with social housing, when they fail to deal with

childcare, when they fail to deal with aged care, and when they fail to support Australian

women, that has broader consequences.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: RICHARD ALCORN 0438 804 563



