

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE

SENATOR FOR THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2GB/3AW/4BC - BUDGET NIGHT LIVE

TUESDAY, 6 OCOTBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Federal Budget.



BROOKE CORTE, HOST: All of the measures, of course, none of it comes

cheap. We've got this budget deficit of $213.7 billion for the year 2020/21. Now,

Senator Katy Gallagher is the Shadow Finance Minister. She's with us here on

Budget Night Live. Good evening, Senator.



SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE: Good

evening, Brooke, thanks for having me on.



CORTE: No, we appreciate your time. Income tax cuts, they're going to be

backdated to July 1 this year. Someone on the text line, someone asking, how

do we get the money? And can you take me back because I'm at work. So this

is for you, you'll get the chunk of the money when you do your tax return, but

you'll start to get some money in your pocket within weeks. Will you give it all

the green light so the ATO can start putting money back out in the economy?



GALLAGHER: Brooke, look, I think Labor has been saying for some time, we

were interested in looking at bringing forward stage two, we've supported both

the first stage and stage two of the Government's proposed tax cuts. So I think

you'll certainly see us working with the Government on that front. We think, you

know, that that is a useful measure to put into the economy now. And I think

anything where we can give people a bit of confidence and put a bit of money

back in their pockets is a welcome initiative. But I mean…



CORTE: …Straight up. Yes. All good?



GALLAGHER: Yes, I think on the tax cuts, we've been saying that for some

time. So that I think that'll be pretty straightforward. We'll wait and see what the

government brings forward and how it does with the legislation. We'll probably

know that a bit more in the next day or so. But I don't see any delays there.

Obviously, the budget is, you know, in deep strife in terms of debt and deficit,

and we're in a deep recession so we do need to put our shoulder to the wheel

to make sure we're doing everything we can to support people and support jobs

in the economy.



CORTE: And the JobMaker hiring credits, which we heard earlier, the

Treasurer explain, it incentivises employers to hire people under the age of 35.

Do you support that? Or do you maybe share this concern that we've raised

this evening already that maybe it disincentivises, the hiring of older workers

too?



GALLAGHER: Yes, so look, we're working through the detail of it and we'll

have more discussions with the Government. I think we acknowledge that there

is an issue about young people and how we make sure that young people

aren’t lost for a generation in terms of work, we need to really protect them. But

we are concerned that for those over 35, that there isn't much in this budget in

terms of support, particularly if you've lost your job. For that hiring measure for

that program you have to be on JobSeeker or in some receipt of Youth

Allowance, for example, but there's nearly a million former workers, a million

unemployed over the age of 35, who are in receipt of JobSeeker at the

moment. We know there's, you know, 1.6 million people on JobSeeker. So

that's a big chunk of people who we can't see getting much support either

through this hiring initiative, or the fact that they're not extending JobKeeper

and we will see people move from JobKeeper to JobSeeker as well.



CORTE: Yeah, I do know Deloitte did some modelling didn’t they, saying by not

extending the Coronavirus supplement, you could see, I think their figures were

140,000 job loss job losses over two years. There was a text earlier from

someone in Victoria - no name here, actually was Chris from Caulfield saying,

Yeah, he's on JobKeeper, full-time worker, single guy. What does the future

hold? Victoria’s workplace situation’s obviously, still very difficult.

JobKeeper,JobSeeker? I mean, what happens in the next 12 months? I think

he’ll feel a little confused about, perhaps, yes, he's got maybe some tax cuts in

there somewhere but he's going to be concerned about some of the programs

that he's been on and where they kind of go and where it leaves him. Can I ask

you as well about what's in there for business. It looks like almost every

business in the country can write off eligible assets until July 2022. It's a pretty

generous tax holiday for I guess everyone but the very largest will ever support

that.



GALLAGHER: You know, we again, we've been saying for some time we need

to do something about private sector investment, business investment in this

country. It had been taking a nosedive before the coronavirus pandemic so we

have to have a look at this. I mean, I think, you know, it certainly supports

business investment. It's a big chunk of money $27 billion for just the



depreciation - 100% depreciation measure so it is a big chunk of money. But

we certainly support, you know, investment for business, you know, for

business to invest. It's a key part of the recovery story, but we do want to work

through the detail and go through our processes on that one.



CORTE: All right, you'll get your reply, of course, Senator Katy Gallagher, the

Shadow Finance Minister, thank you for your time.



GALLAGHER: Thanks very much, Brooke.



ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: PAT CRONAN  0432 758 224





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













