

GED KEARNEY MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR SKILLS

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR AGED CARE

MEMBER FOR COOPER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RADIO MELBOURNE DRIVE WITH RAF EPSTEIN

TUESDAY, 11 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECT: Aged care coronavirus crisis.



RAF EPSTEIN, HOST: The Federal Labor opposition joining me is Ged

Kearney. She's the Shadow Assistant Minister for Aged Care. So she's one of

Anthony Albanese's spokespeople on aged care. And she is, of course, the MP

for the seat of Cooper here in Melbourne. Thanks for joining us.



GED KEARNEY, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR AGED CARE: Good

afternoon, oh good evening!



EPSTEIN: What's your key concern right now with aged care?



KEARNEY: Well of course, there's the immediate crisis. I think what we're

seeing happening in aged care - first of all, I'm horrified and saddened at what's

happening. And I really feel for the callers you just had on. As an MP, I'm

getting dozens of those every day from people who are worried about their

relatives in local aged care facilities, so I'm hearing these stories a lot. But there

is, of course, the immediate crisis and in my view, some catastrophic errors that

have been made which have led to this situation. And for the longer term, of

course, there are structural issues that we have been calling out for a long time,

that I think has played into the current crisis as well. So fixing the current crisis,

I think is the first thing and...



EPSTEIN: Could the Federal Government have done more with the current

crisis do you think?



KEARNEY: I think the Federal Government could have done a lot more to

avoid what's happening right now. Number 1) they could have dealt with the

long term issues that we've been raising for a long time. But number 2) we had

Earl Haven, we had NewMarch, we've had lots of catastrophes happening...



EPSTEIN: Sorry Ged they're the two in New South Wales?  Sorry not

everyone's familiar with all the names of the homes.



KEARNEY: They were some awful situations in aged care facilities that we got

a lot of learnings from. There were recommendations that came from those,

and they haven't been followed up at all. And some of those were raised today

in the Royal Commission hearings that are looking at this. That is squabbling

between the State and the Commonwealth, contradicting advice coming from

the Federal Health department, local hospitals. I mean the Commonwealth

Government, the first thing they should have done, the very first thing was set

up lines of communication. Who is responsible for what? And if you ask me, the

Commonwealth is responsible for aged care.



EPSTEIN: Are you at all nervous about being seen to criticise the person who

will be the permanent Chief Medical Officer Paul Kelly. Because he said today

'Look, we've had a plan. We've had an action plan for COVID-19 the whole way

through.' Are you concerned to be seen attacking him?



KEARNEY: Well, where is the plan? I mean, we had Anglicare CEO from

NewMarch today saying that they were overwhelmed by the crisis. They were

overwhelmed. And I saw Minister Colbeck stand up today and he didn't show

any remorse or any acceptance of responsibility. He said 'Yes there were gaps,

there were gaps.' But there are people dying because of those gaps. I mean,

I'm not laying blame on anyone particular other than to say that the Federal

Government, Scott Morrison, needs to accept responsibility for this and he

needs to make sure that it doesn't happen anywhere else, and that this is fixed.



EPSTEIN: Do you think the level of scrutiny needs to be equally apply to the

Federal Government and also to the State Government? Do you think the State

Government's got questions to answer on the hotel quarantine program?



KEARNEY: Well, that's happening now. I mean, we have a Premier who is

going before a State inquiry today answering questions on that, who has

admitted responsibility. But we have a Prime Minister who is flatly refusing to

accept responsibility for what's happening in aged care and...



EPSTEIN: Although in the middle of last week he said he was very sorry for

what had gone on in places like St Basil's in the transition of staff, he did

apologise for that last week?



KEARNEY: Well he said he was sorry, but he has not actually accepted

responsibility. I mean, I think that's a different thing. We saw that he's refusing

to allow any public officials give evidence at the inquiry into the Ruby Princess

debacle. So I think there's two different levels of accountability and

responsibility here. The Commonwealth is responsible for aged care. And I

think they have really let everybody down. And I'm not one to be just Iaying

blame but...



EPSTEIN: It's difficult isn't it because there's a tonne of people who think that

the Premier here hasn't given any answers. He's been asked lots questions and

they think that he's given no answers at all.



KEARNEY: But at least he's prepared to go before these inquiries. And he will

accept, I mean I'm assuming he will accept the outcome. I mean here we have

the government, the Federal Government simply not accepting responsibility. I

watched Richard Colbeck stand up today and I was hoping beyond hope that

he would accept responsibility and say 'we are going to fix this and we're going

to make sure that is not happening anywhere else'.



EPSTEIN: Well they are throwing resources at - they're part of the Taskforce

that is at the Emergency Management Centre here in Victoria dealing with aged

care, so they're not they're not saying it's not their responsibility are they?



KEARNEY: Well Julie Collins, the Shadow Minister for Aged Care is doing a

wonderful job of holding them to account. She has written to the Prime Minister.

And she has asked that he set up similar response centres in every state and

territory to make sure that this doesn't happen. There's no point setting them up

weeks and weeks into the crisis. The Victorian one was only set up two weeks

ago. Yes, it's a good thing to do. And there are all the right people on there,

including workers representatives, unions. But we want to see one of those set

up everywhere so that they're ready to go. That we've got the response right -

everybody knows the chain of command, if you like, and I don't like to use that

term. But there's no squabbling about whose responsibility it is. That we've got

staff training in PPE ready to go, infection control experts on the ground ready.

There's workforce planning,  we've heard about how stressed the workforce is.



So we need infection control, isolation measures, communications with

relatives, with hospitals, you know, there's a whole lot of work that can be done

before the crisis hits that can just be ready to go. And to be perfectly honest

with us, I don't see that anywhere.



EPSTEIN: I appreciate your time Ged Kearney. Thank you.



KEARNEY: My pleasure Raf.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ANNA LONG 0412 618 355







Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













