





THE HON ALAN TUDGE  MP  MINISTER FOR POPULATION,  CITIES AND URBAN  INFRASTRUCTURE

SENATOR SARAH  HENDERSON  SENATOR FOR VICTORIA





THE HON JACLYN  SYMES MP  MINISTER FOR REGIONAL  DEVELOPMENT, AGRICULTURE

AND RESOURCES

CHRISTINE COUZENS  MP  STATE MEMBER FOR GEELONG

THE HON JOHN EREN  MP  STATE MEMBER FOR LARA





MEDIA RELEASE



CR STEPHANIE ASHER  MAYOR, CITY OF GREATER  GEELONG





The Hon Alan Tudge MP, Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure   WANTIRNA SOUTH, VICTORIA



17 December 2020

LAUNCH OF WANGIM WALK WAVE ATTENUATOR A KEY STEP IN  TRANSFORMING GEELONG WATERFRONT

Geelong’s new $10.1 million, 440m Wave Attenuator has launched today, being a major  milestone in progression of the Geelong Waterfront Safe Harbour Precinct Project.

Named the Wangim Walk, it stretches out over Corio Bay to form one of Australia’s longest  on-water walkways and will be a magnet for the Geelong community and visitors to the  region.



Funded under the $370 million Geelong City Deal the project has boosted local jobs,  providing work for 18 separate consultancies and ongoing construction activities engaging up  to 30 contractors at any given time from six separate companies.

Federal Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure Alan Tudge said the wave  attenuator would expand the waterfront precinct and attract new events that would help the  local tourism industries recover from COVID-19.

“Expanding the precinct broadens the scope for major events and new tourism initiatives,  which will attract thousands of locals and visitors,” Mr Tudge said.

“This is a great example of a city deal project that is providing local jobs and helping with the  economic boost that Geelong needs.”

Victorian Minister for Regional Development Jaclyn Symes welcomed the significant  landmark’s completion.

“Projects like this are expanding on what’s already unique about Geelong and the region,  making it an even better place to live, work, invest and visit. The Geelong City Deal  continues to deliver for regional Victorians with our support,” Ms Symes said.

Senator for Victoria Sarah Henderson said Wangim Walk served a critical purpose as a wave  attenuator, protecting the thousands of craft that use the Royal Geelong Yacht Club’s  facilities and visit for Geelong’s world-renowned sailing events, international championships  and festivals.

“The opening of Wangim Walk signals a new era for the Geelong Waterfront and will help to  unlock an exciting future for the precinct,” Senator Henderson said.

“I have no doubt the walk will also be a major tourism drawcard which will help drive our  economic recovery - it’s an incredible experience to walk out over the water”

State Member for Geelong Christine Couzens said Wangim Walk would be a major attraction  for Geelong residents and tourists to the waterfront, giving them the chance to see Geelong  from a new perspective.

“Continuing to deliver Geelong City Deal projects such as Wangim Walk is so important for  the future of our regional economy. The collaboration between the Royal Geelong Yacht  Club and the Wadawurrung Traditional Owners will make Wangim Walk an iconic Geelong  attraction” Ms Couzens said.

State Member for Lara John Eren said the Wangim Walk would make a difference to many in  the community now and into the future.

“I am proud to collaborate with my colleagues in the Australian Government, Victorian  Government, the City of Greater Geelong and the Royal Geelong Yacht Club (RGYC) in  officially opening Wangim Walk.”

RGYC Commodore Stuart Dickson said the club was delighted to deliver an iconic new  feature for the Geelong Waterfront that would contribute much to the regional economy and  community for years to come.

“Wangim Walk belongs to the community and we look forward to the pleasure it will bring to  all those who live in the city and region or come to visit our beautiful bay and waterfront,”  Mr Dickson said.

“Venturing out over Corio Bay will be a spectacular addition to Geelong’s tourism experience  that will provide ongoing benefit to the visitor economy.

“Wangim, meaning boomerang in the Wadawurrung language, celebrates the rich local  heritage and culture of our first peoples and reflects the shape of the structure. The walkway  points directly to the granite heights of the You Yangs, a place of special cultural meaning  and importance.

“It forms part of the total transformation of the precinct over the next two years, creating  brilliant new community and visitor amenities and opening up the waterfront through new  public space and connections with the city.”

City of Greater Geelong Mayor, Cr Stephanie Asher said: “The Geelong community  welcomes the opening of Wangim Walk and the further transformation of the harbour  precinct. This provides another great space in our city for locals to connect and pursue  recreational activities that make Geelong such a great place to live.”

The Geelong Waterfront Safe Harbour Precinct Project includes the development of the new  Maritime Education Complex, incorporating the Victorian Sailing School and the Yacht Club’s

Off The Beach Centre, which provides vital programs for schools and students from all  around Victoria.

Future project stages will see the creation of extensive new areas of public domain and key  RGYC building redevelopment that will enable expanded community access and use.

The $19.35 million Geelong Waterfront Safe Harbour Precinct Project is jointly funded by the  Australian Government ($5.5 million), Victorian Government ($7.85 million), City of Greater  Geelong ($3 million) and the Royal Geelong Yacht Club ($3 million).

The transformative project has been realised with funding from the Australian and Victorian  governments and the City of Greater Geelong through the $382 million Geelong City Deal,  which contributed $3.5 million to enable construction and installation.

Attendees gathered for the official ribbon cutting ceremony at Wangim Walk this morning  included: Senator for Victoria Sarah Henderson, State Member for Geelong Christine  Couzens, State Member for Lara John Eren, City of Greater Geelong Mayor Stephanie Asher  and Royal Geelong Yacht Club Commodore Stuart Dickson.

More information on the Geelong City Deal is available at  www.infrastructure.gov.au/cities/city-deals/geelong.

[ENDS]

Media Contact:  Mr Tudge - Michael Bennett 0434 782 923  Ms Symes - Casey Lodge 0410 964 928  Senator Henderson - Electoral Office (03) 5221 5900  Mr Eren - (03) 5275 3898  Ms Couzens - (03) 5221 4821  Ms Asher - (03) 5272 5272

