



THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP   MINISTER FOR POPULATION, CITIES AND URBAN  INFRASTRUCTURE

NICOLLE FLINT MP  MEMBER FOR BOOTHBY





THE HON COREY WINGARD MP   SOUTH AUSTRALIAN MINISTER FOR  INFRASTRUCTURE AND TRANSPORT

STEVE MURRAY MP   MEMBER FOR DAVENPORT



MEDIA RELEASE

The Hon Alan Tudge MP, Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure   WANTIRNA SOUTH, VICTORIA



Saturday 1 August 2020

DARLINGTON UPGRADE PROJECT FULLY OPEN TO TRAFFIC

Adelaide motorists will be driving on the finished Darlington Upgrade Project this  weekend, after final construction elements were completed this week.

The morning commute has now been slashed for thousands of motorists with all new  lanes in the lowered motorway open and the speed limit lifted to 80km/h.

The $754.5 million project supported more than 370 jobs per year during construction.

Works on the lowered motorway including rectification works on the eastern walls  between Sturt Road and Flinders Drive have finished.

Federal Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure Alan Tudge said the  finished Darlington Upgrade was city-shaping for the people of Adelaide.

“Even during COVID we have made sure that work continued so we could deliver the  Darlington Upgrade on time,” Mr Tudge said.

“It’s another fantastic example of the Morrison and Marshall Government’s working  together for South Australia.”

Minister for Infrastructure and Transport Corey Wingard said delivering projects that cut  commute times means South Australians can spend more time doing what they enjoy.

“Around 73,000 motorists use this section of Main South Road every day and they’ll now  be able to get where they’re going faster,” Mr Wingard said.

“The Marshall Government is continuing its track record of being the 20-minute city and  supporting our growing population.”

Member for Boothby Nicolle Flint said reaching this milestone of the project will make a  big difference to those in the community.

“I know so many locals who are excited about having better access to Flinders Medical  Centre and Flinders University,” Ms Flint said.

“Being able to get to work, school and the local shops more quickly and safely will mean  they can spend more with their family and friends.”

Member for Davenport Steve Murray said it’s great news for those living in the Southern  suburbs.

“This is fantastic for all motorists using the Southern Expressway but particularly those  who live in the area,” Mr Murray said.

“It’s slashing the drive time and speeding up the commute.”

The lowered motorway has been progressively opened to traffic from 2019, with speed  and lane restrictions in place as construction works have progressed.

All lanes are now open to traffic without restrictions including the lowered motorway  speed limit increased to 80km/h between the Southern Expressway and Ayliffes Road.

A partial closure of the lowered motorway will be required in late 2020, for the final  asphalt wearing course. Advance notice of this closure will be provided closer to the  date.

Some minor finishing works will also be required over the coming months across the  project site including landscaping, wayfinding, public art and remediation of the site  compound, and signage and speed restrictions will be in place where required during  these times.

Please plan ahead, allow extra travel time and take extra care when workers are on site.

Observe speed and lane restrictions, and traffic controllers when travelling through the  area.

Other road closures and traffic restrictions may be required and advance notice will be  provided.

The Darlington Upgrade Project is another important stage in the delivery of Adelaide's  North-South Corridor and consists of an upgrade of approximately 3.3 kilometres of the  existing Main South Road

[ENDS]

Media Contact:  Minister Tudge - Michael Bennett 0434 782 923  Minister Wingard - Gemma Coombe 0415 175 716

