

MATT THISTLETHWAITE MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR THE REPUBLIC

MEMBER FOR KINGSFORD SMITH





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS

TUESDAY, 11 FEBRUARY 2020



SUBJECTS: Nationals; Coalition disunity; Coal; Bushfire recovery.



TOM CONNELL: Our next guests on the program are Matt Thistlethwaite from the Labor

Party and Tony Pasin from the Liberal Party, gentlemen thanks both for your time.



MATT THISTLETHWAITE, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL

SERVICES: G’day Tom.



CONNELL: Now you are watching on I'm sure as the Nationals were going about things

again and we've had some very outspoken Nationals MPs since, one thing seems pretty

clear the insurgents and Barnaby Joyce are not going to stop are they?



TONY PASIN, MEMBER FOR BARKER: Well, I hope because it's important that we're

unified. What we saw yesterday unfortunately was an opportunity that was cultivated

effectively by the Labor Party, led by Anthony Albanese, who tells us the nation is

experiencing conflict fatigue. But what we saw yesterday in the House of Representatives

is a very obvious opportunity that was taken to agitate those tensions and I think it's

disappointing. I for one someone who subscribes to the conventions of this place and I

think over a decade we've trashed them and we shouldn't and we wonder then why

perhaps the people of Australia, the citizenry, have a lower and lower regard for class

politic and I think you saw it on display yesterday and it was principally driven remembering

that that nomination came from Labor.



ANNELISE NIELSEN: Matt Thistlethwaite, was it Labor who was drumming up the

discontent of the Nats, it was your strategy wasn't it so put him forward so surely you would

briefing the Nats beforehand?



THISTLETHWAITE: Certainly not, I mean it's a long stretch to try and blame the Labor

Party for the disarray that's going on in the Coalition.



NIELSEN: You got up and nominated him



THISTLETHWAITE: Llew O'Brian proclaimed yesterday to be leaving the National Party,

so someone who was further independent which supported an independent person in

Kevin Hagen for the Deputy Speaker’s position in the past, we did the same yesterday. But

it's not our fault that this government can't get its act together, can't govern properly and

we all know if you can't govern yourselves you can't govern the nation. And we've seen

that over the course of the summer with the devastating bush fires and how ill-prepared

this government was for that despite the fact that we'd have warnings for over a decade,

we've seen it with economic management and the fact that the RBA has been calling for

some months now for the government to take seriously the downturn and investment the

low wages growth and other issues. It's a government in disarray and that was represented

yesterday by what happened on the floor of Parliament.



CONNELL: You won the day, you won the tactics, you got the story up but surely you can

put up your hand and you don't expect voters to believe that Labor just had a burning

desire to get the talent of Llew O'Brian in as Deputy Speaker?  We know what this was

about.



THISTLETHWAITE: Well I certainly didn't speak to anyone from the National Party or the

government prior to that vote occurring and..



CONNELL: Why did you vote for Llew O'Brian?



THISTLETHWAITE: Because he proclaimed yesterday in the morning that he was moving

out of the National Party and that it would be a rather independent member and sit without

the National Party. Now as I said earlier I'd supported Kevin Hogan when he done a similar

thing because in my view it's probably better to have a more independent Speaker. Those

positions in the Parliament matter to me, Tom, and I think it's probably better to have a

rather independent person in that position because you’re going to get a fairer deal.



NIELSEN: So apart from that you don't think he has any special skills that would have

made him good for the job?



THISTLETHWAITE: Look, I haven't had too much to do with Llew, I’ve met him on a

couple of occasions and had a few conversations with him. He’s certainly got a

distinguished career as a police officer and I thought he was worthwhile of being

nominated. He accepted the nomination and again I think it represents the disarray that the

government's in at the moment.



CONNELL: What do you think of the Nationals MPs that supported this picture we've gone

through, the games over there, happy to call that what it is. But it wouldn't have happened

without Nationals MPs define what the Coalition government wanted?



PASIN: I think of them individually people have to account to their own constituencies and

their teams. But you know from my perspective I think it's important we focus on the

challenges this nation is facing right now as a government, whether it be bush fires floods,

the drought, the Coronavirus. I mean. the reality here is these are games that are played in

Canberra, inside the bubble and I've got to tell you they don't penetrate out in my

electorate. In my electorate what my constituents are looking for is local and practical

solutions to the challenges they're facing, bet it drought or fire.



NIELSEN: But you can't deny it seems to take away the focus on that when I mean you

have a leadership spill for the Nats on the day we're supposed to be having remembrance

for bushfire victims, we have this sideshow yesterday when they could have been focusing

on policy, we don't really have anything put forward yesterday that anyone noticed apart

from the Nationals’ debacle. So is that not the issue that you should be explaining to

constituents?



PASIN: But at least the point about this is from Labor Party's perspective had an

opportunity to end the conflict yesterday, instead of ending their conflict and observing the

convention what we saw was an opportunity to enflame, that take advantage of the

idiosyncratic circumstances that are present in this building at this point. You know this

comes from a Party that are pretty keen to tell us they aren't seeking to politicise bush fires

or droughts all these things and yet every time there seems to be an opportunity the leader

of the Opposition is out with a camera talking about these things, seeking to inflame

situations. What I'd love to see, I know what my constituents would love to see, is us

coming together, putting hands across the divide right now and focusing on the very

serious threats, whether it's a virus, whether it's drought flood or fire, these are real and

present concerns for the Australian people and we should be working together to solve that

not playing silly games in Canberra.



CONNELL: A big debate about coal at the moment, the coal-fired power station, the

possible Healy one in North Queensland will have this four million dollar feasibility study.

Will you look at the results of that and whatever it decides, feasible or otherwise, say fair

enough play on?



PASIN: I think that's exactly right time, what we need to do is look deeply at this proposal

to see if it stacks up, that's what this has been about, others have sought to turn this

debate into something other than what it is. Now we have a discussion and an

investigation about the feasibility of this particular technology in this particular place. My

view is that I'm looking very much forward to the outcome of this report and note that there

are been two previous reports commissioned by Labor that indicate viability of this, that's

why there's a need to double-check and I'm looking forward to the outcome.



NIELSEN: Matt, the discussion has been from Labor that you shouldn't be putting that $4

million of taxpayer money into this feasibility study. But what are you making of Matt

Canavan’s comments this morning that you're more than welcome to get up there and rail

against it at Labor's own peril?



THISTLETHWAITE: Well I don't believe that we should be investing taxpayers’ dollars in a

feasibility study for something that is becoming an outdated technology. Governments

shouldn't be encouraging coal-fired power stations, they should be encouraging the uptake

of renewable energy for a number of reasons. Firstly, coal-fired power is one of the highest

polluting sources of carbon that there is in terms of energy sources. We need to if we're

going to meet our Paris commitments if we're going to deliver a cleaner environment for

our kids transition away from coal-fired power. The second reason is it doesn't stack up

economically and that's because over time what we're seeing is the cost of renewables

coming down, these are big lumpy investments that take a lot of time to come on, in 10

years’ time it's quite likely that the cost of renewables is going to be cheaper than coal-fired

power, so it doesn't stack up economically and it shouldn't be the case that the

government's putting money into something that's not going to get up.



NIELSEN: Are you fighting this at your own peril? Queensland lost Labor the election and

was taking a huge hit from railing against coal, there's not something you should be

considering supporting just for that reason?



THISTLETHWAITE: Well we're actually in the business of trying to support people working

in these industries. At the last election Labor was the only party that had a policy about a

just transition for people working in coal-fired power. And now we're starting to see coal-fired power stations come to the end of their useful life and be retired. What's the

government's approach to supporting those workers in those industries as those coal-fired

power stations reach their retirement age? They don't have one. We're being open and

honest with the Australian public and saying that as they reach their useful lifespan, what's

the plan to ensure that these people have jobs into the futures. We're all about jobs in this

sector…



CONNELL: A particular transmission plan, but that wasn't necessarily fleshed-out was it?

Did you identify set coal-fired power stations when they'd retire, what those workers were

going to do?



THISTLETHWAITE: Well we know that there are lifespans for those coal-fired gas

stations, some of them in Victoria have started to retire already and a lot of those workers

haven't had just transitions in place to help them. It was highlighted on one of the

programmes on the ABC last night about a worker who worked in that industry asking the

government what's the plan for me when my coal-fired power job is no longer there? These

are legitimate questions that workers in those industries should have a plan from the



government for.



CONNELL: Just wanted to ask you, we're nearly out of time, about Blazeaid, I know

something you've been involved with Tony Pasan. This is a bit of, uh, not unspoken about

but little spoken about crisis to do with the bushfires, we're running out of fence posts to

put back in, what's happening here?



PASIN: Well we are Tom, we came into this fire season with up to 12 months serious wait

lists for fence posts. The fires on best estimates are going to need roughly approximately

five years’ worth of production, million cubic tons, we do about two hundred thousand cubic

tons a year. It's an issue that the industry is aware of, the industry, governments,

communities will need to rise to this challenge because I know speaking to farmers that

once they get over the shock of the fire, once they deal with the immediate issues, the first

priority is to fence their property and if you can't donate fence post that becomes a real

issue.



THISTLETHWAITE: I think this is a bipartisan issue, this is one of the sad circumstances

of the fires and if we're going to help these important industries agricultural industries with

rural and regional communities rebuild then we need to get on and that's, you know, all

part of developing a plan to deal with these issues into the future.



NIELSEN: There we go, we found one issue we can reach across the divide about. Matt

Thistlethwaite, Tony Pasin, thank you so much for your time.



THISTLETHWAITE: Thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: BEN LEESON 0404 648 275







