





SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Finance  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Leader of the Government in the Senate

Senator for South Australia

TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Interview on ABC News, News Breakfast with Michael Rowland.        Topics: Australia-China trade relationship; International student pilot program;   30/10/20  08:07AM

Michael Rowland: Let's take you to Canberra where the Federal Government is taking China to the  World Trade Organization, over Beijing's decision to slap tariffs - very big tariffs on imports of Australian  barley. Finance and Trade Minister, Simon Birmingham, joins us from Parliament House. Minister, the grain  growers are firmly backing you in. So, will the Federal Government now push the button on this challenge to  the World Trade Organization?

Simon Birmingham:  Thanks, Michael. A final decision has not yet been made, but it is certainly our instinct  that we ought to use all avenues available to defend the integrity of Australian producers. We know that our  grain growers, just like our winemakers, aren't government subsidised. They don't dump their product on  global markets below value and that Australia is a country who has been a member of the WTO and its  predecessor entity, since 1948, believes in a rules-based system for trade. And when you believe in a rules-based system and you think that the rules are being broken, then you ought to call in the independent umpire  to help to resolve those sorts of issues. Now, in doing so, we'd love to resolve it in a manner faster than the  WTO offers. One of our most recent WTO challenges was actually against Canada, over a wine industry  matter. Although we formally launched that and got the processes underway, we ultimately withdrew that case  because we resolved it through dialogue between the parties. And that remains our preference with China,  with any other party, including India who we have a WTO dispute with at present, to come to the table and  resolve those issues where we can.

Michael Rowland:  Okay. Realistically though, given, where the relationship with China is at the  moment? It’s not great as everybody knows watching this show, what are the chances of any successful  dialogue happening? I mean, you can’t even pick up the phone to speak to your counterpart in Beijing?

Simon Birmingham:  Well, I can pick up the phone, but unfortunately, they're not choosing to do so.

Michael Rowland: Well, it takes two to tango, doesn’t it? You know, you’re calling, there’s no one  answering, there’s no dialogue?

Simon Birmingham:   It does, Michael. But, I just make the point there, because I think it’s an important  one for everyone to understand. Australia’s position on the China relationship hasn’t changed. We remain a  country that wants an economically prosperous China, that wants to see China succeed and wants to engage  with China. We remain a country willing to have discussions and dialogue with China. Yes, we stand firm in  terms of our values and the protection of national security and our critical infrastructure and so on. But, we  haven't changed and China however is a country now that we see on the world stage taking a tone and a  stance that is more challenging, not just with Australia, but it’s engagement with others. And unfortunately,  they are unwilling to have that dialogue, but we believe that the best way to resolve these sorts of things is  always through dialogue and our consistent approach is we're up for that and we urge them to come to the  table.

Michael Rowland: Okay. A few other issues before we leave; our top story of this hour, of course, was  the return of those international students to Darwin. We're getting responses from people like Bob, and I’ll



read his tweets word for word: it’s disgusting that international students are allowed to return, taking up limited  quarantine spaces when Australians are still trapped overseas. The Government should be ashamed. So, the  Government has said Australians take priority. So, what's happening here with this pilot program?

Simon Birmingham:  Well, from the Federal Government's prospective, Australians do take priority. The NT  has managed to create some additional places, I understand to deal with this pilot and these students. But,  other pilots, in other states, have tried to get off the ground haven’t gone ahead, because we’ve said very  clearly that returning Australians must take priority. We’ve managed to grow the capacity in hotel quarantine  for those returning Australians. Our opening of hundreds of places at Howard Springs in the Northern Territory  has achieved that, in addition to that we’ve seen other states lift their numbers to around 5600 that we’re able  to take at present. And that will grow when Victoria comes online next week to about 6700 places in hotel  quarantine, for us to be able to safely transition those returning Australians.

Michael Rowland:  Okay. Fewer Australians are needing to gain access to JobKeeper. What does that  say to the Federal Government about where the still nascent economic recovery is at in Australia?

Simon Birmingham:   Look, the road back isn't going to be completely smooth and easy. But, Australia can  say that not only have we managed the health crisis caused by COVID better than most other countries in the  world, we also managed the economic crisis better than most other countries in the world. That we’ve seen  around 560,000 jobs re-created over the last few months, that we’ve seen JobKeeper work to save jobs far in  excess of what our budget projections were in term of businesses coming back to full strength and no longer  needing JobKeeper. This is great news, but we know the path ahead is still going to be a tough one for many  and it’s why we continue to invest in JobMaker and job creation programs because it’s going to be so crucial  for the pathway back.

Michael Rowland:  And finally, the Government - as you have, this morning, talked a lot about adhering  to the rules-based order when it comes to those trade disputes. Russia's Foreign Ministry has come out  swinging against Australia saying Australia's credibility in terms of following the rules-based order is shattered  care of those SAS war crimes allegations in Afghanistan. The question I want to ask you though, Minister,  should we be taking lessons from of all countries, on the rules-based orders, from Russia?

Simon Birmingham:  Well, Australia has shown a degree of accountability and transparency through the  review that we've undertaken, published and responding to that is sorely lacking in a number of other  countries.



Michael Rowland:  Including Russia?

Simon Birmingham:   I'll let others draw the conclusion there. But I think Australia can take pride in the  overwhelming work of the vast majority of our servicemen and women. Obviously, these are terribly instances  that have occurred, but unlike other countries who may well just sweep these things under the carpet, we  undertook a thorough investigation. We’ve been transparent about it and we're applying remedies to address  it and you wouldn’t see that in many other parts of the world.

Michael Rowland:  We’ll leave it there. Simon Birmingham, thanks for your time.

Simon Birmingham:   Thanks, Michael.





Media Contacts  Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.

