Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg







THE HON KEITH PITT MP

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia  Member for Hinkler

Dr SAM McMAHON  CLP Senator for the Northern Territory

MEDIA RELEASE

24 August, 2020





Gas Industry a winner in NT Election



While the final result of the Northern Territory election is still to be officially declared,  Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt says voters have  emphatically backed the Territory’s onshore gas industry.

Mr Pitt said it was encouraging to see Territory voters resoundingly reject the Territory  Alliance and its hard line anti-fracking stance.

“Territorians recognise how important the gas industry is when it comes to providing more  local jobs and providing new economic opportunities,” Mr Pitt said.

“Development of gas reserves in the Beetaloo Basin has the potential to generate billions of  dollars for the Territory economy and over 6000 jobs at a time when the region needs to  make the most of every opportunity it gets to create jobs and attract investment.

“Having spent time recently with CLP Leader Lia Finocchiaro, I know that it’s been a key  issue for her party but whoever forms government in the Northern Territory must make the  gas industry a priority,” Mr Pitt said.

CLP Senator for the Northern Territory Sam McMahon said the Territory Alliance agenda  would have been devastating for the Northern Territory.

“The CLP was the only party that went in to the election with a clear, positive plan to make  more of the Territory’s abundant natural resources and that has clearly resounded with  voter,” Senator McMahon said.

“I congratulate Lia Finocchiaro for winning back significant public support for the CLP at this  election to make the party a strong and genuine force in Territory politics.”

Minister Pitt said he looks forward to working with whoever forms government to develop  the Territory’s resources sector.

Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg



“The potential of the resources industry in the Territory is immense and will play an  important role in the local and national recovery from the coronavirus pandemic.”





ENDS

Media contact: Minister Pitt - Matt Dunstan 0411 535 072     Senator McMahon - Kris Civitarese 0418 220 411

























