

JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC AFTERNOON BRIEFING

MONDAY, 24 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Aged care crisis; The Labor Party; JobKeeper and

JobSeeker; State borders; Vaccines.



PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: Jim Chalmers, welcome.



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: Hi Patricia.



KARVELAS: The Aged Care Minister Richard Colbeck has apologised for not

being able to recall information at Friday's Senate inquiry. Why do you think he

needs to resign?



CHALMERS: He's clearly not up to the job. It's one thing to apologise for not

knowing how many older Australians had passed away because of COVID in

these homes; it's quite another thing to have been responsible alongside the

Prime Minister for not having a genuine workable plan in place to deal with

these issues. We spent all of Question Time today asking the Government

about this so-called plan in aged care, asking why they didn't heed the

warnings after the earlier mistakes made in aged care homes, and how many of

these 328 Australians who have been lost to this virus in these homes, how

many of those deaths could have been avoided if they actually had a proper

plan in place. The royal commission says there wasn't a plan. That's been very

costly in terms of lives lost.



KARVELAS: The Prime Minister said today that the number of severely

impacted facilities has been reduced to three. Is the plan that's in place now

working? Do you concede that it's been successful?



CHALMERS: I don't think any objective observer of what's happened in aged

care in the last few months could say that (a) there's been a plan, or (b) that it's

been successful. We've lost 328 lives. The Prime Minister on some days takes

responsibility, on other days tries to engage in these weasel words, pretending

it's somebody else's fault. The fact of the matter is the Commonwealth is

responsible for aged care. They didn't have a workable plan. They didn't act

swiftly enough to learn some of the lessons from what had happened in early

months. As a consequence of that, aged care has become really one of the

defining the debacles of the Government's response to this COVID-19 virus.



KARVELAS: The problems in aged care stretch back decades, Jim Chalmers.

How do you think the system should be reformed in a longer-term sense?



CHALMERS: I think you're right to point out that these issues aren't new. This

is a Government that's been in office now for seven years. They put in place a

royal commission which has come out with some interim recommendations

around the use of physical and chemical restraints, around the home care

waiting lists, around all kinds of issues like that, getting people under 65 out of

homes. It's made some interim recommendations and the rest of the

recommendations I think we'll get in February of next year. There'll be a lot that

we can learn from the conclusions of the royal commission. But in the near-term, one of the key conclusions out of the royal commission has been that the

Government didn't have a plan for what's unfolded here. There is a crisis in

aged care. It did exist before but it's been turbocharged now by this diabolical

virus. The point that we are entitled to make is when the Commonwealth is 100

per cent responsible for aged care and the royal commission says there wasn't

a plan, well why wasn't there a plan and how many lives has that cost?



KARVELAS: Okay. Your colleague Bill Shorten spoke to my colleague David

Speers on Insiders several weeks ago, and pointed to the profit motive of aged

care providers. Do you think that's the problem, that they exist for profit?



CHALMERS: Whatever the model is, it isn't working perfectly. We'll have

discussions around the royal commission's recommendations, when they're

available, about the optimal mix of public and private. We haven't come to a

concluded view there. But the points that Bill was making are very similar to the

points that Julie Collins, our spokeswoman, and others, have been making

which is that aged care isn't working to look after and cherish older people who

have done so much for this country, and need and deserve better treatment

than they're getting.



KARVELAS: They absolutely do, but do you think that one of the reasons it's

failing is because it's based on a profit motive, and that that's inconsistent with

looking after older Australians?



CHALMERS: I'll be guided by the royal commission. I'll be guided by Julie

Collins. I'm not prepared to make that conclusion definitively. But clearly the

model as it stands has not been providing the care that people need and

deserve. Clearly, there is a case -



KARVELAS: And is one of those reasons because of the profit motive? Is that

the conclusion you're coming to? That that imperative to actually make money,

to make profit, to be a business, is what butting up against running a good

service? Is that the problem here?



CHALMERS: That's a conclusion for the commission. It's a conclusion for Julie

Collins and others. But clearly as I've said now a couple of times, there is an

issue with the model. We haven't struck the right balance. We haven't got the

right mix of provision because people aren't getting the care that they need and

deserve. That's obvious. As this crisis unfolds, as the debate is carried on, we'll

make a contribution via our spokespeople.



KARVELAS: Just before I move on to the economic issues you're going to be

dealing with this week, what do you make of Joel Fitzgibbon's suggestion, entry

into the debate, in relation to a future split in the Labor Party?



CHALMERS: I don't agree with it. If the point is that we've got different

constituencies in different parts of the country with different interests, then yes

that's true, but that's always been true, more-or-less. Our job is not to sharpen

the differences between people, but to find common cause and find what unites

us, to build a big constituency for change in this country. That's what my focus

is. Everyone's contribution is welcome. It's valued. It's listened to. But I think

our time is better spent working out how we can unite the country behind a

common cause; how we can solve some of these diabolical issues in the

economy in particular -



KARVELAS: Have you told him to pull his head in?



CHALMERS: No, it's not my job to do that, Patricia. I don't -



KARVELAS: Have you shared your views that he should perhaps not be

saying these things at this point?



CHALMERS: No, I haven't Patricia. As I said, I respect the views of my

colleagues. Everyone's opinion is welcome. I don't necessarily share that one,

that we're heading in that direction. The point I'm making Patricia is that our job,

as it has always been in the Labor Party as a party of government is to

represent all Australians in the bush, in the cities, in the suburbs. To do that we

need to find common cause. We need to find what unites us and build a big

constituency for change around that.



KARVELAS: Alright. Labor's calling on the Government not to reduce the rates

of JobKeeper and JobSeeker payments in September. What do you want

instead? When should they be tapered out?



CHALMERS: The point we've been making is that you want to make sure that

your response to this recession is tailored to the conditions in the economy.

We've been making the fairly obvious point that when the Government

announced these changes to JobKeeper, it was before Victoria had got

substantially worse, it was before the lockdowns that you're experiencing in

Victoria. It warrants another look. It warrants a reconsideration of the best rate

and the best way to provide that support into the economy. We want to see it

tailored to what is happening. We know from Treasury numbers in the papers

today released by the Government that in the labour market, unemployment is

expected to get worse before it gets better. The Government expects 400,000

extra Australians to lose their job between now and Christmas. The

Government is hell-bent on withdrawing that support out of the economy. It

makes no sense to do that without a plan for jobs to replace it. We've argued

for the Government's plans to be reconsidered. We think that's common sense.



KARVELAS: Do you think that the closure of state borders, particularly when

we look at some of these border closures of states with zero cases to other

states with low numbers of cases, should stop? Do you think that needs to be

reviewed? Is that something that you think's important?



CHALMERS: The states have those arrangements under constant review, as

they should. They should be listening to the best medical advice as it evolves.

That's what they've been doing. In many ways, when it comes to Annastacia

Palaszczuk or Mark McGowan, that's been the secret to their success as

leaders as during this crisis, to listen to the advice, to pay attention when that

evolves, and to do the right and responsible thing by their people. That's the

approach that we think should be supported. For example in my home state of

Queensland, months ago Josh Frydenberg was calling for the borders to be

opened. That could have been a recipe for disaster for jobs lost and lives lost.

We need to make sure that we're backing in the Premiers when they're making

good decisions based on the right advice.



KARVELAS: Okay. Obviously it's having severe economic impacts. We had

the QANTAS boss intervene last week and say that this is a serious issue.

Obviously, as the economic spokesman for Labor, do you think there is an

urgency around trying to lift some of these hard borders, particularly in cases

like WA? Queenslanders can't go to WA either, but there's not a lot of

community transmission in Queensland. Does that seem justified?



CHALMERS: My position Patricia is that the absolute worst thing for the

economy would be another outbreak of the virus. We've seen that in Victoria.

Our priority needs to be doing the safe, cautious, right and responsible thing

because that at the end of the day will do more to protect the economy than

opening the borders too early. Nobody wants these lockdowns and these

border closures to exist any longer than is absolutely necessary. But what's

been proven in the last little while is that they have been necessary. When you

spend as much time with the business community as I do, the thing that people

really nervous about is another outbreak of the virus. Those leaders are doing

the right and responsible thing in making that their number one priority. If they

do that and we can limit the spread then we can get the economy back on

track.



KARVELAS: Just finally, a story has broken this afternoon. I'd love to hear

what you think. Is it irresponsible of the Sydney Archbishop Anthony Fisher to

suggest Catholics shouldn't take the Oxford vaccine - of course it hasn't been

rolled out yet - because it's made using stem cells from what he says are

aborted foetuses?



CHALMERS: First of all the point that you just made in your question, that we

shouldn't be getting ahead of ourselves and that we don't have access to this

vaccine, is an important point, if not the most important point. My personal view

is if and when a vaccine is available and rolled out that as many people as

possible should get vaccinated. That's my personal view and I say that as a

Catholic. That's the best outcome for Australia. The vaccine is really what will

get us to the other side of this diabolical health problem with all of the economic

consequences it brings.



KARVELAS: Are these comments unhelpful then, given, yes, you have to get

the public on board to actually accept taking the vaccine?



CHALMERS: They jumped the gun a bit. I think that's the first bit. We don't

have access to it. We don't know exactly what the final vaccine will look like.

They jumped the gun. Whether or not they are unhelpful, I'm not keen to get

into that. My personal view which I'm happy to share is that the more



Australians that vaccinated when the vaccine is available, the better. There will

always be some exceptions but we need to make sure it has broad coverage.

That's how we protect each other and that's how we protect the economy as

well.



KARVELAS: Jim Chalmers, lovely to speak to you. Wear a mask. Keep safe.



CHALMERS: Thanks Patricia.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











