



SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women



TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP, BALGOWLAH  TUESDAY 15 DECEMBER 2020



Subjects: Opening of Liberal Party office in Balgowlah with Senator Andrew Bragg; comments  about the Australia-China trade relationship and reports about China banning Australian coal

Marise Payne:  Thank you, Andrew. And congratulations on this initiative to open Liberal House here in  Balgowlah. I think it is really important for senators, particularly in their roles around New  South Wales, to provide an opportunity for the community in seats which are not represented  by the Liberal Party in this case, to provide an opportunity for the community to come to visit,  to raise issues of concern to them. You've been doing that consistently. It's a great pleasure to  support you in this initiative today and one that I look forward to continuing to support when  I'm able to do so. And I know that our state colleagues, Felicity Wilson and Natalie Ward and  James Griffin, will also make sure that they are part of team Liberal here in Warringah and  making sure that they are open to the community and that this becomes a hub of Liberal  activity in this part of Warringah. And congratulations again. Very happy to answer a couple of  questions.

Journalist:  Okay, [indistinct] just ask. Are our coal exports to China now in peril?

Marise Payne:  I think the Trade Minister has made some comments this morning. But if the reports are  correct, then that is likely to constitute discriminatory practices against Australia. That would  not be in accord with China's trade obligations under the China-Australia Free Trade Agreement  or, indeed, their international trade obligations. And I know that the Trade Minister and the  Government will be pursuing that further.

Journalist:  And how about our iron ore [indistinct]?



Marise Payne:  Well, similarly, we are dealing with each of these issues - and there are certainly difficulties,  there is no question of that - each of these issues on the merits of each case. And the Trade  Minister has made clear in relation to a number of other commodities the steps that we will  take. Importantly, we are working extremely closely with Australian industry. And I want to  acknowledge Australian industry for their engagement with Government, their input and their  support in our efforts to work with Chinese agencies and authorities on each of these issues.

Journalist:  And what efforts are you making to speak to your counterpart about this worsening situation?

Marise Payne:  Well, for ministers in the Government, we are very open, very engaging, and very happy to  speak with our counterparts. Those offers have been made consistently. I have been  corresponding with my counterpart, State Councillor Wang Yi, this year, having spoken to him  earlier in the year in the context of COVID. We’d welcome the opportunity to have a discussion  by telephone. But ultimately, that is a matter for our counterparts in China. The Australian  Government is more than willing to engage in those conversations and we look forward to the  opportunity.

Journalist:   And do you think China is treating its major export partner with due respect?

Marise Payne:  Well, China's decisions are a matter for them. But what I would say is that we have a very  important, Comprehensive Strategic Partnership, which underpins our relationship. We have a  very long history of very positive relations. We have had opportunities in the past to work  through these issues. And I look forward to being able to do that again with representatives in  the Chinese Government.

Journalist:  Is there anything in their government or Australia can do to show some [indistinct]?

Marise Payne:  Well, I think the Prime Minister said in his remarks last week that he would be very, very open  to taking up an opportunity for such a conversation. We have been very consistent, very  considered in the engagements that we have made, the comments that we have made, and we  look forward to an opportunity to advance on these issues. I would say that our diplomatic  representatives in China, the ambassador and senior officials, and of course DFAT  representatives in Canberra engage consistently with our counterparts from China. They are  very important conversations. They are part of the day-to-day engagement. And we will  continue to do that and ensure that that contact is very effective.   Thanks everyone.

