









SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Finance   Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Leader of the Government in the Senate

Senator for South Australia



MEDIA RELEASE

9 December 2020

Australia-Singapore digital trade agreement kicks-off

The Australia-Singapore Digital Economy Agreement (DEA) has kicked-off, setting a new global  benchmark for digital trade rules and providing more digital trade opportunities for businesses and  consumers in both countries.

The Agreement is expected to deliver practical improvements to lower costs and make it easier for  Australian exporters to do business in Singapore, including in areas of personal data protection, e-invoicing, paperless customs procedures, and electronic certification for agricultural exports.

Federal Trade Minister Simon Birmingham said the Agreement would benefit Australia’s digital  exports to Singapore, our largest two-way trading partner in South-East Asia.

“This Agreement sets a high standard of rules for digital trade and will transform the way Australian  businesses operate and interact with Singaporean businesses and consumers,” Minister  Birmingham said.

“As Singapore’s economy continues to become more digitised and sophisticated, this Agreement  will make it easier for Australian businesses to connect with the rising number of Singaporean  businesses and consumers involved in cross-border digital trade.

“Reducing trade barriers and providing more export opportunities for Australian businesses to  reach more customers is absolutely critical as we continue the economic recovery from COVID-19.

“This ambitious digital trade deal sets new benchmarks including simplified arrangements for the  exchange of electronic trade documents, and new rules that will prevent unnecessary data  localisation requirements, including for the financial services sector, and forced technology  transfers which can stifle trade and investment flows.

“Importantly, the Agreement also balances digital trade outcomes with strong protection of privacy  and consumer rights, providing certainty for businesses operating online and consumers accessing  products and services.”

The DEA upgrades the Singapore-Australia Free Trade Agreement (SAFTA) through a new Digital  Economy chapter. The full text of the DEA and a summary of its key features are available  at: Australia-Singapore Digital Economy Agreement.

Media enquiries  Benn Ayre: +61 428 342 325   Julia Ebbs +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia

