

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS

MONDAY, 31 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: COVID-19 numbers in Victoria; Scott Morrison’s failings in aged care;

foreign affairs and Australia’s national interest; Port of Darwin 99-year lease; Shinzo

Abe.



KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: Let's go live now to Geelong. The Deputy Labor Leader and

Shadow Defence Minister Richard Marles joins me. Mr Marles, thanks for your time.

Overall the number of new infections is encouraging but tragically the rate of deaths

continues to be a big concern.



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: The

number of new infections is encouraging. I mean, it’s down in the 70s now, so it's a couple

of days where we've had two digit numbers and hopefully that forms part of an ongoing

trend of reducing the new infections. And I do think there is a sense of we’re over the worst

of it. Obviously the number of people who are dying is still a very significant number. We've

had more than 400 deaths now in aged care and that's an absolute tragedy. I mean this

has been an enormous crisis for Victoria and for the nation, and there's been an enormous

amount of focus to get through it. But we remain in great need, I think of the

Commonwealth Government taking responsibility in relation to aged care. They are

responsible for aspects of government in the state of Victoria. Aged care is one of them.

They are the funder, the regulator-



GILBERT: Is Labor politicising that?



MARLES: No, we are not politicising it-



GILBERT: Is Labor politicising aged care?



MARLES: No, we are absolutely not politicising it. What we want is for the relevant tier of

government to take responsibility for what they actually have responsibility for. There is

nothing political in that. And to have a situation where in essence the thesis of Scott

Morrison and the Commonwealth Government is that aged care doesn’t count if it happens

in Victoria and it is not their problem if it is happening in Victoria- it just doesn’t add up. I

mean they are responsible for aged care across the nation. They're responsible for aged

care in Victoria. They're responsible for infection control in aged care in Victoria. And they

have to give explanations about that. And right now we're still not hearing valid answers

from Scott Morrison and his government about whether or not there's people working in

multiple aged care facilities. Responsibility needs be taken by the Commonwealth

Government and that's what people who are working in aged care, who are living in aged

care and have families in aged care are absolutely crying out for.



GILBERT: On the Foreign Relations Bill, we're expecting- possibly not this week but the

government over coming weeks- will introduce that bill. Labor will support it. And as

Andrew Clennell reported, you're also planning to amend it, to move for the cancellation of

the $506 million leasing of the Port of Darwin. Can you confirm that?



MARLES: Well what we need to see first of all is that the legislation that is being planned

to be put forward by the government to the parliament. Right now we haven't seen a copy

of that legislation. If what the government is seeking to do is to review agreements that

have been signed by states, by universities, by local councils with countries around the

world, including China, then obviously a national security review of agreements of that kind

need to include agreements the Commonwealth itself have signed. Now that would be the

Commonwealth's own BRI agreement that was signed by Steve Ciobo with China back in

2017, but it would also include the sale of the Port of Darwin.



GILBERT: Should it be cancelled?



MARLES:What we need to do is get a sense from the Commonwealth about whether there

are national security implications around that agreement. And they're the ones who are

sitting in the seat. They're the ones who have this information at hand. But if they’re about

to review every agreement that has been signed around the country with foreign countries

in respect of national security matters, then that ought to apply to the agreements they

themselves have signed.



GILBERT: It sounds like, you know, far from wedging Labor on this issue that Mr Albanese

and Labor is seeking to wedge the Government on this issue. That you'll back it and go a

step further. Is that a fair assessment?



MARLES: Well all we're after is consistency. That's actually all we’re saying here. The

government had this idea, that we need to be looking at the national security implications

of agreements which have been signed by other tiers of governments, by public entities

such as universities with foreign powers. Okay, if that's the case it ought to apply to

agreements that the Commonwealth itself have signed. If we're talking about agreements

that have been signed with China, the Commonwealth itself have signed a BRI agreement

which they did at the end of 2017, and they sold the Port of Darwin. Now, we have long

been concerned about the sale of the Port of Darwin. We said we wouldn't have done it if

we were the government of the time. If we're now going to look at the national security

implications of various agreements which have been signed around the place, well then

that’s got to apply to the agreement which was signed in respect of the sale of the Port of

Darwin.



GILBERT: On a few other matters before you go; Shinzo Abe, the longest serving Prime

Minister in Japanese history is resigning due to ill health. Will that destabilize the balancing

effect that his leadership, I think, many have suggested has had in the region?



MARLES: Look, I think Japan will continue to be a very significant player within the region

and certainly the bilateral relationship that we've enjoyed with Japan will continue. It's a

very deep relationship but it's also right to acknowledge at this moment a significant

contribution that Shinzo Abe has made. We were seeing from 2006 through to 2012 really

a revolving door in the Prime Ministership of Japan. We were seeing essentially a new

Prime Minister every year. And since then Shinzo Abe has provided enormous stability to

one of the critical nations of the region, and certainly a nation which is so critically

important to us. He was responsible for establishing a National Security Committee. He

was responsible for culminating or finalising the Free Trade Agreement with Australia. And

I think that the thing that we need to understand in the challenging strategic circumstances

that Australia faces in the world today, is that so much of those circumstances we share

with Japan. And indeed what becomes really clear when you analyse Australia's situation

is that our relationship with Japan is just so profoundly important going forward. Shinzo

Abe has been a great friend to Australia in that context. I think he made a wonderful

speech to the Parliament when he visited here. And he's going to be sorely missed. That

said, obviously our relationship with Japan will continue to go on as strong as it ever has.



GILBERT: And you would encourage the Prime Minister, Scott Morrison in his suggestion

to the AFR today that he will be putting a lot of effort into the relationship with the next

Prime Minister in the context, he said of the quadrilateral security dialogue which is

basically Japan, India, the US and Australia. That's all about balancing China, isn't it?



MARLES: Well I think the QUAD is really important. I mean the QUAD is about us

engaging with like-minded countries in the region. And that's why it's such an important

piece of regional architecture. Again, in terms of the contribution of Shinzo Abe has made,

he was responsible for the first ever strategic partnership that Japan has had with Australia

but also with India. So he's been really critical to the establishment of the QUAD. But the

QUAD is really important for Australia going forward. In this moment in time, given the

complexity of the strategic circumstances that we face, being able to compare notes and

work closely with like-minded friends within the region has never been more important.

That's true in respect of India as well but it's absolutely true in relation to Japan. And when

you look at, you know, what steps we need to take to guide our nation through the global

waters, one of the ones that is absolutely critical is to further deepen our relationship with

Japan. And so it is absolutely a number one priority.



GILBERT: Mr Marles, I appreciate it. Deputy Labor Leader Richard Marles, talk to you

soon.



ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.









