

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister



Friday 18 September 2020



STATEMENT - NATIONAL CABINET



The National Cabinet met today to discuss Australia’s COVID-19 response, recent progress following the  Victorian outbreak, easing restrictions (including international border measures), helping Australians  prepare to go back to work in a COVID-safe environment and getting the economy moving again.

National Cabinet continues to work together to address issues and find solutions to the health and  economic consequences of COVID-19. Australia has done well on both the health and economic fronts  compared to most countries around the world.

The Acting Chief Medical Officer, Professor Paul Kelly, provided an update on the latest epidemiological  data and medical advice in relation to COVID-19.

There have been more than 26,800 confirmed cases in Australia and sadly 837 people have died.

Following Victoria’s second wave, there are now around 1,100 active cases in Australia, a decrease from  2,500 cases two weeks ago. In Victoria, infection rates continue to decline in a positive sign, while daily  infection rates have remained low in all other states and territories. Some differences have emerged in  testing rates between states and territories, and National Cabinet agreed the importance of enhancing  testing. More than 7.2 million tests have been undertaken in Australia.

National Cabinet reaffirmed a suppression strategy for COVID-19 with the goal of no community  transmission. Seven of Australia’s eight states and territories are successfully suppressing COVID-19,  enabling most Australians in those jurisdictions to live and work in a COVID-safe economy.

National Cabinet recommitted to providing all necessary support to Victoria.

National Cabinet welcomed the Commonwealth’s $2 billion extension of the COVID-19 Health Measures  package to support Medicare-subsidised telehealth and pathology services, GP-led respiratory clinics,  home medicines delivery, public and private hospital services, as well as further investments in PPE. To  date, over 30 million telehealth consultations have been delivered, with mental health telehealth  consultations a priority. Telehealth services will be extended to 31 March 2021.

National Cabinet will meet again on Friday 16 October 2020.

ADF Support

National Cabinet welcomed an update from Lieutenant General John Frewen DSC AM, Head of the  Defence COVID-19 Taskforce, on the contribution of the Department of Defence and the Australian  Defence Force to the national pandemic response, particularly relating to Defence’s support to the  states and territories.

As at 17 September 2020, there were 3,241 Defence personnel directly supporting Operation COVID  ASSIST and contributing to the Commonwealth’s whole-of-government efforts.  This included 1,306  personnel in Victoria, 736 personnel in New South Wales, 586 personnel in Queensland, 163 personnel  in Western Australia, 152 personnel in South Australia and 128 personnel in the Northern Territory.

Full details of Defence’s contribution is provided in the attached chart.

Australians returning home

National Cabinet noted that there are a significant number of Australians wishing to return home from  overseas, with the Commonwealth having taken steps recently to provide further support for those  facing personal hardship.

National Cabinet agreed that all jurisdictions would continue to work towards enabling more Australians  to return home by increasing the current caps on international passenger arrivals.

New South Wales and South Australia will continue to implement existing plans to accommodate more  returning Australians by increasing their current international passenger arrival caps by Monday 28  September 2020 by 500 and 100 respectively.

Queensland and Western Australia will adopt a two-stage increase in their international passenger  arrival caps over the next three weeks that will see an additional 500 Australians returning through each  jurisdiction each week. Queensland will commence with an additional 200 passengers from Monday 28  September 2020, increasing to 500 passengers from Monday 5 October 2020. Western Australia will  commence with an additional 200 passengers from Monday 28 September, increasing to 500 passengers  from Monday 12 October 2020.

National Cabinet also agreed that any facilitation of special commercial services would be carried out  through the jurisdictions of South Australia, Tasmania, the Northern Territory and Australian Capital  Territory.

Contact tracing by domestic airlines

National Cabinet noted that domestic airlines will progressively implement four mandatory contact  tracing data fields (name, email address, mobile phone number and state of residence) from 1 October  2020 on a mandatory basis during the period of the COVID-19 pandemic.

This will be implemented by the Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and  Communications in-conjunction with domestic airlines.

Coordinating contact tracing efforts and quarantine arrangements

National Cabinet welcomed the review by Dr Alan Finkel AO and Commodore Mark Hill CSC on the  lessons learned from the visit to Health NSW by Commonwealth and Victorian officials.

National Cabinet agreed to a review of systems and operations in all jurisdictions to strengthen capacity  and capability to effectively track, trace and isolate COVID-19. Further, National Cabinet agreed to  commission a report by Dr Finkel to enable jurisdictions to exchange case and outbreak management  data to enhance the management of outbreaks nationally.

National Cabinet received an update from Jane Halton AO PSM on the review of state and territory hotel  quarantine systems. Australia’s hotel quarantine system has performed well across most jurisdictions  and Jane Halton’s work will provide useful guidance on improvements for state and territory  governments.

Agriculture Workers Code

National Cabinet noted progress with implementation of the Agriculture Workers Code, which is on  track to be implemented by Victoria, NSW, ACT and the Northern Territory by at least 25 September  2020 as provided for in the Code.

Rural and Regional National Cabinet Reform Committee

National Cabinet commissioned the new Rural and Regional National Cabinet Reform Committee. As a  first tranche, the Committee will focus on developing a shared understanding of the quantum, status  and impact of existing investments by governments in rural and regional communities and, by the end of  2020 provide advice to National Cabinet on options to improve the delivery of existing investments to  support Australia’s COVID-19 economic recovery through strong and sustainable rural and regional  communities.

Aged Care

National Cabinet noted progress on joint actions underway to meet the commitments it made on 21  August 2020 to boost aged care preparedness at the provider, local, state and national level.

National Cabinet noted that while all states and territories are considered to have good existing  emergency response capabilities and are on track with establishing and/or scaling up virtual or physical  Response Centres, further practical actions will be undertaken to ensure a high level of preparedness.

The Commonwealth will continue to work with the states and territories, including through the  development of resources, to support the operation of response centres.

On 7 September 2020, AHPPC endorsed advice from its Aged Care Advisory Group that each state and  territory should establish emergency response centres.

Within each jurisdictions’ public health response structure, a dedicated aged care emergency response  team has been established and key personnel identified at the state and Commonwealth level.

The Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission is completing an infection control site visit program as  part of its COVID-19 regulatory activity. As at 11 September 2020, the Commission has undertaken 673  visits relating to infection control out of a total 2,720 Residential aged care Facilities (RACF) (25 per  cent). These visits are sequenced based on a risk assessment such that those visits represent those  considered to be highest risk facilities. In total nationally, 2,446 visits to RACFs have been undertaken by  the Commission, the Australian Defence Force, AUSMAT and state and territory governments.

Income tax exemption for small and medium business grants

The Commonwealth and Victoria have reached an agreement to make the grants to small and medium  business recently announced under Victoria’s Business Resilience Package exempt from income  tax.  This recognises the exceptional circumstances Victorian businesses face.

The Commonwealth will extend this arrangement to all States and Territories on an application basis.  Eligibility would be restricted to future grants program announcements for small and medium  businesses facing similar circumstances to Victorian businesses. Any tax exemption would be time  limited for grants paid until 30 June 2021.

AHPPC Advice on Boarding School Students

National Cabinet agreed to a new AHPPC Statement on Boarding Students and Students Living in Border  Zones, which supports all jurisdictions adopting appropriate risk-based approaches (such as the  Queensland approach) to ensure boarding students can cross borders and safely return home to their  families during school holidays.

ENDS

Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

Press Office of the Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Prime Minister, Canberra



