

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  3AW DRIVE WITH TOM ELLIOTT  FRIDAY, 20 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Ongoing issues regarding COVID-19; health and economic implications  arising from coronavirus; economy; economic stimulus package for coronavirus;  schools closing or staying open during coronavirus; Labor's actions during the  Global Financial Crisis; sporting events during COVID-19.

TOM ELLIOTT, HOST: Anthony Albanese, good afternoon.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Good  afternoon, Tom. Thanks for having me on the program.

ELLIOTT: I know there is not much precedent for it in Australia, but would you like to be  part of the Government’s national Cabinet during this time of national emergency?

ALBANESE: Well, look, that is a decision for Scott Morrison. He has chosen to not go  down that path. I think when he announced that there would be a national Cabinet, I think  that many people listening thought, and I know that is the case for many, thought we would  be invited to participate. It is a decision made from the Government. I cannot do anything  about that in terms of the response that is required. I have been constructive. I continue to  be constructive. The structure of it is, of course, a matter for the Prime Minister.

ELLIOTT: I mean, you could ring Scott Morrison up or just approach him in the corridors of  Parliament House, the corridors of power, and just say, ‘Hey, ScoMo, could you let me in?’

ALBANESE: Well, yes, that could happen. But I talked to him this morning, he hasn’t  raised it. He knows that it is up to him to be able to do that. But he has chosen to do that.  That is a matter for him. He certainly knows that we are being constructive. I've been  making media conferences every day. I have had full briefings from the Chief Medical  Officer yesterday. I was part of a briefing with people from the National Security Network.  And I'll continue to be constructive.

ELLIOTT: On that, the Parliament is going to sit for one day next week with just 100  people in the House of Representatives to debate and probably pass the Government's  stimulus package. Do you support what the Government's doing there?

ALBANESE: Look, we will be supportive of the package. We may well have amendments.  But we haven't seen the legislation yet in terms of we have seen some of it, but not all of it.  We are determined to be constructive. So, we will put forward if we have improvements  that can be made. We'll be making those suggestions. at the end of the day, though, we  will vote for a package. We're not going to stand in the way of economic stimulus. If I have  a difference of opinion it is that I think the Government has not had the sense of urgency  that's required. So, for example, the payments of $750. The only reason why those  payments haven't been made already is because of politics. It is because they're waiting  for the last quarter of the financial year that begins in April to come. And they want the  stimulus to feed into those figures. To my mind, this is a time when you should put aside  politics and just worry about outcomes, whether it is outcomes in terms of health and  protecting people and minimising the number of people who contract this virus, or whether  it be ameliorating the consequential economic costs that will come as a result of the  response, as a result of people limiting their economic activity. So, this is a real challenge.  During the Global Financial Crisis, I remember well sitting in the Parliament, and being  frustrated that we sat there, I think, until 3AM one morning, while we had the then-Opposition insist that every single measure go to every single vote. We had more than 30  divisions. I'm determined to not be like that. And that's why when I became the Labor  Leader, I said I want to be known as the Labor Leader, not the Opposition Leader. That  was in general. But at times like this, it is certainly appropriate that we all put our shoulder  to the wheel and head in the same direction as much as possible.

ELLIOTT: Now, one contentious aspect of the Government's policy is to keep government  schools open. A lot of private schools are closing but government schools remain open for  the time being, although many parents have taken their kids out of state school for an  extended Easter holiday. What do you think? Do you think schools should remain open as  they are at the moment?

ALBANESE: Look, I think this is one of the areas whereby caution should be exercised in  whatever measure. And if we're going to make a decision in a few weeks' time, then that  should be communicated. And if it's appropriate, make a decision today rather than in  weeks' time. But on this issue, my understanding is, as we've discussed, I'm not a party to  those discussions between the state Premiers, the Prime Minister, and the various health  officials and leadership there. We have to take the health advice. So, I don't want to, I'm  not looking for product differentiation for the sake of it from when it comes to these issues.

ELLIOTT: Okay. And what about the Budget being delayed until October? I know a little  while ago it went from April to May, but to delay it months and months and months is  almost unprecedented. Do you support what Josh Frydenberg is doing there?

ALBANESE: It is. My concern there was that we were not consulted on that measure by  the Government. One of the things that should not occur is that it shouldn't be used as an  excuse to not have regular economic update of the state of the economy, including the  state of Government finances. That needs to happen. One of the principles here  throughout these issues, whether it be on health issues or on the economy, is we want  people to trust authority. But authority has to trust the people in order for that to happen.  There has to be transparency. And we will certainly be arguing very strongly that there  needs to be those economic updates. We can't have a circumstance whereby from the  mid-year economic forecast last year, there to be no update of Budget figures between  then and October. That would be unacceptable. Because it will also create a level of  uncertainty in the economy. And I think the key here is that more people are looking for



certainty. They're looking for transparency. They want to know what's going on. They're  feeling anxious. And that is understandable. It's no good yelling at people saying, 'Stay  calm'. What we have to do, decision-makers, in whatever role we have, is to be  transparent. I have argued, for example, that just as the Reserve Bank puts out arguments  of why interest rates have changed, and now explains the reasoning, when the  Government makes a decision such as it made on a range of issues today, even social  gathering has changed today, they need to explain very clearly why those changes of  decisions have been made. Because the feedback I'm getting is that one of the reasons  why people are anxious is that there are these updates every day. Now, circumstances of  why that's occurring, and I am not being necessarily critical of all of those changes,  inevitably there will be some change going through. But I think when people hear  information and advice today that changes tomorrow, that creates some doubt in their mind  over whether that's the final advice or not.

ELLIOTT: We are getting stimulus packages, probably another one of those in a few  weeks. Hey, very quickly. I know you're a rugby league man. But are you pleased that the  AFL and the NRL are continuing to play?

ALBANESE: I must say that there is some concern. I am both a rugby league fan and an  AFL fan. I support the Rabbitohs and the Hawks. And I think it's good for people that they  are getting to watch but I just hope that player welfare is put first. Because I am somewhat  concerned about, it's pretty hard to have a rugby league or an AFL game and have the sort  of social interaction distances that the Government is saying are advisable.

ELLIOTT: You're not going to get two square metres in a rugby league tackle. We better  leave it there. Anthony Albanese, I do appreciate your time.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053





