

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

TODAY SHOW

FRIDAY, 14 FEBRUARY 2020



SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; China travel ban; Meetings of politicians; The

Government’s failure on our future submarines.



ALLISON LANGDON, HOST: Let’s go to Peter Dutton and Deputy Opposition Leader

Richard Marles, thank you both for joining us this morning. If I could just go first to you

Minister Dutton and the Chinese Government is not very happy with you do you care?



PETER DUTTON: Well of course we want to work very closely with the Chinese

government but our responsibility is to make sure that we keep Australians safe and the

advice from the Chief Medical Officer yesterday, who'd met with all of the Chief Medical

Officers from the States and Territories was clear and that is that the travel ban should be

extended and we've done that and I think it's a sensible response. We're really pleased

that people up on Christmas Island look like they were all going to be cleared and hopefully

back home early next week. So it's a big problem, the numbers now are over 60,000 and

1370 deaths as at this morning but we'll assess it week by week and as I point out we'll do

what's in our country's best interests.



KARL STEFANOVIC, HOST: You would have seen the response from the Chinese

Embassy in Canberra, they are not happy Jan.



DUTTON: Well Karl, you can understand it from the Chinese perspective, they want there

to be a normalised arrangement and countries like Australia, like the UK, others have

decided to make sure that we deal with the difficulty that we face and we've brought people

back who have been stuck in Wuhan and we've acted responsibly. I don't think we can go

against the medical advice, the medical advice was clear, now over the next week maybe

that changes and maybe they take a different view and we're very conscious of the impact

on the Australian economy on tourism on the international student market and many other

businesses that obviously are impacted but I think the view clearly within the Chinese

community here is that we're doing the right thing and that's what's going to continue.



LANGDON: Richard this is where it gets tricky isn't it because when we close the borders

to keep ourselves safe but there is that there is a very significant economic cost here.



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: There

is an economic cost and tourism is taking a belting in relation to this but look Peter has

given the right answer. I mean you can understand the perspective of the Chinese but at

the end of the day we have to be taking advice from our own medical officials who are

amongst the best in the world, and as difficult as this virus is around the world I think we've

only seen a handful of cases here in Australia which speaks to the response. But I think

one of the points that Peter alluded to there which is really important it is precisely because

we're managing this well here it's really important we're not scapegoating communities in

Australia. You know it worries me that Chinatowns around our major cities are empty at the

moment. People just as you come here people should be going and having a Chinese

meal in those places as well.



STEFANOVIC: Now I'm not going to be ever making my way into the diplomatic corps, but

I will say-



LANGDON: Understatement of the year.



MARLES: You can be diplomatic.



STEFANOVIC: I have absolutely no faith in the Chinese Government I think they've

covered this thing up from the start. I think there are a lot more of these cases that are

present. I mean we've seen overnight the number of cases have almost doubled. It's

almost in every province in China. Peter do you have any faith in the actual information

that's flowing out of China at the moment, can they be trusted?



DUTTON: Karl, I think you're right at the top there, the diplomatic corps not going to be

knocking on your door any time soon, so that’s a fair point you make.



STEFANOVIC: I don’t care though.



DUTTON: We are working very closely with the Chinese I mean you've got to give them

credit for the way in which they've responded domestically from what we're aware in terms

of quarantining. This is a difficult situation for them and we've provided a lot of assistance

so we've sent a lot of equipment across as other nations have at the request of the

Chinese Government to help them deal with the threat that they're facing-



STEFANOVIC: Do you have faith in the numbers coming out of China?



DUTTON: Well to the extent that the Chinese are able to gather that information together

Karl, just given the scale of this and the way in which they're having to respond we rely on

the numbers as best we can. There may be, I mean there are people who believe that the

numbers are higher but we take the numbers out of the WHO and from the Chinese. But I

think the way we've reacted where we've got 15 cases, people have been put in isolation,

we're not allowing it to spread and I think that's what's right for our country.



LANGDON: Richard I wanted to ask you about something else, Anthony Albanese your

Leader is under a bit of pressure at the moment to explain this group of pro coal members

that are holding secret meetings to do with climate change. I mean how is it that Albo first

learns of this group through the media and what's that tell you?



MARLES: This is a beat up, like this is an absolute beat up-



STEFANOVIC: No it's not; Albo is not going to make it to the election.



LANGDON: You’re fiery this morning.



MARLES: Oh Karl, what’s in the coffee in this place?



STEFANOVIC: In truth you have you have a right wing part of your party, who is getting

together having these little tiny fancy pants dinner, trying to bring down their Leader who is

doing a good job. What's that about?



MARLES: A group of people went and had a dinner and talked about policy like that’s all

that's happened here-



STEFANOVIC: Oh yeah?



MARLES: It's absolutely all that's happened here; look at what's going on on the

Government's side, I mean the Nationals, they had a knock him down drag him out fight on

the first day back in this session within their party room with an actual leadership

challenge. They bring it onto the floor of the Parliament this week and actually split from

their party, that's division.



STEFANOVIC:  But how awful for Albo that these people, these people got together on

your side of the party and tried to break him down. I mean, with all the work Albo is doing,

Albo must be filthy.



MARLES: It’s a group of people had a dinner; this is an absolute beat up. You are right

Albo is doing an absolutely fantastic job-



STEFANOVIC: And he's filthy.



MARLES: He's doing an absolutely fantastic job and people are really pleased with the

way he's gone, I don’t think anyone's giving this a second thought.



LANGDON: My greater concern here is with both major parties we've got huge divisions to

do with energy policy and my fear is that we need solutions and we need solutions now

and we're not going to have that when there is this bitter infighting within both major parties

at the moment.



MARLES: Going and having a dinner is not bitter infighting, what you've got on the

Government's side is a is a giant chasm on this, such that with seven years in Government

they've been unable to come up with an energy policy, that's not the same as what's going

on within Labor.



STEFANOVIC:  Okay let's talk about submarines, it's another hot button issue this

morning the Government's $50 billion dollar submarine plan, $50 billion dollar submarine

plan, it's turned into a bit of a debacle this morning not only is there a big question mark

over what's not generating Australian jobs, but over the French contracts the ability to

deliver them on top. Minister can I ask a very simple question this morning Peter, when are

we going to see the first sub?



DUTTON: Well look Karl they’re in a design stage now, so we've committed to making sure

that we can get the defence spending up to 2% of GDP. We're making sure that the subs

are designed to suit Australian conditions. We're not only investing in subs but other

vessels as well, so there's a massive roll out of infrastructure within the Defence

Department and you know Labor never built a boat, never built anything really for defence,

they took money off the defence-



STEFANOVIC: Peter Peter Peter-



MARLES: It's just not true.



STEFANOVIC: It was really simple question, when will we see the first sub? Because it's

an absolute debacle, I mean it was they're saying nine months now it's been delayed at the

very least. This was a disaster from the start. When will we see the first sub touch the

water and hopefully stay afloat or go under?



DUTTON: Well let's hope it can do more and stay afloat, that's the first point. That's pretty,

that's sort of a central criteria number one. But look the rollout and the design there in that

phase now. So I think the discussion at the moment is about how much local content there

will be and why is there not you know, more companies involved in Australia in building the

thing at the moment. The things in design stage, the architects are working on at the

moment and then they'll put the contracts out. So again there's a lot of kerfuffle about this

but when you strip it back that's exactly what you would expect that to design phase will go



into construction phase and it will be put into operation -



STEFANOVIC: You know what; Donald Trump will build a wall in Mexico before we see a

sub in Australia.



MARLES: So that was a whole lot of waffle what we got there, with the greatest of respect

to Peter -



DUTTON: I want to go back to the Richard Marles fan club; I want to talk about the Richard

Marles fan club those twenty that just gathered for dinner-



MARLES: He does not want to talk about submarines, that’s really clear for me. Tony

Abbott said it would be mid-2020. Right now that they're talking about 2034. Peter there

couldn't give you an answer. Start off with $50 billion; it’s now at $80 billion. Christopher

Pyne said it was going to be 90% Australian built, but Naval are saying it's going to be less

than 50%. In every direction this thing's going the wrong way.



STEFANOVIC: Richard were you at that dinner?



MARLES: I was not at the dinner, but I’ve been to OTIS and they do serve a good steak.



STEFANOVIC: And did you bag your Leader when you were at dinner?



MARLES: Albo is fantastic and he is doing a great job and I’m really happy to go to OTIS

with Peter.



STEFANOVIC: Well it is Valentine’s Day, so maybe you go together, thank you for being

with us, really appreciate it.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: SIMON FUREY 0415 032 732





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











