



Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra





SENATOR THE HON MICHAELIA CASH  Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business  Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate

THE HON DAN TEHAN MP  Minister for Education

MEDIA RELEASE

18 December 2020

Support for school leavers



Year 12 students will start to receive their ATAR results from today and many will be  considering their future options.

More than 236,000 students completed Year 12 this year and the Morrison Government  wants the class of 2020 to pursue their passions and that could mean undertaking a degree,  learning a trade, studying a vocational qualification, upskilling with a microcredential, starting  a business or getting a job.

There is no one single pathway to success in life, and our Government wants every  Australian to have the opportunity to use their skills to pursue their ambitions and to make a  contribution to our nation.

Our Government is providing more opportunities for young Australians to access education,  through additional university places, cheaper degrees in areas of expected job demand and  free or low-fee training courses.

The National Careers Institute has a School Leavers Information Kit and School Leavers  Information Service to help inform young Australians about their opportunities.

Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business, Senator the Hon Michaelia  Cash, said people should pursue the education, training and employment options that best  suit their goals and aspirations.

“I encourage students who get their ATAR results today to think about what they do next and  to use the information provided by the National Careers Institute to help inform their  decision,” Senator Cash said.

“The Morrison Government’s $1 billion JobTrainer Fund will see free or low-fee training for  up to around 320,000 young people and job seekers, to gain the skills they need to get a job.

“The $4 billion JobMaker Hiring Credit, funded by the Australian Government, is also aimed  at accelerating youth employment during the COVID-19 recovery.”





Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

Minister for Education Dan Tehan said the Morrison Government has provided up to 30,000  additional university places for Australian students in 2021.

“I congratulate all 2020 school leavers,” Mr Tehan said. “Despite a challenging year you  have reached the end of your school education and a world of opportunity is ahead of you.

“Know that your Year 12 marks will not define the rest of your life and that there are many  different paths to reach your goals in life.

“If you want to go to university, our Government is providing additional university places for  Australian students and we are making it cheaper for students to study areas of expected job  demand, like IT and mathematics.”

The School Leavers Information Kit Your Career: What’s next for you? is available at:  yourcareer.gov.au/school-leavers-support.

For tailored support about future education, training or work options, school leavers can call  1800 CAREER (1800 227 337), text SLIS2020 to 0429 009 435 or email  schoolleavers.nci@dese.gov.au.



ENDS



Media contact:  Cash: Guy Creighton - Guy.Creighton@dese.gov.au - 0438 815 302  Cash: Brittany Higgins - Brittany.Higgins@dese.gov.au - 0449 171 294  Tehan: Byron Vale 02 6277 7350 | minister.tehan.media@dese.gov.au

