

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  SYDNEY  MONDAY, 10 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: COVID-19 aged care disaster; PPE; Morrison Government’s delay in  releasing and responding to Productivity Commission report on mental health;  Victorian outbreak.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: There are a couple of matters I  want to deal with this morning before taking questions. Firstly, the Labor Party very much  welcomes the Prime Minister's announcement that the Government will be recommending  to the Queen to award the Victoria Cross to Teddy Sheean. Teddy Sheean was a  remarkably brave Australia who gave his life at the age of just 18 to save his comrades on  the HMAS Armidale. It's been a long running campaign and the Labor Party has long felt  that Teddy Sheean deserved the honour of the Victoria Cross. We feel that the  independent review should have been implemented earlier than this. But of course  nevertheless we welcome this very, very much. I pay tribute to all those Members of  Parliament who worked so hard for this result. The Tasmanian Labor team, Brian Mitchell  in particular but all the Labor senators, Luke Gosling, Shayne Neumann, Richard Marles,  Jacqui Lambie and Guy Barnett in the Tasmanian Parliament as well. This is an important  day for Australia's Veterans for honouring a great Australian, Teddy Sheean deserves the  VC and Labor very much welcomes his awarding of the VC subject to Her Majesty's  approval.

A couple of other matters. Very concerning reports from the Royal Australian College of  Physicians that medical professionals are struggling to get the necessary PPE protective  equipment, masks, gowns, and goggles in Victoria in particular. We have around a  thousand active cases of health care workers with COVID-19. Roughly 40 percent of whom  are nurses. We've known that this is an urgent national priority for months. We knew that  there were PPE shortages early in this crisis. Of course we all understood and understand  today the pressures and constraints on PPE but the Government rightly has an objective of  no Australian healthcare worker dying from COVID-19. That needs to be more than an  objective. It needs to be the reality and to make it the reality we need all health care  workers and I must say aged care workers and disability service providers as well with  access to the PPE they need.

If you've got one in five healthcare professionals without access to surgical masks then  something has gone seriously wrong. The PPE stockpile is a national stockpile. It's a  federal Government stockpile. But of course everybody would understand that it's

important that it be distributed in Victoria as much as is necessary to ensure that all health  care workers have access to the PPE they need, the personal protective equipment they  need.

I just want to touch on mental health. Of course we continue to see concerning numbers  and reports around mental health and this pandemic. Again we've welcomed the Victorian  Government’s announcements in this regard just as we welcome the federal Government  extending the number of consultations you can have under a mental health care plan to 20  in Victoria. We think that number should be the number across the country, 20 across the  country in relation to this pandemic. Also Australia's mental health challenge will not end  when we are through this pandemic. I was disappointed to see the Minister of Health say  that the Government will be responding to the Productivity Commission inquiry into mental  health in the 2021 Budget. We should be responding in the 2020 Budget. The response  should be funded in the 2020 Budget which will be brought down in October. We don't yet  know what's in the Productivity Commission report. The Government should release that  as a matter of urgency. Australians should see it as a matter of urgency. But even more  important than that the Government should respond and implement the PC  recommendations, the Productivity Commission recommendations, without delay and that  means funding it in the October Budget.

Anything other than that is a failure. It's an unnecessary delay. It means months more  anguish for many Australians. We do not have time to waste when it comes to tackling the  mental health challenges in Australia. And this has been an important commitment across  the Parliament but it's important that the Government implements the report's  recommendations in October in the Budget not wait until next year.

Happy to take questions from our colleagues on the telephone.

JOURNALIST: Just on the Royal Commission into Aged Care, we just heard a blistering  opening address from Council assisting. They said neither the Health Department nor the  Aged Care Regulator had developed a COVID-19 plan for Aged Care. That’s almost  gobsmacking.

BOWEN: This is just extraordinary. Let's be very clear. We've known all along that  Australia's biggest exposure to COVID-19 was aged care. This makes, this makes sense  to everyone. This is where Australia's most vulnerable to COVID-19 are cared for, living in  many cases in close quarters with common staff across agencies. This was a clear  exposure. We knew it was coming. For us not to have the plans developed particularly  after Newmarch House is just gobsmacking. It's extraordinary. Also, we now know that the  aged care regulator was informed by St Basil’s Facility in Melbourne of their positive cases  despite the fact the COVID Committee in Parliament was told that that was not the case  that the Federal Government had not been told. Now this raises a number of important  questions. Why did the federal Department of Health tell Parliament that they didn't know  when the aged care regulator did know? Why on the face of it did the aged care regulator  take four days to tell the federal Department of Health? And what happened in those four  days? It would appear nothing. When did the Minister for Ageing know that in fact his  Department or the aged care regulator had been informed? What did he know when did he  know it? And what did he do about it? Aged care is a responsibility of the Federal  Government. And we have Australians who are dying in aged care and if there was no plan  in place to deal with it particularly after Newmarch House, if the regulator was being  informed of positive cases in aged care facilities and not passing it on to other Federal  Government agencies that this is a serious failure.



And those Australians with parents and grandparents in aged care facilities have every  right, have every right to be very angry if the regulator was told and nothing was done.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

BOWEN: I've seen reports that the Minister for Defence and other Australian Government  officials have been making strong representations to the United States that this should not  happen. The Labor party very strongly supports those efforts. The Labor Party strongly  supports the efforts of the Minister for Defence if that report is correct. It would be deeply  concerning for all Australians if there was an arrangement entered into where this person  was released from gaol, three Australians died. The Minister for Defence would have the  full support of the Labor Party in every action necessary. And every action necessary taken  up to and including by the Prime Minister. We would trust that that's the case and we would  strongly support those actions being taken. He should not be released.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

BOWEN: Yes these have been long seated issues in aged care. What we're seeing is a  result of aged care which is not fit for purpose in Australia. The Labor Party's been talking  about this for a long time. I remember when Bill Shorten was Leader of the Opposition and  he called for the Aged Care Royal Commission. The Morrison Government said, no they  didn't want to have a Royal Commission. The then Minister for Ageing said a Royal  Commission would be elder abuse. He said that in the Parliament. Which was an insult not  only to Mr Shorten but to everybody who is concerned about the state of our aged care.  We've got aged care which is based on a workforce which is by all evidence underpaid. A  workforce which is highly reliant on casual labour or people working across aged care  facilities. When you've got aged care which is really not fit for purpose then of course we  are seeing in the response to COVID-19 a situation which could have been better handled,  with a better funded, better organised aged care facility. As the Labor Party's been saying  for many years. And of course when you've got such a long waiting list for home care  you've got more people in aged care facilities than otherwise wouldn't necessarily need to  be the case. Because if people could get home care packages then they wouldn't be in  aged care facilities to start with.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

BOWEN: Well I think it's unfortunate that this has taking so long when you had an  independent review already recommend some time ago Teddy Sheean receive the VC. I  mean the Independent Review does not recommend that lightly. It doesn't happen easily. It  is appropriately a very, very high bar to be awarded a Victoria Cross to start with. It’s a  particularly high bar to have it awarded retrospectively after the passage of many decades.  An independent review free of any political involvement recommended this. A long time  ago. For the sake of the memory of Teddy Sheean we think it would have been better if  that was implemented as soon as the recommendation was received. And of course we  very, very much welcome this announcement today. We very, very much welcome the  Prime Minister's announcement that he'll be recommending to Her Majesty the award of  the VC. This has been a long standing campaign by many members of parliament. The  Tasmanian Labor contingent. By the other MPs that I mentioned. And it's appropriate that  this great Australian who gave his life at the tender age of eighteen before it had barely  commenced and it did so with great bravery be honoured with our highest military honour.



JOURALIST: (inaudible)

BOWEN: Well again it's a terrible fact that we've lost so many Australians including today  in aged care facilities. As I said on the weekend we welcome the fact that the Federal  Government has indicated they will set up aged care response teams in other states and  territories as necessary. But we need more detail about the trigger points about how or  when that will happen. And after -

JOURNALIST: (inaudible)

BOWEN: Quite right I agree. And that's the point I'm making. We knew from Newmarch  House that this, and even before, we knew that this was Australia's biggest exposure.  We've now got the announcement from the Federal Government late last week that they  will set up  aged care response teams in various states and territories when necessary. We  call for that some time ago. We don't have time to waste. That's why we're saying the  Federal Government should also make very clear to Australians with parents and  grandparents in aged care facilities how and when those aged care response teams will be  set up. And after the self-evident failure that we know of now this morning from St Basil's  and the fact that the aged care regulator was informed despite the fact that Federal  Parliament through the COVID committee was told it was not informed. We need the aged  care regulator to be acting much more responsibly and we need those aged care response  units particularly in Victoria to be lifting the response. Because quite clearly in St Basil’s at  least that we know of they were told and nothing was done. Okay are we all in? Thank you  very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512









