





THE HON ANDREW GEE MP  Minister for Decentralisation and Regional Education  Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Investment  Federal Member for Calare





MEDIA STATEMENT



11 September 2020

Outcomes from Regional Boarding School Roundtable

“Today, I met with peak boarding school representatives across Australia to discuss  border closures and their impact on regional boarding schools, students and their  families.

Schools are safe environments. Boarding schools are already following Australian  Health Protection Principal Committee (AHPPC) guidelines for example, they have  COVID safe plans in place.

With school holidays just around the corner, the Coalition Government is working  with the states and territories on solutions.

The Federal Government welcomed moves from the Queensland Government to  provide exemptions to ensure boarding school students from NSW and ACT could  be with their families these school holidays. We hope further solutions in Queensland  and other states can be applied to manage the remaining concerns of families.

Boarding school representatives reported problems because of the inconsistent  application of border restrictions. They spoke of schools staying open throughout  holidays this year which is not great outcome for schools, students or staff. Many  parents are also electing instead to keep their children closer to home and not  returning them to their schools.

Boarding school families are not looking for open slather. They want to be COVID  safe: they want their kids and communities to remain COVID safe.

Families are seeking a range of compassionate, caring and common-sense solutions  such as applying public health guidelines for boarding school students, who are  adversely affected by the boarder restrictions.  This also includes allowing age  appropriate quarantining and travel arrangements to allow students to return home  and back to school.



I know that the Prime Minister and my Ministerial colleagues are working very hard  on these issues and are in constant contact with their State and Territory Ministers.

We all welcome that collaboration as it is fundamental to a solution that will see us  through not just for these school holidays, but also into 2021.”

Media Contact: Gabrielle Phipps, 0400 917 405, Gabrielle.Phipps@dfat.gov.au



