

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  6PR PERTH LIVE WITH JANE MARWICK  THURSDAY, 17 DECEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: vaccine rollout; vaccine supply deals.

JANE MARWICK, HOST: Well the Federal Government has released a timeline  for the rollout of the COVID-19 vaccine into Australia but it's not without its  issues. Chris Bowen is the Shadow Health Minister and he joins me this  afternoon. Chris Bowen good afternoon and welcome.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH Thanks Jane, good  afternoon.

MARWICK: Look it sounds good. It looks as though by around March the  people in the neediest category, the most vulnerable will be able to get a  COVID-19 vaccine. On the surface that looks good.

BOWEN: Yeah and it's remarkable international achievement. I mean Jane the  average time to develop a new vaccine is 17 years I mean this has been done  in lightning speed and that's a tribute to the world's researchers including  Australian researchers. It's good that Australia has access to the vaccine  although there is a long way to go and indeed we could have better access and  distribution will be a great challenge.

MARWICK: Yeah will this is interesting so how will it be distributed? Do we  know yet.

BOWEN: No well the government is in discussions about that and that's fair  enough. I'm critical of them for some things I'm not critical of them about that.  This is a complicated undertaking. The Pfizer vaccine, which is the one which is  most advanced and we do have some access to. We've got 10 million doses  and it’s a two dose vaccine so people are going to have to go back a couple of

weeks apart and get two doses for it to work.

MARWICK: So does that mean we’ve got 5?

BOWEN: Exactly.

MARWICK: Oh okay.

BOWEN: Five million Australians will get it so one in five of us at this point and  quite rightly the government is prioritizing the elderly and essential health  workers, that makes perfect sense to me. I'd like us to have more of that  vaccine, and we can get to the other vaccines later. But I'd love for us to have  more of that because one in five is obviously not enough. Just putting that  aside, there'll be huge distribution challenges because this is a new type of  vaccine which we’re not used to in Australia and it's got to be distributed at  minus 70 degrees Celsius. Now, we just don't do that here, there are things that  can be done, and will be done. Again, I'm not sort of taking political potshots I'm  just pointing out that this is a huge challenge and we can't just assume that you  know come March the vaccine starts rolling out and everything's hunky dory and  we're back to normal because that's not the way it's going to roll.

MARWICK: What about the timeline of it and waiting until March? It has to go  through an approval process with the TGA the Therapeutic Goods  Administration. My understanding is that should happen by January?

BOWEN: Yeah that's right and so again there's some things I’m critical of and  there’s other things I’m not and I'm not critical of waiting until January. That is  perfectly appropriate to my way of thinking. The TGA, the Therapeutic Goods  Administration is world class and respected and we've got to have confidence in  them. If they say it makes sense to wait until January that's good enough for  me. We will just divert for a second, I know there's a lot of sort of anti vaxxer  stuff out there.

MARWICK: Tonnes of it, tonnes of it.

BOWEN: Yeah too much and there are people too with genuine concerns or  jeez this is happening too quickly too so you've got to tell people the  Therapeutic Goods Administration the TGA, world class and respected. They’ve  got my confidence I think they can have all of that confidence. If they say they  want to wait till January to get it right that's perfectly fine with me, I'm not going  to criticise that. Where I do have a point to make is that if they do approve it in  January, under the terms of the deal that the Federal Government has made,  we won't get the vaccine until March and I think that's a bit too long to wait. It's  available in January we should get it in January.



MARWICK: So why the lag?

BOWEN: Well that’s the deal they’ve done. They've done this deal with Pfizer,  the Morison Government and it gives us 10 million doses,  5 million Australians  and we start getting in March and I think we could do better than that.

MARWICK: Is this a matter of investment? If we paid more could we have had it  sooner?

BOWEN: Well we came a bit late to the party I've got to say. The first deals  were done around the world in last March. We didn’t get a deal in Australia until  September which means we were a bit behind in April, and when Scott Morrison  said we were first in the queue I'm going to tell you that's just not true. It wasn't  true then, it’s not true now. We’re not first in the queue far from it, we’re a fair  way down the road. I think that the government wasn't as fast as they could  have been. Yes I've always accepted that there’s risk to be had here. So for  example the government did a deal with the University of Queensland and now  that that vaccine has fallen over.

MARWICK: Yeah.

BOWEN: And that's nobody's fault. That's not the scientists fault. It's not the  Federal Government's fault you know, these things happen and so I'm not  critical of that at all. But that does mean now there's a big hole in our strategy  because we had 50 million of that vaccine. Well that vaccine is not going to exist  now so that's been a bit of a blow. The world's best practices to have five or six  deals, so that we spread the risk around. We don't know which vaccines going  to really nice come through. People say the AstraZeneca one and we all hope  that's the case, I certainly do. We've got a deal with AstraZeneca, but we don't  have to deal with the Moderna, which is the one with 95% approval.

MARWICK: Yeah look Peter Collignon was talking to me the other day about  the Mederna one too, so why don't we have a deal with Moderna?

BOWEN: Well we just don’t, the Federal Government hasn't done a deal with  Moderna they mustn't think it's necessary.

MARWICK: Maybe it's too expensive?

BOWEN: Well we also don't have a deal with J&J and the TGA has said that  that's one that shows a lot of potential. Now these things are expensive the  vaccine is bloody expensive there are no two ways about it, but it is really the  key to fully opening up. We're pretty open now but we're not fully open.





MARWICK: Plus enough people have to have it don't they, you have to have  90% of the population to agree to have it so we’re not home and hosed yet

BOWEN: No well you’ve certainly got to, you can’t really say that it's working  until you’ve got about 60% and then as you said, you know ideally 90%. The  other thing Jane that a lot of people might not realise is that this particular  vaccine stops the disease, it doesn't stop the infection and it's an important  difference. The virus can still be transmitted it just stops you getting sick. So you  can have the virus and not be sick because you've had the vaccine but give it to  somebody else. It's very important to stop the disease to stop getting sick, but  it's also important to know it doesn't actually stop you spreading it. That’s one of  the reasons why the World Health Organisation is right to say you know, hang  on, hold your horses this is wonderful, but let's not just think come March this is  all just over, back to normal because we're not.

MARWICK: Chris Bowen thanks for your time this afternoon on 6PR.

BOWEN: Thanks for having me on Jane, it’s been great.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ELIZA MITCHELL 0413 410 931









