

THE HON ANGUS TAYLOR MP  MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND EMISSIONS REDUCTION

MEDIA RELEASE



Wednesday, 28 October 2020

ABS: LOWER ELECTRICITY PRICES



Welcome news today for Australian energy consumers with the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS)  Consumer Price Index (CPI) update detailing a fall in electricity prices in the September 2020 quarter.

The ABS found electricity continued to fall by 0.7 per cent for the quarter nationally and 2.5 per cent  through the year.

This is the seventh straight quarter of ABS CPI electricity price reductions compared to the  corresponding quarter of the previous year.

This follows recent reports from the Australian Energy Market Operator that wholesale electricity prices  in the National Electricity Market (NEM) have dropped to levels not seen since 2014, and the Australian  Competition and Consumer Commission that found households and small businesses were paying less  for their electricity.

“After energy prices doubled when Labor was in government, report after report confirm energy prices  are falling under the Morrison Government,” Minister Taylor said.

“We now have seven consecutive quarters of price reductions nationally, and nine consecutive quarters  in Sydney and Adelaide - that’s price falls in every single quarter under the Morrison Government.

“In comparison, there was not a single ABS CPI quarterly reduction in Australian electricity prices under  Labor.

“The Government’s initiatives are clearly working to drive down prices for Australian households and  businesses.

“This is good news comes at a time when families and business owners are dealing with  the impacts of  the COVID-19 pandemic.”

There are still better deals available and consumers can cut their costs by comparing offers in the  market and switching suppliers. The ACCC found typical residential customers could save up to $219 by  shopping around, while typical small businesses could save $424 a year.

The Government’s free energy comparison website, energymadeeasy.gov.au compares all available  offers in the region and is an excellent resource for families and small businesses to find the best deal  for their energy needs.

The findings from the ABS, AEMO and the ACCC demonstrate our policies are creating real savings for  Australians. The Government will continue to deliver reforms across the electricity market that put  downward pressure on prices and ensure families and businesses have access to affordable, reliable  power.

ENDS

Minister Taylor’s office:               Liam O’Neil,  0428 113 617              John Hulin, 0466 443 917

