

THE HON KEN WYATT AM MP

Minister for Indigenous Australians  Member for Hasluck

TRANSCRIPT

ABC NEWS AFTERNOON BRIEFING  20 AUGUST 2020



Topics: Aboriginal flag, Mining, NT Election

E&OE…

Patricia Karvelas My guest this afternoon, Ken Wyatt, lovely to speak to you.

Ken Wyatt AM MP It's good to be with you, Patricia.

Patricia Karvelas Do you agree with Nova Peris that the Aboriginal flag should  belong to all Aboriginal people?

Ken Wyatt AM MP Well, it's been a powerful symbol over a long period of time, the  tent embassy to some of the most significant marches and it's served as unifying  symbol, an emblem on so many fronts, and it should be available. Our challenge,  though, is we have to respect the copyright laws that exist in respect to intellectual  property and Harold Thomas owns those.

Patricia Karvelas Are you disappointed that it won't be featured during the AFL  Indigenous Round this weekend?

Ken Wyatt AM MP Well, what I'm hoping, Patricia, is that people who go to the game  take their Aboriginal flag with them and drape it around their neck or carry it, and  carry it with pride and display it because the AFL have made every endeavour. And  in speaking with the AFL, I know the level of commitment that they have  demonstrated to the Indigenous round, and I am disappointed. But there are some...  (interrupted)

Patricia Karvelas I think we're having some problems with that Skype line just when  I was about to hear from Ken Wyatt, the Minister for Indigenous Australians, on this.  Ken Wyatt, I think we've got a clearer line now. How do you feel about a non-Aboriginal organisation trying to charge Indigenous people to use the flag?

Ken Wyatt AM MP Right, look, what's disappointing is the flags not there and, Harold  has entered into an arrangement with three particular companies and they do have a  relationship that is a business one, and therefore they have made a decision around  that business. But it is disappointing that we don't have the flag on the ground.



Patricia Karvelas Okay, but on that question of a non-Indigenous company profiting  from the Aboriginal flag, do you think that's right?

Ken Wyatt AM MP I think the arrangements Herald has, have certainly been  negotiated by him. Now he's chosen companies the he believes will assist in the way  in which the flag is used and is managed. But when you think about Harold and his  statements, he's always talked about the flag being symbolic of Aboriginal people.  The symbolism is about the struggle, the relationship to land, but also it's a symbol  that he wants to see, unify Australia, and it's unfortunate that some common sense  has got has not prevailed.

Patricia Karvelas So is WAM clothing holding Indigenous people to ransom?

Ken Wyatt AM MP Look, I think they're meeting, their financial obligations, whatever  they are, I'm not aware of the detail of any of the arrangements that Harold has...

Patricia Karvelas Sure, but we will we do know they charge for the use of the  Aboriginal flag. Do you think that's morally wrong?

Ken Wyatt AM MP Well, look, on this occasion, I think that the big events such as  the NRL, AFL, it would be good to have the flag on the Oval unencumbered so that  we can celebrate the Dream Time rounds that both those codes have.

Patricia Karvelas Is acquiring the rights to the flag, something you think the Federal  Government should look into?

Ken Wyatt AM MP We've been having quiet discussions with the Agency looking at  what are the options. But we've got to take into account. And I notice the comments  made by, and I'll read Eileen Camilleri, who is the CEO of the Australian Copyright  Council. She made this comment on an NITV.

"There's, is think, a lot of competing interests of people wanting to assert their right to  use it, whereas in fact, Mr. Thomas is the owner, has the copyright owner, owner of  the image, is entitled to use it in whichever way he wishes."

And this is the challenge that all of us will face when there is artwork or there is  intellectual ownership of a particular product we have as a country, established the  copyright laws and they prevail and it'll require further discussion and negotiations for  us to look at the future.

Patricia Karvelas Okay. And are you prepared to go into those negotiations? Is the  Morrison Government you said quiet discussions are going forward. Do those  discussions involve acquiring the rights to the flag?

Ken Wyatt AM MP I've had private discussions with Harold. I won't disclose the  detail of those. But, in listening to Aboriginal people on the ground, listening to the  broader community and certainly based on media reporting, the first set of  discussions were just Harold's thoughts. I'm also very cognisant of IP and I'm working

with my Agency in looking for a way forward that does not breach the individual  ownership of the product by any Australian.

Patricia Karvelas So when you say you're looking at options, what might they  involve? Do you see the option which has been suggested by, as you know, this  movement and many Indigenous Australians that the Federal Government acquire a  copyright, is that one option that's available to you and you will pursue?

Ken Wyatt AM MP Well I think it'll depend on all sorts of factors. Patricia, because  whilst the group talking about the Commonwealth purchasing, there also is a  likelihood that any individual would want to enter into an arrangement that protects  their copyright. And so that's one of the challenges. Doesn't matter who sits in this  seat. We have to be very mindful of our own laws in this country and how we protect.  But it's a pity to see.... (interrupted)

Patricia Karvelas I think we lost you a bit there Ken Wyatt, you're making the point  that it's a pity to see the most unifying, if I can sort of prompt you again on that, the  most unifying symbol being used this way?

Ken Wyatt AM MP I look, let's remain optimistic. Let's look at where the future  months take us, and certainly next year let's hope that we see on the grounds of all  major sporting events that are dedicated to the Indigenous rounds. We see the  Aboriginal flag on the ground and we see it alongside the Torres Strait Islander flag  because they are symbols of our nation ...

Patricia Karvelas Sure, but that's just one occurrence of it being used to. This  movement, as you know, is a much bigger movement. It is about the right to use the  flag in a way that isn't about someone's commercial interests. Is the governments  against that? Is your position that that is the wrong use of the flag?

Ken Wyatt AM MP The use the flag, Patricia, in the context of the question you ask,  should be available to all people who want access to it...

Patricia Karvelas And right now it's not right, because it's based on profit. So it's it's  not currently available?

Ken Wyatt AM MP Well, it's based on an arrangement that the owner of the flag has  with the three organisations. He deals with it and he's got the right to do that.

Patricia Karvelas And do you want to try and change that right? I mean, you can do  that as the Federal Government. Are you prepared to do it?

Ken Wyatt AM MP I'm prepared to look at a range of options. Now, what those  options depend very much upon whether we take into consideration whatever  nuances that apply. But hopefully what I would hope to see is common sense prevail  and the use of the flag become more free for significant events. Look, whatever the  agreements are that Harold has, they're his business, it's his right to do that as it is  for any Australian.



Patricia Karvelas Ok, maybe you're right, but it doesn't make it right, does it?

Ken Wyatt AM MP Well. If we take the notion it's our symbol. Then the view prevails  that, no, it's not. But on the other hand, we've got an individual who created a very  strong symbol. Who owns it. And under copyright law, as I indicated, can choose to  make arrangements. And what I have indicated in my discussions with the Agency is  for us to work our way forward out of this.

Patricia Karvelas So you told your Agency to be clear, Ken Wyatt, that you want to  change this arrangement?

Ken Wyatt AM MP No, I've had a discussion with them on how we look at the way  forward in respect to what options are available. Now, we don't know those because  we may be limited. That depends on a whole host of factors. But I'd love to see the  flag used freely, across this nation, as it has been for a very long time.

Patricia Karvelas And is it the Morrison Government's position that it should be?  Have you spoken to the Prime Minister about it?

Ken Wyatt AM MP Not on this particular matter, because part of my earlier  discussions were around the whole gamut of Aboriginal affairs, the Closing the Gap.  And this issue has been heightened this week because of the Indigenous Dream  Time round. Last year, the AFL bought the rights to have the flag on the ground. And  the AFL have continued to support Indigenous players and Indigenous communities  across this nation and have not reconciled from that. But on this Dream Time round,  the flag won't be shown.

Patricia Karvelas What do you make of BHP refusing to rule out destroying dozens  of sites sacred to the Banjima people in the Pilbara as part of its South Flank mining  expansion?

Ken Wyatt AM MP As I've said before, on sites that are sacred. They have a  significant place within the history and in the cultural context of not only the Banjima  people, any nation of people. And these sites are critical. For BHP to walk over those  sites, without having had discussions with the Banjima people is disappointing, but I  would hope they have those discussions, because they know the relevance, and  BHP needs to be open to having further discussion and dialogue. We saw the  backlash that Rio experienced.

Patricia Karvelas Just before I let you go. The Northern Territory election, of course,  is this weekend. And part of the promise from the Government is to keep the  Northern Territory closed or the border closed for 18 months. Do you think that's  sensible, that type timeframe? Minister, given the sort of success in in closing the  border and what that's meant for remote communities and keeping coronavirus out?

Ken Wyatt AM MP Well, I think all governments are looking at their states and  territories populations and they are putting into place measures to prevent the impact  of COVID-19 in their communities. And the Territory, along with Western Australia  and South Australia, have been very strong in their stance on their borders being

close. But what we would hope also is that equally some consideration is given to the  impeding of the economy, whilst at the same time protecting people and hopefully the  vaccine that looks promising is available and we'll see a change. But an incoming  government might have a different view. We just have to wait and see who's who  wins government after a Saturday and then what their decisions are.

Patricia Karvelas Minister, thanks so much for joining us.

Ken Wyatt AM MP It's a pleasure, Patricia.

Patricia Karvelas Ken Wyatt is the Minister for Indigenous Australians.

[ENDS]

Authorised by K. Wyatt, Member for Hasluck

