





THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP  MINISTER FOR POPULATION, CITIES AND URBAN  INFRASTRUCTURE

SENATOR THE HON SARAH HENDERSON  SENATOR FOR VICTORIA



THE HON RICHARD WYNNE MP  VICTORIAN MINISTER FOR PLANNING



THE HON JACLYN SYMES MP  VICTORIAN MINISTER FOR REGIONAL  DEVELOPMENT

CHRISTINE COUZENS MP  STATE MEMBER FOR GEELONG



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

The Hon Alan Tudge MP, Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure   WANTIRNA SOUTH, VICTORIA



10 September 2020

CITY DEAL EXPANDING GEELONG’S NETWORK OF LANEWAYS

Geelong’s network of laneways will be further expanded with a new pathway set to begin  construction next year.

As part of the $370 million Geelong City Deal, 28 Malop Street has been purchased with  the existing building to be demolished.

The demolition will make-way for construction of a new connecting laneway to better link  the Green Spine, the city’s water-front and the university precinct with Little Malop  Street’s thriving shops, food outlets and nightlife via Denny’s Place.

The laneway network overhaul is part of the broader, $38 million Revitalising Central  Geelong Project under the City Deal.

Federal Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure Alan Tudge said Geelong  was fast becoming an even better place to live, work and play under the City Deal.

“The laneway will bring to life a new part of the city which will support new jobs and  improve the local economy for emerging and existing businesses,” Mr Tudge said.

“It’s crucial that investments like this one under the City Deal get cracking because  Geelong, and Victoria, desperately needs the economic stimulus.”

Victorian Minister for Planning Richard Wynne said the expansion of the laneway project  will continue to breathe new life into Central Geelong.”

“Geelong is booming and is a great place to live and invest - this project will improve  accessibility to the city’s growing network of laneways and the businesses that thrive off  them.” Mr Wynne said.

Victorian Minister for Regional Development Jaclyn Symes said the laneways project will  help people to move easily between Little Malop Street and Malop Street.

“The new laneway will improve pedestrian access for thousands of office workers from  Worksafe and NDIA offices. This will help them to more easily visit Little Malop Street -

that’s good news for local businesses along that strip who’ll no doubt be looking to  welcome more customers and a boost to business,” Ms Symes said.

Senator for Victoria Sarah Henderson said the Geelong City Deal is supporting the  continued transformation of the region by leveraging the city’s strengths.

“The Geelong City Deal is focused on improved investment and coordination across  three levels of government to support a prosperous and liveable future for Geelong and  the Great Ocean Road region,” Senator Henderson said.

“The project will provide a welcome economic boost to the region once COVID-19  restrictions start to ease, thereby creating jobs for the people of Geelong and the  surrounding region.”

State Member for Geelong Christine Couzens said the pandemic had had huge impacts  on local businesses.

“That is why it’s important we get on with these projects to drive investment into the city,  support local construction jobs and help the region bounce back,” Ms Couzens said.

Existing tenants of the building are been provided with ongoing support to locate and  move to another appropriate location in Geelong, including waving rental fees.

Progress is also underway on the next section of the Green Spine between Gheringhap  and Moorabool streets, which will now be delivered in the first quarter of 2021.

The next section will provide a new entry to the city from Johnstone Park and the train  station precinct and include a landscaped triangle park that will feature new trees, grass  and seating areas as well as improved pedestrian access along the north side of the  street.

Preliminary design work on the remaining blocks of the Green Spine that will connect  greenery and safe dedicated bike lanes from Bellarine Street all the way through to the  Botanic Gardens is also underway.

The Geelong City Deal will deliver $370 million of new government investment,  consisting of $183.8 million from the Australian Government, $172 million from the  Victorian Government and $14.4 million from the City of Greater Geelong.

More information can be found at www.infrastructure.gov.au/cities/city-deals/geelong.

[ENDS]

Media Contact:  Mr Tudge - Michael Bennett 0434 782 923  Mr Wynne - Nicole Bland 0417 375 623  Ms Symes - Casey Lodge 0410 964 928  Senator Henderson - Nicholas Lamanna 0400 673 789  Ms Couzens - Electorate office (03) 5221 4821

