

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC INSIDERS WITH DAVID SPEERS

SUNDAY, 18 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECTS: NSW ICAC revelations; Federal integrity commission; COVID-19;

Universities; Jobs ; ACT and New Zealand elections.





DAVID SPEERS, PRESENTER: Tanya Plibersek, welcome to the program.



TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Good

morning.



SPEERS: So do you agree with what Kristina Keneally's arguing there, that in the Gladys

Berejiklian case, she’s suggesting women are so weak of mind and heart that a romantic

entanglement impaired her from exercising scrutiny?



PLIBERSEK: Look, I think there's a very simple proposition at the heart of this. Someone's

personal life is a hundred per cent their personal life - unless it impinges on their work and

the New South Wales ICAC is looking at the moment at this very serious set of allegations

that Daryl Maguire has inappropriately used his office to enrich himself and it's quite

properly looking at all of his associates. It is quite properly looking at whether the Premier

turned a blind eye to this behaviour. I'm not going to pre-empt or comment in detail about

what ICAC is looking at because I'm a Federal MP. My concern is why don't we have a

national integrity commission, a similar anti-corruption body at a Federal level that you've

just been discussing with your guests and-



SPEERS: We'll come to that. I'm keen to get your thoughts on that. But I just want to.. just

clear this up. You are one of Australia's most prominent female politicians. Do you share

the view of your colleague that there's this suggestion here that being romantically

engaged with someone, entangled with someone, has impaired her ability to exercise

scrutiny?



PLIBERSEK: I feel actually, as a human being, very personally sorry for the Premier. It is

hard to form and maintain relationships in our line of work. But there is never any excuse

for corrupt behaviour or turning a blind eye to corrupt behaviour. Any sort of impropriety

should be properly investigated by ICAC and if it's referred to the police by the police or the

courts.It doesn't matter who the person is. It doesn't matter their gender. It doesn't matter if

we like the person or feel sorry for them.



SPEERS: And do you, just to be clear on this, do you think Gladys Berejiklian should

resign?



PLIBERSEK: I'm actually not going to comment on that. Jodi McKay is doing a great job at

holding the New South Wales government to account. She's a person of unimpeachable

integrity. I'm going to leave that fight for Jodi McKay.



SPEERS: All right. Then on the idea of a national integrity commission or anti-corruption

body, Labor is saying that what the government's put forward is too weak. Do you think

such a body should be able to investigate politicians, hold public hearings, that sort of

thing?



PLIBERSEK: Absolutely I do. I think it's extraordinary that two years ago the government

said it had begun work on a national integrity commission almost a year before that. So

there's a three year delay now, according to the Morrison government's own timetable on a

Federal equivalent and I can't believe - even the discussion of what they're proposing now

is - it's the integrity commission you have if you don't want to have an integrity commission.

It can't look at behaviour that's happened in the past. It can only happen- it can only look at

behaviour that's happened after the laws have passed and the body is set up. It can't look

at things off its own bat. It can't accept referrals from whistleblowers. So basically the

government says 'Oh do we feel Investigating ourselves over this allegation? Hmmm.’ And

then if the government wants to investigate itself, it can refer itself to its own integrity

commission. I mean, what a joke. We would not have seen investigation of the land deal

around the airport. We would not have seen investigation around the dodgy water deals

we’ve seen. We wouldn't have seen investigation of allegations of forged documents or

branch stacking using taxpayer funds. All of these things ought to be properly investigated

by a Federal integrity commission and the model that the government's proposing wouldn't

touch those sorts of issues. It shows how weak the model is.



SPEERS: Let me turn to Victoria, one new case yesterday, two today. We're looking at a

pretty equivalent situation to New South Wales. Do you think Victoria should be open to

the same extent that you are there in New South Wales?



PLIBERSEK: Well, I think the first thing to say is Victorians ought to congratulate

themselves. It has been such a tough time and they've done so well as the numbers in the

last few days show. I think it's been an extraordinarily difficult time for Victorians. I would

be going stir crazy if I was under the same lockdown as they've done. So I think they ought

to congratulate themselves and I think it's actually really gross that Federal Liberal MPs are

trying to use this as an attack on Daniel Andrews. What he has done is - he hasn't done it

for popularity - he's done it because he's considered it the right thing to do. The Federal

government ought to be looking at its own role in Victoria's difficulties including aged care,

which is completely a Federal government responsibility, where some of the largest

failures are. And have a look at the contact tracing app. I mean Greg Hunt, he's a

Victorian, the contact tracing app at last count had found 14 people. That adds up to about

$5 million per person that the app has found. Imagine how much sooner Victoria could

have opened up if the contact tracing app that the Federal government is completely

responsible for had worked as it was intended to work, as it was promised to work.



SPEERS: What about an area that is a shared responsibility to a degree and that's

education. There are still students in Victoria, Years 8 to 10, that are still learning from

home, months down the track. Would you like to see them able to return to the classroom?



PLIBERSEK: I want to see all kids in the classroom as quickly as possible because

remote learning takes a toll, and it takes a toll most particularly on the most disadvantaged

students and we've seen that. We've seen teachers just doing an extraordinary job in

getting work into kids' lounge rooms. It's been harder for kids who don't have an internet

connection, don't have a device at home, teachers have been driving loaner computers

around and dropping off dongles and packets of papers that kids can do their work on. It's

been really tough and hardest, as I said, on the most disadvantaged students, so of

course, I want to see them back in the classroom and the Federal government could help

here by providing resources for catch up, for tutoring, for helping kids in the classroom that

have fallen behind. And sadly the most recent Federal budget had none of that extra

assistance which could go into classrooms to help those kids who've fallen behind. Kids

have fallen behind, but we can help them catch up if we put the effort and the resources

into doing so.



SPEERS: On higher education, the government's funding reforms have now gone through

the Senate, tomorrow in the House, they'll be rubber stamped there. These are changes

that might make some degrees cheaper - maths and science and so on - but others, like

the arts and law, far more expensive. Will Labor reverse these changes if you win the next

election?



PLIBERSEK: We'll announce our education, higher education policies well before the next

election, but you can judge us on our record. We almost doubled higher education funding

when we were last in government and opened up universities to an additional 200,000

students. But on this legislation David, we are heading down an American path of

university debts that are crippling for life. Your degree would have cost about $40,000. My

degree, I did a four year degree would have cost closer to $50,000. And my daughter, who

started university this year, if she started next year instead - she's doing Arts/Social Work -

she would graduate with a debt of around $55,000. She wants to be a child protection

worker, so she'd be entering a labour market with high unemployment where, at the

moment, one in three young people are looking for a job or more hours of work, entering a

labour market with high unemployment with a debt of close to $55,000, $58,000 of debt,

these young people, at the same time as they don't know if they’ll have a job, they want to

save for a house. It's so tough on these kids, so tough and so unfair.



SPEERS: Yeah. For some it will be cheaper under this new approach for the courses I

mentioned. Can you just clear up for us, if Labor does come to power and they're entering

their second or third year of that degree, it won't suddenly become more expensive for

them? You're not going to jack up the fees for those who are getting a cheaper deal now?



PLIBERSEK: I'll tell you David, we are not in the business of putting up university fees. We

want every young person to choose the degree that suits them best, that will help them get

a great job, and have a great life. That applies to university, that applies to TAFE. We

made university much more accessible-



SPEERS: Right. So if you choose, if you choose one of these cheaper courses now, if you

choose one of these cheaper courses now for next year, don't worry Labor is not going to

change the rules in year 2 or 3?



PLIBERSEK: We are never in the business of making it harder to go to uni. We're always

in the business of making it easier and you know what? With one in three young people

looking for a job or more hours of work, I want to make sure that any young person who's

not earning can be learning - at TAFE, at university, in an excellent, properly funded school

system. Because it's good for those individuals, it gives them the skills and the education

they need to get a job in the future. But it's also good for our nation. We know that

investing in education is one of the best ways of increasing productivity and by the way, for

every extra dollar we spend in education - put it this way - every million dollars we spend in

education, we create about 15 jobs, almost 15 jobs. For every million dollars we spend in

construction we create 1.2 jobs. So the investment in education isn't just good for the

individuals. It's not just good for our national productivity. It also has a massive

employment multiplier.



SPEERS: All right. Couple of other quick ones. You've got a book coming out in a couple

of weeks.



PLIBERSEK: I do.



SPEERS: It's a collection of essays called 'Upturn: A better normal after COVID-19'. In

your introduction, you write about the need for more well-trained workers in the caring

sector - aged care, childcare, disability care - and you say all that's missing is the

government commitment to training the workforce and paying a share of wages. So do you

think the government should directly be subsidising the wages of these care workers?



PLIBERSEK: We effectively do that. There's massive investment in childcare and we just

announced another $6.2 billion in Anthony's Budget reply speech that we would like to see

go into childcare. That means more women can go to work.



SPEERS: That's indirect support. I appreciate that. I'm just saying that's indirect support to

the families. Should the workers have their wages subsidised?



PLIBERSEK: Well no, that money goes into the system and that money then pays workers

wages and it happens like that in childcare. It happens like that in aged care as well. We've

got more than a 100,000 people waiting on the Home Care waiting list who have been

assessed as eligible for Home Care. All we need is a government that's prepared to pay for

those packages and those packages pay the wages -



SPEERS: I appreciate that point, but there's been a shift in Labor's approach here. You

took to the election last year a plan to directly subsidise child care workers' wages.

Anthony Albanese's package announced last week that you're referring to didn't have that.

It's, it is extending the family- the payment for families up to quite high incomes of half a

million dollars a year. So do you think you should still be trying to subsidise the wages of

the workers?



PLIBERSEK: No, we should be putting the money into these sectors - aged care,

disability, childcare, education, healthcare - because they are massive employers,

including massive employers of women. The separate issue of unequal wages and

underpayment in the caring professions has to be dealt with through an industrial relations

framework that properly pays caring professions. We know that there's a gender pay gap.

We need to address that gender pay gap but what I'm talking about in the book is

expanding aged care, expanding childcare, expanding health and education, which are all

big employers of women, where you get really strong additional job numbers for every

million dollars that you invest in those sectors.



SPEERS: OK. Final one. A good night for Labor in both the ACT and New Zealand last

night. In fact, a big win, a landslide win for Jacinda Ardern across the ditch. What are the

lessons for Labor in Australia from these results?





PLIBERSEK: I think Jacinda Ardern did a great job, Andrew Barr did a great job as well in

the ACT and the lessons are clear. Govern well. Give people a vision for the future. Make

sure that you're investing in the services that make life better. Make sure that you've got

focus all the time on jobs, on full employment and that positive vision for the future includes

building things, making things, caring for people, good jobs with decent pay and conditions,

investment in renewables to power our future, to bring down the cost of energy in our grid

for our households and our businesses. I think there's a lot in common between the ACT

and New Zealand and congratulations to two great teams and two great leaders.



SPEERS: In the case of Jacinda Ardern, does having a progressive female leader help?



PLIBERSEK: Oh, well, she's just an inspiring person, an inspiring leader and I think the

whole world has been looking at Jacinda Ardern and saying "I wish we had a bit more of

that".



SPEERS: Tanya Plibersek, thank you.



PLIBERSEK: Thank you.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350



