

LINDA BURNEY MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND SOCIAL SERVICES  MEMBER FOR BARTON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC FAR NORTH QUEENSLAND BREAKFAST  THURSDAY, 10 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECT: There are 28 JobSeekers for every job vacancy in regional  areas.

KEIR SHOREY, HOST: The Federal Government is planning to return  JobSeeker to the old base rate pretty much after December of this year. But  there are new figures out showing that it's places like Far North Queensland  that will be hardest hit by this snap-back, as it's being described by many  people. Linda Burney is the Shadow Minister for Families and Social Services  and she's with us now. Thank you for coming on.

LINDA BURNEY, SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND SOCIAL  SERVICES: Good morning.

SHOREY: So take us through these numbers, basically it seems to show that  there's something like 28 Australians currently receiving these unemployment  payments for every one job vacancy that exists in the regions. Is that correct?

BURNEY: That's correct. There are about 12 people on JobSeeker for  everyone job in the cities. But when you get to regional Australia, and  particularly places like Far North Queensland, there are something like 28  people who are on JobSeeker. That is, they are unemployed and are looking  for work, and there is one job for every 28 people. Now that's an average and  obviously it's worse in some areas than 28 people.

SHOREY: And that means it's essentially, using those numbers, two and a half  times as difficult to find a job as it is in Brisbane, compared to a place like Far  North Queensland.

BURNEY: Oh absolutely. And what Labor is saying very much, and you



covered it in your introduction, not to snap-back JobSeeker to the old rate of  Newstart at Christmas time. But to announce a permanent increase to  JobSeeker. We know pre-pandemic that people were absolutely struggling to  put food on the table on the old base rate of around about $40 a day.

SHOREY: So where would the Labor Party like to see it sit? Because obviously  after September it does get reduced to a degree.

BURNEY: So at the moment if you're on JobSeeker you are receiving  Coronavirus Supplement which is $500 a fortnight. That will go back to $250 a  fortnight, I think it's about the 24th of September, or somewhere around about  there. And Labor hasn't set a figure and we have done that very deliberately.  That's the responsibility of the Government. Obviously it's not being ignored,  but we are saying very clearly; not only is there fewer jobs in regional areas, but  that sort of snap-back is going to have a devastating effect on the economy and  on small businesses. And you are going to literally be able to see it in regional  areas.

SHOREY: Linda Burney, there has been a lot of, at least anecdotal evidence,  and we've had a lot of it on this program too, about employers finding it in fact  difficult to get people into jobs because of this increased JobSeeker rate. That  idea of there being a disincentive with a rate that's, you know, quite a lot higher.  Does Labor have an idea as how to deal with that issue.

BURNEY: Well I don't accept that argument. I think that's a very easy and  simple argument to make; that the rate of JobSeeker is disincentivising people  to get work. And I just don't think that's true. I've never met an unemployed  person who doesn't desperately want to work. It's not just about money. It's  about pride, it's about contribution. And very often where there are vacancies is  where there's seasonal work, for example picking, getting a harvest off, meat  works - and many of those industries rely on casual labour, they rely on people  coming in from other countries to do that seasonal work. Now under JobSeeker  there is mutual obligation. And that is that if you are offered a job that's  reasonable, then you have to take that job.

SHOREY: Alright Linda Burney, thanks for your time this morning. We'll see  how this plays out over the coming weeks.

BURNEY: Thank you very much.

ENDS   MEDIA CONTACT: DARYL TAN 0422 028 222





