

JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC FAR NORTH QUEENSLAND

MONDAY,  24 FEBRUARY 2020



SUBJECTS: Impact of Coronavirus on regional Queensland; Morrison Government

inaction in regional Queensland; LNP climate chaos; The Great Barrier Reef

bleaching.



PHIL STALEY, ABC FAR NORTH QUEENSLAND: The Federal Shadow Treasurer has

visited North and Far North Queensland recently to hear what businesses need to survive

the downturn in business in this beginning to 2020. The bushfire crisis, now COVID-19 and

its subsequent travel ban, and indeed the potential of coral bleaching as well have

businesses calling for financial help to stay afloat. Jim Chalmers says there is more that

the Federal Government could do to help.



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: We've met with the Chamber of Commerce

and we've done a roundtable hosted by the Mayor with TTNQ, Advance Cairns and some

tourism operators trying to understand how we fill that gap that's emerged. We've got the

councils doing some great things, the State Government's doing some great things, the

business community is remarkably united which is terrific to see. They know what they

want. But there is a bit of a gap there when it comes to the Federal Government. We want

to help the businesses from this part of the world pressure the Federal Government to

come to the table and provide the support that business needs.



STALEY: I had a similar chat that I'm having with you with the member for Leichhardt,

Warren Entsch. He did explain, I thought rightly so, that a rescue package along the lines

of giving $1000 to an exporter would be really different to $1000 for local residents to pump

up the economy. It's really complex. Would you agree with that?



CHALMERS: There are fine judgments associated with that but if there's a problem with

one proposal or another from business then the onus is on Scott Morrison and the Federal

Government to come up with something different. One thing we can surely all agree on is

that we value our tourism and aquaculture businesses, our education services and our

retail sector. If we value them then we owe it to the businesses here to come up with some

kind of plan. If direct cash grants are not what the Government wants to do, what do they

want to do instead? The sorts of things that we hear are what can we do along the lines of

what the Local Government and the State Government have done with fee relief? Is there

a tax equivalent of that? What can we do to promote Far North Queensland in the big

tourism markets overseas? How do we make sure that Austrade is being really helpful so

that we can establish those markets? How can we make sure that businesses are getting

advice on what's actually happening? The travel ban was extended again and businesses

want to know what timeframe they are trying to survive before things will pick up again. All

of these things are important. The Federal Government should come here and do as I've

done today with Nita Green, sit down with these peak business groups and tourism

operators and work out what if anything can be done.



STALEY: Those businesses that you've met, are they even clear on what it would take to

get them through? As you say we don't know where the end is. I'm wondering in your

meetings today, did you hear something that made you think that they're aware of what

they need or are we still trying to work out what we need?



CHALMERS: There's a pretty remarkable degree of unity amongst the business

community. That's not common - you go to big regional centres and they've all generally

got competing interests. What's remarkable and heartening about what I've heard today in

all of these meetings and roundtables is that business is speaking with one voice. That

shows how serious things are. They've been asking things like can we do more to promote

specific destinations here overseas? The Government's got a package for bushfire-affected communities and so a lot of businesses here are saying, is there an equivalent for

us a bit like the State Government is doing?



STALEY: It's a business disaster, isn't it?



CHALMERS: It is. It's quite serious. We'll know the full economic impact in time but you

only have to walk down the main drag here to see that the place is not as full as it usually

is, the planes aren't full and there are more 'for lease' signs than there should be. You can

tell that there is weakness in the local economy. My view is that it was weak before the

virus hit. There's a whole other conversation about the lack of a broader national economic

plan. Business is speaking with one voice. They want some help promoting destinations.

They want to at least have a conversation about things like BAS deferrals. They want to

make sure that Austrade is being as helpful as possible. All of these things are important.

We want to be constructive on the Labor side and say to the Government, here are some

ideas presented to us, what do you reckon?



STALEY: As if we didn't have enough to worry about in the Far North we get the news last

Thursday that the reef may well be about to be bleached again or may already have been

bleached. From the people you've met, can we deal with this? This feels like a cruel blow

after a series of cruel blows.



CHALMERS: It is but there are a couple of things about that, Phil. We've got to make sure

that when we communicate the condition of the reef to the rest of Australia and the rest of

the world, that we need to not overdo it. We need to be really measured with our

commentary about it. You read stuff in the international press that the reef is not worth

visiting. It is worth visiting. It is beautiful. It is amazing. It is one of Australia's best assets.

We need to be careful about that kind of commentary. But we also need to be cognisant

and upfront that as the climate changes it impacts the reef. That's why a region like Far

North Queensland and North Queensland have a lot of skin in the game when it comes to

climate change because that is a remarkable asset that you have, the Great Barrier Reef.

The warmer things get, the more likely it is that the reef suffers from it. That's one of the

many reasons why I think we should do something meaningful about climate change.



STALEY: Could you see something like this leading to the Federal Government trying to

lower its emissions targets or even act with little bit more urgency in that regard?





CHALMERS: Ideally they would be more ambitious on dealing with climate change than

they are. I know that you've spoken with Warren Entsch about this recently and from time

to time. The problem that Warren has is that a big, substantial chunk of the Government’s

partyroom are essentially climate change deniers. They don't understand the impacts on

the reef or that renewable energy is cheaper and cleaner for families and businesses. That

is a problem. Anthony Albanese is stepping into that void that's been left by the

Government and saying that as a nation we should have net zero emissions by 2050. That

would be good for the economy. It would be good for the environment. It means investing

more in renewable energy and you've got big advantages here in hydro and other types of

renewable energy. We can do something good for the economy and something good for

the environment. We can get power prices down and we can lower our emissions. If we

could do all of that then that would be a really good thing.



STALEY: That is Jim Chalmers, Federal Shadow Treasurer, speaking to Phil Staley about

the calls for assistance to businesses suffering following pretty big downturns to the

beginning of 2020.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949





