

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

TRANSCRIPT

Monday 31st August 2020



Minister Littleproud iv Afternoon Briefing

PATRICIA KARVELAS: The royal commission investigating the last catastrophic bushfire season  says better coordination between territory, state and federal leaders is needed to deal with national  emergencies. The Commission has published its interim report, which says the last fire season  demonstrated challenges with coordinating resources across the country. Now, the report says the  National Cabinet approach that's been established to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic could also  be used to manage natural disasters. Agriculture and Emergency Management Minister David  Littleproud joins me now. David Littleproud, lovely to speak to you.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks for having me PK.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: The royal commission says there's an opportunity to refresh and to  strengthen national disaster planning. What work is being done around that now?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, look, the harmonisation in the preparedness in the fighting of the  fires and the disaster recovery is so important. And while states have always had the operational  management around that nationally coordinated approach of assets and particularly around aerial  assets, AFAC, who is the peak body that represents the fire commissioners, has been tasked with  the responsibility of securing the fleet of aircraft that's required in the past. So, obviously we want  to work and make sure with the fire commissioners around what that would look like in the future.  You've got to understand there wasn't any recommendations as of yet around that. But the  commission's observations did say that there needs to be better harmonisation at all of those  levels, and we obviously will now wait for a couple of weeks while the commission goes and  consults with key stakeholders to give us some firmer recommendations. But a lot of that had  already been sorted through and I think there's- the fire commissioners themselves had lent in  again this year in making sure the preparedness of a fleet strong of 150 aircraft has already been  secured.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: Do you agree that the Watch and Act warning isn't clear enough about  what people should do when it's issued?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah. I think we need to have greater consistency here, Patricia Karvelas,  and that's around the use of the data. And I think that's where- I mean, we've invested $6.2 million  to try and get a risk- a fire rating framework that is consistent across the states. Because if you're  on one side of the border, it should be consistent on the other because the fires don't respect the  state borderline. They will come across. And if it's coming from the other side, you need to have an  appreciation of where it's coming from. And we've had conversations at ministerial council level  with the states around this and we're hoping now that if we can get that harmonisation, this will be  a real key achievement of the state and federal governments working together and state  governments appreciating the opportunity to harmonise that, to keep people safe.

TRANSCRIPT



TRANSCRIPT

PATRICIA KARVELAS: So what do you make of the suggestion that National Cabinet could be  adopted for the national management of future natural disasters? Do you envisage, for instance,  what we saw with COVID-19, these kind of rolling meetings? We were seeing two meetings a  week, even more frequent, daily meetings during a bushfire crisis? Is that the way that it should  work?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah. I think the big question out of this is where does the trigger point  come for the Federal Government to get involved in that operational management, and where our  resources need to come in, and you know, understand that that's really from the ADF. And, in fact,  in the last bushfire season, I had 50 tasking requests by state governments for aerial assets, from  the Defence Force or troops on the ground all that were approved within four minutes. But then  there was a juncture whereby where we hit the fires plus day one where there were communities  that were looking for support and some of the states were just overwhelmed. And then so how  does the Defence Force fit into that? And the Prime Minister took the extraordinary step of going to  the Governor-General and asking for army reservists to be involved. So, if we had those  conversations in a structured way, then is there an ability for there to be clearer lines of delineation  as when the Federal Government needs to use its assets to support the states in the operational  management of disasters.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: The royal commission also found that the multiple Bushfire Recovery  Agencies can slow and fragment the recovery process. Is there merit in the idea of a single  scalable agency?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah and that's one of the things that obviously we're working through.  We're not going to pre-empt the recommendations of the royal commission. But Andrew Colvin and  I have reflected on what's worked well and what hasn't. And obviously, we need to understand  there needs to be consistency. Because there was fires in Stanthorpe on the Queensland-New  South Wales border and in Tenterfield. But what you got was different even though you're only  across the border. Now, is that really the way in which we want to actually help people recover? I  think we've already started a process where we've asked the states to come on that journey, not  pre-empting this report, but actually already starting them to have that conversation with us about  that consistency because while the Federal Government pays some of it, so too the states. But this  is a conversation I think needs to happen and happen quickly so there is that consistency around  the country.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: Does specific work need to be done around evacuation messaging for  tourists and how to better manage those kinds of processes too? I mean that was a huge issue  over the summer period.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah. I think the comms piece - communications piece - is very important  for us to understand, one, in terms of an investment in the infrastructure that is fit for the future and  fit for purpose, but, two, is about that harmonisation coming back and using all the data in a  consistent way right across. Because if you're a tourist and you're in a different state or from a  different country, what you want to have is a single source of truth. And that's an important  opportunity around where we could work together with the states to make sure that they  consistently achieve that. So I think there's a lot of learnings there that can happen. And they're not  big wins. They're something that's just common sense and I think this could be the impetus  depending on where the royal commission tells us to go with their final recommendations, for us to  finally get this sorted one way or another.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: The royal commission also identified the lack of a national public safety  mobile broadband capability. Is that something that's being worked on? Because, obviously, this  country's large and people go to pretty remote places. Is that a way that- something that you're  working on, ahead of this report?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Definitely, PK. In fact, there's been $1.9 million invested in that. And in  fact, I've only just got briefed on the updates on that. We're just finalising the final contributions of

TRANSCRIPT



TRANSCRIPT

the states around that switchover and making sure that we can achieve that. So, I would expect  that that's very imminent in terms of the finalisation of that, and that goes to the communications  piece in making sure that we keep our emergency service personnel, but also Australians safe with  leading-edge technology.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: Have you given any thought to how to mitigate the risks of COVID-19  outbreaks in evacuation centres?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah. And look, the states have done a lot of work on this and I got to  congratulate them. And whether that is, in fact, just keeping their emergency service personnel,  whether that be in a flood rescue event or whether it's actually moving firefighters from one state to  another, what are the COVID restrictions we want to put around them and keep them safe from  COVID; but then also how do we reach into some of these recovery centres. And again, that's  where the Commission itself made observations around the inconsistency between states. And  there are some real exemplars in terms of recovery and how they triage people, and I think my  home state of Queensland is A-grade with respect to that. And so there's a learnings and then  overlaying the complexity this year with COVID-19. We have to be prepared. And the  commissioners, not only of fire but of emergency management, are working through that, have  worked through that, with the states in a local level to make sure we have that covered.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: On another issue, what's your reaction to China's decision to launch a  second investigation into whether Australian wine is subsidised?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Let me make this clear: this isn't a second inquiry; this is, in fact, what they  announced the other- three or four days ago. In fact, there is no change. This is just a formalisation  of that process. So, it's not anything new to us. The counterveillance, it goes on top of the  dumping. So, this simply is the Chinese Government must undertake that as part of the formal  process. We respect that. We obviously will vigorously defend the Australian wine industry as not  being subsidised. In fact, of the 37 OECD countries in the world, only New Zealand subsidises their  farmers less than us. And in terms of dumping, Australian wine is the second highest priced wine  commodity in China. So, it's a high-end product and obviously we'll work with industry to vigorously  defend this. We respect the process and we'll work through that calmly and respectfully.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: We've seen the Treasurer reject the sale of Lion Dairy to a Chinese firm,  reviews of foreign agreements and a focus on foreign interference in migrant communities. Is this  Australia retaliating as well?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No. It's got nothing to do with that. That was a commercial decision by that  particular company. Obviously, we'd like to see an Australian company buy it, but we've got to  understand that foreign investment isn't always a bad thing, so long as it's works in our national  interests and they pay their fair share of tax. So we shouldn't be afraid of it, but we have to work  through it and make sure we make the decisions in the national interest. But that was a commercial  decision by that particular company with respect to walking away from the purchase.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: Today Huawei cancelled its sponsorship of the Canberra Raiders NRL  team. Should we expect more retaliation? What did you make of that decision?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, actually, I've only just heard of that from you. But obviously I'm not  privy to that decision and why. I can't actually make any further comment because I'm not privy to  what their announcement was or is.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: Okay. Before I let you go, what do you make of the idea Barnaby Joyce  has been talking about, and others have. He's the not the first one to raise it but about-

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Sorry. Sorry, PK. You just cut out.

TRANSCRIPT



TRANSCRIPT

PATRICIA KARVELAS: Here I am. I'm back. David Littleproud, can you hear me? Around- David  Littleproud, I want to ask you about Barnaby Joyce's idea - although it's not his idea alone - about  remote voting for the Parliament. Do you think that's something that should be pursued?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, look, I think we're going to have to see how COVID plays out. We  don't know how long we're going to be with this. But I'm probably of the view us that it's important  that this is the most precious part of our democracy and that the expression of those ideas are  done more forcefully and more passionately when you are here. And to vote is a privilege and an  honour that the Australian public give to you. So, my view is that I think it's important that we are  here to express our beliefs, but also to make sure that we are in a room and show quite clearly  how we vote by walking in and having the courage of our conviction to walk into that room and  vote.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: Okay. But wouldn't a modern Parliament that is more inclusive look to a  different model? I understand the argument you've made. But equally, if you want a modern  Parliament that is more inclusive, wouldn't this be- particularly in a country as big as this, wouldn't  that be perhaps something worth pursuing?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I live in one of the biggest and most remote electorates in the  country. I know what I signed up to when I put my name on that ballot paper. I know the  commitment I have to make to the people of Maranoa. And I know what that commitment is, and I  intend to live up to that. My personal belief is that I believe the conviction of your argument should  be portrayed face-to-face, on the ground, right here, albeit, I understand that we're in the middle of  a pandemic.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: Thanks so much for joining us.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks for having me PK.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: David Littleproud is the Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency  Management.

Media contact  0455 448 985

