The Hon Darren Chester MP   Minister for Veterans’ Affairs  Minister for Defence Personnel

Gordon Ramsay MLA  Attorney-General

Minister for the Arts, Creative Industries and  Cultural Events

Minister for Building Quality Improvement  Minister for Business and Regulatory Services   Minister for Seniors and Veterans

Member for Ginninderra



Open Arms — Veterans & Families Counselling provides free and confidential support for current and ex-serving ADF  personnel and their families. Help is available 24/7 on 1800 011 046 (international: +61 1800 011 046 or +61 8 8241 4546)  or visit www.OpenArms.gov.au

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

Wednesday, 19 August 2020

VETERANS AND THEIR FAMILIES HAVE THEIR SAY ON RESEARCH  AND TELEHEALTH HUB

VETERANS, their families and the broader ex-service community that supports them will be able to  have their say on how they are supported as part of the feasibility study into a new research and  telehealth hub.

Minister for Veterans’ Affairs Darren Chester today said the potential for a national research centre  and telehealth hub in the Australian Capital Territory (ACT) has moved to the next stage with Yellow  Edge Pty Ltd, partnered with ORIMA Research, selected to undertake this work.

“The input from these groups will create a profile of ACT veterans and look at how their needs could  potentially be supported through a digital health platform,” Mr Chester said.

“It is also hoped that the results of this study will provide an understanding of possible approaches  to support veteran mental health research and link support services for veterans and their families.

“Throughout the coronavirus pandemic we have seen the potential benefits telehealth has to offer  for veterans and their families and this work will build on this and ensure any future hub is informed  by best practice.

“The Government is committed to supporting veterans and their families across the ACT community  and I look forward to the Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) and the ACT Government working  closely together to support this important research into ways to improve services for the growing  veteran community.”

A workshop was held recently with Yellow Edge and ORIMA, the ACT Government and the  Commonwealth Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) to identify key stakeholders who will provide  valuable input into this work.

The outcomes of this research will complement and enhance the Australian Government’s  investment in a network of six Veteran Wellbeing Centres, providing localised health and wellbeing  support to the veteran community.





ACT Minister for Seniors and Veterans, Gordon Ramsay, said he was pleased to see the next stage of  this research begin.

“We are reaching out to the ACT veteran community and those who support veterans and their  families and we hope to further build our knowledge and understanding,” Minister Ramsay said.

“What we hear will assist us to explore the potential establishment of a research and tele-health hub  in the ACT.I am looking forward to progressing this much needed facility right here in Canberra.”

How can you help?  We are seeking the participation of ACT veterans and their families, and of telehealth and other  services providers which currently support these veterans.

If you would like to be involved in the upcoming consultation you are invited to register your interest  through contacting Yellow Edge Pty Ltd on actveterans@yellowedge.com.au by  5pm, Friday 4 September 2020.

For more information about the feasibility study or the progress on the Veterans’ Wellbeing Centres  program, visit the DVA website www.dva.gov.au/wellbeing-centres or contact the project team at  veteranswellbeingcentres@dva.gov.au.

For more information about the ACT Government’s role in the feasibility study and work to support  the ACT veteran community more broadly, visit https://www.communityservices.act.gov.au/wac or  contact the Community Services Directorate at communityparticipation@act.gov.au.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACTS:

Minister Chester, Rachel Tharratt: 02 6277 7820  Minister Ramsay, Anton Gallacher: 02 6207 3795  DVA Media: 02 6289 6466

Office of the Hon. Darren Chester, Canberra ACT.





