

The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au

18 March 2020

RELIEF PACKAGE FOR AUSTRALIAN AVIATION INDUSTRY

A major relief package is on the way for the Australian aviation industry.

The package involves the refunding and ongoing waiving of a range Government charges on the  industry including aviation fuel excise, Airservices charges on domestic airline operations and  domestic and regional aviation security charges.

These measures are in response to unprecedented and likely sustained period of falling international  and domestic aviation demand related to the impact of COVID-19.

The total cost of the measures are estimated to be $715 million, with an upfront estimated benefit of  $159 million to our airlines for reimbursement of applicable charges paid by domestic airlines since  1 February 2020.

“Our response today demonstrates our commitment to supporting the aviation sector as we put  Australia in the best position possible to deal with the COVID-19 outbreak,” Mr McCormack said.

“Our airlines run on tight budgets at the best of times and these past few weeks have been  particularly tough. I’ve been speaking with Australian airline executives every day and will continue  to work with them to make sure they receive the support they need.

“Providing this assistance not only helps our airlines but also the entire aviation industry, regional  Australians in particular and other industries such as tourism and trade, which depend on aviation.

“Our first priority as a Government is to ensure public health and safety is number one.

“This core focus underpins every public policy measure we are taking in response to this unfolding  situation.”

The Federal Government will continue to work closely with the aviation industry as it faces the  ongoing challenges associated with COVID-19.

Ends.

Media Contact:  Mr McCormack - Tess Salmon 0467 740 017 | Dean Shachar 0418 202 860

