

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE

SENATOR FOR THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY



MORRISON GOVERNMENT’S ECONOMIC INACTION HITS THE BUDGET



Scott Morrison’s economic credibility is in tatters with new government

figures showing that the promised surplus is narrowing and net debt has blown

out to a new record high.



For a government that promised to have a surplus in their first year and every

year after that all they have delivered are deficits.



The Government promised to pay down debt but instead it has more than

doubled on their watch.



Today’s budget bottom line is $3.7b worse off than what was predicted in the

budget update in December despite Scott Morrison and Josh Frydenberg’s

ironclad commitment that the budget was already ‘back in the black’.



Today’s figures also show that net debt has blown out to a new record high of

$430 billion - more than double the $174.6 billion they inherited when they

came to office.





With these results it’s no wonder why the Government tried to quietly walk

away from its pre-election promise to eliminate net debt by 2029-30, a promise

it had made just eight months earlier.



Labor has been saying for months that Scott Morrison and Josh Frydenberg

should have been rolling out an plan to protect an economy that was already

floundering well before the bushfire crisis and Coronavirus outbreak hit.



This Government’s arrogance and continued lack of action to respond to an

economy that was clearly weakening last year is resulting in serious

deterioration of the budget and this is prior to the impact of bushfire’s and

coronavirus becoming known.



Every financial update since the budget in April has downgraded this

Government’s economic forecasts and today’s results confirm that this trend is

continuing and still the government sits on its hands.



When growth is slowing, unemployment is rising, wages are stagnant and

people are worried now is the time for leadership and an economic plan and

Scott Morrison has been incapable of providing either.



Ultimately it’s the Australian people who will pay the price for this Government’s

inaction.



FRIDAY, 28 FEBRUARY 2020



MEDIA CONTACT: PAT CRONAN 0432 758 224





