

TRANSCRIPT



Senator James Paterson

Liberal Senator for Victoria



Monday 07 September 2020



Sky News: NewsDay



Subjects: Victorian lockdown



Tom Connell: From lock down in Melbourne is liberal Senator James Paterson. Thanks

very much for your time. What was your response, first of all, I'm sure you were tuning in

like a lot of Melbourne. What did you make of the plan outlined yesterday?



Senator James Paterson: Well, Tom, I've been absolutely inundated over the last 24

hours by very distressed constituents who've been in touch to share with me their deep,

deep concern about the plan that the premier outlined. They don't feel like it is a path out

of lockdown at all. In fact, they feel like it is a pathway for continued, ongoing, indefinite

lockdowns and they're very concerned about what that means for them. And their

concerns have been reflected more broadly today by the business community, by leading

epidemeologists in the medical community who are all very sceptical about the details

outlined in the premier's plan.



Connell: So the details or at least the numbers, if not the full detail on it from Daniel

Andrews, according to him if you open things up again and if we focus on when curfew will

be lifted, everyone will be able to get back to school hospitality will be able to open. At the

moment, it's based on a daily number of five cases per day over a fortnight average that

gets a three per cent chance of a new outbreak and then lockdowns if you shift it to 25. So

you have a more generous number when you unlock 25 daily cases. That possibility of a

third wave is 62 per cent. On those numbers is this the logical choice to take the

conservative path?



Paterson: Well, they're incredibly ambitious, incredibly tough targets to meet. They're

tougher targets than any other state or territory has set. In fact, Victorians are suffering

under some of the longest and harshest lockdowns in the world and will be required to

achieve far more than any other people in the rest of the world to get out of those

lockdowns. I mean, at the beginning of this crisis Tom, we were told by leaders like Daniel

Andrews that it was necessary to have these temporary, very tough restrictions because it

will allow us to flatten the curve and prevent the health system from being overloaded.

Well, six months on, it's not looking very temporary anymore. And Victorians are entitled to

be as angry as they are today.



Connell: We've heard the federal government just now single out contact tracing. The

state government, Victoria says it's vastly improved contact tracing. I think the stats

coming out were from missing 10 per cent of beginning of investigations within 24 hours.

It's now only missing two per cent. So it says it doesn't need any more help from the

federal government. What's your response to that?



Paterson: Well, Tom you'd certainly hope that it was improved because, frankly, it was a

shambles earlier on in this crisis. It was totally overwhelmed by the break out, that again,

was as a result of another public policy failure, which is the hotel quarantine debacle. I

really hope it has improved and I hope it's improved at least to the New South Wales

standard because they've been able to demonstrate that they can get on top of low levels

of community transmission and keep on top of it with an excellent tracing system. Victoria

only got back to the situation it is now because it wasn't able to do that.



Connell: We had, of course, the federal government offer assistance and seemingly

through whatever labyrinthine bureaucrats and so on, or whether it went to a leader or

whatever happened, it was refused on hotel quarantine. Are you worried this could echo

that, the refusal of more help on contact tracing?



Paterson: Well, I hope Daniel Andrews has learned the errors that he made in turning

down those offers of assistance from the ADF, which were very clearly made despite

Daniel Andrews’ denial, and in fact taken up by other the states, including New South

Wales, Queensland, and Western Australia. I certainly hope out of pride or some other

misplaced emotion, he's not turning down any offers of success that will come from the

federal government at this stage because it is in all of our interests that Victoria get on top

of this, get past it as soon as possible, because it's not just going to have a devastating

impact on the Victorian economy and Victorian society, but it's going to hold back the

whole country.



Connell: Are we going to see widespread disobedience, Do you think, in Melbourne in

particular?



Paterson: I hope not, Tom. I don't think the answer is disobedience. As tough as these

restrictions are, as unjustified as many Victorians feel they are, as angry as they feel that

they are, that they are only being imposed on them because of the failures of the Daniel

Andrews administration. I don't think disobedience is the answer and I hope Victorians grit

their teeth and bear what is going to be another couple of difficult, very difficult couple of

months.



Connell: So you've always been one for civil liberties. But right now, your messages to

Melburnians Victorians obey all of the various very tough restrictions right now that are

going to be in place and mean that Melbourne's going to be under lockdown for many,

many weeks in the end.



Paterson: You're right Tom, I am for civil liberties, I am for the right to protest and the right

to free speech and the right to scrutinise and criticise your own government. And I think,

frankly, the very harsh way in which the Victorian government is now cracking down on

protests in stark contrast to the way that they did not crack down with the BLM movement

in June reflects very poorly on them and their respect for the civil liberties and freedoms of

Victorians. But I do not advocate, I do not encourage, I do not suggest Victorians should

do anything other than abide by the law. It would be an unwise thing to do that.



Connell: So what are you saying, though, about the right to protest? Because right now,

essentially, the government is shutting down any protests because of concern for COVID-

19 and and shutting down anyone, even suggesting a protest. Do you still advocate that

use of what is the law?



Paterson: Tom, that's a hard won right, it's a hard won freedom that Australians have

fought and died for on the battlefield. And, I absolutely understand why Victorians are

deeply concerned by that has been taken away from them. And I absolutely expect that it

will be restored as soon as it is safe to do so. But while ever we have the chief health

officer telling us that it is dangerous to gather in numbers outside then the rule of law must

be enforced and it must be enforced fairly and equally on everyone, not selectively based

on the political philosophy of those who are protesting. It has to be done fairly.



Connell: James Paterson, appreciate your time today.



Paterson: Thanks, Tom.



ENDS



