

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  SYDNEY  SATURDAY, 8 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: COVID-19, Morrison Government’s lack of detail on aged care  response centres, PPE, Victorian outbreak.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks for coming this  afternoon. I've got two matters to deal with before taking questions.

Firstly, we welcome the Federal Government's announcement yesterday that  they will take steps to set up aged care response centres in each state should  the need arise. This is something my colleague Julie Collins suggested on the  25th of July. So that's welcome. It's important that the Federal Government  provides as much detail as possible urgently. All those Australians who are  concerned about aged care, concerned about their parents and grandparents,  in aged care, on what protocols will exist as to how those centres will be set up  and when those centres will be set up, if necessary. We know that we went  through Newmarch House in New South Wales in March and April. We know  that the lessons have not necessarily always been taken on board. It's very  important that we take the lessons on board, of what's happening in Victoria,  and we ensure that if there are any further outbreaks in other jurisdictions, that  action is taken without any delay whatsoever.

The second matter I want to deal with is mental health. As you know, we  welcome the fact that mental health consultations or Medicare plans have been  extended to 20 in Victoria, we think they should happen across the board. The  mental health impacts of the pandemic do not stop at the Murray River or any  other state border. But mental health actually needs more attention beyond this  pandemic. This is a bipartisan commitment. However, I was disappointed to  see the Minister for Health say during the week that the Government would not  be responding to the Productivity Commission's report on mental health until  now this Budget, but the Budget after. That is let me say an unacceptable  delay. The Productivity Commission has reported to the Government and we do

not know what that report says they have not released the report. But the  Government should release the report as a matter of urgency and it should  respond to it by the October budget and should fund the response in the  October budget. Every day of delay is is a missed opportunity when it comes to  improving the mental health of Australians. The Government should reflect on  this change its mind, release the Productivity Commission report now and take  steps to report and to respond in the October Budget. happy to take any  questions on the phone.

JOURNALIST: The Federal Government is pressuring the states and territories  to contribute more in economic support, do you think that's fair, have they  contributed enough?

BOWEN: Look, I've been disappointed to see the National Cabinet in many  respects start to break down and I don't think this is a helpful intervention on  behalf of Prime Minister. I mean, we've had the Federal Government  undermine state governance undermine Annastacia Palaszczuk's  border  closures, I saw the Treasurer and the Prime Minister at the despatch box in  Parliament, saying that Annastacia Palaszczuk should open her borders. Even  worse, even worse. We've seen the Federal Government intervene in a federal  court case against the West Australian Government's border closure, to support  Clive Palmer. Now they've tried to backflip too late, the damage has been done.  The Commonwealth has given evidence and intervened and has undermined  the work the state premiers are doing and Mark McGowan is doing in particular  in Western Australia. We don't want to see the passing of blame. We want to  see constructive work together. And we don't want to see one government  undermining another government which is what's happening with Scott  Morrison undermining the state premiers. We in the Labor Party have  supported all the premiers was supported Steven Marshall and Peter Gutwein  and Gladys Berejiklian in the actions they've taken. We supported their border  closures. We haven't played that game. It's Scott Morrison and Josh  Frydenberg and their Government, that's played that game. And that's  particularly disappointing.

JOURNALIST: We heard today that in Victoria there's been another thirty year  old that has died from COVID-19. Are you concerned that maybe younger  people are potentially becoming complacent to the virus, they think it's an older  persons disease that can't effect them, is this an issue that younger people are  not taking the virus as seriously given that we've seen this second thirty year  old that has died in a matter of days?

BOWEN: This has been a concern from the beginning. This is not a disease  which only impacts on elderly people. Every Australian is vulnerable. Every  Australian needs to protect their health including young Australians. Of course,

there's a great danger that young Australians, even if they don't get sick, will  spread the virus if they're not careful to older Australians, but there's also a  danger for themselves. And this is, as you said, a stark reminder, a tragic  reminder that every Australian is in this together young and old regardless of  our age, regardless of where we are, we have to remain vigilant for ourselves  and for our country.

JOURNALIST: Should all health care workers treating known or suspected  COVID-19 patients be given P2 or N95 masks?

BOWEN: Well, all health professionals should be given every piece of personal  protective equipment that the medical experts have advised is necessary for  them. The Government has an objective of zero health worker deaths as a  result of COVID-19. Again, one that we suggested. To meet that objective  every healthcare worker needs to get the PPE they need now. It's up to the  AHPPC and other medical experts as to what the appropriate PPE is in each  case, but we must see those health care workers particularly Victoria and  anywhere else there is an outbreak have access to that PPE. We know that  there were only 20 million masks in the stockpile when we started this  pandemic. I've acknowledged the Government's efforts to improve that number  since but they were starting from behind. It is unacceptable that there be any  health care worker deaths in Australia and PPE is a clear part of ensuring there  aren't any.

JOURNALIST: Just on aged care, the point you made at the start of the  presser, do you think that the states need to contribute to this rapid response  team as well, or do you think it should be just the domain of the Federal  Government to make sure that rapid response team are available of all states  and territories?

BOWEN: Well, aged care is the responsibility of the Federal Government. Now  I'm sure that all states and territories would cooperate with any request to them  from the Federal Government to assist in the development of the aged care  response centres. I do acknowledge that we will need a cooperative approach  but ultimately the Commonwealth is responsible for aged care, the  Commonwealth must take the lead, the Commonwealth must be ready for any  outbreaks in aged care, the Commonwealth must make the key decisions when  it comes to aged care.

JOURNALIST: What do you make of reports that the decision to use barely  qualified security guards in Melbourne's hotel quarantine and not police or ABF  was part of the Government's social inclusion policy?

BOWEN: Look I've seen that newspaper report but that's all I've seen. I'm not

going to provide our further comments on one report without further verification.  There is a judicial inquiry. Premier Andrews can provide further updates and  responses as he sees fit.

JOURNALIST: But that's the point, Premier Andrews is not providing any  response to this.

BOWEN: I've only seen the newspaper report and I don't intend to comment  further on that newspaper report.

JOURNALIST: Do you think the hotel quarantine issue was a failure of the  Andrews Government?

BOWEN: Well evidently as has been acknowledged by the Premier there have  been failings, there is a judicial inquiry. Again ultimately quarantine is a Federal  Government responsibility. But the National Cabinet did agree that states would  take some of the role. And I think we need to ensure that our commentary is  based on the facts. I will await further information from the state government  and further information from the judicial inquiry into due course.

JOURNALIST: Daniel Andrews has said that he will take full responsibility for  this, if there are adverse findings in this inquiry which there very likely will be,  what should he do? Should he step down or continue to lead the state?

BOWEN: He has indicated that he is taking full responsibility I'm not going to  preempt the results of any independent judicial inquiry, I must say I think  Premier Andrews is handling a very difficult situation very well.

JOURNALIST: Given Victoria is the state requiring the most economic support  following the failings of the hotel quarantine do you think it has contributed its  fair share?

BOWEN: Well. The Victorian Government is responding to every concern in  Victoria to the best of their ability. And as I said, I think ultimately, we want to  see states and territories and the Commonwealth working together. That's why  we've supported Premier Andrews we've supported Premier Berejiklian, and all  the premiers dealing with the different challenges in the different states and  territories at different times. I think that's incumbent on federal politicians. As I  said, it's been unfortunate to see Scott Morrison and Josh Frydenberg,  undermining state premiers including Annastacia Palaszczuk and Mark  McGowan, when in fact, they needed support they got undermined, but I'll  support, Anthony Albanese will support, Federal Labor will support premiers  regardless of partisanship, regardless of jurisdiction, where they are taking the  necessary steps to ensure the health and economic well being of their state



and territory.

JOURNALIST: Is it good enough that the guidelines for the Government's arts  and entertainments package still hasn't been finalised?

BOWEN: No, it's not good enough. Paul Fletcher is fiddling while the art sector  burns. The Government was very slow to put the art sector package out there.  Not only have they been slow to announce it, they have been super slow to  implement it. This is a massive failure on behalf of the Federal Government.  This is important for the culture of the country. It's important for the economy of  the country. We want to see an art sector on the other side of this crisis, of  course, of course the arts sector has been under enormous pressure and the  fact that Paul Fletcher is still fiddling while the arts sector burns is a disgrace.

JOURNALIST: Just on the issue of other states contributions to COVID, the  Prime Minister made it clear in his presser yesterday saying the  Commonwealth has contributed in excess of 300 million dollars to a variety of  programs where the states have only contributed a little over 40 million dollars,  don't you think it's fair enough that the Commonwealth does highlight that  discrepancy to push the states and territories to potentially contribute a little bit  more financially?

BOWEN: Well if Scott Morrison has got a particular request of a premier he  should make it and he should make it in detail and he should make it through  the National Cabinet, not engage in a public slanging match with premiers  Labor, Liberal or any other variety.



ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512









