







The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology

Senator the Hon Linda Reynolds CSC  Minister for Defence



MEDIA RELEASE

INCREASING DOMESTIC MANUFACTURING DURING COVID-19

17 March 2020

The Federal Government is working with local industry to increase domestic  production of medical protective equipment such as surgical face masks, sanitizer,  goggles and gowns amid the outbreak of COVID-19.

Med-Con Pty Ltd - a manufacturer near Shepparton in regional Victoria - has  increased production with the support of the Government and the Australian Defence  Force.

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said work is underway  to significantly increase their manufacturing capability over time to meet demand as  the COVID-19 situation continues to evolve.

“From helping to access new equipment to providing staff, we are doing what we can  to enable companies like Med-Con to ramp up production and boost our domestic  capacity,” Minister Andrews said.

“There’s a lot of fear in the community at the moment but Australians should know  that work is happening to help us best respond to this unfolding crisis.

“This is important work but it’s also essential we get it right - this equipment needs to  be produced to the highest standards.”

Minister for Defence, Senator the Hon Linda Reynolds CSC said around a dozen  ADF personnel are helping under Defence Assistance to the Civil Community  (DACC) arrangements.

“The team, which is comprised of highly qualified engineering maintenance  specialists from the Army Logistic Training Centre and the Joint Logistics Unit -  Victoria, are supporting the request,” Minister Reynolds said.





“These skilled soldiers are with the company’s existing staff on production,  maintenance and warehousing tasks.

“The Defence support will fill a short-term gap while Med-Con Pty Ltd recruits and  trains supplementary staff. This is an example of the kind of exceptional  circumstances which the DACC rules are designed to cover.”

In addition the Government has put out a Request for Information (RFI) to get a  further understanding of the manufacturing capability and capacity that exists  domestically, so that as a country, we are well-positioned to increase production of  these products at home.

Minister Andrews added, “we are casting the net as widely as we can, asking  manufacturers if they have the ability to diversify the work they do.”

“As those opportunities continue to present we will work with manufacturers to  support their transition.

“Australian manufacturers have already been reaching out with offers to help. I’m  confident our Aussie ingenuity will guide us through this difficult time.”

Media Contacts:

Minister Andrews: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846

Minister Reynolds: Nicky Hamer 0437 989 927

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

