



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham MP  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Senator for South Australia

The Hon Christian Porter MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Industrial Relations



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au



12 September 2020

SYDNEY WATERFRONT INDUSTRIAL ACTION

The Morrison-McCormack Government has urged all parties involved in Sydney’s waterfront  industrial dispute to work together on a quick resolution to minimise the impact on workers, freight  and the nation.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the Government understood how frustrated Australian shippers and transport  operators were with increases in stevedore fees and charges, but actions disrupting shipping  operations further were not the solution.

“During this pandemic, the entire nation has seen just how much we rely on our freight industry to  keep shelves stocked and our economy running and how tirelessly all operators - including shippers  - have been working to make this happen,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“Australia relies on shipping with 99 per cent of our trade moved by sea, so it is absolutely vital we  see a quick resolution achieved between all parties.”

Minister for Trade Simon Birmingham said the COVID-19 pandemic was already placing immense  strain on global supply chains and further disruptions were the last thing our exporters needed.

“Our exporters are already having to grapple with significant pressures as a result of the COVID-19  pandemic and now is the worst possible time for such actions that only compound these pressures,”  Minister Birmingham said.

“It’s hard enough for our farmers and businesses right now and the last thing they need is further  uncertainty and delays in getting their product out of Australia.”

Attorney-General and Minister for Industrial Relations, Christian Porter said the Government  encouraged all parties to follow the workplace laws and make agreements that contribute to higher  productivity.

“The Government expects all parties to comply with Australian workplace laws, to bargain in good  faith and make agreements that contribute to higher productivity,” the Attorney-General said.

“The independent Fair Work Commission is available to assist parties when there is a dispute during  enterprise bargaining and the Government encourages parties to take advantage of this if they need  to.”

Ends.

Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Minister Birmingham - Benn Ayre 0428 342 325  Attorney-General - Kevin Donnellan 0408 491 956

