

6 October 2020



Research revival a step towards STEM-smart recovery



scienceandtechnologyaustralia.org.au



/research-revival-a-step-towards-stem-smart-recovery



A billion dollar boost to university research and a half a billion COVID-19



lifeline for the national science agency are a “shot in the arm” for



Australia’s job-creating research capability.



The nation’s peak body for science and technology also backs the



Government’s decision to drop a proposed $2 billion cut to the R&D tax



incentive to boost sovereign capability and drive economic recovery.



Science & Technology Australia CEO Misha Schubert said the “research



revival” highlighted the crucial role of science, technology, engineering and



maths in the nation’s economic recovery.



“Research and development are job creators, so must be central to the recovery



strategy,” she said.



“The billion dollar boost



for university research this year is an immediate lifeline to a



sector under enormous pressure with the loss of international students during the



pandemic.”



“It’s a wise call to drop the proposed cuts to the Research and Development Tax



incentive, which STA



urged the Government to rethink



when COVID-19 hit Australian



industry hard.”



“We are also pleased to see the bridging boost for CSIRO and a recommitment to a 12-



year funding pledge for major research infrastructure projects through the NCRIS



scheme.”



“A $5.8 million promise to scope options to accelerate the translation and



commercialisation of research can be a crucial step towards our long-term goal of a



Research Translation Fund.”



“A Research Translation Fund to turn more cutting-edge Australian research into



products, services and jobs was the centrepiece of STA’s pre-Budget submission.”



Ms Schubert commended the introduction of new funding to support the upskilling of



women in STEM through an Industry Cadetship program.



“Women are still only one in four STEM workers in industry, so further measures to



boost women’s participation in the private sector are needed and welcome,” she said,



1/2



STA has also welcomed last week’s announcement of support for the manufacturing



sector, through the modern manufacturing strategy and collaboration scheme.



Key Budget measures confirmed tonight include:



A $1.0 billion boost to university research in 2020-21 through the Research



Support Program;



$459.2 million over four years to the CSIRO to fill the budget hole in commercial



revenue the nation’s science agency will be able to generate amid the pandemic;



Dropping proposed cuts to the R&D tax incentive, keeping $2 billion in the



nation’s R&D system over the next four years;



$5.8 million this year for the Department of Education, Skills and Employment



for a scoping study of options to accelerate the translation and commercialisation



of research;



$47 million more than previously estimated in Cooperative Research Centre



funding;



A reaffirmation of the 12-year funding commitment to the 2016 National



Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy (NCRIS) Roadmap;



$25.1 million over 5 years from 2020-21 to create a Women in STEM Industry



Cadetship program, and $35.9 million over 5 years for the Boosting Female



Founders initiative to support women-founded startups;



A $41 million research and development program to support regionally-based



industries; and



$27 million to boost curriculum resources and STEM education for primary and



high school students.



2/2

