

The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

The Hon Darren Chester MP  Minister for Veterans Affairs   Minister for Defence Personnel   Federal Member for Gippsland







The Hon Lisa Neville  Victorian Minister for Water  Victorian Minister for Police and Emergency Services  Victorian Minister for the Coordination of Environment, Land,

Water and Planning: COVID-19  State Member for Bellarine

Jane Garrett   MLC for Eastern Victoria









MEDIA RELEASE

10 December 2020

MORE WATER FOR GIPPSLAND WITH START OF PHASE 2 OF  MACALISTER IRRIGATION DISTRICT PROJECT

The Australian and Victorian Governments have announced the start of work on Phase 2 of the  Macalister Irrigation District modernisation project following the signing of a construction milestone  funding agreement.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the Macalister Irrigation Modernisation Phase 2 Project would build on previous  investments across the Macalister Irrigation District.

“We want to increase water security across Australia and funding projects such as the modernisation  of the Macalister Irrigation District is getting that job done,” Mr McCormack said.

“We have committed to build the next generation of water infrastructure to create jobs and  contributing to regional economic recovery.”

Irrigators are already seeing benefits of the modernisation project, allowing significant on-farm  investment and improved irrigation practices.



The completion of Phase 1 will result in a saving of up to 22 gigalitres of water. Phase 2 will increase  water availability and security through the generation of around 10,300 megalitres of water savings  and will improve water delivery efficiency to support increased agricultural output.

The Victorian Minister for Water Lisa Neville said Victoria had led the way in modernising the  Macalister Irrigation District to deliver benefits for both Gippsland farmers and the environment.

“The Victorian Government is proud to have invested more than $46 million in the Macalister  Modernisation through Southern Rural Water - and locals are already seeing the benefits,” she said.

“The project delivers water savings and increased efficiency for irrigators, while supporting the  health of the environment including the Gippsland Lakes.”

Member for Gippsland Darren Chester said Phase 2 of the project would complete the  transformation of the Macalister Irrigation District’s ageing assets into a highly automated, efficient,  modern water delivery system.

“This project is supporting hundreds of local jobs, protecting the environment and building on a  world-class agricultural region to make it sustainable for the next 50 years,” Mr Chester said.

“It complements the other water projects being constructed in Gippsland, such as the $10 million  Lindenow Valley Water Security Scheme.”

Jane Garrett, MLC for Eastern Victoria, said the Macalister Irrigation District was an important  economic driver for Gippsland.

“These upgrades create work in construction and secure the prosperity of the region for future  generations,” Ms Garrett said.

The $62.6 million Phase 2 project is jointly funded by the Australian Government providing $31.3  million, the Victorian Government $10.4 million and Southern Rural Water $20.9 million.

The previous $60 million Phase 1B project was also jointly funded by the Australian Government, the  Victorian Government and Southern Rural Water with $20 million each.

The Australian Government is investing $3.5 billion towards a 10-year rolling program of water  infrastructure projects that, in partnership with states and territories, will help supply billions of litres  of water for productive use each year and deliver the National Water Grid.

This investment will grow Australian agriculture, increase water security, build resilience to drought  and support regional prosperity.   For information about the National Water Grid visit www.nationalwatergrid.gov.au.  Ends.

Media Contact:  Mr McCormack - Jo Williamson 0418 475 668 | Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Ms Neville - Kieran Jones 0421 031 900  Mr Chester - Electorate Office (03) 5144 6744  Ms Garrett - Electorate Office (03) 5940 5010

