

JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS AM AGENDA

TUESDAY, 17 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Economic impact of Coronavirus; Parliament; Further stimulus; Support

for affected airlines; Support for casual workers.



ANNELISE NIELSEN, HOST: Jim, thank you for your time. If we can start with what's in

that breaking news about just 90 MPs representing the Government and the Opposition in

Parliament. This is pretty extraordinary. Do you think it's the right call?



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: We're in the hands of the negotiations

between Tony Burke and Christian Porter here. I'm happy to go along with whatever

they've negotiated on our behalf. These are pretty extraordinary times which require

extraordinary steps like this and so long as we make the right and sensible decision about

how we keep the wheels of democracy rolling then that's fine. We've got some legislation

that we need to pass from the Government's first stimulus package. We haven't seen that

legislation yet but it's important that we get that support out the door as soon as possible

and that's why Parliament needs to meet.



NIELSEN: We're almost certainly facing quantitative easing at this point. We’re almost

certainly facing a recession. Do you think the Government's doing enough?



CHALMERS: Clearly the first stimulus package that the Government announced in the

second half of last week was too small and too slow. We said at the time that it was

unlikely to be sufficient to get enough support out the door quickly enough to make a

genuine difference. We're pleased that the Government has come to that same conclusion

now and flagged that they will be doing more. There are some obvious gaps in the

Government's first package, whether it be sick leave for casuals, sole traders, or childcare

workers who are very concerned and who are relaying that concern, there's an issue with

the airline industry which Catherine King has been talking about for some time now. There

were gaps in the first package. By the Government's own admission now, it was too small

and too slow and more needs to be done.



NIELSEN: The Government did say that the package was designed to be scalable so that

they can quickly turn it up if they need to, which is almost undoubtedly what is happening.

What's wrong with that approach?



CHALMERS: Clearly it needs to be scaled up. That's the point that we've been making for

some time now. The Government said on Thursday that the package was proportionate to

the challenge that we face in the economy. That's clearly not right. I'm not making a

political point there, I'm making an economic point that that was not sufficient then and it's

certainly not sufficient now. We welcome the news that the Government is going to do

more. We need to see more urgency with this package that they are about to release, and

subsequent packages after that no doubt, than we saw with the first one. The Government

left it too late to act with the first stimulus package. They need to do more. They need to

get that support out the door faster and there are groups who've been ignored who need to

be accommodated in some way.



NIELSEN: The approach from Labor to deal with Coronavirus has been very bipartisan.

This is quite an escalation in your rhetoric. What's caused this?



CHALMERS: No, this is entirely consistent, Annelise. This is what we've been saying for

some time. We are being constructive, responsible and supportive. From 20 minutes after

the Government's stimulus package was announced we said that we'll be supportive of it.

That's what people expect of us, that kind of bipartisanship. But we also have a

responsibility to inject a sense of urgency where it's absent or lacking. We have a

responsibility to the Australian people, particularly workers and businesses, to make sure

that we identify any gaps and put pressure on the Government to fill them. I don't think it's

in any way an escalation of what we've been saying for some time. People expressed their

concerns last Thursday that more would need to be done. That's clearly the case. It's good

that the Government's going to do more. We need to see it urgently.



NIELSEN: Simon Birmingham, the Trade and Tourism Minister, said to Laura Jayes this

morning on First Edition that we need a national aircraft carrier. Qantas is obviously under

extreme stress, cutting 90 per cent of flights. Would Labor support a bailout of the airline if

that's what it comes to?



CHALMERS: Absolutely there needs to be action in the aviation industry. Something like

50,000 Australians work in this really crucial part of our economy. It's a problem not just for

Qantas but for Virgin and for all of the other carriers as well. It's a really big and substantial

problem which flows from the serious reduction in flights and all of the work that goes on

behind the scenes to make those flights possible. Catherine King in particular and Anthony

Albanese and others have been saying since the weekend that action needs to be taken

here. Again, consistent with our approach to the health measures and to the economic

measures, we will be very supportive of the Government if they come out with a decent

package of support for the airlines. That's one of the pressing needs that needs to be

addressed as soon as possible.



NIELSEN: Just before you mentioned that you want to see more support in the second

round of stimulus for casual workers who might need to take sick leave. The Government

did announce that they can go to get those payments from Centrelink if they need to.

What's wrong with that approach?



CHALMERS: We're worried that that's not a sufficient incentive for people to stay home if

they're crook. Our overriding objective, not a political objective, but for Australians and

workplaces all around the country, is if people are sick we need them to stay home from

work. We're worried that $40 a day would not be a sufficient incentive for people to do that.

The point that we've made for some time now is when Australians do the right thing by

their colleagues at work, then businesses and Governments should do the right thing by

them. Some businesses have come to the table and taken steps to pay sick leave in these

extraordinary times. That's a good thing and we want to see more businesses do that. But I

think there's an opportunity for the Government to do more than they have done so far to

make sure that people who are very vulnerable in the workplace don't have to choose

between doing the right thing by their co-workers and being able to feed themselves.



NIELSEN: We've had both the Finance Minister and the Trade Minister today say that the

Government can't save every job and can't save every business. Do you think that's fair

enough, to be saying that Australians?



CHALMERS: Clearly a substantial number of jobs and businesses are at risk. This time

last week Scott Morrison told the Australian Financial Review summit that his objective

was to prevent job losses and to prevent business closures. They’re the objectives the

Government has set for itself. Clearly we're in for a really rough time and we need to do as

much as we can, as soon as we can, to protect jobs and businesses. When the

Government does the right thing we will be supportive. If there is more that can be done or

there are gaps in what the Government is proposing, then we'll point that out as well. We

are all in this together. We all want to see people stay in their jobs and we want to see

businesses continue to operate. This is a very difficult time. The economic circumstances

are extraordinarily choppy and so we'll do the right and responsible thing at every turn to

support the Government in their attempts to prevent job losses and business closures.



NIELSEN: Are you in any doubt now that we're going to be in recession this year?



CHALMERS: I don't get into the prediction game, Annelise, as you know. There's a strong

expectation amongst most of the forecasters that that is a very real prospect. We haven't

seen from the Government an assessment of where they think the economy was at before

and after the first stimulus package. That would be useful to help inform the public and to

establish a baseline so that we can determine whether or not the measures that are being

put in place are successful or not. Clearly people are expecting a very difficult time ahead

in the economy. That's for obvious reasons. It's not that hard to understand why things are

slowing up. It's good that the Reserve Bank is doing what they are doing. We want to see

the Government come up with what is a genuinely proportionate response to the challenge

that we face. We want to see businesses continue to do the right thing where that's

possible, too. If everybody does what they can and puts their shoulders to the wheel then

we can get Australia through a difficult period that everyone expects to be extremely

challenging in the economy in particular.





NIELSEN: Jim Chalmers, thank you for your time.



CHALMERS: Thanks, Annelise.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949



