



SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Senator for South Australia

SENATOR THE HON JONNO DUNIAM  Assistant Minister for Regional Tourism   Senator for Tasmania



MEDIA RELEASE

13 October 2020



New campaign urges Aussies to back tourism industry and holiday  beyond their own backyard

Aussies are being urged to plan and book a COVID-safe holiday in different parts of  Australia as part of a new domestic tourism push aimed at providing a much-needed boost  to our cities, tourism regions, airlines and tourism businesses.

Starring two of Australia’s most iconic homegrown personalities, Hamish Blake and Zoe  Foster-Blake, a new Tourism Australia campaign is focussed on encouraging Australians to  plan and book trips to parts of our country where it is safe and possible to do so.

Federal Tourism Minister Simon Birmingham said the ramping up of domestic campaign  activity from Tourism Australia formed part of the Morrison Government’s tourism support  and recovery plan to help the industry rebound.

“Tourism employs one in 13 Australians and is the backbone of so many businesses across  Australia, but the industry has been hard hit by the COVID-19 crisis,” Minister Birmingham  said.

“Our Government has stepped up to the plate, providing billions in economic assistance to  the industry, but with restrictions easing and some interstate borders opening-up again, the  best support that can be given to the industry is for Aussies to make bookings and undertake  COVID-safe trips.

“This campaign is about getting more Australians on planes and spending in our cities or  tourism regions. We are urging Australians to support our airlines and airports, tour  operators, hire car companies and accommodation providers, while also giving people the  chance to enjoy some of the incredible experiences our country has to offer.

“With our international borders expected to remain closed for the foreseeable future and the  summer holidays only a couple of months away, this is a shout out to all Australians who are  in a position to do so, to try something new and consider booking a holiday to a destination  within Australia they have never been to before.

“Whether it be a surf lesson in Byron Bay, a wine tasting experience in the Adelaide Hills, a  boat trip out to the Great Barrier Reef or a guided walking tour in the Top End, Australia has  so many unique and wonderful tourism experiences.

“Australians should be congratulated for the support they’ve given to the industry during  COVID-19 in particular by taking regional trips where restrictions have allowed. However, as  some interstate travel returns, this campaign urges them to start thinking about going one  step further and taking a trip to a destination that has always been on their bucket list.

“With interstate travel now possible to many parts of Australia, there isn’t a better opportunity  than right now for Aussies to book a plane ticket, head to an interstate destination and help  save a tourism business or the job of a fellow Australian.”

Assistant Minister for Regional Tourism Jonno Duniam said this campaign would encourage  Aussies to support hardworking tourism and hospitality business owners across our  regions.

“As restrictions continue to ease, there’s no better time to visit our regions and support local  businesses,” Assistant Minister Duniam said.

“Tourism is the lifeblood of so many Australian cities, towns and communities, and each of  us can make a difference to these communities by getting out of our loungerooms and  visiting a regional area.

“Our regions have so much to offer, so whether you’re visiting somewhere for a week or  stopping by for lunch, you’ll be doing the community a huge favour.”

Tourism Australia Managing Director Phillipa Harrison said that with domestic restrictions  lifting and consumer confidence improving, now was the perfect time to inspire those  Australians who are able to, to plan and book their next holiday.

“Our Holiday Here This Year campaign is all about galvanizing Australians to support their  fellow Australians by booking a holiday wherever they can around the country,” Ms Harrison  said.

“With the peak summer travel period just around the corner, it is crucial that we continue to  remind people of all the incredible destinations and tourism experiences that are right on  their doorstep waiting to be explored.

“This will be just the first of a series of initiatives that we will be implementing over the  coming months to continue to drive as much domestic demand as possible, particularly to  those regions and operators that are typically popular with international visitors.

“Our goal is to try and get Australians travelling differently by using the Holiday Here This  Year campaign platform to urge them to start ticking off their holiday bucket list or heading  interstate for a trip of a lifetime, and in turn provide a much need boost especially to those  areas most affected by the bushfires and COVID-19.”

The new campaign is the latest iteration of Tourism Australia’s domestic focussed Holiday  Here This Year campaign. It will be rolled out across print, social media, search, radio and  outdoor advertising as well as campaign content across Tourism Australia’s social media  and digital channels, and amplified through industry and content partnerships.

More information on the campaign can be found at: www.australia.com/holidayhere.

You can download all of the campaign materials including the TV commercial at:  https://www.dropbox.com/sh/yetv2f8tpvn0u1g/AADkGm1pky9ojHKlVOIYfoZ6a?dl=0

Media Contacts  Benn Ayre: +61 428 342 325 (Birmingham)  Carla Howarth: +61 499 037 732 (Duniam)

Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.





