

BILL SHORTEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT SERVICES    SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE SCHEME   MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  5AA MORNINGS WITH LEON BYNER  FRIDAY, 18 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECT: NDIS Watchdog issues single fine despite thousands of complaints.

LEON BYNER, HOST: One fine, one fine only has been issued and only one provider  banned by the disability watchdog. Despite more than, listen to this, eight thousand  complaints being lodged in the past two years. This disability sector, which has had a lot of  scandals, is going to get 22 billion from the federal government this financial year. And an  independent review found the system left vulnerable people open to harm and neglect. Bill  Shorten, Shadow Minister. Good morning. Good to talk to you.

BILL SHORTEN, MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG: Good morning, Leon.

BYNER: What do we do about this?

SHORTEN: Well, first of all, this situation where there's only one fine issued after 8000  plus complaints is unacceptable. We happened across this alarming statistic because we  just put in a range of questions to the government and we got this answer. I mean, could  you imagine - you get more fines from a speed camera on the main road in half an hour. A  fine isn't a symbol of everything, but when you've got 8000 complaints, there's something  deeply alarming that this government is neglectful of making sure that it's a watchdog, to  make sure people are getting properly looked after.

BYNER: Bill, what would the reason be that they've only issued one banning notice or  compliance notice with so many complaints? Why do you think that would be?

SHORTEN: Well, they do have the power, so I think it's a bit of a culture of light touch. I  can't fully, adequately, explain it. But these are vulnerable people. We saw the case of  Ann-Marie Smith, which you have covered extensively, and your radio station, the lady in  South Australia who died of neglect, with one carer not apparently doing the right thing at  all. There's been a review. My gut assumption is that whilst the government acknowledges  there are vulnerable people, it's just not front of brain to them to do anything about it, I  don't know. To be honest, words fail me. This is core business of government, to make  sure that people receiving Commonwealth assistance are being properly treated and that  the assistance is consistent with what taxpayers would expect.



BYNER: So what happens from now? Because we've got to we've got to protect the  interests of those who are vulnerable. How do we do that?

SHORTEN: Well, I thought the review which came out of Ann-Marie Smith’s death, there  was some good stuff there. Specifically, where you’ve got people with disability who are  vulnerable to harm or neglect, that should be identified at the outset when you're getting  government assistance. And what we need to do is make sure that no vulnerable person  who's receiving these supports has a sole carer providing services. So if you're someone  who has trouble with mobility, with speech, with looking after yourself, there shouldn't just  be one person looking after you. There's got to be another set of eyes and ears, just to  make sure that everything's going fine. I mean, so many people who work in disability are  just fabulous people, generous, not paid what they're worth. You know, they give of  themselves emotionally. But what we need to do is have a community based visitor  scheme. There's a lot of good people out in the community who are happy to go and have  a chat and a cup of tea and just see how people are going. We've had it in the past. This is  not rocket science. It doesn't cost billions of dollars. But if we could set up a  Commonwealth based visitor scheme, then what you've got is you've got a second pair of  eyes and ears. I also think that the watchdog's got to leave the kennel. Simple as that. This  idea that you just wait till someone comes to you with a problem, I mean, that doesn't  appear to work anyway. But if you're a wrongdoer and you know that you're never going to  get caught doing the wrong thing, well, then you're not really worried. I mean, imagine if  our police force only ever sat in the police station.

BYNER: So really, what are you asking the Minister or the government to do? And are you  saying, well, use your rules more vigorously, that you’re too soft on these organisations  who make serious errors?

SHORTEN: I’m telling them to fire up. Give a stuff. It's not enough just to go to conferences  and hand out cheques. If you're a Minister in a government that is such a great privilege,  you have the chance to change people's lives for the better. Fire up. It's not just, let the  market rule and leave it to someone else. We live in a world now where there's a lack of  ministerial responsibility. Apparently, no one is responsible. So I would say put resources  in the community visitor programs, make the system accountable to the people. And you  know, we've had to fight for six months to get data released about the number of people  with profound disability who are being infected by COVID or have passed away because of  COVID. Disability isn't a second order issue. Now, maybe to some politicians, they think it's  an also ran issue. It's not very sexy. It's not very important. You can't meet a lot of famous  people or whatever. I think being a Cabinet Minister responsible for this welfare program is  a privilege. And so you've got to treat every day as precious, not a moment to be wasted.  And there's enough warning signs out there. Tell your agency to leave the office and get  out and see the people. There's a lot of good people in these agencies, but leadership  starts from the top.

BYNER: Bill Shorten, thank you for coming on today. That's the Shadow Minister for NDIS,  Bill Shorten.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM HOULIHAN 0438 366 400





