

SENATOR THE HON KRISTINA KENEALLY

DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES



ANDREW GILES MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

SHADOW MINISTER ASSISTING FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR CITIES AND URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

CHINATOWN, MELBOURNE

FRIDAY, 6 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Labor’s petition to stand against racism; Faith-based attacks by Josh

Frydenberg and Alex Hawke; Sports Rorts and Bridget McKenzie firing a warning

shot over Scott Morrison’s bow.



ANDREW GILES, SHADOW MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS: Good

morning everyone. I'm Andrew Giles, Labor's Shadow Minister for Multicultural Affairs, and

I'm here in Chinatown today with my friend and colleague Senator Kristina Keneally, the

Shadow Minister for Home Affairs. I'm particularly pleased to be here in Chinatown, where

we are launching today Labor's petition against racism. We are calling on the Government

to fund a national anti-racism campaign and now is the time that needs to happen. We're

doing it in Chinatown because, while racism is on the rise, generally - we're seeing reports

of anti-Semitism and Islamophobia - we know in response to the Coronavirus issue, we're

seeing Chinese-Australians and Asian-Australians generally feeling the brunt it. We're

hearing terrible stories of exclusion and racism. Labor is standing with them. We are calling

on the Government to join us in standing with them. This petition is an opportunity for us to

say to the Government - “it's time to act”. It's also an opportunity for ordinary Australians,

all Australians to come together by signing the petition to say we exist in solidarity, we

stand up for multicultural Australia. We won't let anyone be separated by these forces of

hatred and division. And so, in the Parliament yesterday, I moved motion calling on the

Government more broadly to stand up for multicultural Australia. I like to think that my

colleagues and I made some good speeches but I'd encourage Australians to look at the

speeches of Government members. They could not point to a single achievement they've

made in standing up for a multicultural Australia since Harold Holt in the 1960s and I think

that speaks volumes. But that wasn't all. There were also some terrible remarks made in

the midst of that debate and Senator Keneally will touch on this.



KRISTINA KENEALLY, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE AND SHADOW

MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you, Andrew. And I wholeheartedly endorse the

petition that Andrew and I are launching here today and invite Australians to sign up and

commit to standing up against racism. I wish that Scott Morrison would make the same

requirement of his Cabinet ministers. Two sitting weeks in Parliament, two of Scott

Morrison's ministers and two attacks based on faith. Two faith-based attacks. That's right.

We've had two weeks in Parliament, two of Scott Morrison's ministers and two faith-based

attacks.



First, Josh Frydenberg inexplicably using - inexplicably using - the Hindu faith as the basis

political joke. Not once, but several times, with the Prime Minister and other ministers

laughing along with him. Secondly, we see last night, what extraordinary and offensive

comments from Alex Hawke, Minister Alex Hawke, attacking the Member for Cowan, Anne

Aly on the basis of her religion and her family. It is unbelievable that we have a Prime

Minister who on one hand holds himself out as the defender of people of faith and as the

person who stands up against religious discrimination. And then on the other hand, allows

two of his ministers, on the floor of the Parliament, to use faith as the basis to attack

people - the Hindu faith, people of the Muslim faith. Now, the Hindu community in Australia

has made it quite clear they found Josh Frydenberg's antics cringe-worthy and racist and

they've called on him to apologise. I want to make clear, I think that Josh Frydenberg and

Alex Hawke should stand up and apologise for the things they have said and the offense



that they have caused. There is no excuse from our political leadership, to using religion

and race as the basis to attack one another. We need more unity and less division. Social

cohesion doesn't build itself and it is created when we have the community standing

together, respecting and recognising one another's differences and celebrating them and

supporting one another. That leadership needs to start from the top and that is why the

actions that we are taking here today in launching this petition is to bring a community

together, not to do as Josh Frydenberg and Alex Hawke have done, to seek to divide.



I also want to touch on another issue that has emerged today, ahead of her appearance

before the Sports Rorts Inquiry, former Sports Minister, Bridget McKenzie, has fired a

warning shot across Scott Morrison's bow. What do we hear today from the former

Minister, Bridget McKenzie? She's clearly sick and tired of being blamed in public by the

Morison Government for decisions taken after the Government went into caretaker mode -

changes made to the grants allocation. Bridget Mackenzie has come out today and made it

clear - she made no changes after the 4th of April and she signed a brief allocating the

grants under the now-corrupt Sports Rorts Scandal. Well, Bridget McKenzie didn't make

changes after the 4th of April. Question is - who did? Who did? Was it the Prime Minister?

Was it his office in those 136 emails? In the changes that were made after the government

went into caretaker mode? Were those changes made by Scott Morrison? Were they made

by his office? Scott Morrison has misled the Parliament. It is now clear that Scott Morrison

has not been truthful with the Australian people when he says he just passed on

representations, so the decisions were all made by Bridget McKenzie. Because Bridget

McKenzie has made clear today, she didn't make those decisions. Bit by bit, the truth is

coming out and the truth is closing in on Scott Morrison and his office. And I have to say, I

look forward to Bridget McKenzie's appearance before the Inquiry into these corrupt Sports

Rorts. Thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACTS:

TIMOTHY DUNLOP (KENEALLY) 0428 043 110

LACHLAN POULTER (GILES) 0423 937 655





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











