

SENATOR TIM AYRES

SENATOR FOR NSW







E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS WITH TOM CONNELL

TUESDAY, 18 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Hotel Quarantine, Aged Care, Gas.



TOM CONNELL, HOST: Let's go to my next guest in the program; Labor

Senator Tim Ayres. Thanks for your time, I've got a couple of topics I want to

get to. But first of all, just the breaking news this afternoon and what's

happened there in New South Wales - we've got a link to hotel quarantine, a

security guard working there contracting the virus and then working shifts

elsewhere. Would this be a surprise if security guards were allowed to be

working in hotel quarantine and taking up shifts in other places concurrently?



SENATOR TIM AYRES: Well, firstly, it's a reminder isn't it, of just how careful

we've got to be all around the country to avoid the risk of additional infections

and to keep the infection rate down. I think you're right. Firstly, at a broad level

across the community, we've seen just how damaging casual and insecure

employment has been during the pandemic. It has clearly had an impact in the

Victorian second wave. Secondly, I think you're right: why on earth would

casual security guards be in a position where they are working shifts at other

locations? We've got to run a tight ship in hotel quarantine. And I'm sure as we

learn more there'll be a lot of focus on that question. It's a good question.



CONNELL: But it's hard to define an answer, isn't it? I get we're coming at this,

both of us, with some facts put on the table only recently. So without casting

aspersions just yet, if that were the case, if there was any permission for

security guards or it wasn't made clear they shouldn't be working elsewhere,

that seems like a terrible error to have made.



AYRES: Well as you say, it's very early days and the focus of authorities here

in Sydney has to be on the contact tracing operation that they've been running

in New South Wales. That's got to be the focus, but it's a real reminder of how

careful governments have to be, how careful every ordinary Australian has to

be following the public health guidelines. Making sure we keep each other safe

and keeping that infection rate down. And it's a reminder of the corrosive

impact of too much casual employment in the labour market: what that means

in the course of the pandemic, but also in terms of ordinary people's lives,

being able to get along and do the things that people should be able to get out

of a good decent job



CONNELL: On to aged care: Labor has been expressing a lot of concern about

the government response on all of this. The government did accept on Friday

errors have been made. There were apologies and they pointed out changes

that have been made since. Are you pleased with any aspect of their response?



AYRES: I'm not sure what has to happen for Scott Morrison to take

responsibility for the role of the federal government. In this case, in aged care,

they made a significant announcement about an allocation of funding for aged

care for what they called surge employment. There was a warning to the

government in April that 70 to 80 percent of Victorian aged care workers might

not be able to turn up for work because of the risk of infection, people being

tested and infected with coronavirus. Less than half of that allocation has being

spent.



What on earth is going on in Richard Colbeck's management of this portfolio?

What on earth is going on in aged care? We know that the sector has been in

crisis: the aged care Royal Commission, step by step, has been demonstrating

for Australians the depth of the crisis in aged care and that's gotten sharper in

this pandemic. More than 230 older Australians have lost their lives, 141 aged

care centres in Victoria at least with infection...



CONNELL: So just a little bit limited on time, but let me ask you this - because

the government's been pushing back against some of the claims put forward by

counsel assisting in the Royal Commission: are you concerned that when we

get to the final recommendations and report the government will push back

against aspects of that as well?



AYRES: Well, the thing here to do is to take responsibility for the system. They

are the Commonwealth Government. Their responsibility goes beyond the

press release, the press conference and the announcement. It actually goes

into the delivery and the hard work.



And Australians should expect that there should be a high standard of care for

aged care. It's a growing sector, we've got more and more Australians entering

aged care every year. And we need a Commonwealth government that's

prepared to step up to the plate and do the things that are necessary, not to

cut, not to abrogate their responsibilities, but take their responsibilities

seriously.



It goes much further than just responding to the findings of the Royal

Commission important as that is. It goes into whether or not this is a

government that's prepared to step up and take responsibility.



CONNELL: All right, just finally as well, you've called a government report that

surrounds the push towards more gas and subsidising gas infrastructure about

ideology - disagreeing about whether or not gas will be cheaper than

renewables plus storage. Does that clash, though, with a lot of industry? You've

got a background at a manufacturing union, a lot of industry is saying in the

next few years in particular, and put it out to 10 years, affordable gas is vital.



AYRES: Well, there's two separate problems here, Tom. One is a push by

some in the Coalition. We haven't seen the COVID Commission's secret report

- everything that the COVID Commission does, if it's done anything, has been

kept secret. There is a push from some in the Coalition to push us towards gas

for the production of electricity. Well, you know, the price of gas has tripled

since Tony Abbott become the Prime Minister. We are, as a result of the

failures of the Howard government, one of the world's largest gas exporters  -

we're exporting gas to the world for a price that is half what gas is being sold for

on the East Coast of Australia.



The rubric through which we should examine the question of gas and any other

power source is: firstly, through price; secondly, through lowering emissions;

and thirdly, through jobs. And if the argument is about gas for electricity

production... those are three priorities that can that can absolutely be delivered.

But let me come to the second set of problems. The second set of problems is

gas security for manufacturing businesses, particularly those manufacturing

businesses where gas is not a substitutable feedstock. And we have a crisis in

manufacturing that is entirely a product of the failures of the Howard

government and successive governments to secure gas supply for those



businesses. That's the issue which we should be focusing on. It is a fool's

errand to be off chasing the idea of gas being the solution for our energy policy

needs.



The energy policy sector needs two things: it needs a plan, and we've got a

government that's had 19 plans over seven years and not delivered on any of

them, and secondly, we need low cost, low emissions energy and gas just

doesn't stack up.



CONNELL: We might get more on the supply another day because there's still

plenty of standoffs going in Victoria even over conventional. But as I said,

perhaps another day. Tim Ayres thanks for your time.



AYRES: Good on your Tom. Thanks.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JOE MCKENZIE 0431 377 319





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













