



THE HON KEITH PITT MP

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia  Member for Hinkler

MEDIA RELEASE

24 March 2020

Resources industry and Government come together for COVID-19 response

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt has brought together some of  Australia’s biggest resources companies and key industry representative groups to prepare a  unified response from the sector to deal with the COVID-19 outbreak.

Minister Pitt said the virtual roundtable discussed issues ranging from ensuring workers’ health  and safety to keeping them in jobs and putting the industry in a good position ready for the  recovery.

“The health of all Australians will always be the Government’s priority in dealing with the  Coronavirus, but we must also plan to ensure a continued strong future for this critically important  industry,” Minister Pitt said.

“It was very encouraging to see all companies participating in the roundtable committed to a  working on a unified industry response and some have already set aside funding to take on new  workers.

“Despite the impact of the Coronavirus, resources and energy exports are on track to reach nearly  $300 billion this financial year, surpassing the previous record by $18 billion,” Minister Pitt said.

The Government committed to working with mining, oil and gas companies to ensure they can  continue to operate under changing circumstances during the national response to the  Coronavirus.

“It’s critical that resources operations continue and new projects commence as planned wherever  possible and we are working with resources companies to ensure they can get workers in and out  of regional and remote areas in accordance with health and safety requirements, Mr Pitt said.

“I thank all particpants for their contribution to today’s discussion and their pledge to hold similar  meetings throughout this pandemic.

“The resources sector has already shown great resilience to be in such a position of strength as we  head into this current health crisis. It will be key to Australia’s economic recovery once the global  COVID-19 pandemic has passed.”

Meeting participants were: The Minerals Council of Australia, APPEA, NOPSEMA, BHP, Rio Tinto,  Newcrest, Woodside, Shell, Santos and Senex.





Media contact: Matt Dunstan 0411 535 072

