SENATOR TIM AYRES

SENATOR FOR NSW





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2NZ INVERELL

MONDAY, 31 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Aged Care; Regional Universities; National Party leadership.



MONTE IRVINE, HOST: I've been joined on the phone now by Senator Tim Ayres, he's a

New South Wales Senator. Good morning, Senator, how are you this morning?



SENATOR TIM AYRES:  Good morning. Good morning to your listeners.



IRVINE: Now, Senator, we're going to jump straight into it this morning. There's still a lot of

concern and a lot of questions to be answered by the Aged Care Minister in relation to

aged care and their response to COVID 19.



AYRES: There's a twin crisis really in aged care: one is the first and the front of mind

crisis, is the impact of COVID-19 on our aged care centres, 412 aged care residents have

died of Coronavirus over the course of the crisis - many of those in the wave of infections

in aged care in Victoria. And the second crisis, of course, is the long term one, the crisis

that the Aged Care Royal Commission is revealing every week: the diminishing standards

of care, the systemic failures in aged care, that mean that elder Australians aren't being

treated with the love and the dignity and the respect and the care that they should be in

aged care.



We had multiple warnings as a country about the impact of coronavirus in aged care

centres. It was clear from the overseas experience in the United States and in Canada, in

the United Kingdom and in Italy that Coronavirus was going to have a devastating effect in

aged care centres. In New South Wales, Newmarch House and Dorothy Henderson Lodge

showed just how devastating Coronavirus could be in a situation where 70 to 80% of staff,

weren't able to attend work because they were being quarantined and it just showed how

difficult it is to manage infection control in an aged care centre.



So there were multiple warnings to the government, which is completely responsible for

aged care despite Scott Morrison trying to duck responsibility for this question before the

parliament. The government really stood by, it was a bystander in the process. And that's

had a terrible effect on aged care residents and I feel for all those people who've got their

mums and dads and brothers and sisters in aged care now, wanting to know that the

Federal Government is doing everything that it can to stop further infections.



IRVINE: This is an ongoing issue. I can remember when I used to work for a union in

Tasmania; aged care was something that was on the agenda then 8-9 years ago. Why has

there been such inaction in aged care? What stopping there being changes coming

through for all this time?



AYRES: Well I think that it's really important that Australians consider aged care as an

issue that's about us. It's not about other people. It's about us. We all get old. We've all got

brothers and sisters and parents who are going to be, already are or going to be in aged

care. We've got to think about the aged care system as a way of delivering care to

Australians who need it. You can see why Scott Morrison doesn't want the parliament to be

convened. The parliament was very important last week at holding the government to

account and pushing these issues up to the government in a credible way that means that

the government has to respond and has to take accountability for this issue.



But that's also why Anthony Albanese stepped up in the National Press Club and set out a

plan for restoring the standards in aged care. And that was a very important moment, I

think. The Labor Opposition has been very focused on this issue all of last week. We will

be very focused on it in the parliament this week, dealing with the issues that have

impacted so many Australians, particularly in Victoria. But we've also set out a plan and a

direction forward for the country should we be elected in an election that's likely to take

place in last part of next year or through the following year.



IRVINE: What I found very interesting, obviously the Opposition was effective, so effective

that the Minister for Aged Care left the chamber.



AYRES: Yes, the only reason that Richard Colbeck, the Minister should have turned his

back on the parliament was to go and clear out his desk. I've sat in the Senate opposite the

government and watched this minister try to answer questions. And it's clear that he's not

on top of his brief and it's clear that he isn't up to the job of administering aged care. It's

been an afterthought, and this bloke's been made the minister. It's very clear that the

person who is in charge of aged care should be a person with real capacity, who's got the

capacity to turn the system around and this guy just isn't up to it. It's a bit of a symbol of the

contempt with which some of these characters regard parliamentary accountability. And it

just underlines why it's so important that the parliament meets. I understand why Scott

Morrison doesn't want the parliament to meet.



Parliamentary accountability isn't good when you're the Prime Minister and mistakes have

been made. But it's just so important for the country that the parliament meets and there's

proper democratic accountability. That's how we improve. That's how we make

government decisions better. That's how the Australian people get to see the performance

of governments the performance of oppositions - it's very important that the parliament

continues to meet throughout the rest of the year.



IRVINE: Absolutely. Now just moving on to something that is coming up as well, is the

debates happening now with the funding package for universities and, in particular, the

way it's going to affect regional universities. We have a regional university here in our

region, and I personally went to a regional university down in Tasmania, the Launceston

campus is classed as a regional university. So what are the issues that are going to be

surrounding this?



AYRES: Well, as we've seen, the impact of the COVID 19 crisis in the university sector

has impacted all Australian universities but, in particular, it's impacted regional university.

So if you look at the three key regional universities in New South Wales outside of

Newcastle, Sydney and Wollongong: Charles Sturt University, University of New England,

not far from where you're broadcasting from now, and Southern Cross University on the

North Coast - all are heading towards big cuts. University of New England has announced

cuts in costs that will deliver 250 lost jobs. Now, that's very important from an economic

perspective in the New England, because 250 jobs is a big impact on the local economy by

any stretch of the imagination. But the real impact will be felt in terms of teaching and

learning and research. The University of New England has 4000 residential students and

23,000 remote students, half of those from regional communities. It is the most important

university in your listening area for school leavers. And we know that if kids from country

towns and regional centres go to university in the big cities, they are very likely to stay

there. But if those school leavers attend university, at University in New England, for

example, 70% of those young men and women stay in regional Australia, so they get their

skills, and they use them in regional Australia.



So they've got big cuts to the system. And what the government's proposing is this poorly

thought through, ideologically motivated funding plan where the cost of degrees, for

degrees they don't like, will be increased. And the cost of other degrees, particularly in the

STEM areas, will be reduced. And that is supposed to, I think, send an economic signal to

students that they should study in the areas that the government wants them to. It will have

all sorts of perverse effects. It is very unlikely that a student who wants to do business, law

or economics is going to change their mind and study engineering or dentistry instead. I

don't think it's going to have the effect, and none of the experts think it's going to have the

effect on student choices. But it's going to have dramatic effects on the funding of

universities and make the Coronavirus crisis, which has cost so many jobs and so much

teaching and learning and research capability. It's going to make that just much, much

worse.



IRVINE: It is also interesting to note that Barnaby Joyce has come out and said he's

supporting what the Vice Chancellor at the University of New England is doing with with

cutting jobs, but he's also pushing for an annex of the campus to go to Tamworth. So it's

almost like a contradiction in terms they're cutting jobs but they're looking to move part of

the annex to Tamworth. How do you see that impacting the region?



AYRES: Oh it's a circus, isn't it? I mean, really, most local members when confronted by

big cuts in an educational institution that's so important to the region, will be opposed to the

cuts. Mr. Joyce is for them. No, it's just inexplicable. There are cuts in Charles Sturt

University where Andrew Gee, who's one of the education Deputy Ministers, he has come

out and said he thinks the cuts are a very bad idea. Mr. Joyce in New England, big cuts at

UNE that will have an impact on students, on the people who are teaching, but also on the

research capability of that university. It's so important in agriculture and rural education, all

these areas; he says he is for the cuts. There are cuts at Southern Cross University, where

Kevin Hogan the local Nationals MP - nobody knows what Mr. Hogan thinks about these



cuts.



This is a very bad situation. The National Party should be on the side of country towns and

country communities and backing local capability. But they are at best confused and Mr.

Joyce, really, the idea that the university should relocate some of its capability to Tamworth

just like he relocated that Department from Canberra to Armidale in the lead up to the

election before last - a catastrophic loss of jobs and capacity. It's just not taking the role of

government and the role of the university seriously.



IRVINE: Do you think this is one of the reasons particularly what's happening regionally

with the universities, do you feel this could be part of the reason why the National leader is

under siege from his party? There's questions again about his leadership and whether he

is fit to lead the National Party.



AYRES: Well, we've just come through some of the toughest 24 months for regional

Australia: an absolutely almost unprecedented drought, a very difficult drought season,

bushfires which devastated much of the North Coast of New South Wales and just went for

months and months and months in Southern New South Wales, difficult market conditions.

And then we've been confronted with this coronavirus pandemic which has done enormous

damage to markets and to the regions, and the National Party is entirely focused on its

own leadership. They should be fighting for regional Australia, but instead they're fighting

each other. This is a bit of a symbol of, in the hundredth anniversary year of the National

Party, how the modern National Party is a shadow of its former self. And they should be

focused on the interests of your listeners not focused on who gets to be the Deputy Prime

Minister. But that's how they've spent the last the last couple of weeks.



IRVINE: Look, Senator, thank you so much, a very interesting discussion with you again

this morning. I look forward to talking to you next Monday.



AYRES: Good on you, Monte. Talk to you next week.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JOE MCKENZIE 0431 377 319



