

SENATOR DEBORAH O’NEILL  LABOR SENATOR FOR NSW

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS FIRST EDITION WITH PETER STEFANOVIC  MONDAY, 2 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Alinta Energy Data Breach; Foreign Investment Review Board (FIRB);  Coronavirus

HOST, PETER STEFANOVIC: Can I ask you how troubling this report is?

LABOR SENATOR FOR NSW, DEBORAH O’NEILL: Well, I think it's extremely  concerning that the privacy data of over a million Australians is now at risk. And there's one  person who's responsible for that, and that is the man who approved the acceptance of the  Chow Tai Fook bid for Alinta Energy. People who wake up this morning and turn on the  kettle using Alinta Energy cannot be assured, because Scott Morrison didn't do his job, that  their privacy is protected. Now that is a very concerning problem. If somebody takes your  identity the risks are enormous- loans taken out in people's names. And what we see is a  government, particularly a leader, Mr Morrison, who as the Treasurer, simply didn't do his  job. Problem is when you need him to be looking after your interests, he's more interested  in looking after his own. Remember what he was doing in 2018? Chasing the leadership,  instead of looking after the identity, through the privacy laws and the Foreign Investment  Review Board (FIRB), of 1 million Australians.

STEFANOVIC: So just to elaborate then, if you wouldn’t mind Senator on how that  information is used against people and then how different would that be to other  companies that are Chinese owned as well?

O’NEILL: Well, the FIRB actually makes advice that's given to the Treasurer. There is no  one else who can take responsibility for giving approval to a purchase. Mr Morrison was  the one who gave it the tick off. And on giving that tick off, he had a series of conditions  that had to be applied. One of them was that all data of customers who use Alinta would be  stored in Australia. I have spoken with the whistleblower who knows chapter and verse on  this. And the reality is that there is data now in three jurisdictions- New Zealand,  Singapore, and the Philippines. That is a total breach of the conditions. But who was  watching this? That is the question. The Treasurer does the approval. Mr Morrison gave  the approval for the Chinese company, Chow Tai Fook to have access to Australians’ data.  Once your privacy is breached you are in serious trouble of having your identity used to do  things that you don't want to have anything to do with including taking on further debt

STEFANOVIC: But the Foreign Investment Board is independent.

O’NEILL: The Foreign Investment Board is not the entity that's responsible for this, they

can only make a recommendation. There is only one person, one person only who can  take responsibility for this and that is the Treasurer. The Treasurer at the time who allowed  this to happen was none other than the current Prime Minister, Mr Morrison. He was  missing in action, when he should have been watching that Alinta and any other company  from overseas that is taking over an Australian critical infrastructure such as energy,  should be paying attention to the conditions on which the sale was approved. Here it is  2020, and we know from the whistleblower at a very high level that the company Alinta  Energy still is not compliant with the conditions that Mr Morrison signed off in 2017.

STEFANOVIC: So how many times has Labor gone against an FIRB decision.

O’NEILL: Look, the Foreign Investment Review Board makes its own decisions, Labor is  not privy to that. It's a negotiation. It’s a piece of information that they provide solely to the  Treasurer. The problem we see is without proper oversight, that everything is at risk when  it comes to these foreign deals being done with the approval of the Mr Morrison in place as  the Treasurer.

STEFANOVIC: So why have the FIRB there anyway, if you don't go with its decision?

O’NEILL: Well, the structural realities of government, you know, are not our responsibility  in Opposition. Mr Morrison relied on the Foreign Investment Review Board, they did their  job, they said, 'Look, we should let this through and these are the conditions'. It's then over  to the Treasurer to make sure that the conditions are complied with. Mr Morrison didn't do  his job then and because he failed to do his job - because he was more interested in  getting the job of Prime Minister -  he didn't look after the interests of what was then  800,000 Australians and is now over a million Australians whose identity is stored offshore.  A complete abrogation of the responsibilities that came under the FIRB conditions for the  sale to go ahead.  STEFANOVIC: Now Senator...

O’NEILL: Well it really matters because overseas we've seen in another jurisdiction, in the  US, that identity theft from a much smaller failing led to five Chinese spies taking over  people's identity. We've got a million Australians at risk this morning because Mr Morrison  didn't do his job as Treasurer. He just doesn't seem to be able to put the interests of the  nation ahead of his own political interests.

STEFANOVIC: Senator just before we go, should the travel ban be extended when it  comes to the Coronavirus?

O’NEILL: Look, clearly I have great concerns about the capacity of Mr Morrison to look  after the Australian people. This morning a million people are at risk because of a data  breach. We don't know how many people are going to be at risk because of the  Coronavirus, but I will trust Dr Brendan Murphy's advice every day and the agencies that  are working to support him. I trust our medical professionals to provide good advice. Mr  Morrison is going to try and look like he's doing the right thing looking after us. Well, he's  not up to the job. He's been found in wanting over the Christmas period during the fires.  He's certainly left us wanting in terms of protecting the identity of a million Australians. We  should stick with Mr Murphy. He will tell us what to do.

STEFANOVIC: Senator Deb O'Neill. Appreciate your time. Thank you so much for joining  us.



O’NEILL: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: GRACE FINCH 0422 859 471









