

MATT THISTLETHWAITE MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR THE REPUBLIC  MEMBER FOR KINGSFORD SMITH



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS  TUESDAY, 8 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Victorian Roadmap; Scott Morrison failing to be a leader;  JobKeeper; Regional jobs.

TOM CONNELL, HOST: I'm joined by my pollie panel, Liberal MP Tony Pasin  and the Labor Party’s Matt Thistlethwaite, gentlemen thanks both for your time.  Interesting when you look at the approach and this was pointed out yesterday  by the Prime Minister, Matt, if this were the approach in New South Wales, the  caseload, Sydney would be under curfew right now, that doesn't seem to  square with any sort of appetite to actually live with Covid does it?

MATT THISTLETHWAITE, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR  FINANCIAL SERVICES: Well I just don't think that there's any comparison  between Sydney and what's going on in Melbourne, Tom, at the moment  because Sydney didn't have that big spike in infections and that second wave.  You know if you went back a couple of weeks ago in Melbourne they were  having over for around 500 infections per day, Sydney didn't get that it's a  completely different scenario. So I don't think that there's any sort of  comparison that you can make that the Prime Minister has been making those  sort of circumstances. And I just don't think that the Prime Minister's being a  very good leader at the moment.

CONNELL: As I said the appetite for at what point you lift restrictions, there'd  still be curfews, all hospitality shut, schools shut for years three to ten if there  are even just five cases of community transmission over a fortnight. That's a  really high bar isn't it?

THISTLETHWAITE: Well the reason why those restrictions are in place, Tom,  is because they're working. Victoria was having over 500 infections per day one  month ago, now they're down around that 50 level per day so the restrictions

are working and they're based on the advice of the medical experts. Now if the  Prime Minister was a good leader he'd be encouraging Victorians to keep going  because it's working, you're getting there, I know it's tough but we'll get through  this together. He was saying at the beginning of this pandemic we're all in this  together, now he's saying we're all in this together except you Victorians, you're  doing the wrong thing and that's just not acceptable. We want a Prime Minister  that can unite the country and bring us together and get us all through this  difficult period.

CONNELL: If they're working then I mean by that extension of logic as long as  they're working keep them there, I mean where's the consideration of the  economy, you could say well let's just get zero cases in all of Victoria and until  then we'll shut the joint up and you can say hey it's working well.

THISTLETHWAITE: I don't think Daniel Andrews and the Andrews government  have advocated that. What they're saying is that you need to get the health  piece right before you can open up the economy and that's the key point here.  If you were to open up too early and you had a third wave, imagine what sort of  damage that would do not only to businesses and the economy down there but  to the mental health of Victorians. You've got to get that health piece right,  that's the key priority and then you'll get the economic opening up after that.

CONNELL: Okay, Tony would voters in Victoria be a bit confused if Daniel  Andrews says here's the roadmap, obey it, and the PM says well this is a worst  case scenario, we'll review this?

TONY PASIN, MEMBER FOR BARKER: Tom, my thoughts are with Victorians  right now. Their predicament can only be described as grim and on the  weekend any semblance of hope they might have had was evaporated by the  Premier's announcement of this roadmap which is not a roadmap it's a car  crash. The reality here is this is a pathway to significant economic despair, now  Matt seeks to come on your show and defend this situation but what he's failing  to do is appreciate that what this roadmap is saying is that when the point that  Victoria gets to the situation that New South Wales finds itself in it should still  be in lockdown. I mean, that is ridiculous and it's going to do untold economic  damage to the economy. My thoughts right now are with the thousands, nay  millions of Victorians who run small businesses and their employees who are  currently in lockdown thinking when will we get out of this? How will we get out  of this? And the failure of the Victorian leadership to get an industrial size  integrated tracking capability in the way that New South Wales has it is the  reason why they're going to have to be in lockdown for such significant period  and the cost of that is not going to just be visited on Victorians, it's going to be  visited on all Australians.

CONNELL: Do you think there's a real risk of civil disobedience in Victoria now,

Tony Pasin?

PASIN: Look, I hope not Tom. We don't need that and what we need here is a  recalibration by Premier Andrews to appreciate that the roadmap he set out is  just to be honest ridiculous and what we need to see is a fairer, more  appropriate calibration of that way out because you know I'm starting to be very  concerned that unless we get this right, unless we tailor the economic  adjustments correctly, many more people will die as a consequence of the  restrictions than have died as a result of Covid. I mean, we worry about the  mental health of all Australians but particularly Victorians right now, it's a really  difficult thing when hope has been removed and you start thinking about your  long-term future in a world which you know, I heard the Premier on radio  yesterday in Victoria talking about restrictions that might run to February. Oh  my god, if I was in lockdown 23 hours a day right now and hearing the leader of  my state telling me there's some prospect that this might proceed well after  Christmas I'd be very concerned and that's why I think Victorians are happy to  hear the Prime Minister saying we will review this roadmap on the way out in  the interest of all Australians.

CONNELL: Matt, some concerns around JobKeeper and JobSeeker from  Labor now having second thoughts about what extent they should taper down,  on the other side we're hearing reports that you know some people in cities that  are back up and running don't really want to go to work because JobSeeker is  still a double, of course the normal payment that Newstart is, does this have to  be factored in too in the states that are back up and running?

THISTLETHWAITE: Well both of those programs are put in place, Tom, to  support jobs and to get people through this difficult period and importantly with  JobKeeper to maintain that link and that relationship between the employer and  the employee. Unfortunately when we get to the, you know, the end of  JobKeeper which is March next year, it's probably likely that there's certain  sectors of the economy that are still going to be doing it very tough and one  that's predominant in my electorate is the aviation sector, I've got Australia's  largest airport, Sydney Airport, in my electorate. We've had thousands of  people stood down or on JobKeeper there, it's quite likely that the aviation  sector won't be back up in in full capacity by March next year and a lot of those  people will still be out of work. The Government needs to explain to those  people how they're going to support them beyond March next year if  international travel hasn't returned and they're the issues that Labor is raising at  the moment because you really do need a plan to support jobs.

CONNELL: What about agriculture workers, Tony Pasin, are there workers  heading out to the regions where you are now looking to pick up some of this  work?



PASIN: I haven't seen any evidence or at least not much of that, Tom, I'm  leaving the studio this morning and catching up with a pork processor who's  reached out to me because he has 20 unfilled positions which is putting his  pork processing facility at real risk. So in this space a lot of time is spent on fruit  pickers and that kind of casual piecemeal work, but I've got to tell you there's  long term full full-time well-paid employment out in the regions which currently  isn't being filled. I expect when you scratch the surface because of the impact  of JobSeeker and JobKeeper on the one hand people are saying to this uh  processor look I'd rather stay home on this beefed up JobSeeker, and on the  other hand some of them are saying well look I'm in receipt of JobKeeper from  my employment that he's maintaining me at a rate of yet today fifteen hundred  dollars, uh, a fortnight. So the reality is these payments need to taper off to  allow the economy and opportunity and businesses to adjust. I really worry that  what we'll end up with is the Labor party on the one hand in calling for the new  normal being a long-term and you know employment subsidy forever, I mean  we can't have that we need to tailor this appropriately, it needs to be tapered  and right now you know if there are people who are looking for employment I  can point them in that direction. I can't believe I just heard Linda Burney on  your show previously saying there are no jobs out in the region, I wish that, well  I wish all the jobs in my region were filled because they're not and they need to  be because it's starting to impact our economic capacity.

CONNELL: Perhaps it's a region by region thing, we'll have to give you the last  word because we're out of time but I guess if someone wants a job out in that  area Tony Pasin’s office you know where to call. Tony Pasin, Matt  Thistlethwaite, thanks for your time today.

THISTLETHWAITE: Cheers Tom.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: BEN LEESON 0404 648 275









