

Doorstop interview, Parliament House, Canberra



ministers.treasury.gov.au



/ministers/josh-frydenberg-2018/transcripts/doorstop-interview-parliament-house-



canberra-31



12 November 2020



Subjects: JobMaker; Labour force; ministerial standards; responsible lending;



JobKeeper; JobSeeker;



JOSH FRYDENBERG:



….Aspects of hundreds of thousands of young Australians. Employers who take on



someone aged 16 to 35 will get up to $200 a week if they are an eligible employee who



has been on JobSeeker on the period prior to their employment. We look back at



Australia’s experience with previous recessions, particularly the 1990s recession, and



we recognised how it took a full decade to get the unemployment rate back below



six per cent from where we started. With respect to young people, it took a full 15 years



to get that unemployment rate back to the level below from where they started. Right



now, when it comes to younger people, those aged 15 to 34, the unemployment rate is



10.2 per cent. An unemployment rate of 10.2 per cent for those young Australians aged



15 to 34. But for those Australians aged 35 to 44, the unemployment rate is 4.7 per cent.



Recognising this fact, we worked with Treasury to design a program that can support



some 450,000 jobs across the economy. The passage of the Hiring Credit follows the



passage of other important legislation that implements the initiatives put in the Budget.



Like our tax cuts for more than 11.5 million Australians. Like our incentives to business,



to go out and invest and to expand their business, creating jobs across the economy, like



the loss carry-back measure, like the research and development incentives. We



recognise that the Australian economy has been hit by a once in a century economic



shock. A shock like no other that saw our GDP fall by around seven per cent in the June



quarter, the most significant fall that we have seen, and that 1.3 million of our fellow



Australians ether lost their job or saw their working hours reduced to zero at the start of



the pandemic. But the good news is that the Australian economy’s recovery is now well



underway. 446,000 jobs have been created over the last four months, consumer



confidence is now up for a 10th straight week, consumer sentiment had its biggest



1/5



increase in a Budget month since the series began back in 1974 and was again up this



week for the third consecutive month. We’ve seen our AAA credit rating reaffirmed,



we’ve heard from the Governor of the Reserve Bank that our economic response is on



the right track. There are still many challenges ahead. the road to the recovery is going



to be long, it’s going to be bumpy, it’s going to be hard, but there are some positive signs



across the economy. Certainly with the recent news of the trials with respect to the



Pfizer vaccine, again, that’s more positive news and should give Australians hope for the



future as they can see the light at the end of the tunnel.



QUESTION:



Could I get your thoughts? Anthony Albanese has implemented similar restrictions on



sexual relations with MPs and staffers, what do you make of that?



JOSH FRYDENBERG:



Well again, they’re matters for the Labor leader. Scott Morrison set out very clearly our



position earlier this week, and as you know, under the Prime Ministership of Malcolm



Turnbull, rules with respect to that were put in place.



QUESTION:



Do you think it’s appropriate for Parliament wide restrictions now that Labor’s



[inaudible]?



JOSH FRYDENBERG:



Well again, I think it’s appropriate that all Members of Parliament meet community



expectations with respect to these issues and much has been said this week and I’m not



going to add to it.



QUESTION:



Treasurer, you extended JobSeeker this week until the end of March, that’s the same



time JobKeeper is now scheduled to run out. The original economic cliff, if you like, was



September, how worried are you now about unemployment spiking beyond the end of



JobSeeker and JobKeeper at the end of March, if that is what you decide to do?



JOSH FRYDENBERG:



Well the key point is that the $3.2 billion that we committed for the extension of



JobSeeker by an additional three months was not money that was announced in the



Budget on October 6, it was a decision that we have taken subsequently. This is an



extension of the JobSeeker coronavirus supplement and it will support those who need



that support. But there is a range of measures across the economy that are helping to



drive these improvements in the labour market. Some $570 billion has been committed



by the Government, both in terms of balance sheet support and direct fiscal support.



That’s the equivalent of 26 per cent of GDP. In contrast, you’ve got the states, who have



2/5



committed some $65 billion, around just three per cent of GDP. We’ve done the heavy



lifting, and we are obviously seeing the benefits of those support packages. With respect



to next year, we printed in the Budget what we thought would happen to



unemployment. The expectation is it could go up before the end of the year to around



eight per cent and obviously we’ll have more to say to that in the lead up to MYEFO. But



then next year, it will come down to about seven and a quarter per cent, by mid next



year come down to 6.5 per cent the year after and lower after year after that.



QUESTION:



How do you plan on reducing unemployment when supports are affectively going to be



taken away, these are supports that have been keeping people afloat, keeping people



connected to employers, you take those away, the unemployment rate’s going to rise?



JOSH FRYDENBERG:



We’re providing additional support to the Australian economy. These measures, for



example, with the JobMaker hiring credit that passed the Parliament last night, is going



to provide up to $200 per week to an employer to take on a younger person who has



been out of work.



QUESTION:



How many jobs will that create?



JOSH FRYDENBERG:



450,000 jobs is what it’s going to support.



QUESTION:



For how long?



JOSH FRYDENBERG:



The program runs, as you know, for a year and it’s an important program that will



support getting younger people into work.



QUESTION:



Treasurer, can you see though that there is a large number of people that are going to be



excluded by the JobMaker credit, that it’s going to make it harder to get a job, not over



35, but peoplewho are in that bracket that don’t receive some of kind of payment



support?



JOSH FRYDENBERG:



3/5



The key point to understand is the JobMaker hiring credit is one of a series of economic



supports that the Government has put in place. We’ve already passed through the



Parliament and legislated tax cuts for more than 11.5 million Australians. That’s putting



more money into their pockets and that money will be spent across the economy,



helping to create jobs. We’ve got the loss carry-back measure, we’ve got the expanded



instant asset write-off measure, we’ve got the support for businesses to take on new



apprentices, some 100,000 new apprentices, by providing up to a 50 per cent wage



subsidy. These measures, together with our infrastructure roll out and our other



supports for regional Australia, all come together to do one thing, to create more jobs.



What I said on Budget night is that the measures that we have announced can help



create up to one million new jobs, with the broader dynamism across the Australian



economy. The recent data that we’ve seen over the last week and in the weeks prior,



should give Australians real confidence. Real confidence that there is a light at the end



of this tunnel. We are performing as a nation, as an economy, as a community, better



than far many other countries around the world and we’re well-placed for this recovery



that is underway.



QUESTION:



What do you make of Labor’s resistance to the plans to axe responsible lending laws?



JOSH FRYDENBERG:



The responsible lending laws have become the restrictive lending laws and that’s seen a



very prescriptive approach taken by ASIC. This had prevented the free-flow of credit



which is so important to the economic recovery. I noticed that the Council of Financial



Regulators, which includes the heads of various independent financial bodies, has



supported the proposed moves by the Government. This will be an important measure



to help get the free flow of credit through the economy which will help create jobs,



which will help our economic recovery.



QUESTION:



Treasurer, you said JobMaker will help create 450,000 jobs in a year. That’s not true.



Treasury says 45,000 jobs so why are they providing 10 per cent of the figure that you’re



overselling?



JOSH FRYDENBERG:



In the Budget, it was very clear that the JobMaker hiring credit will support around



450,000 jobs. That is very clear…



QUESTION:



Treasury says 45,000.



JOSH FRYDENBERG:



4/5



Treasury have given evidence to the Committee about the additionality and they’ve also



made it very clear in Treasury papers in the Budget that the measure will help support



450,000 jobs Jono, just like the JobKeeper program helped support more than 3.5



million jobs.



QUESTION:



That’s not true, it created 45,000 jobs according to Treasury. You’re now saying support



450,000 jobs.



JOSH FRYDENBERG:



We’ve been consistent all along that this program will help support around 450,000



jobs. Importantly, what it’s doing is providing up to $200 a week to employers who take



on young people. I go back to those statistics which are very clear that you’ve got an



unemployment rate for those who are aged 15-34 at 10.2 per cent, and you’ve got an



unemployment rate for those aged 35-44 which is at 4.7 per cent. What we saw from the



Labor Party yesterday in the Parliament was a lot of grandstanding. Now, it’s no



surprise to any of you, they’ve have had their own challenges. They’ve had their own



challenges with Joel Fitzgibbon. They’ve had a horrible week. A horrible week for



Anthony Albanese and his team. They were looking for a hill to fight on. They were



running up in the Parliament amendments which were already covered by the



legislation, the protections that were in place in the legislation about additionality,



additional headcount, additional payroll. That’s very clear. We’ve got protections about



contrived schemes where the Tax Office will take action against businesses that don’t



follow the rules. We also know that the Fair Work Commission and the Fair Work Act



and those protections also apply. What we have got with the JobMaker hiring credit is



spelt out very clearly in the Budget papers, supporting 450,000 jobs, getting young



people into work. Labor had a big defeat last night. They had a big defeat. They stood up



in the Parliament, asked us plenty of questions in Question Time, and then obviously



tried to change the legislation in the Senate. They were defeated and now we can go



ahead and create and support many, many jobs for young Australians.



5/5

