

THE HON TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

RN BREAKFAST WITH FRAN KELLY

WEDNESDAY, 26 FEBRUARY 2020



SUBJECTS: Scott Morrison’s Tradie crisis; 100 businesses in 100

days; coronavirus; domestic and family violence; Bettina Arndt.



FRAN KELLY, HOST: Another pressure point is a national skills shortage with new figures

from the Education Department showing that apprenticeship numbers have collapsed - by

almost 140,000 in the 7 years since the Coalition Government was first elected back in

2013. Tanya Plibersek is the Shadow Minister for Education and Training and she joins me

in the Parliament House studios too. Tanya Plibersek good morning, welcome to

Breakfast.



TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Good

morning Fran.



KELLY: You're claiming a tradies crisis on the back of these figures from the Education

Department. But what do they tell us that we didn't know already?



PLIBERSEK: Well they tell us there is a continuing crisis of Scott Morrison's making. This

government has cut more than 3 billion dollars from TAFE and training. Around the country

we've seen TAFE colleges close, we've seen courses stopped, and the shortages that

exist -  like plumbers, bricklayers, carpenters, electricians, auto mechanics, hairdressers,

bakers - many of these have been on the skills shortage list for some time. We've got

almost 2 million Australians who are unemployed or underemployed, and three quarters of

Australian businesses will tell you they can't find the skilled staff they need. When you've

got almost 2 million people unemployed and underemployed, and three quarters of

businesses are saying they can't find the skilled staff they need, why would you cut 3 billion

dollars from TAFE and training?



KELLY: Alright, but some tidying up needed to happen - dodgy providers we know

flourished under the VET-fee help scheme that Labor brought in. I mean presumably that

inflated apprentice and trainee numbers when you were last in government. Is this drop

some kind of re-alignment?



PLIBERSEK: No, this is seven years of very poor numbers in apprenticeships and

traineeships. Apprentice and trainee numbers were never fewer than 400,000 under Labor,

they did go higher than that for a time, but they were never less than 400,000.



KELLY: And what are they now?



PLIBERSEK: Well, they hover around 160,000 or 170,000 now. Which just shows you that

we continue to see very substantial drops under Scott Morrison's government because of

the cuts to TAFE and training. There are young people out there that want an

apprenticeship, desperately want an apprenticeship. I really take issue with this sort of

notion that the Government tries to pedal - which is that there are "job snobs" or parents

are telling their kids that they shouldn't go to TAFE they should go to university.



KELLY: Do you think there is, do you think there's an attitudinal problem with the trades?



PLIBERSEK: No. I do not think that at all. You know I'm a parent of three kids, if one of my

kids said they wanted to be a plumber I'd be absolutely delighted - my dad was a plumber,

it's a great job, you can support a family very well on a trades job like that. And I think

blaming kids for 3 billion dollars of cuts to TAFE and training is really, I think, really

offensive.



KELLY: It's really confusing for people at budget time, and times like this, listening to one

side or the other talking about how much is in the budget for trades and training. At the last

budget for instance, last year, it included a 585 million dollar skills package for

apprenticeships and vocational education, including 156 million for 80,000 new

apprenticeships over 5 years. So has that had a chance to work through yet?



PLIBERSEK: No, it has not Fran because what the Government is announce these

programs and then underspend them.



KELLY: Is that what's happening here? Do we know that yet?



PLIBERSEK: We know that for certain. As well as the 3 billion dollars that the Government

has straight out cut, they have underspent by almost a billion dollars on about 4 or 5 really

substantial programs that are set up to support apprentices and trainees in the

workplace. It is inconceivable - they say these are demand-driven programs and that's why

they've been underspent, but we've got employers who want to put people on, we've got

young people who want to do an apprenticeship or a trade, we've got families who would

love their young people to do that, we've got workers in mid-career who would like to

upgrade or change their skills. What we don't have is a government that's prepared to

invest in TAFE and training.



KELLY: So why are these funds underspent then?



PLIBERSEK: Because they're so poorly designed by a government who is not committed

to fixing this problem. Just recently in New South Wales; we've got the NSW Government

saying that they're looking at changes to the TAFE system; we've had the Victorian, the

Queensland and the Western Australian governments all offer free TAFE of one form or

another, because they see that there is a crisis here. What we don't have is a federal

government as a partner to solve this crisis.



KELLY: What we do have though is an infrastructure boom that's expected to continue for

the next 15 years.



PLIBERSEK: Absolutely.



KELLY: So this drop in apprenticeships, this drop in trainee numbers, doesn't seem to be

holding projects back.



PLIBERSEK: But it's affecting projects in terms of wages, it means that the cost of these

projects goes up because there is a trades shortage. And it’s affecting businesses, Fran. I

was in Bendigo the other day talking to Australian Turntables - fantastic local business,

been there 35 years - they would expand if they could get the apprentices and trainees

they need. Weld Australia say that the reason we aren't doing more of the shipbuilding,

naval shipbuilding and so on here in Australia is because there's a shortage of welders.

That we're not training enough appropriately qualified welders in Australia. We've got

examples of businesses across the board that say "we could grow, but we don't have the

skilled staff we need". This is not a problem that we woke up to today. This is a problem

that I have been talking about for years, that we have been talking about for years, and it

has been dramatically exacerbated by the billions of dollars of cuts.



KELLY: You're currently on a national listening tour - you're going to visit 100 businesses

in 100 days is that where you got these stories from?



PLIBERSEK: Well, the figures. They’re not secret figures, they're the Government's own

figures and I'm just drawing attention to them. But the anecdotes....



KELLY: I meant the Turntables Australia.



PLIBERSEK: Yeah, absolutely the anecdotes. I have been talking to businesses - small,

large, medium sized who all say we would love to grow, we can't, we haven't got the skilled

staff.



KELLY: You are listening to RN Breakfast. Our guest is Shadow Education Minister,

Tanya Plibersek. The Coronavirus, school pupils from China have been allowed to return

to Australia. We're seeing thousands of uni students arriving via third countries. The

spread of Corona in China itself seems to have slowed. Do you think it is time to lift the

blanket travel ban on university students coming in from China?



PLIBERSEK: Well, I don't think it's - it doesn't matter what my opinion is. What matters is

what the health authorities are telling us. We should be taking the best advice of our health

authorities. If our health authorities tell us that we can manage small groups beginning to

return to Australia, then we should take their advice and do that in a managed way. The

last thing I would want to do is urge for political reasons, or economic reasons - measures

that would expose the Australian community to any risk.



KELLY: Can I ask you on another issue - the horrific domestic violence murder of Hannah

Clarke and her three children in Brisbane. You get the feeling that this has really struck a

chord, no doubt about it. Is this a watershed moment for this country as we grapple with

what to do about family violence, because you have to say that it doesn't seem to have

slowed things down. There was another murder in Townsville on the weekend. There's

nine women - at least nine women have been killed at the hands of former domestic

partner this year, and five children so far.



PLIBERSEK: Fran, I hope it is a turning point for Australia but I hoped when Rosie Batty

was so brave after the loss of her son, Luke, that that would be a turning point and it

wasn't. I don't doubt for a minute that all of these expressions of grief from public figures,

from private individuals are utterly sincere. I really do believe that Australians are shocked

and appalled by what has happened. What frustrates me is we keep scratching our heads

and saying ‘what can we do about this?’. And we know what we can do about this. We've

had a Law Reform Commission report. We've had previous parliamentary reports - one just

in 2017 by a committee led by Graham Perrett, my colleague. We've had a Royal

Commission in Victoria. We've had a Royal Commission in Queensland. We have so much

- my own National Domestic Violence Plan, our National Plan for Violence Against Women

and Their Children that I did when I was the Minister for Women in the previous Labor

Government. We know what we need to do. What is missing is not bipartisan will, but

bipartisan commitment to action. We have stop....



KELLY: But we have an action plan that has got $800 million dollars put to it. So what

aren't we doing?



PLIBERSEK: So, why is it that we still ask ‘why didn't she leave?’ when the real question

should be ‘where would she go?’. We are still turning women and children away from

emergency accommodation every night in Australia. We are - actually, many of the

domestic violence programs have had their funding threatened, they have been at risk of

losing their funding. We've now got in the Parliament of Australia a Senate Inquiry driven

by Pauline Hanson that is giving a megaphone to the angry groups who say that women

who are victims of violence and take their children out of the family home are bringing



violence upon themselves. This is a megaphone for those groups and I can tell you that

you don't need to scratch the surface of the internet too hard to find people who will say

that very directly - that they are responsible for what happened to them because they

destroyed families. We need to act on the information we already know. We don't need

another inquiry. We don't need another investigation. We need to act on what we know

keeps people safe. That means emergency accommodation. That means greater

resourcing for Police who are doing a fine job right across Australia, much better than they

did 20 years ago or 40 years ago. We need laws that prioritise the safety of children and

their mothers.



KELLY: And just on that, in terms of the questions that we ask, the Government sided with

Labor yesterday to pass that motion in the Senate condemning Bettina Arndt for her

comments that Hannah Clarke's estranged husband could have been, quote “driven too

far”. But if we start stripping people of the AO's, where is that going to end. I mean, in this

country you might not own people's views, people are entitled to their views. Bettina

Arndt's views were well known before she was awarded this honour.



PLIBERSEK: Yeah, I think what she said was stupid but predictable. I don't think what she

said - I think these attitudes are harmful but from Bettina Arndt, really who cares what she

says. What is worse is that we say we care but we don't change the things that we know

would keep women and children safe.



KELLY: Tanya Plibersek thank you very much for joining us.



PLIBERSEK: Thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DANIEL DORAN 0427 464 350



