

Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA

The Hon Steve Irons MP

ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR VOCATIONAL EDUCATION, TRAINING AND APPRENTICESHIPS  MEMBER FOR SWAN

MEDIA RELEASE



3 April 2020



$1.3 BILLION TO SUPPORT APPRENTICES AND TRAINEES NOW  AVAILABLE TO SMALL BUSINESSES



Wage subsidies for apprentices and trainees have already started to flow, giving employers  and employees stability and financial relief during the COVID-19 pandemic.

The subsidy will initially cover 50 per cent of wages paid to apprentices between January to  March this year and continue until 30 September 2020.

Minister for Skills, Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash said the Morrison Government’s $1.3  billion Supporting Apprentices and Trainees package will help businesses retain their  existing apprentices and trainees through this difficult period.

“This is all about supporting those who continue to support our economy and our nation,” she  said.

Wage subsidies will be available to small businesses, including those using a Group Training  Organisation, to help retain existing apprentices and trainees. Employers of any size who   re-engage an apprentice or trainee that has been displaced from a small business may also  attract a wage subsidy.

Subsidies will cover wages paid from 1 January 2020 to 30 September 2020 and businesses  will be reimbursed up to $7,000 per quarter, up to a maximum of $21,000, per eligible  apprentice or trainee.

Minister Cash said the financial support was already flowing with eligible businesses who  applied for the funding yesterday receiving the money by close of business.

“We have targeted this financial support to provide rapid and direct assistance to protect jobs  and keep businesses, apprentices and trainees connected to the benefits of training already  undertaken,” she said.

Assistant Minister for Vocational Education, Training and Apprenticeships, the Hon Steve  Irons MP said apprentices and trainees were crucial to our current and future workforce.

“We are committed to supporting both apprentices in training, as well as employers, who  have made significant investments in their employees.”

“To keep eligible employers of apprentices or trainees informed they are being contacted by  their Australian Apprenticeship Support Network provider.”

2



For further information on how to apply for the subsidy, including information on eligibility,  contact an Australian Apprenticeship Support Network provider:  www.australianapprenticeships.gov.au/search-aasn

Media Contacts:   Guy Creighton - Guy.Creighton@employment.gov.au - 0438 815 302 (Minister Cash)   Roman Gowor - Roman.Gowor@dese.gov.au - 0437 544 666 (Assistant Minister Irons)

