

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW   5AA BREAKFAST  WEDNESDAY, 18 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Government’s announcement of second stimulus package for COVID-19; coronavirus; airlines affected by coronavirus; Parliament sitting during  coronavirus issue.

DAVID PENBERTHY, HOST: Anthony Albanese, the Leader of the Federal Labor Party.  Albo, good morning to you. The Federal Government is expected to announce the details  of its package to bail-out the airlines. What would you like to see them do?

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Well, look,  this is a good start. The announcement that would be made, my understanding is, this  morning, is about essentially taxes and charges. The airlines pay a range of fees including  fuel excise, including departure taxes, including air services fees, that is the fees for  essentially flights, control, etc. And indeed, Air Services Australia gave a dividend to the  Government recently back, into consolidated revenues. So, it is reasonable that the  Government suspend the collection of those fees. That will come at a cost of around about  $715 million. It is essential that be seen potentially as a start. I have spoken to both the  CEOs of Qantas and Virgin. And we know that airlines like Rex provide a vital role for  regional communities. And so, I think the request that the Government essentially give  some form of guarantee with the airlines for borrowing that might need to be made, needs  to be given serious consideration by the Government as well.

PENBERTHY: Hey Albo, walk us through this crazy set-up for Parliament next week. So,  what’s the deal? There are going to be 60 lower house MPs and 22 Senators?

ALBANESE: Well, what we'll do is we'll pair 60 MPs. So, 30 from the Coalition, 30 from  Labor, will be paired with each other. So, that will mean for people who have to travel long  distances, for people who might be vulnerable in terms of more susceptible to catching the  virus or more susceptible if they do catch the virus to more serious health implication, then  they won't be coming. And we'll be able to get on. There will be about 90 members of the  House of Representatives there. It was a great myself and the Prime Minister yesterday  morning. I think that it is a common-sense measure. We will also be putting in place some  practical measures such as almost 90 won't be in the chamber at the one time. We will be  able to have, if you like, some social distancing in the chamber, I suspect is what it will look  like.

PENBERTHY: So, you are going to be sitting four metres apart from each other on the  green chairs?

ALBANESE: Well, I think that rather than everyone being cramped in there, we'll have  some sensible arrangements. And things like the attendance in the Parliament won't be  there. We will have to look after ourselves. Largely, there'll be some skeleton staff. But  you'll need someone from Hansard and the clerks will be sitting there that provide advice.  But it is, I think, important, and the Prime Minister agreed, that at a time like this, that the  national leaders are actually able to meet. It's obviously important that the economic  stimulus package be passed. We want to protect jobs and protect the economy. And that  requires legislation. A common-sense approach will occur. There will be a Question Time  as usual, but the truth is, we on our side will know who's going to be asking questions. So,  everyone won't be required to be in the chamber. We have asked for the legislation to be  considered so that the Labor Party caucus can meet on the Monday morning. Many people  will be ringing in rather than being physically present in the same space.

PENBERTHY: Albo, we're getting details from stimulus packages right around the globe  now, $600 billion in the UK, there is Bloomberg reporting that there could be as much as  $1.2 trillion in the US, New Zealand announced the package that was effectively 4 per cent  of GDP. Have you got a figure that you think would be appropriate, or a GDP ratio that you  think would be appropriate for the Prime Minister to announce today in this second whack  of stimulus that we're going to have in Australia?

ALBANESE: Look, we want to make sure that the Government gets this right. So, we have  put forward constructive suggestions. On the airline issue, for example, I spoke to the  Prime Minister about that yesterday. I spoke to Michael McCormack, the Transport  Minister, on Monday. I obviously have a bit of experience of being the Minister for six  years. So, I think we have the best domestic airline structure in the world, bar none. We  have essentially the to the two airlines, both with full service, Virgin and Qantas, as well as  Jetstar and Tiger as the budget airlines, then we have a good regional airline structure as  well, that serves the country. What we need to make sure is that during this crisis, we don't  lose the structure in any industry so that it can't return back once this crisis has been seen  through. And that's got to be the focus of the Government. How do we minimise job losses  now? And how do we look at industry so that you don't lose, if you like, all the capital  investments that is there because it'll cost far more to get that going again. Areas like  childcare, I am very concerned about what happens if childcare centres simply can't  operate? Do we lose those childcare centres from the industry and then in six months’ time  we are wondering how kids will get access to childcare? So, there are all of those issues  that need to be dealt with. I think, in the case of the Government's economic response,  what is very clear, and despite the fact that there was some criticism of what Labor did  during the Global Financial Crisis, we saw Australia through. And we did that by early  action. Going hard and going early. And if we're going to make the decision, whether it's on  the health issues, or on the economic response to the health issues, I think the principle  has to be that if you are going to do something in a week or a month, do it today, or at least  give notice of it coming today so that the community can act with some certainty. There's a  great deal of fear out there. And it is understandable, because people are feeling confused.  They're not sure what's going to happen. And therefore, they're acting in a way that reflects  that community anxiety. It's the role of the Government to give clear advice, give a clear  path of where this is headed and what the response will be to build confidence. And we  want people to have confidence in authority. But in order for that to happen, the authorities  have got to have confidence in the people and be transparent about where these issues  are going. And that is the principle that I think the Government needs to apply. We're trying



to be constructive here. We're putting forward positive suggestions to the Government  directly, as well as in the statement I made on Sunday evening.

PENBERTHY: Federal Labor Leader, Anthony Albanese. Thanks for joining us.

ALBANESE: Thanks very much for having me on the program.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053









