

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS 24 AFTERNOON LIVE WITH PATRICIA KARVELAS  WEDNESDAY, 18 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus.

PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST:  Chris Bowen, welcome.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks, PK.

KARVELAS: There's now an indefinite new ban on indoor groups of 100  people or more. As you know, exemptions for schools, for public transport,  university, prisons, courts, supermarkets, work sites, are those exemptions that  you think are right for these times? Do you support these exemptions?

BOWEN: We support the policy, the 100 person limit. I know it will cause huge  dislocation. I was talking to one wedding provider in my electorate this morning  about some of the dislocation that will be caused. This is the biggest public  health crisis facing the world in 102 years. This sort of dislocation is  unfortunately part of how we have to deal with it to make sure this disease  doesn't take hold in our society. The exemptions I understand - obviously  public transport is essential to people getting around. Universities I'm sure are  already managing the situation carefully and reducing unnecessary contact and  engaging in social distancing. I would expect and trust that universities, that  while they're exempt, are nevertheless applying some common sense  in minimising any unnecessary gatherings of large numbers of people, whether  it's less than 100 or more than 100.

KARVELAS: Are you satisfied with the criteria being used for the Coronavirus  testing now? Do we need to expand the criteria? There was a couple on 730  who weren't able to get a test and they ended up, it emerged, they had Corona.

BOWEN: I don't want to quibble on terms of details but I'll make a principled  statement. Testing should be widespread. We should make sure the only

criteria as to who gets tested is who needs testing, not the availability of test  material. I know more tests have arrived. That's a good thing and we welcome  it very much and thank the Government for arranging that. The World Health  Organisation has made it very clear that one of the keys to successfully  dealing with Coronavirus is, in their words, ‘test, test, test, test’. The more tests  the better. There are complex issues that are being worked through but we say  more testing is better because we know that a number of the transmissions we  have seen in other countries have been from people who didn't know they had  the disease, didn't realise they were carriers. More testing and testing focused  on particular hot spots has been shown internationally to be part of the reason  for those countries who have more success than others in containing  Coronavirus.

KARVELAS: Based on the numbers that have been reported health authorities  say they are still coming from overseas, people contracting the virus  overseas. That local transmissions have been more minimal in the numbers.  Are you concerned about a rise in the local transmissions and what that  might mean? Do you think it's time to review the testing criteria?

BOWEN: Absolutely it's right to say that community transmission is the big risk.  It's right to say if we're not testing many people, there may be  community transmission we are not detecting. It's right to say the more  testing we're doing the earlier, and as a general principle, the more you do the  earlier and the better off we'll get through the virus.

KARVELAS: Should they change the criteria?

BOWEN: The Government is working on the advice of the AHPPC.  I understand that to be the case and I'm making a principled statement that  more testing has got to be a positive thing.

KARVELAS: What other measures do you think might be necessary? If you  look online many people talking about what happens when they arrive at  airports. Do you think there should be temperature tests at airports and  shopping centres, given they'll remain open?

BOWEN: I don't know about testing people's temperatures at shopping centres  but every step that can be put in place should be put in place. We’d like to see  the fever clinics up and running more quickly. I do want to see - I think you and  I have talked about - the big expansion in the telehealth rebate. Every  Australian should be getting the telehealth rebate in terms of seeing their  doctor.

KARVELAS: Let me pick you up on that because the Government announced,  Greg Hunt just yesterday, an expansion of telehealth.



BOWEN: A small expansion.

KARVELAS: What's the limitation you want to address?

BOWEN: It doesn't apply to everyone. They extended it to midwives and a few  other expansions. And don’t get me wrong, I welcome it. It's good. But I think it  needs to be much broader. Basically everything should be covered during this  crisis by a telehealth rebate. We don't want people going to the doctors if it can  be avoided. Taking the doctor's time and their time. It would be much better if  the telehealth rebate was much more broadly available and importantly Patricia,  should be available to doctors who are providing telehealth consultations from  their home. At the moment it’s not. They have to physically go into the surgery  to do it. It’s a bit of a technical glitch. I think if there's a doctor self-isolating who  is pretty well and can work and can provide health advice over the phone,  they should be able to do that under Medicare and get the telehealth rebate if  they're working from home. It might sound like a detailed technical matter, it's a  pretty important one in dealing with this health crisis.

KARVELAS: One of the sticking points, or the points of concern has been  in relation to schools with parents voting with their feet and withdrawing their  children, private schools closing down. Today Premiers, the Prime Minister,  they're all singing from the same song sheet. Gladys Berejiklian was asked  about private schools which have closed and she essentially said they  should consider reopening or they shouldn't be closing. A similar comment I  think being made by Daniel Andrews. What do you make of that? Should  the private schools reopen?

BOWEN: I think school closures are a matter for the individual school if they're  in the private sector. In relation to the Government schools I accept what I  understand to be the unanimous advice of the state chief health officers to their  respective state governments, that is not necessary or productive at this time. I  have expressed to you the general principle more should be done earlier but  obviously state governments will work closely on the medical advice they are  receiving as well. I make two key points. It would be good to provide parents  with information about what trigger point might lead to schools being closed.  What timing are we being talked about for schools being closed more broadly? I  have made the point that school closures are growing increasingly likely. I think  the more information that's given to Australians and to families and parents the  better for planning purposes about what might happen and when it might  happen. That’s the first point.  Secondly, there needs to be urgent  measures put in place for healthcare workers if schools do close. The PM has  used health workers as a reason not to close schools. If there is reason to close  schools, I don't want it not to happen because of the impact on health workers.  What I'd like to see happen - and we've been saying it consistently now for

days - is plans put in place to assist health workers should schools have to  close. By that I mean a system with childcare and other arrangements so they  don't have to stay home. It's a very, very important matter. The Prime Minister  has used a figure of 30%. That to me says it's even more important measures  are put in place. I know your next question is what will it look like? It could look  like a range of things. In Norway, schools have closed but instructions have  been given they're to remain open with a skeletal staff to just cater for  healthcare workers’ children. Maybe a school with 30 teachers might have one  or two teachers and maybe instead of 400 kids there’s 20 or 30 kids which is  obviously a much better system in relation to the risks of social distancing  but enables the healthcare workers not to withdraw from their work which  we simply can't afford because of school closures. The point I'm making is let's  not argue whether schools should close today, tomorrow or next week, let's  agree there should be more information out there so people have the  right information to deal with. There is tonnes of misinformation on the Internet  at the moment. Secondly, let's put real plans in place so that healthcare  workers don't have to weigh up do they go to work or stay home with my child  who is not old enough to stay at home. Let's avoid that by planning now.

KARVELAS: The Prime Minister said he's comfortable sending his children to  school. Are you comfortable sending your children to school?

BOWEN: Yes. My children are still going to school.

KARVELAS: Should parents re-engage, the ones who have withdrawn?

BOWEN: Every parent will make a personal choice. I am not going to  lecture other parents about what personal choices they should make. At this  stage my children, my wife and I's children, are going to school.

KARVELAS: I don't want you to lecture anyone. I find politicians  lecturing unpleasant.

BOWEN: I'm glad we agree on that. It is a serious point.

KARVELAS: It is a serious point. Parents have voted with their feet and it looks  like a 6-month time frame. Daniel Andrews says some of the caps on meetings,  100 people, might be even 10 months in the making. If it is the case, do you  urge parents to re-engage? It's a long time to withdraw?

BOWEN: I don't think any parent would be contemplating keeping their kid out  of school for 10 months. They might say during this time they are making  a decision and revise it on a daily or weekly basis. Patricia I know you've  got children and I won't tell you what decision you should make in relation to  your children. I'm sure you wouldn't tell me what decision I should make, my

wife and I for ours, and I won't do it for any other Australian. Everybody in this  situation will make a choice. We've made ours. I think the broader point is the  more information that's available to people, the more informed people can be,  the less likely we're going to see the panic and the concern in the community  which is a very important issue and I think it is incumbent on the Government to  provide that sort of information including what sort of criteria will they consider?  The Premier and the Prime Minister have said they might close schools. They  haven’t ruled it out. I think it would be useful for the Prime Minister to outline  what sort of criteria would be considered and what trigger points and  timeframe might parents need to know about so they can figure out how they'll  cope as a family if their children's schools are closed. And steps and  arrangements they can put in now. Normally, if it was a different  situation, grandparents might step in. That's not recommended for obvious  reasons in this case. Let's get our plans in place now and let's not scramble  or have a Prime Ministerial announcement that schools are closing across the  country the next day or two days’ time. Let's try and give people a bit more  notice. I'm not expecting the Prime Minister or any leader to say schools are  going to close on this date. I would suggest a bit more criteria, trigger points  and information to be part of the public information.

KARVELAS: Your colleague and the Deputy Leader of your party Richard  Marles suggested getting the Defence Force involved in logistics.

BOWEN: So have I.

KARVELAS: He did it just today. What do you want them to do?

BOWEN: Richard and I have both said that in our respective portfolios,  because this is a national emergency and every national asset should be  deployed. What could they do? Here’s two examples. We don't have the fever  clinics up and running at the federal level. There's a whole range of challenges  in getting the clinics up and running. I don’t doubt that. I have never questioned  that. We have been told we might not get them until late May. That’s way too  late. If one of the challenges is infrastructure, even temporary buildings for the  fever clinics, there is engineering corps in the Army and accomplished  construction experts in the Army who can get buildings up very quickly. There  are medicos in the Army, ADF, including the Reserves. There's doctors and  nurses and medics who can play a role. I'm not suggesting that solves  everything but I’m suggesting if that helps us get one or two or three clinics up  more quickly, that's a good thing to have and we should be deploying the ADF  and we should be doing so now.

KARVELAS: Just on what might be needed in terms of stimulus, the  Government is planning to unveil something tomorrow is my understanding.  The Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews says there's a need to look at a survival



package for the economy. He says the Federal Government might look at  guaranteeing mortgages, guaranteeing incomes. They're pretty radical  suggestions. Do you think that's what the Federal Government should be  looking at now?

BOWEN: They're radical suggestions for radical times. This is a very big  challenge for our society and my health focus, and for the economy. Basically,  tick to the stimulus but you're probably going to need more. We think you  should do more. The Government has said that themselves now, there will be a  second stimulus package. Part of that package should be not just to stimulate  but to assist those businesses very directly affected by the slowdown in  economic activity to get through this, to survive. And support for workers. Again  you and I have talked about it before, let's pay casual workers when they can't  go to work during this crisis. It would be good for the economy and the health  system because they wouldn't be second guessing whether they can afford the  risk of not being paid if they get tested. It will be good in the interests of  fairness.

KARVELAS: Level with the Australian public. Is it your view that now a  recession is inevitable?

BOWEN: I think the economic impact of this is very significant. There will be a  big hit this quarter. I suspect a big hit the next quarter as well. Time will tell.  There's a big global impact. Of course as you’ve heard us say before the  Australian economy was weak going into this. Going into this. Let's not pretend  everything was rosy.

KARVELAS: But that weakness isn't comparable with what we're seeing now?

BOWEN: I'm not, but I am pointing out that we can't pretend everything was  rosy until Coronavirus came along. By the same token, let's not be churlish.  Coronavirus will have a big impact on the economy and how the Government  responds will determine in part at least how well the economy gets through it.

KARVELAS: Chris Bowen thank you for coming on.

BOWEN: Thanks, Patricia.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512





