

MARK BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENERGY

MEMBER FOR HINDMARSH



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP

ADELAIDE

SATURDAY, 8 FEBRUARY 2020



SUBJECTS: Government divided over climate change, Government plans

for new coal-fired power and nuclear power, sports rorts on steroids,

Budget, coronavirus.





MARK BUTLER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND

ENERGY: This is a divided, shambles of a Federal Government. It is divided

over the science of climate change. It is divided over energy policy, and already

this morning it is divided over company taxation.



Australians needs a Government that is focused on meeting all of these

challenges. But, instead, Scott Morrison leads a team that is focused on its own

internal divisions, fighting over the spoils of government, and finding new ways

to spend billions of taxpayers’ money on their own political ends.



Over the course of this week we saw the Government simply incapable of

acknowledging the deep concern in the Australian community about the threat

of climate change, particularly over this most awful of summers that we have

been experiencing in recent months.



And this morning we see the Government still has no energy policy - just

ideological flights of fantasy. We’ve seen plans this morning to spend

potentially billions of taxpayers’ money on building a new coal-fired power

station that private investors will not touch with a bargepole. And yet more

Coalition MPs pushing the Government to build incredibly expensive nuclear

power stations right up and down the coast of Australia.



Australia needs a plan for its future - but this divided, shambolic Government is

simply incapable of coming up with that plan. There is no plan to get the

economy and wages going. There is no plan to fix Australia’s energy crisis and

there is certainly no plan to tackle climate change.



JOURNALIST: Do you see any merit in the plan to increase tax on the gas

industry?



BUTLER: All we’ve seen so far is a well-placed leak apparently from the

Government to The Australian newspaper. We don’t make a practice of

responding to Government leaks. If there is a serious proposal the Government

wants to put on the table, of course we will look at it very closely, very seriously

and take it through our proper processes. But I do note already that the fellow

who was the Resources Minister only six or seven days ago, Matt Canavan

from Queensland, has already come out and panned his own Government’s

proposal.



JOURNALIST: The Queensland Labor Government increased the rate of

royalty taxes on petroleum by 25 per cent as part of its 2019 State Budget, do

you think the industry is being unfairly targeted by both parties at both levels?



BUTLER: We’re not going to respond to speculation, particularly in the media,

about a proposal we haven’t yet seen. Obviously all Australians expect that

companies that are able to make a profit out of Australia’s resources will pay

proper amounts of taxation. We are not going to respond to media leaks, unlike

Matt Canavan who as I said was the Resources Minister six days ago and who

has already come out and panned his own Government’s proposal which we

haven’t seen yet.



JOURNALIST: While we are on Queensland, what do you make of the Federal

Government’s spending up to $6 million on two new Queensland electricity

generation projects, including a coal-fired power plant?



BUTLER: The private investment sector has made it very clear, it has no

appetite for building expensive, new coal-fired power stations. The only way the

Coalition party room gets its way, its ideological obsession with having a new

coal-fired power station built in Australia, is for taxpayers to foot the bill. The

proponent of this station has made it clear that they want a taxpayer indemnity

against future carbon risk and the Australian Industry Group, the peak employer

organisation, has indicated that that indemnity might run to $17 billion of

taxpayer funds. Now if the investment sector, the industry itself won’t touch this

project, why should taxpayers foot that bill?



JOURNALIST: Do you think the Government overpromised when they initially

claimed they would get the Budget back in the black?



BUTLER: Let’s wait and see. The economy was already faltering before the

coronavirus, before the awful summer of natural disasters, particularly

bushfires, that we’ve seen. Constant revisions downwards to economic growth,

wages figures and suchlike so I think Scott Morrison and Josh Frydenberg’s

boast about a Budget surplus last year was already pretty ambitious but we’ll

wait and see what the Budget figures in the future hold.



What is clear is that Australians need a plan to get the economy going, to get

wages growing again, and this shambolic, internally divided Government is

simply incapable of coming up with a plan.



JOURNALIST: It has been revealed a Queensland community promised $2

million in federal funds for a new swimming pool says it didn’t want the grant in

the first place. This money is from a different scheme. Will the Senate Inquiry

examine this issue to?



BUTLER: This latest rort, it is a sports rort on steroids. It makes the last sports

rort scheme, which Bridget McKenzie lost her job over, look relatively modest.

$150 million spent, entirely as I understand it, in Coalition held seats. No

guidelines - apparently the only guidelines were the electoral margins of

Coalition held seats that were targeted with this money. Obviously we are going

to look at this forensically. We are back in Parliament next week and we intend

to hold this Government to account for their waste of hundreds and hundreds of

millions of taxpayers’ dollars simply focused on their own party political ends.



JOURNALIST: So guidelines for the program were promised but never

published and the great majority of funding went towards swimming pools in

just 11 Coalition held seats., how concerning is that?



BUTLER: This is extraordinarily concerning and it is just now becoming a

course of conduct, a recidivist Government intent on spending huge amounts of

taxpayers money just for their own electoral purposes. It is a complete rort.



JOURNALIST: Is this further evidence that the Gaetjens report should be

released?



BUTLER: The ANAO, the Auditor-General, a statutory office holder who is

commissioned by the Parliament to look at the expenditure of public money has

already made his view utterly clear about the sports rorts scheme. It was rorted,

it was of questionable legal validity and it went overwhelmingly to Coalition held

seats. Now it looks relatively modest compared to this latest sports rorts on

steroids, the swimming pool saga. We are going to make sure that this

Government is held to account in every possible way.



JOURNALIST: Keith Pitt is the new Minister for Mining and Water, how can

mining and water fit into the same portfolio?



BUTLER: That is a matter for Scott Morrison to explain. We always took the

view, John Howard always took the view that the management of Australia’s

precious water resources should sit with the environment department. At the

end of the day, an environmentally sustainable water resource, whether it is the

Murray Darling Basin or anywhere else on our continent, is the only way to

ensure environmental sustainability obviously - but also to ensure that there are

sustainable communities along the Murray Darling Basin. We don’t support the

idea that water resources should be taken out of the environment department

and put along a resources portfolio.



JOURNALIST: Nationals frontbencher Darren Chesters has downplayed

suggestions his colleagues may cross the floor in Parliament due to his party’s

internal unrest and there is no legislation that anyone would cross on, do you

buy that?



BUTLER: I don’t think anyone buys this. This is a deeply internally divided

Government. The first week back after this most awful of summers, the new



decade and all we saw last week was the Government focused on its own

internal divisions. Fighting over the spoils of Government instead of helping the

country meet all of these challenges. The challenges of a faltering economy,

climate change, energy prices and so much more. This divided, shambolic

Government is incapable of meeting Australia’s national interest.



JOURNALIST: Is the Government releasing enough information on

Coronavirus or could they be doing more?



BUTLER: The Opposition has tried as far as possible to provide whatever

support we can to the Government. The Government is acting on medical

advice and obviously this is a very deep global crisis that the world is facing.

We want to make sure the Government acts promptly, on the basis of medical

advice, and we support the measures that have been taken so far.



Thanks everyone.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LUCY CARUSO 0408 803 428



