

FIONA PHILLIPS MP  MEMBER FOR GILMORE



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  CANBERRA  MONDAY, 2 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Bushfire recovery; help for small businesses; coronavirus; Bomaderry  High School.

FIONA PHILLIPS, MEMBER FOR GILMORE: I’m here today to talk to you about bushfire  recovery, or the lack thereof, of assistance for our small business owners in my electorate  on the New South Wales South Coast. For weeks and weeks I have been going on in this  parliament and in this electorate because the money is just not getting through to our small  business owners.

We've got small business owners like, for example, Vince who is a beekeeper, Vince and  Maria. They have gone through so much but the guidelines just do not fit their case. They  are not going getting the help they need.

We’ve got Katrina in Kangaroo Valley who has had to lay off staff. These are businesses,  and this is happening all over the electorate. We just need more help for our small  businesses.

JOURNALIST: What kind of help do you think they should be getting? How should we deal  with this?

PHILLIPS: At the moment, unless people are directly fire impacted these businesses are  not getting the help they need. So we've got businesses out there that have lost so much  income, for some people like Simon from the Ulladulla Surf School, I mean these are  businesses that have lost over 80% of their income. We're talking about an unfolding  economic crisis on the New South Wales South Coast.

We've seen jobs that are just going - people are laying off people. We need, we need  some sort of help, some sort of assistance, for our small business owners that have lost  income.

JOURNALIST: How likely do you think it is to get that extra help? And maybe how fair as  well, because there are businesses that are struggling in other crises like the Coronavirus,  the tourism sector has taken a hit, you’ve got education you’re talking the whole country,  and many businesses that need help. How likely it is, do you think that indirect affected  communities will receive help and how fair is it that it’s isolated to New South Wales coast?

PHILLIPS:  Well what I know is that businesses on the New South Wales South Coast for  months and months, this has been impacting everybody there. This is not something that  will just go away. We need for real help for people there. If you go to the New South Wales  South Coast it’s what everyone is talking about. It’s impacted everyone. It’s impacted  tourism operators and that impacts people putting food on the table.

JOURNALIST: Do you think they should prioritise these kinds of payments before talking a  bit more specifically about payments for businesses affected by the virus?

PHILLIPS: I think that everything is important. But what I know is what people are telling  me on the New South Wales South Coast is they need help now.

JOURNALIST: How much of that do you think, umm, do you think the Prime Minister gets  it?

PHILLIPS: I don’t think he gets it at all. He flew into HMAS Albatross at Nowra, and then  he flew out again. He didn't even stay to talk with people in my electorate. I've got people  coming to me, they are so upset. They've had to lay off staff, they can't find food, to pay  the bills, or put food on the table, and everybody is impacted. Whether it's the business  owner themselves, the staff, people in the community. There's less people buying things.  We want people to come back to area, that's a positive story and support our area and  we're starting to see that, but we need to see more of that. The tourism money. I mean that  hasn't even flowed through. I mean, where is it?

JOURNALIST: What would your response be if payments for those directly affected by the  virus impact go through before any kind of support for the New South Wales South Coast  [inaudible]

PHILLIPS: Well what I know is that the Government announced $75 million in tourism  funding. But we haven’t seen it. I mean where is it? I’ve got tourism operators that keep  ringing me. No-one can find the money?

JOURNALIST: So before they potentially specify any kind of support package because of  the virus to go through the $75 million [inaudible] a priority, would that need to happen?

PHILLIPS: They said that $75 million would be spent on Tourism grants for bushfire  recovery and that's where it should be. We need more money not less.

JOURNALIST: On Coronavirus, do you think the Government should be extending its  Travel Bans?

PHILLIPS: I think obviously we’re all very concerned about that and certainly we will work  with the Government on that. It’s an issue, but people should remain calm and listen to the  authorities.

JOURNALIST: What about in South Korea and Italy specifically given those regions have  been affected?

PHILLIPS: Yeah, happy to work with the Government. The reality is that in my electorate  on the New South Wales, people are going through bushfire recovery every single day.  We’ve got people’s houses that are not going to be cleaned up for months and months and  months. They are living next to, in many cases properties that haven’t been cleaned up.



That's what they're worried about. And that's what we need to do, get on with the clean-up  and we need to make sure that the tourism funding and the small business funding is  getting through to people. We've got the disaster recovery allowance, which is a 26-week  payment to the rate of Newstart, that people can't access. The government won’t even tell  us how many people have been able to access.

We know that for example in for businesses that not many people will be able to access  the loans at all. It needs to be fixed.

JOURNALIST: The government's changing the way that it gives is its funding to non-government schools. It's going to be more based on parent’s incomes. Do you think that’s  fair?

PHILLIPS: What I know is that in my electorate that our schools are doing it tough and just  a week or so ago, I visited Bomaderry High School, on the NSW South Coast that ironically  after the bushfires suffered extensive damage. And I have never seen anything like that in  my entire life. I'm talking about a whole block with 16 classrooms so extensively damaged  it's no longer used. I'm talking about ceilings that are actually crumbling to the floor. That's  what we should be talking about. We should be talking about that our schools - I’m a  mother and I would never want my child, or any child, to have to go through that. The  government needs to fix our schools and apportion funding appropriately.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JESSICA MALCOLM-ROBERTS 0413 570 618













