

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY  DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  SYDNEY  SATURDAY, 21 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Testing for Covid-19, Self-isolation, National Coordination Mechanism,  Border Force and Bondi Beach, Newstart, States closing borders, Second cruise  ship arrival.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Good morning, everyone. I'll make  a few brief comments before passing over to Kristina on related matters. Obviously as this  crisis unfolds we continue our approach of supporting every step that the Government has  put in place, but constructively calling for more. Kristina and I we will be doing that this  morning in relation to a couple of matters. Firstly, in relation to testing, we need to test test  test. People across the country are working their guts out to test more people, but we need  to do better as a country. I understand the constraints. I understand the limitations on  testing, but we need to do more. Today we say it must be the formal objective of  Government policy to have people tested if they are in contact with people who've suffered  Covid-19 or have symptoms, not 'and' have symptoms. People across the country are  exhibiting symptoms. Obviously very worryingly going for tests and being denied tests  because they don't meet the criteria. The deputy chief medical officer has made it clear if  there were more tests, they might consider different criteria. We know from South Korea,  that testing is one of the key elements in beating this virus. In South Korea 5,500 people  per million have been tested, in Australia: 3,300. That's a big difference. We need to do  more. Also, people are waiting too long for test results. I've heard reports of eight days,  sometimes six days, we need to do more. Interestingly, other pathology tests aren't  occurring at the same rate. People are getting less testing done. There's been notifications  to the stock exchange by pathology companies for profit warnings, we have spare capacity  in the pathology sector, we need to ensure that every single pathologist in the country is  deployed, every single pathology practice in the country is deployed to get these tests  turnaround more quickly. Again, we don't underestimate the complexity, but much more  needs to be done.

Now, another issue is self isolation and ensuring the support for people in self isolation.

The Prime Minister correctly said yesterday, self isolation means self isolation and people  should comply with the law. But we also need to ensure we're supporting those people so  that they aren't tempted to break the law. And Kristina and I have been talking about that  and Kristina will have further comments to make about that particular suggestion and also  other breaking developments.

KRISTINA KENEALLY, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE AND SHADOW  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you, Chris. There are right now in Australia,  thousands of people self isolating. Some of them are self isolating because they have been  diagnosed with Covid-19 some because they have been in close contact with someone  with Covid-19 and some are isolating because they've been directed to by the Government  having returned home from overseas. Labor supports that direction from Government and  thanks those Australians who are taking steps to self isolate during this health crisis. We  also know that many people are self isolating because they are elderly, and they run a high  risk if they  contract Covid-19.

Now, when it comes to self isolation, one of the things we need to ensure is that people  have access to a secure supply of food. And in the last week, we have seen major retailers  take a decision to discontinue home delivery of groceries. Now our food retailers in  Australia have been working incredibly hard. They have taken extraordinary steps to meet  extraordinary demand and we acknowledge the work that they have been doing and no  one here is blaming the food retailers for taking what is a necessary decision in order to  ensure that we have food stocks on the shelves. But what is happening now is that people  who are in self isolation who cannot access home delivery groceries are being directed to  Food Bank and that is a completely unacceptable way to address this gap. People who  can shop at grocery stores should not be directed to Food Bank. Food Bank is there for the  most vulnerable in the community. It is a charity. It is a charity that is there to supply  people who are most in need with food and the demands on food bank are extraordinary at  this time. I have spoken with senior officers at Food Bank in the last 24 hours who tell me  not only are their stocks running low, but their supply of volunteers is drying up. This is not  an appropriate response.

Now two weeks ago, the Government stood up a National Coordination Mechanism. This  National Coordination Mechanism sits within the Department of Home Affairs. It is there to  resolve bottlenecks that are non health related during the Covid-19 crisis. The fact that  people in self isolation are not able to have food delivered to them is exactly the kind of  problem that the National Coordination Mechanism should be resolving. Now Labor stands  ready to work with the Government. We call on the Government to urgently through its  National Coordination Mechanism, step in and work with grocery retailers, transport  companies and others in the community, including our public servants who may be able to  resolve this problem, this bottleneck. What will rapidly emerge is a crisis as thousands of  more Australians are directed to self isolate.

We also call on the Government to make clear which Minister is leading the National  Coordination Mechanism. We know when it comes to the Health Committee that has been  stood up that is part of the National Cabinet is being chaired by Brendan Murphy, the Chief  Medical Officer and that Minister Greg Hunt is the lead Minister. We do not have clarity yet  from the Government as to who is the lead Minister for the National Coordination  Mechanism. We call on the Government to make that clear. And we advise that when they  do so Labor will of course, as we always do, appoint a relevant Shadow to work alongside  the Government and the community as we work to be constructive during this crisis. This is  too important. Australians need a Government to get it right and we stand ready to be

constructive in that endeavour.

Happy to take any questions. I think we have some people on the phone?

JOURNALIST: Jen from Seven News. Chris Bowen, can I ask; We're on a frightening  curve at the moment, the rate is almost doubling every three days, we'll reach 30,000  cases based on this projection in about two weeks time, which could mean hundreds of  deaths. Was this rapid increase preventable? Did the Government act fast enough  considering we were the first country to declare a pandemic? Are you being told to have to  expect higher rates than that? Or hopefully will we start to see a decrease as a result of the  strict measures?

BOWEN: Well Jen, you're right that the news we're seeing everyday is not good and we're  currently doubling cases every three days, which is not a good trajectory for the country to  be on and frankly, the Government needs to be honest with the Australian people about  that. We cannot have the message that we've got this. We've all got to stick together.  We've got to work together, we will get through it. It is a very, very serious situation. And as  I said during the week, we cannot look back on the other side of this and say; 'Could we  have done more earlier?'. If in doubt, do more do it earlier. I understand there are some  complicated issues to work through. I think we're being more than constructive and  reasonable with the Government in making suggestions to them about what more can be  done. At the same time supporting every single measure that they put in place, including  some that were controversial at the time. Don't look controversial now but were at time.

So it is a very serious situation, we all need to be honest about that. It's going to get much  worse before it gets better. There's no point gilding the lilly. There's no point pretending  that everything's going to be okay. Our health system will be under severe pressure. And  perhaps that can lead me to say; we all have responsibilities here. We all have to be  ensuring that we're engaging in proper social distancing. Young people might feel that you  know that they're not going to get it or that they're well enough to withstand it. But it's about  our responsibility to the country. We all must engage in the appropriate social distancing,  because not only your health but the health of somebody you love might depend on it. So  this is a very serious situation. We cannot look back later and say; "Could we have done  more? Could we have done better?" That is why we've supported every single step that's  been taken and asked for more to be done.

KENEALLY: If I might Jen off the back of Chris' comment there about young people, it's  incredibly important that this message is driven home to young people. This is a disease  that young people can get. They can go into hospital, they can die from it. And I was quite  concerned and I know Chris was as well, we were quite concerned by pictures circulating  on social media of particularly young people at Bondi Beach, clearly not practicing social  distancing, clearly gathering in large numbers. And it's incredibly important that the  messaging that we are getting from Government is loud and clear and consistent, that it's  targeted at relevant groups and in mechanisms and ways that they will hear and  understand. And I will also flag that earlier this week I wrote to the Minister Alan Tudge, the  acting Minister for Immigration and Citizenship and make clear that while Labor has  concerns regarding the 1.6 million temporary migrants that are about to be trapped in  Australia in terms of their access to health testing and support, we also would support the  Government in sensible measures such as those implemented in New Zealand for Border  Force and other authorities to conduct spot checks at backpacker hostels and other  enforcement measures in relation to temporary visa holders. It's incredibly important that  everyone in the community, citizen or not, complies with the health directions that we are

getting. A virus does not check your visa before it infects you. The reality is the coronavirus  is going to spread throughout the community and we need everyone in the community,  citizen or not, complying with the health directions.

I've got Fi Whelan next on the list for questions.

JOURNALIST: Yes, yes. Hello there. I just wanted to ask what do you think of the idea of  increasing Newstart as a way of helping people through this who lose their job?

BOWEN: Well, I'm happy to take that one Fi. We've consistently seen way before this  crisis, that Newstart is too low and the Government needs to deal with that. Now, if  anything, this crisis provides even more evidence that everything should be on the table  when it comes to supporting people through this crisis, everything. And this is no longer  frankly, just about stimulus. It's about ensuring people's well being through the most  challenging circumstances that we might possibly begin to imagine including not only  including but especially our most vulnerable. And you know, people are being put out of  work already, already. Companies under great-- small business in particular under great  pressure in hospitality and elsewhere, under great pressure. So, Newstart increases very  much should be on the table for the Government. We would say as a principle it should  have  been anyway. But let's take this crisis as increased evidence that the need for a  Newstart increase is justified and urgent.

JOURNALIST: Can i ask, are there any other-- when the Government unveils its package  tomorrow, is there anything else that you would like to see in there?

BOWEN: Oh, look, we've said we will be constructive. We've said, you know, Jim  Chalmers has made a series of markers, if you like, of constructive suggestions and things  that we would like to see. But again, it's similar to the health challenge facing the country; If  in doubt, do more. And we have said consistently what the Government's done so far, in  health and in the economy is good, but not good enough.

KENEALLY: I think we've got another question from Jane Norman unless you had another  question there Fi?

JOURNALIST: No, I'm good. Thank you.

KENEALLY: Jane Norman, ABC.

JOURNALIST: Thanks for taking our questions. I've just got two. The first is that we're  gradually starting to see the states close either all of their borders or partially. Today  Queensland closed its border with the Northern Territory. My question is whether you  believe that needs to the extended where the states need to be closing the borders to  basically shut down or curtail domestic travel. And the second question, if I can is just  about the testing. I see the point about South Korea having a much more aggressive  testing regime but given there is a worldwide shortage, where is Australia going to be  sourcing these additional test kits from?

BOWEN: Well, as I said, just I'll take the second part first Jane. In relation to testing, we  don't underestimate the complexity. But other countries are testing more. Now to be fair  we're testing more than some other countries but other countries are testing more than us  as well. So we need to be, I'd say, world's best practice. Australians deserve the best and  other countries are securing the testing. South Korea has, that's as an example, a country

that has really tackled this very, very strongly and is having some success, some success  in very difficult circumstances. So I'm not here today to say the Government has a magic  wand that they can waive and get more testing into the country. I am saying the objective  of Government policy should be that every single Australian who needs a test gets a test.  Not every Australian who wants a test, every Australian who needs a test, I think is a  legitimate benchmark to be setting. And by that I mean, if you have symptoms, even if you  have no known link with somebody with Covid-19, even if you haven't been overseas, if  you have symptoms, the test should be available when it's been approved by a doctor.  That should be the objective of Government policy. The Government says most of the  cases we have identified are mainly because of overseas contact. I accept that's the fact  based on the evidence from the testing, but the fact of the matter is, we're not testing  people who simply have symptoms, who haven't been in contact with somebody-- known  contact with somebody who has Covid-19 or been overseas. That means that that  statement, that statement is based not on the full facts, because we're not fully testing  everyone.

In relation to domestic flights, I'll just bring you back to the principle that we've applied  consistently. If in doubt, do more. Now, the Government and the state Governments have  all the evidence available to them and all the data and all the legal advice about what's  possible when. But we'll support any measures that are put in place if they help stop the  spread of this virus.

KENEALLY: Are there any other questions?

JOURNALIST: I have another one Jen.

KENEALLY: Yes. Go ahead, Jen.

JOURNALIST: Yep. There's a promising trial in Brisbane, some of our researches using  an HIV drug and malaria drug to combat the virus and it's proving, as I said, very  promising, Do you think the Government should fund this?

BOWEN: The Government should do everything possible. You know, you won't often hear  me say-- I've seen with some approval what's happened in the United States and in  relation to malaria drugs. But there are some without without, if you like, developing a false  sense of hope and security, there are some promising signs. But much, much more work  needs to be done and our Government needs to find every available opportunity as do  other like minded Governments around the world. If there is a chance that an existing  medicine has some benefit in this environment, which has already been tested and we  know it doesn't cause harm. Of course, we need to be taking every single opportunity.

JOURNALIST: And Chris your reaction to the Government lifting the debt ceiling yesterday  to $850 billion?

BOWEN: Well, I'll leave Jim Chalmers to comment on particular matters in relation to the  to the fiscal situation but we've shown we've been constructive in every element.

KENEALLY: Before we wrap this up, I just would like to know we've had some information  while we've been here in this media conference. It appears the second cruise ship has  been-- has been allowed to disembark passengers. Can I say I am concerned about this  situation. It is an indication of the continuing mixed messages that have been sent by the  Government as we work our way through this crisis. Now I understand that this crisis is



complex and evolving. However last week the Government said there would be no cruise  ships. We have had yesterday a cruise ship, we understand that there is, there are reports  of another cruise ship being allowed to release passengers. This is a matter in which the  Government needs to urgently get on top of as we are seeing people from these cruise  ships testing positively and now people having to be tracked down as they spread across  the country.

This is a matter that while Border Force is responsible for checking people and releasing  them, once they have checked their documentation, Border Force does not enforce the  health-- They enforce the health measures, they don't design the health measures. And so  this is a matter where the health advice needs to be clear and consistent and consistently  applied. And Chris may want to say a bit more on this but I am concerned that the advice  being provided to our Border Force officials and to the community appears to be  inconsistent at this stage.

BOWEN: I'll just add very briefly because Kristina has covered the field very well in relation  to cruise ships. I think all Australians will be looking at the situation very concerned as  Kristina and I are, and it underlines the fact that as we've seen in relation to other matters  in this crisis, consistency of communication is key and frankly, we are not seeing it. We are  not seeing it. And to have-- I saw one instance today of somebody who was only notified  that they need to be tested for Covid-19 when they got back to Adelaide from Sydney  having got off that cruise ship, that's just not good enough. We need to have consistent  messaging and we need to have consistent policy decisions being put in place. And I  thought, if I might say so, I thought the prime Minister was dismissive of this issue  yesterday, and, unfortunately, excessively dismissive of what is a significantly concerning  event with those cruise ships, which aren't being managed anywhere near as well as they  should be.

JOURNALIST: Sorry, where was the second cruise ship?

BOWEN: We've only got information coming into us while we're holding the press  conference so there is a second ship, but we'll have to, obviously, Kristina and I've just  responded to events as they emerge, but I'm sure more details will emerge. But the first  ship was concerning enough, even if it is only one ship, that's concerning enough.

KENEALLY: All right. Thank you very much everyone.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACTS:          TIMOTHY DUNLOP (KENEALLY) 0428 043 110  LIZ FITCH (BOWEN) 0424 512 512





