



SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women

STATEMENT

ASEAN-related Foreign Ministers’ Meetings

9 September 2020

ASEAN and the ASEAN-led regional architecture remain at the heart of our vision for a  stable, open, inclusive and resilient Indo-Pacific, and are essential to the regional  recovery from COVID-19.

This week, I will participate by videoconference in the East Asia Summit Foreign  Ministers' Meeting, the ASEAN-Australia Post Ministerial Conference and the ASEAN  Regional Forum. I will also deliver a keynote address at the ASEAN Ministerial Dialogue  on Strengthening Women’s Role for Sustainable Peace and Security.

As we chart our way through the COVID-19 pandemic, it is vital that regional recovery is  guided by the principles set out in the ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific, such as  transparency, inclusivity, good governance and respect for international law.

I look forward to underlining Australia’s commitment to working with our regional  partners to respond to the health and economic implications of the pandemic, as part of  our practical cooperation under the Outlook.

ASEAN has played a vital role in galvanising our region’s response to COVID-19,  charting a course for economic recovery and shaping the post-crisis regional order.  Southeast Asia’s ability to rebound from the pandemic will be pivotal for Australia’s  economic recovery.

In 2018-19, ASEAN accounted for A$124 billion in two-way trade - 14 per cent of  Australia’s total - and $259 billion in two-way investment. I look forward to underscoring  Australia’s commitment to signing the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership  agreement this year.

I also look forward to discussing key regional security issues, including the South China  Sea, the Korean Peninsula, Hong Kong, the situation in Rakhine State, the threats

posed by terrorism and the spread of disinformation, and the role of women in our  pandemic response and recovery.

Media Contacts  David Wroe: +61 429 531 143  Melanie Ruiz: +61 427 888 392  Authorised by Senator the Hon Marise Payne, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Women,  Australia.

