RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2GB AFTERNOONS WITH DEBORAH KNIGHT

WEDNESDAY, 26 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Virtual Parliament; JobKeeper;  Victoria dealing with COVID-19; Scott

Morrison’s failure on Aged Care; Superannuation;



DEBORAH KNIGHT, HOST: Aged care, the economy, it’s a lot to cover and in a first for

Parliament, some MPs have tried their hand at modern technology dialling into Question

Time. One of them is the Deputy Leader of the Opposition Richard Marles who joins us

now. Richard thanks for joining us.



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Great

to be with you, Deb.



KNIGHT: So where are you, you're in lockdown at home, yeah?



MARLES: Well right now I'm in my electorate office in Geelong and this is where I

participated on Monday in Question Time which was a very unusual experience -



KNIGHT: Weird. At least you are able to participate though. I mean, you didn't have any

sort of weird goings on behind you with the zoom call, you kind of had all that under

control, you didn't have to make sure you were’nt muting it in the wrong way.



MARLES: No we did a dry run on the Sunday actually with the Speaker and a number of

people in the House of Reps Chamber to make sure that we got it right. This is technology

which has been used around the world but if people go to YouTube you can see some

pretty funny clips from the House of Lords-



KNIGHT: Exactly.



MARLES: Where this technology has gone completely wrong. So we wanted to make sure

that none of that happened here and it went pretty smoothly.



KNIGHT: So far, so good.



MARLES: Yeah.



KNIGHT: Well there is a lot to obviously be across in Parliament. The Government's

overhaul of JobKeeper being put to Parliament today. Now your party, Labor been critical

of the entire scheme but you'll be backing the Government on this?



MARLES: Well our point in relation to JobKeeper is that firstly it’s critically important. We

were calling for a wage subsidy from the very start in circumstances where the

Government didn't want to do this, but ultimately they came to the party. We've been

critical about aspects of JobKeeper going along the journey, but the way in which we've

approached this is to seek to be constructive and that's the way in which we will do that.

There'll be issues that we have with the detail of it and the way it's being implemented-



KNIGHT: Because the reality is it has been keeping the economy afloat, JobKeeper and

JobSeeker.



MARLES: Of course, which is why we called for it in the first place. And why we were out

there ahead of the Government in arguing for a wage subsidy, which is what JobKeeper is.

So it's really important that people are connected with their employment throughout this

period, particularly when we're talking about jobs that just don't-  aren't able to operate in

the midst of a lockdown. So we have been supportive of the concept and we’ll continue to

raise issues or add amendments to make it better and we've done that actually over the

journey but we're fundamentally supportive of JobKeeper.

KNIGHT: Now the blame game is definitely occurring at the moment, there's been real

restraint I think from criticising directly Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews but the PM, the

gloves are off it seems, criticising the Victorian COVID response during Question Time

yesterday and doubling again, doubling down again in that criticisms today, they’re

warranted those criticisms aren't they?



MARLES: Look I think not everything has gone perfectly in Victoria and Daniel Andrews

would be the first person to make that clear-



KNIGHT: Well that’s one way of putting it, its been a disaster.

MARLES: Well, Daniel Andrews has stood up each and every day and answered all the

criticisms around that, but I think one of the points that is being made here is that you know

the running of the country is a joint responsibility of all three tiers of government and the

Commonwealth has some responsibilities in Victoria as well and aged care is the most

obvious of those and that's actually where this is, where the pandemic is playing out in the

most frightening and the most lethal way. This is purely and simply that the Commonwealth

Government's responsibility -



KNIGHT: But if the, if the hotel quarantine hadn't have gotten out of control like it had then

there wouldn't have been the outbreak that would have had led to the cases in the aged

care. I mean it sparks from the failures from the Daniel Andrews government and the hotel

quarantine



MARLES:  Oh well sure, but we can we can also say that if the disease had never come

into Australia none of this would have happened and ultimately the responsibility for our

nation's borders lie with the Commonwealth Government. But at the end of the day COVID

is present within the community it's present in New South Wales as well and there is a

degree to which you can say that as long as it exists in any form there is a risk of this

blowing up and you know with aged care what we saw with the tragedy that occurred at

Newmarch in New South Wales was that in the aftermath of that the government did

nothing to think about how they could prepare the sector for a flare up of Covid-19 and

that's not just my conclusion, that's the conclusion of the Royal Commission which has

been established by the Morrison government itself, that in the aftermath of Newmarch

rather than actually working out how to protect the sector from COVID going forward they

engaged in self-congratulation and hubris and that is borne out in terms of what is now

playing out with aged care in Victoria.



KNIGHT: Should the Prime Minister be standing by his aged care minister Richard

Colbeck?



MARLES:   I think the Prime Minister needs to take responsibility in some ways like Daniel

Andrews has. I mean Daniel Andrews is not out there saying everything's fine in Victoria

he's actually standing up and taking responsibility so there is at least a sense in which a

government is grabbing hold of the situation and thankfully I'm touching wood as I say this.

The numbers are going in the right direction at the moment-



KNIGHT: Not the number of deaths though, that's the second deadliest day we've seen in

Victoria.

MARLES: That is true and that is going in the wrong direction and obviously the

overwhelming majority of those deaths are in the aged care sector. But what we're seeing

when it comes to aged care is a Prime Minister who is absolutely and resolutely failing to

take responsibility for this. He points his finger directly at Victoria as you rightly described

and is essentially saying 97 per cent of cases are fine, so you don't need to worry about it,

and this is all Victoria's fault. Well actually this is a sector which is run by the

Commonwealth, they are the regulator, they are the funder, they are the tier of government

responsible for it and it's important that they actually stand up and prepare this sector for a

pandemic which we could see coming before COVID even got to Australia, even before

COVID hit Australian shores, we knew that aged care facilities were going to be one of the

most vulnerable sectors within our society. This Commonwealth Government needs to take

responsibility and actually own up to this so that we can make sure that this is - doesn't

play out worse than it already is in Victoria, but also that aged care facilities around the

nation are protected, in the event, God forbid, that there is a flare up elsewhere in the

nation.



KNIGHT: Well no one's been sacked in Victoria as a result of the hotel quarantine debacle.

Does that mean that Richard Colbeck, he’s safe then, there shouldn't be any heads rolling

over aged care?



MARLES: Well I don't think the Aged Care Minister is across the fundamentals of what is

playing out here. What I'd say in relation to Victoria is that Daniel Andrews established a

judicial inquiry on day one without fear or favour and he's been facing the media every

single day and taking responsibility. You know what we've got with the Aged Care Minister

is a Minister who's not even sure how many people have died in aged care and that's not a

gotcha question, that ought to be a fundamental tenet of the job that you seek to do as the

Aged Care Minister and he's unable to answer that question. I mean I think there are real

issues with the administration of this sector by the Aged Care Minister. But what I want to

see is responsibility for this sector taken by the Prime Minister and I don't think any of us

imagine that it's going to be perfect sailing either. I think there's actually quite a lot of

understanding that mistakes are going to be made given how unusual and how

unprecedented this pandemic is. But what we want is to see government take

responsibility for what is theirs and when it comes to aged care it is the responsibility of the

federal government.



KNIGHT: Now the 12-month extension to the State of Emergency that the Victorian State

Government is seeking, Bill Shorten has warned that it is freaking Victorians out and it has

been criticised by the Liberal Party and crossbenchers concerned about the lack of

transparency here, what are your thoughts?



MARLES: Well it's obviously important for Daniel Andrews to give explanation for this but

you know he, as I say, been standing up yesterday and today to give that explanation -



KNIGHT: Is it a power grab?



MARLES: Oh well it’s not a power grab, I mean firstly, we're not talking about an extension

of the restrictions which are in place in Victoria at the moment. This is about fundamentally

the power that can be exercised by the Chief Health Officer. I mean really we're in a

situation in Victoria, but in Australia and globally, where the strategy is to in essence hide

from the virus to stop its spread until we are in a position where there are treatments,

vaccines that enable us to go out and face the virus. Now that is still a fair way off, there's

optimism about vaccines and treatments but it's still a fair way off. In the meantime, it's

going to be really important that our medical officials have all the powers that they need to

make sure that orders can be put in place to stop the spread of the virus. Now that's all

that's going on, of course governments need to be transparent and they need to explain

their decision. But I think we can all understand what is trying to be achieved here. And I

don't think there's anyone in Victoria now who would be saying that restrictions have been

put in place up until this moment in time have been a capricious use of power. I mean, it's

been trying to actually stop the spread of the disease. And as I say, hopefully- as I touch

wood at the moment- that that is working and the numbers are going- in terms of new



infections- are going in the right direction.

KNIGHT: A couple of quick things; the unions are backing a review of the super guarantee

increase. Labor's not so keen on that though.

MARLES: Well, we have always been supporters of superannuation going to 12 per cent.

The position that has never been properly put by conservative governments and

conservatives in this country is support for superannuation in Australia. It's the centrepiece

of dignity in retirement. And what we've seen on the part of the Liberal Governments all

through the recent decades but certainly right now is opposition to superannuation. And

we're seeing that play out in terms of the measures that have been put in place during

COVID-19. A whole lot of the relief which people have actually accessed, in terms of

getting through these really difficult months has been their own superannuation accounts

which means that people have effectively been put in a position of having to steal from

their own futures, in terms of being able to get through these months. Now you know, we

don't think that that's the way in which this should have played out.

KNIGHT: Joel Fitzgibbon's causing all sorts of dramas and headaches for your leader, for

Anthony Albanese. Should Albo be getting tougher on Joel here?

MARLES: Look I think a lot has been said here. I mean Joel at the end of the day is

speaking for his community and we can understand people doing that. But I think Anthony

has made it very clear where we stand in relation to all of these issues and what we all

want is to put ourselves in a position where we can present as an alternative government

at the next election. Where we talk about the way we can guide Australia into a post

COVID future, with a sense of hope and optimism and we're all very much focused on that

so that in doing that we win the next election.

KNIGHT: Yes, well as you're touching wood, hoping that COVID and we're through the

worst of it we all are too. We thank you for your time today. Thanks so much for joining us.



MARLES: Thanks Deb.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363



