



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina





The Hon Paul Toole MP  NSW Minister for Regional Transport and Roads  Deputy Leader of the NSW Nationals  State Member for Bathurst



MEDIA RELEASE

2 November 2020

MORE CASH TO FIX LOCAL ROADS, BOOSTS JOBS IN REGIONS

More regional communities are set to benefit from the Australian and New South Wales  Governments’ commitment to improving local roads and create thousands of local jobs in the  regions, with Round 2 of the accelerated Fixing Local Roads program opening today.

The Australian Government committed $191 million in June to build on the NSW Government’s $500  million Fixing Local Roads program, ensuring even more regional communities benefit faster.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the Australian Government’s commitment would ensure that more local road  projects were delivered to create more local employment.

“We’ve already seen $243.6 million of joint funding go towards 253 shovel-ready projects in 84 Local  Government Areas in the first round of funding and this latest round will see another $136.4 million  injected into regional New South Wales to generate more jobs and stimulate local economies,” the  Deputy Prime Minister said.

“This is money for small projects that make a big difference in people’s everyday lives right across  regional New South Wales.

“It will mean smoother, safer trips to school, work or even the shops and most importantly, it will  create much-needed jobs in hundreds of communities.”

NSW Minister for Regional Transport and Roads Paul Toole said the program marked a major  investment in the roads that regional communities use every day.

“We know how much better roads mean in the bush - and projects like these will be key to helping  regional communities recover from the impact of bushfires, drought and the COVID-19 pandemic,”  Mr Toole said.

“This round will prioritise projects that are shovel-ready and can start in the next six months because  we know regional communities need this investment and job creation right now.

“Communities are already starting to see projects from Round 1 commence around the state, and they  can expect to see even more in the coming months as we continue to turbocharge this initiative.”

Applications for Round 2 of the program are open from today until Friday, 4 December 2020.

Projects will need to start this financial year and be delivered within two years, to ensure local  communities see the benefits as quickly as possible.

The Australian Government committed $191 million in June to build on the NSW Government’s $500  million program.

Updated guidelines and a factsheet for Round 2 of Fixing Local Roads can be found here  www.rms.nsw.gov.au/fixinglocalroads

Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Jo Williamson 0418 475 668 | Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Minister Toole - Ella Smith 0428 745 348

