

THE HON ANGUS TAYLOR MP  MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND EMISSIONS REDUCTION

THE HON DAN TEHAN MP  MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  MEMBER FOR WANNON

MEDIA RELEASE

Monday, 14 December 2020



SECURING VICTORIA’S ENERGY SYSTEM



In a move to secure Victoria’s energy system, the Morrison Government will safeguard the Portland  aluminium smelter’s continued delivery of emergency power reserves to the market.

The Portland facility is a major user of electricity, representing around 10 per cent of Victoria’s electricity  demand. The Morrison Government has acknowledged the fragility of the Victorian electricity grid given  the premature exit of Hazelwood and the rapid investment in intermittent renewables without firming.

To ease pressure on the grid, including on particularly hot days, Portland can reduce its demand to  ensure the lights stay on. Doing so has helped avoid black outs in Victoria.

The Government will underwrite revenue earned by the Alcoa-owned facility for reducing its load when  the supply-demand balance is tight.

The Government will provide Portland with a guaranteed Reliability and Emergency Reserve Trader  (RERT) revenue of up to $76.8 million over four years to 2024-25, subject to negotiation.

The underwriting is temporary and will cease once post-2025 electricity market reforms are in place that  better value the essential system services provided by large industrial loads.

In return for Government underwriting, Portland will be required to participate in the RERT to the  maximum extent possible.

Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction Angus Taylor said the Government was focused on  maintaining the reliability and security of the electricity system.

“The Portland aluminium smelter provides unique and valuable energy services and emergency reserves  to the grid, particularly over summer,” Minister Taylor said.

“It is three times larger than the largest battery in Australia and has been vital to avoiding black outs in  previous summers.

“The Government will ensure Portland continues to play that important role and is appropriately  compensated for the grid services it provides.

“However, the Government’s underwriting is not a silver bullet. We need more dispatchable generation  in the system, and we need mechanisms to keep providers of valuable system services participating in  the energy market.”

Member for Wannon Dan Tehan said the Morrison Government was backing the Portland Smelter to  remain viable, and keep locals in jobs, while it acted in the interests of all Victorians.

“The Government’s underwriting comes at a time when Victoria has been hard hit by the COVID-19  pandemic. Keeping the grid reliable and secure is more important now than ever to support jobs,  families and businesses,” Mr Tehan said.

“If Portland were to close it would risk the reliability and security of the grid, and may lead to the early  closure of one of the coal-fired generators the state relies on for much of its power.

“If another coal-fired generator closes early, it would mean higher electricity prices for all Victorian  consumers as it did when the Hazelwood power plant closed in 2017, which saw prices skyrocket by up  to 85 per cent.”

AEMO and AusNet also have an obligation to ensure Portland is able to continue to provide these energy  services to the grid to deliver affordable, reliable power for consumers. The Commonwealth is working  productively with the Victorian Government to ensure assistance is provided, as it did back in 2017.

The Government will continue to take necessary steps to ensure an affordable, reliable and secure  electricity system to power Australian homes, businesses and industries.

ENDS

Minister Taylor’s office:             Liam O’Neil,  0428 113 617  Minister Tehan’s office:             Byron Vale,  0428 262 894

