Media inquiries: Aaron Langmaid 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania







Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck  Minister for Aged Care and Senior Australians  Minister for Youth and Sport



2 April 2020



Working together to support Senior Australians in Aged Care

The Federal Government rejects assertions by the ABC that there have been no inspections in  nursing homes since the COVID-19 outbreak - or a commitment to infection control.

This is backed up by the statement from the Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission, here.

There has never been closer interaction between Government, regulator and the sector.

The focus of all parties since the outbreak has been to ensure those most susceptible to the  impacts of the virus have been protected and the sector prepared.

The Government has been engaging with the aged care sector since late January, issuing  several fact sheets on COVID-19 and infection control and continues to meet with providers  and peak bodies twice weekly to communicate related issues.

There has been seven specific training modules provided to the sector with over 58,000 aged  care workers completing the basic module on infection control and 69, 527 completions  across all modules as at April 1.

The Federal Government, the sector and its employees are actively engaged in preventing the  spread of the virus.

Restricted access to residential care facilities was a requirement directed by the National  Cabinet on the advice of the AHPPC, with guidance from the CDNA.

Requests were made to put in place measures to ensure families can maintain connection with  loved ones and to be sympathetic to individual issues particularly for those in palliative care  and those with dementia.

A $10 million funding injection for a Community Visitors Scheme is among a raft of  measures aimed at supporting the sector.

The initiative specifically targets Senior Australians who may be experiencing increased  social isolation as a result of social distancing and visit restrictions.

Media inquiries: Aaron Langmaid 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania



It is run across all states, with over 13,000 volunteer visitor places each year for those  accessing residential and home care, including an LGBTI CVS service in four states.

Additionally, $444.6 million in funding announced by the Prime Minister will include the  $234.9 million worker retention bonus measure, aimed at reinforcing the aged care  workforce.

It builds on a range of supports and measures being delivered by the Morrison Government.

Information for families and residents regarding visitation, available here.

If a family or loved on has a concern regarding care they should contact the ACQSC on 1800  951 822.











