



The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP   TOWNSVILLE, QLD  WEDNESDAY 14 OCTOBER 2020



EO&E…

PHILLIP THOMPSON OAM MP, MEMBER FOR HERBERT: Well, thank you all for being here today. It's  fantastic to be joined by the Prime Minister of Australia, Scott Morrison. And also, as many of us here  know, or want to happen, the future Premier for Queensland, Deb Frecklington. The Prime Minister, as  well as Deb, are frequent flyers to our region. They've been here in the good times and there's some of  you who may realise and know the bad times. Through our flood and when people were displaced and  out of their home, both the Prime Minister and Deb were here in town, listening to the people on the  ground, to know how we can help. Because that's what a good government does. They listen. Deb joined  me in the afternoon a couple of days after the flood, ripping up people's houses, ripping up carpets that  had been flooded, carrying out infected mouldy furniture to help people to start with the rebuild. And  seeing what Townsville has become from there in their many trips to Townsville to now is absolutely  amazing and we know that there are many people that are still doing it tough. And I don't know if you  saw, but I co-piloted the helicopter before with Jeff. Don't listen to them behind me, I was up the front  ensuring that everyone was safe and that we got back on time for everyone.

But what we're here to talk about is CopperString and CopperString is so vital for the northern region and  especially for Townsville. And the reason it's important here is it creates cheap electricity. Now, creating  cheap electricity and reliable electricity for industry and for people is fantastic because it means we can  get more investment here. Now, in Townsville, we've had high unemployment for a long time. So anything  that encourages the lowering of power prices, for whether it's industry or whether it's people or just  putting that pressure down is fantastic. And we will back it in and we will support it because we want  organisations and companies to move to Townsville because we have the fastest port to the Southeast  Asian market in the country. We have a lot of people here that want to get into work and want to get out  there. So this is great. And the nation has been doing it tough. They've been doing it tough through this  pandemic. But Townsville has been doing it tough through drought, through floods, and in the pandemic.  So having and backing the CopperString, which will get people to work, as well as the other  announcements that we've done through the Budget and getting that wraparound support here. Whether  it's through mental health, but also through creating jobs that will be in construction, but in construction  those people will go buy the bacon and egg burger down the road, go buy the coffee, put on admin  workers. It's what needs to happen. And I know that with the Prime Minister and as well as Deb’s support

that we can grow our economy and do what's needed to be done here in Townsville. And a good  government is about creating that healthy environment so industry, so business, so families can do what  they do best. To get back to work, get out and get back to normality, because that's what we want to see.  Now, I’d like to pass it over to the PM for some comments.

PRIME MINISTER: Thank you very much, Phil. Great to be here with you. Great to be here with Senator  McDonald, Susan McDonald. Few people know north Queensland better than Susan and particularly her  family over many generations. And Deb, it's great to be here again together today up here in Townsville.  It was quite exciting today to be up there not only to see where the connection point effectively is for the  CopperString project, I'll come back to that second. But it was tremendous, Phil, as we swung back around  to see the many other projects that as a government we've committed to and are delivering. Fly back over  the stadium - I remember being up here when we made those commitments, going back over the port  and seeing the massive port development works that are going out there, the dredging and so on. This is  a massive project, which is all part of this incredible ecosystem, as we're talking about today, of which the  CopperString project is a key part.

Our recovery plan out of the COVID-19 recession has many components. Of course, there's the cushioning  the blow through JobKeeper and JobSeeker and the cash flow supports and the many other supports to  help people get through. Of course, there's the bringing forward of investment through the instant  expensing and the loss carryback, to bring forward spending of the tax cuts that we've made law last  Friday, straight after the Budget. The bring forward of hiring decisions through the JobMaker hiring plan.  But there's also the third stage of the plan, which is about building our economy for the future and  whether that's in manufacturing or the opening up of our gas and the building of our hubs there. Or it's  the work that we're doing on research and development. All of these projects which are about building a  stronger future for Australia. It's also about government being a catalyst for investment. And this  CopperString project, when it was first discussed with me, I think I was Treasurer at the time, and then  following through as Prime Minister. And already we've committed $5 million to the works that have been  done and there's more money provision in this Budget, which is still being worked through in the  discussions with the project team to get it to the next stage. But what the CopperString project does is it  connects a more than $50 billion opportunity across northern Queensland that can be realised by  connecting it up to the rest of Australia through the national electricity grid. And what it unlocks in terms  of new power supply that can go into that grid, connected up to it. But also lowering the electricity and  power prices of the manufacturing and minerals chain that goes right across this incredible stretch of  Australia.

As you can hear in this very hanger, things are going on here in Townsville. I mean, stuff is going on and  we want to see more things going on and that’s going to happen through catalytic projects like this. Now,  I want to stress this CopperString project, it’s not on the grid. It’s not on the map. It’s not part of the  official plans connected up to AEMO and all the other agencies are involved in. This one is a private project,  this is one of about connecting what is off the grid and connecting it to it. And that’s what the role of  government is, and that is what Deb’s government, I’m sure, if she is elected in a couple of weeks time, is  all about as well. Government has a role to be a catalyst to put the private sector knowledge and the  know-how and the partners, whether they’re in the minerals industries or the manufacturing or zinc or  copper or right across this river of prosperity that runs from here out to Mt Isa. CopperString makes that  work. Now we’ve got to get the numbers right, we’ve got to make sure it stacks up, we’ve got to do our  due diligence, you've got to bring the partners together. But on first assessment, this is obviously a project  that is worth getting in behind. It's got hurdles still to clear. But we're there. We're part of it. We're part

of the process. We're part of actually trying to bring this to reality. And that's the sort of hands on  approach that you can expect, obviously, continuing for my government.

But I have no doubt that's exactly the approach that Deb would take as well. She knows what's at stake  here and for this region to be prosperous in the future, these sorts of projects are what makes it happen.  So, Deb, I'm going to ask you to say a few words and happy to take some questions. I was happy to take  the full blow there off the noise in the hangar, but I'm sure the mics were able to pick that up. This is a  really exciting time for Australia as well as at the same time being a very difficult one. Oftentimes the  biggest opportunities come out of times of greatest stress and trial. And as we move through the COVID-19 recession, we come out of it, we're going to come out of it stronger because of the vision and the  innovation and the commitment of the proponents have brought together this amazing concept of  CopperString. They talk about the big projects that make Australia, you know, down my way down south,  things like the Snowy 2.0 we're doing now, big Western Sydney airports, things like that. But up here, it's  about connecting it in, connecting into what is possible up here. And as Susan and her family will know,  they've understood the opportunity for ages and we're just getting started. We're just getting started up  here in the north and this is a critical project for that. But Deb also knows about that, I’ll ask Deb to say a  few words.

THE HON. DEB FRECKLINGTON, LEADER OF THE QUEENSLAND LNP: Thank you, PM. Well, it is fantastic to  be back in Townsville. And how good is it to have Prime Minister Scott Morrison here on the ground in  Townsville? So thank you, PM. I know you've been in Rocky this morning. I was in Mackay this morning.  And Senator Susan McDonald, I know you're from the north west. You get the north west. And I'm really  excited to be able to say that a future LNP government will open up the north west of Queensland. Phil  Thompson, this is your hometown. It's a great spot. And always it's always good to be with you as well.  Can I say Phil was not co-piloting the helicopter. Thank you very much to Jeff for keeping us safe, although  we were very close to those power lines.

But excitingly, I'm here today with the four candidates, the north Queensland team over here. We've got  Natalie, Glenn, Scott and of course, John, because these guys know how important it is to open up the  north west to improve places like Townsville to get Queensland working again. And we can do that by  making sure that we've got the might of government behind a big, bold, ambitious project like  CopperString 2.0. So thank you very much to Joe and to the CopperString people who are here today.  Thank you to the organisations who have spoken to the pm and myself about how important a project  like this is for the improvement of Queensland. Just imagine the possibilities. Now, the PM's just talked  about it, but the possibilities are not only for the North West Minerals Province, the future of battery  production, the future of copper, but also the future of agriculture and irrigation projects in the north  west. It's really exciting. And I, for one, love talking about big, bold, ambitious projects and this is a  wonderful one that goes in with that. So thank you very much, PM.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks, Deb. Let's take some questions.

JOURNALIST: Why do you feel the need to come to Queensland and bolster Deb’s campaign? The Premier  says you’re just here to hold her hand. Do you agree with that?

PRIME MINISTER: I think that's a fairly offensive thing to say, actually. You know what? Politics, it's not a  game. And I am a bit disappointed in the way that, now I see the Premier is chipping in. And the other  fellow, I can’t remember his name. But, you know, treating this like it's some sort of game. It's not. There  are 750 jobs here in this project. What I'm here to talk about is our recovery plan from the COVID-19

recession and getting Queenslanders working with the sort of projects that make a huge difference. To  get apprentices hired, to get young people back into work, to get traineeships happening and to see, you  know, transformational projects like this that we've been working on now for several years. And so, you  know, those who want to sort of look at things at that superficial level, I think that says a lot more about  them than it does about us. I mean, this is a project that immediately I understood its value. And when I  was much younger in my teens, I remember coming up here to Townsville and went on that milk run flight  out to Cloncurry, dropping in at Hughenden and then, you know, Julia Creek, Cloncurry. And I've always  understood this ribbon that runs out into the north west here. And when I saw how this project could  change this area, things like the Hughenden Irrigation Project as well. Massive projects for up here. By the  way, g’day to everyone out there at the Cloncurry Bowls Club, hoping to get out there again soon. But  that's what politics is actually about. It's not about all that rubbish, sledging. So if the others want to sledge  about it, fine, that's up to them. We're here to actually get people back into jobs.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you make of the LNP’s plan to get Queensland back to surplus in 4  years if they win?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I think it's important to be ambitious. I think it's important to be keen on fiscal  responsibility. And I know that that is Deb’s and Tim's total focus. I mean, if I as Treasurer and previously  working with Mathias Cormann, hadn't been ambitious to get the Budget back into balance before we hit  this COVID-19 recession, I can tell you what we wouldn’t have had the firepower to respond like we have  and put $101 billion dollars into JobKeeper that's kept 3 million people in work. So, you know, you've  always got to be conscious of balancing the books well and being conscious of every dollar. That's why  our response to the COVID-19 recession has been targeted, has been proportionate, to be temporary and  to ensure that we use existing channels to get that support out there. So we didn't see the waste and  mismanagement that we saw during the global financial crisis. I mean, in the last crisis, we learnt from  Labor what not to do. And in this crisis, we're demonstrating how you do it and keep people in work. I  mean, what we've just seen from the from the IMF, is the IMF- this is before the Budget already revised  up in terms of what they thought would be Australia's performance this year through the COVID 19  recession. They previously thought it to be greater than it was going to be. And now they've pulled that  back because they could already see before the Budget, that we were making our way back and our  Budget goes even further than that today. You would have seen the consumer confidence figures, one of  the biggest, if not the biggest confident response to a Budget by Australians that we've seen. And that's  why it's the Budget that Australia has needed.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Ms Frecklington said that she’d be able to get Queensland back to a surplus  through a lot of hard work and by growing the economy.

PRIME MINISTER: That’s right.

JOURNALIST: If it’s that easy then why isn’t the federal government doing that?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, that's how we got our Budget back to balance last time. That's exactly how you  do it.

JOURNALIST: [inaudible] a surplus in 10 years?

PRIME MINISTER: That's exactly how you do it. See, our guarantee is on the essential services that  Australians rely on. Whether that's the important mental health services they rely on, the National

Disability Insurance Scheme, aged care, hospitals, schools, all at record levels. I'll tell you what you don’t  balance a Budget by putting out people's taxes, and you don't balance a Budget by filling office buildings  full of public servants. You don't do that either. The way you actually balance a Budget in this country is  you get people off unemployment benefits and you get them into work. And that's our plan. And that's  Deb's plan. And I think that's a plan worth backing.

JOURNALIST: But the Federal Treasurer himself said it was unrealistic to target surpluses for the forward  estimates, and what it would require in terms of significant increases to taxes?

PRIME MINISTER: Well there's no doubt that Deb inherits- if she is to be elected Premier in this state- a  pretty shocking set of books. There's no doubt about that. She certainly would have to with Tim, start  from well behind the line. I mean, when Queensland went into this, their books weren't as good as the  other states and territories in so many cases. And so, yeah, I'd agree with you. It's going to be a tough job  in terms of what she's inherited, if she's to be elected Premier. But this is the point. Liberal and National  governments, what we always do is put the focus on running a good and confident set of books. And we  are very ambitious to achieve that. But the way we do it is we understand that you need the private sector  to be ignited again. And that's how you achieve it here. That's how you do it. And I have no doubt that's  the way she intends to do it.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister on the vexed border issue, NSW Premier has implored the Queensland-

PRIME MINISTER: I couldn't quite hear you?

JOURNALIST: The NSW Premier has implored the Queensland Premier to stick to that [inaudible] for  opening [inaudible] laid out in the roadmap, do you see an impediment to that happening? I know you  said it’s a matter for states and that states say they’re following health advice, given the health changes  at one stage or another, do you see any impediment to the borders reopening on November 1?

PRIME MINISTER: Well again, that's a decision that's going to have to be made by the Queensland  government based on the medical advice, and the medical advice has to be transparent. And it should be  very clear. And there shouldn't be double standards in terms of how these things are put in place, the  federal government has never sought to say to the Queensland government that they should take their  border down. We've never actually said that. We've just said that if you're going to have one, that has to  be clear why it's there and you've got to run it in a way that's fair. And I remember back in June that Deb  Frecklington, myself and Annastacia Palaszczuk were all on a unity ticket back in June, that we were going  to have the borders open in July. We were all working together to achieve that. But then we saw what  happened in Victoria. And as a result, that set that plan back and I understand that I understand that  Queenslanders would like the fact that there's some, there's a buffer and there is a protection when it  comes to this virus. I get that. But at some time, at some time when it's safe to do so, you have to be able  to lift it. And the reason for that is, is yes, the border for a time has been able to afford some protection,  particularly from Victoria. But it does come at a cost. I mean, you can't pretend that as well. And you put  these things in place. You've got to acknowledge the cost that it imposes and the costs, particularly to the  tourism and hospitality industry here in Queensland, well, it's significant. There's I mean, the build back  from the pit of the COVID recession, I mean 70 per cent of the jobs came back to New South Wales, 70  per cent of the jobs have come back in South Australia, but only 44 per cent here in Queensland. And one  of the reasons for that is the tourism and hospitality industry has been hit hard in Queensland. It depends  very significantly on New South Wales and on Victoria and on the Kiwi tourism business as well as  internationally. Kiwis will be having holidays in New South Wales from Friday. And the only thing stopping

them having a holiday in Queensland is the fact that they're required to quarantine for two weeks in  Queensland.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you think that Australian politicians-

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister-

PRIME MINISTER: You were in unison there.

JOURNALIST: Do you think that Australian politicians should be going out of their way to help state media  organisations bag this country’s think tanks and its media?

PRIME MINISTER: I'm going to have to interpret that question a little bit. But I think you might be referring  to the fact that Kim Carr has made his way into some state owned media in China, is that right? I think  that's what's occurred there. Well, I suspect Kim's pretty happy about that. Look on issues like that, I tend  to not pay too much attention to it. I mean, there's a lot of noise that goes around. We just deal directly  with our counterparts wherever we possibly can and through diplomatic channels and do that. But it was  a bit surprising that Kim Carr found himself in a state owned media Communist Party promotional video.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister the IMF is warning governments not to withdraw support prematurely, is it  risky scaling back JobKeeper and JobSeeker?

PRIME MINISTER: I think what we’ve demonstrated is that we’re getting the balance right, absolutely.  One of the pleasing things I've seen whilst particularly being here in Queensland. I mean, we we started  the transition out of, on JobKeeper several weeks ago. And what we're finding is businesses have  graduated from JobKeeper. You know, businesses still being on JobKeeper into the future won't be a mark  of success. And the fact that we've had so many businesses already graduate out of JobKeeper means that  Queenslanders in particular, but Australians more generally, become less and less reliant on other  taxpayers for their income each and every day. That's the goal, to get us off the situation, when we no  longer needed at all. And we're still some time away from that. We've extended it out for another six  months and the JobSeeker payment has gone through its first adjustment, and we'll consider that further  as we get closer to the end of the year. So, of course, we agree you've got to be calibrated about how you  make these next steps. But, you know, we've been working hard on getting those steps right. And I think  what you've seen in the public's response to the Budget this year, what you've seen in the IMF’s response,  in upgrading our economic forecasts, and I think that is an acknowledgement of how Australia is managing  its way through this crisis. And I'll tell you the reason for that, is it's Australians, and responding well to  the measures we've put in place to support them.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how confident are you that Queensland is going to come to the table at  National Cabinet on Friday to agree to a National Hotspot definition?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, that's actually not before National Cabinet on Friday.

JOURNALIST: How do you think Deb is going during the campaign?

PRIME MINISTER: Sorry?

JOURNALIST: How do you think Deb is going during the campaign?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, the key point about Deb’s campaign is she has a plan to get Queenslanders  working again. I mean, I have no doubt that should Deb be elected at the next election or indeed, the  government is returned the health issues will continue to be managed, they'll continue to work. I mean,  what needs to be done there, I think is very clear. And the Queensland Public Service and public health  system has built a lot of resilience into it to deal with the health challenges. And so I'm optimistic on that  front either way. But the real difference, I think, is whether someone's got a plan to actually get  Queenslanders back into jobs and an economic plan to do that. Now, our federal Liberal National plan to  get Australians back to work is working, and we have a plan to continue that into the future. And whether  it's Deb's plan on lower energy costs for manufacturers, or it’s Deb's plan to build the water and road  infrastructure that is needed for Queensland, or come in supporting projects like this one or more  generally. What's very clear in the time I've had to spend with Deb over these last few days and prior to  that, is she's thought very carefully about the way that Queensland can grow back out of this COVID-19  recession. You know, we'll overcome the Coronavirus and there is a strong set of relationships in place to  manage the health impacts of the coronavirus. And I have no doubt that Deb will do equally as well in  managing those issues and her team. But where I think the difference is from what I can see is Deb has a  positive plan to grow the economy. And her candidates here in north Queensland and those I was with  early today down around Rockhampton and back down on the Gold Coast and in Brisbane earlier on the  weekend. It's about getting Queenslanders working again, and Deb clearly has a plan for that.

JOURNALIST: Can you please give us a figure on what you consider to be the threshold into of becoming  a high income earner? Is it $150,000? Is it $180,000, what’s your definition?

PRIME MINISTER: What it often depends on where you live and I mean, I was talking today-

JOURNALIST: If you’re in Sydney what’s the threshold?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, look, it all depends on what your role is. I mean, let me make this point. I was in  Rockhampton today, and there are many people there and in Sydney, for that matter, or in Melbourne or  in Perth or other places who go out and work in the mines. And they earn quite well while they’re up there  in the mines. But you can’t do that work forever, and so what they’ll do is they’ll save. Now, I think it's a  good thing for Australians to want to earn more. And I don’t want to anything to penalise them for doing  that. And I think it's a good thing that Australians get to keep more of what they earn. So one of the things  that Australians you know rejected at the last election and they rejected it in Bill Shorten and Anthony  Albanese is just a reheat of Bill Shorten on tax. They rejected this idea of setting one Australian against  another. And particularly in this COVID-19 pandemic and recession, we don't get out of this as part of  some phony class war setting one group of Australians against another. in Australia, we have a progressive  tax system, those who earn the most pay the most tax, those who earn the least get supported by other  taxpayers. That's how we do things in Australia. Our tax plan delivers on that and we will continue to  deliver on that. But what I want to do, is ensure that under our tax plan that we've legislated, particularly  what we've already delivered and into the future, there'll be no more bracket creep. There'll be no  disincentive. You know if you're earning $60,000 dollars a year or you're earning $80,000 dollars a year, if  you earn an extra dollar, you're not going to pay higher rates of tax for that. And I think that is  transformational. Our tax plan means that is already law. And if Anthony Albanese wants to change it,  he'll have to repeal it. 94 per cent of Australians paying no more than 30 cents in the dollar in tax. That is  a game changer. We took that to the last election. We were supported at the last election. We made it

law. And Anthony Albanese now wants to switch it back. Labor's learnt nothing from the last election.  They still think high tax is the way to go.

Thanks, everyone.

[ENDS]

Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

