



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure and Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au

22 March 2020

SUPPORTING REGIONAL AUSTRALIA THROUGH COVID-19

An initial $1 billion will be injected into regional communities to support businesses, agriculture and  tourism impacted by the ongoing spread of coronavirus (COVID-19) as part of the Federal Liberal and  Nationals Government’s response to the crisis.

Today the Commonwealth Government announced an extra $66.1 billion in stimulus measures which  brings the total economic support package to $189 billion in assistance.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said many small and medium businesses are the core of regional communities.

“The $1 billion will support regions, communities and industry sectors which have been  disproportionately affected by the economic impacts of COVID-19 such as tourism, agriculture and  education,” Mr McCormack said.

“Agriculture is the lifeblood of this nation and it is already on its knees following a prolonged  drought, bushfires and floods.

“Similarly, many rural, remote and regional communities rely on tourism to support their local  economy and in these extreme circumstances, this crisis could cripple them.

“Our funding will ensure we provide the right support so industries and businesses keep going and  employees can keep their jobs which includes the more than 3 million small and medium businesses  as well as casuals, sole traders, retirees and those on income support.”

The economic stimulus package also supports $14.1 billion over the forward estimates for those  doing it tough across Australia under a new income support payment, Coronavirus supplement, to be  paid at a rate of $550 per fortnight.

This payment will be eligible to both existing and new recipients of the JobSeeker Payment, Youth  Allowance JobSeeker, Parenting Payment, Farm Household Allowance and Special Benefit and will be  paid on top of existing payment each fortnight.

In addition to the $750 stimulus payment already announced, the Federal Government will provide a  further $750 payment to social security and veteran income support recipients and eligible  concession cardholders, except those who are receiving an income support payment that is eligible  to receive the Coronavirus supplement.

“These measures are part of the Government’s plan to help prevent people from losing their jobs  and keep businesses operation,” Mr McCormack said.

“Whilst, there are still few confirmed cases in regional Australia, we all have a role to play in slowing  the spread of this virus including heeding the advice from health authorities, practising good hygiene,  social distancing and self-isolation where appropriate.

“Australia is a resilient nation, no more so than in regional areas, where many are still feeling the  effects of drought, bushfires and floods and this will have a further impact on their recovery but we  will get through the other side of this crisis.”

Further information about these measures can be found at www.australia.gov.au

Media Contact: Tess Salmon 0467 740 017 I Hannah Maguire 0429 920 254

