



The Hon Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister



MEDIA RELEASE

Monday 27 July 2020

COVID-19 COMMISSION TURNS FULL FOCUS ON RECOVERY

I am pleased to announce today that the National COVID-19 Coordination Commission is moving into a  new mode, shifting its focus to concentrate on creating jobs and stimulating our economy as we learn to  live with this pandemic.

While the health response continues to be of the utmost importance in managing outbreaks as they  arise, we have to continue our focus on recovery and reform.

The Government’s JobMaker Plan is built on enabling a business-led economic recovery.  We are driving  skills and training reform, bringing business and unions together to create the industrial relations  conditions to get people into work, locking in affordable and reliable energy, expanding opportunities  for small business in the digital economy, boosting our manufacturing capability, underpinning renewed  housing construction, delivering a record infrastructure investment pipeline, deregulation and  streamlining project approvals and federation reform.  And there is more to do on issues such as  taxation, research collaboration and ensuring regional Australia prospers in the years ahead.

I have asked the Commission to concentrate its efforts and business expertise on providing advice on  what more could be done to create as many jobs as quickly as possible to accelerate Australia’s  economic recovery.

When I announced the establishment of the Commission, I said its key task was to fix problems. It has  certainly done that - from sourcing personal protective equipment and helping address supply chain  challenges to ensuring businesses have the tools to stay open or to reopen safely.

Under the leadership of Nev Power as Chair, the Commission will continue to work closely with business  leaders and key industry sectors, focusing on areas where we can make the most gains, most quickly.

Joining this effort as part of the new Commission Board will be Mike Hirst, Samantha Hogg, Su  McCluskey, Bao Hoang, Laura Berry and Paul Howes.  Together they bring valuable expertise in the  sectors of finance, resources and infrastructure, regional Australia, small business and workforce issues.  I look forward to their contribution to our economic recovery.

They join existing members Nev Power (Chair), Jane Halton, Paul Little and David Thodey.  Catherine  Tanna has advised me that once existing projects on utilities and energy are completed she intends to  step down from the Commission. I thank her for the contribution she has made over recent months.

The group will now be called the National COVID-19 Commission (NCC) Advisory Board, to better reflect  its role.  I look forward to continuing to receive advice from the NCC on how Australia can best recover  from the impacts of COVID-19.

New Board member biographies are attached.

[END]

Media Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

Press Office of the Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Prime Minister, Canberra











NCC | Media Release

1







New board member biographies

Mike Hirst - financial services  Mike is a retired career banker who has worked across most areas of the industry and has extensive experience in retail  banking, balance sheet management, financial markets and strategy. After 9 years in the role of Managing Director of  Bendigo and Adelaide Bank, Mike retired in July 2018.

Mike currently serves on a number of listed and not for profit boards including GMHBA, health.com.au, AMCIL and Racing  Victoria where he is Deputy Chairman. Mike is an Honorary Member of the Business Council of Australia.

Mike was previously Deputy Chairman of Treasury Corporation of Victoria and the Australian Banking Association. He was  also a director of Rural Bank, Sandhurst Trustees, Colonial First State Fund Managers, Barwon Health and Austraclear Limited.  During the Global Financial Crisis Mike was appointed to the Federal Government’s Financial Sector Advisory Council and  remained a member until his retirement.



Samantha Hogg - resources and infrastructure  Samantha Hogg has more than 25 years of experience in executive management across the resources and infrastructure  sectors as well as broad Australian and International experience in finance, marketing and strategic projects. She held  executive roles (2008-2014) including as chief financial officer (since 2012) of Transurban, through a period when the  business grew to become a top 20 ASX company.

Ms Hogg was also responsible for recapitalising the company in 2008 through the Global Financial Crisis and she successfully  financed and transacted the $7.1 billion acquisition of Queensland Motorways.

Ms Hogg is a fellow of the Australian Institute of Company Directors and a non-executive director of Hydro Tasmania and  MaxiTRANS.



Su McCluskey - agriculture, regional Australia  Su is a Director of Australian Unity, Foundation for Young Australians, Australasian Pork Research Institute, NSW Rice  Marketing Board, Chairman of Energy Renaissance and a Commissioner for International Agricultural Research. She was a  member of the Review Panel for the Australian Charities and Not-For-Profits Commission Legislation, the Small Business  Digital Taskforce and led the review of the Australian Small Business and Family Enterprise Ombudsman. She was also a  member of the Harper Review of Competition Policy and the NSW Review of the Regulatory Framework.

Su was the inaugural CEO of the Regional Australia Institute. Prior to this, Su was the CEO of the Council of Rural Research  and Development Corporations, the Executive Director of the Office of Best Practice Regulation and Specialist Adviser to the  Office of Small Business. Su has held senior positions with the Business Council of Australia, the National Farmers’ Federation  and the Australian Taxation Office. She is also a beef cattle farmer at Yass, NSW.

Su was named the Westpac/Australian Financial Review Regional Women of Influence in 2013 and received the Women in  Agribusiness award in 2014 for outstanding contribution to policy development.















NCC | Media Release

2 2

Bao Hoang - business (franchising), health care services   Bao Hoang is Founder and Group CEO of ‘Rolld’ Australia Pty Ltd. Founded in 2012, the group includes ‘Rolld’, a fast, casual  food franchise that serves Vietnamese hawker-style food, and ‘Mama’s Buoi’, a casual dining restaurant that serves home-style Vietnamese cooking.

After completing his Bachelor of Physiotherapy at Melbourne University in 2005, Mr Hoang immediately joined a  Physiotherapy franchise, and after two years, Mr Hoang opened five clinics. In this time, he was influential in growing the  corporate services unit ‘Actif’, and founded the aged care services unit ‘Revita’, of which he is a current shareholder and  involved in management consultancy.



Paul Howes - superannuation, workforce and workplace relations   Paul Howes is the National Managing Partner of KPMG Enterprise a role that he has held since July 2019. Enterprise is  KPMG’s specialist practice working with mid-market, private, family and emerging businesses.

Prior to his role as National Managing Partner, Paul was the Partner in Charge of KPMG’s Customer, Brand & Marketing  Advisory practice and also led KPMG’s Asset & Wealth Management practice, leading the firm’s work in the superannuation,  asset management and wealth sectors.

Paul joined KPMG in 2014 after 15 years in the Australian labour movement, including 7 years as the National Secretary of  The Australian Workers’ Union (AWU). He also served as Vice President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions (ACTU).

Paul is currently a director of Beyond Blue. He has previously served as a director and Deputy Chair of AustralianSuper, a  director of the Australian Workforce and Productivity Agency, the Prime Minister’s Manufacturing Taskforce, and served on  the boards of a number of policy institutes.



Laura Berry - Indigenous business, procurement  Laura was appointed CEO of Supply Nation in 2015, having been involved with the organisation since its inception through  her work with two founding member companies. Laura joined Supply Nation following four years at Qantas where she led  Qantas Group’s Corporate Community Investment Program.

With over two decades of experience in stakeholder management, risk mitigation and reputation management, Laura’s  career has spanned both private and public sectors. Since taking the reins at Supply Nation, Laura has led the organisation  through a significant period of growth: doubling the membership base, growing the supplier base by over 300% and  increasing the national footprint of the organisation.

Laura is currently a member of Telstra’s Indigenous Advisory Committee, and both McKinsey & Company and NRMA’s RAP  Steering Committees. Laura holds a Graduate Certificate in Management from the University of Technology, Sydney; is a  graduate of the AICD Company Director’s Course, and holds memberships of the AICD and Women on Boards.

Laura has previously held directorships of Engineering Aid Australia, Supply Nation and Indigenous Business Australia’s Cooee  Traveller. Laura was also previously a director and the Chairperson of CareerTrackers Indigenous Internship Program.

In September 2018, Laura was announced as one of the Australian Financial Review’s Top 100 Women of Influence. Laura  proudly identifies with her Aboriginal and Italian heritage and was born and raised in Canberra.





