

SENATOR TIM AYRES

SENATOR FOR NSW





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2HC COFFS HARBOUR AFTERNOONS WITH DENISE

WEDNESDAY, 9 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Anthony Albanese’s vision statement on regional jobs; Renewable

Energy; Regional Universities; Border restrictions; Federal Election.



DENISE ANDERSON, HOST: You're having lunch with Denise on 2HC, it is Wednesday

afternoon. And a surprise visitor in the office today, Senator Tim Ayres. Good afternoon to

you.



SENATOR TIM AYRES: Good afternoon, Denise. It's lovely to be actually in the studio

with you in Coffs Harbour for a couple of days.



ANDERSON: Yeah. Well, you picked the right day to be here, didn't you?



AYRES: Yeah, it sounds like there's a little bit of spring rain tomorrow, which will be very

good.



ANDERSON: Yes, we could do with a little bit more wet stuff. We haven't had a heck of a

lot. Even the last two years, the rainfall has been very low. But there's nothing you can do

about it as a Senator.



AYRES: No, no, there's lots of things that Senators can do, but we can't make it rain. I

know how important Spring rain is for people, for people in our agricultural sector it makes

a big difference.



ANDERSON: Yes. You've been in town. You were at CX earlier today, talking to people

about a lot of different things. What about jobs in regional towns? What's being done about

that?



AYRES: Well, I'm here with Anthony Albanese, who's made a big speech this morning at

the CX about regional jobs and really putting regional employment and regional economies

at the heart of Labor's vision as we approach the next election. We've chosen to come to

Coffs Harbour because the Coffs Harbour and Grafton local government areas were some

of the worst affected areas in the COVID-related economic crisis. Early on in the crisis

losing 11% of jobs; lots of hospitality and tourism jobs just disappeared. The picture hasn't

gotten any better. And we know that in regional Australia there are currently 28

unemployed people for every vacant job. So government's got to put a shoulder to the

wheel. This government hasn't got a plan for regional jobs. Anthony Albanese is sketching

out today for people a comprehensive vision for jobs in regional economies. And I think

that's a very important development when we're fighting for the future in the bush.



ANDERSON: Do you think it'll take a while, if we ever get past COVID, to get the doors

open on some of these smaller businesses?



AYRES: Well, we are in very challenging circumstances. There are a million people

unemployed today across Australia more people than have ever been unemployed in our

history. The government is withdrawing too fast from the economy, the stimulus that's kept

many people connected with their work. And that means that we are likely to lose 400 to

500,000 jobs between now and Christmas. Many of those jobs will be in regional Australia.

So you're facing up to an economy now where one and a half million people unemployed

by Christmas this year. It's a deeper recession than it needs to be. There are more people

unemployed than there needs to be because the government's made some big errors

along the way.



Labor believes that any economic recovery can't leave regional Australia behind. So we’ve

got to be focused on building regional jobs, regional employment opportunities for regional

business. That's why we're in Coffs Harbour today. We have always had a strong view

about regional economies. We learnt a lot of lessons in the last election. And one of them

is we need to be absolutely clear with regional communities that good jobs have got to be

at the centre of our agenda for regional Australia, and we're going to be really focused on

that.



ANDERSON: Right. So we're hopefully some of these smaller businesses, which a lot of

them are mums and dad type businesses and employ perhaps a couple of young people,

they would love to get their doors open and get the people back in with them. But of

course, the government can't go on paying people forever. There's got to be some

changes to the JobSeeker/JobKeeper packages. Would the Labor government be looking

at something to carry it on if it had to?



AYRES: Well we certainly wouldn't be withdrawing the JobKeeper and JobSeeker support

from the economy as quickly as the government is. That is going to mean many hundreds

of thousands of people more lose their jobs than should happen. But it is right that that

can't go on forever. It has to be supported by a plan for employment, a plan for jobs. That

means investing in things like regional transport and infrastructure, supporting regional

businesses making sure our TAFEs and Universities are delivering for regional jobs and

regional businesses. And it means investing in the industries of the future.



Anthony Albanese, just one example from the speech, makes it very clear that we are

going to continue exporting resources right around the world. But Australia has the

capacity to become a renewable energy superpower. We've got vast wind and solar and

battery resources here. We can drive down the cost of electricity and energy. And that

means new job opportunities, new investment opportunities for Australian manufacturing,

for our steel and aluminium sectors that need cheap electricity and certainty around energy

prices for the future. But we have to be able to provide grid stability and as battery

technology gets stronger and cheaper and more effective, hydro has also got an important

part to play in stabilising the grid and providing clean cheap energy for jobs and clean

cheap energy for households. Bills should be going down, not going up.



ANDERSON: As you say, the battery backup - that's probably the biggest issue, because

everybody would have solar panels on their roof if the batteries could hold the energy

stored there and they could just flick on a switch and something would work. These days,

of course, its not just lights on in the house, everybody's got a phone, iPad, or a TV in

every room. So there's a lot more electricity being used than there ever used to be. So

anything that'll help the price go down is good.



AYRES: Yeah, the battery technology is there. Big battery storage has been installed just

up the road here in the New England, supporting grid stability for the big solar and wind

investments in New England. That will be the centre of the energy production in Australia:

there is there is more energy capacity being exported from the New England in renewable

power, more than Lake Liddell produces and over the coming years they will be three

times the amount of power that the Lake Liddell power station produces byuch cheaper,

with grid stability and the capacity to deliver for households and business. That's where

we've got to be going. We're lost in Australia, led by Scott Morrison and the Liberals who

are so torn apart on energy policy, that they can't produce an energy framework and any

energy certainty for investors.



ANDERSON: Of course, a lot of times people have tried to put up solar or wind farms or

something you've got others, let's call them the greenies, out there saying 'you can't do this

one bird might fly into it' or something's going wrong. But a place like Australia, with so

much inland Australia which is vacant - now I'm not saying it's empty, I'm saying vacant

because there's not a lot of people, you've got properties and such like that - is there an

incentive to let somebody come in and lease a bit land to put their solar panels up?



AYRES: Yeah, we've got to support farmers who want to use some of their land for these

purposes. We've got to support the big renewable energy businesses and investments

because we know that it's going to drive the price of electricity down and that means

cheaper bills for households. Australia used to have a competitive advantage in low energy

prices. That's why we had a big steel and a bigger aluminium industry onshore in Australia.

We've let that go. Energy prices have gone up hand over fist since this government was

elected. The steel and aluminium industries have gone offshore. We've got to drive the

price of energy down so we can secure new investment in big manufacturing and that

means serious jobs, good jobs for regional Australia. It's got to be at the heart of Labor's

agenda.



ANDERSON: Yes, it's probably something that needs to be more on the TAFE and uni sort

of thing: how to run solar power, how to create wind power, maybe a diploma in something

like that.



AYRES: Unfortunately, in TAFE and universities we're going in the wrong direction. We're

training 140,000 less apprentices every year in Australia than at the beginning of the

Abbott-Turnbull-Morrison government. Many of those job opportunities, apprenticeship

opportunity for school leavers are in regional Australia.



And, as we all know, the government has systematically excluded the university sector

from participation in the JobKeeper package and has not delivered a package to support

universities. And as a consequence of that, regional universities are engaged in big cuts.

The University of New England: 250 job cuts. Charles Sturt University and Southern Cross

University: not too far behind with big cuts in capacity and that means less opportunities for

students and, critically, a negative impact on the research agenda of these universities,

which is all about the big issues facing regional communities,



ANDERSON: It's quite expensive though for, if I say, I'd love to go and do a course to do

uni or something up here, and we've got the uni, Southern Cross, it's rather prohibitive for

just the working person to say: 'Hey, can I afford to get a diploma in something?'



AYRES: Yeah, I think you're absolutely right. And the government's reached in with this

university funding package, which will make the price of university for students more

expensive, and is really shaped by this sort of weird anti University ideology that means

that there'll be less opportunities for young kids going into the university or slightly older

people like you and I who might want to have a crack at re skilling and doing different

things. We should be helping people, supporting people in TAFE and university not making

it tougher for them. University is for everybody, not just for people in the big cities.



And it is a real problem for our future capacity for making it harder for people to get into

university and if we're making it harder for universities to do the kind of research that

matters. When you watch the television every night and see the updates on what's

happening with the Coronavirus and updates about the likelihood of vaccines or what the

government's doing, the public health response, it's university researchers and academics

who you see, that's who we look to in a crisis to provide expert information. Why on earth

are we cutting the capacity of our universities at the same time as we're in the kind of crisis

that we're in now? We should be supporting our universities and making sure they deliver

for students, but also making sure that we build the smart, clever Australia that we're going

to need for our future.



ANDERSON: Okay, a couple of questions to sort of finish off here, Tim. Do you think we

should be opening our borders straight away? Or should we be really just so cautious

about it?



AYRES: Well, I've noticed that the Prime Minister's begun the hyper-politicisation of this

debate. There are very challenging circumstances. What I think there has been is an

absence of national co-ordination and national leadership right through the pandemic. And

that's meant that states have essentially been left to make decisions by themselves. And

with an absence of national leadership, I can understand the decisions that the various

state governments have made. Now we've got a big crisis in Victoria that people are

working their way through. It's very encouraging to see the number of daily infections

reducing in Victoria. We should all be thinking of them and supporting them in what's been

a pretty difficult time down there for Victorians. I hope they can come through this as fast

as possible and that borders and workplaces can start to reopen as fast as possible, but of

course, as safely as possible.



ANDERSON: A lot of people are getting infringement notices - hiding in the back of the

truck or something getting over the border, they've tried three or four times. We had a

couple come up to Coffs Harbour, she had a baby, and they'd come into the state illegally.

And they were in big trouble. I mean, it's kind of crazy: this is a deadly illness, it's deadly to

a lot of people. And people are just not worried. They just want to keep on traveling and

moving around.



AYRES: Well you can see that it puts a lot of pressure on people, the border restrictions

and the public health restrictions. But you're right, this is a deadly virus. We can't afford to

let it get out of control. We can't afford to have it spread around the country. And we

certainly, as an economy, can't afford to have the country going in and out of lockdown.

We've got to suppress the virus. That means it might be really inconvenient for people, but

we all have to look after each other by following the public health restrictions. Doing the

basic hygiene ourselves, washing our hands, keeping a distance, doing that social

distancing. But those border restrictions are there, they present real difficulties for people.

But we've just got to look after each other and comply with them.



ANDERSON: Well, I just realised, as you were speaking that I shouldn't have shook your



hand when you came into the studio. We should have elbow bumped, but I'll give you

some hand sanitizer as you go out. Tim, when's the next federal election due?



AYRES: Well, there can't be a federal election before the last half of next year. We are

focused as a Labor opposition on making sure that we're providing a constructive

opposition through this crisis. So we've criticized when it's been necessary to criticize but

we haven't been a carping opposition on the outside. So we've supported the government

when it's been important to support the government. But we have got a very different

agenda for the future of Australia. We've got a real focus on regional economies and

regional jobs. We're going to set out a very clear and simple policy agenda as we approach

the next election. It's likely to be anytime after August in 2021



ANDERSON: Right, okay, so that's why you're warming things up now - starting to stir the

pot a little bit more.



AYRES: Well we're certainly going to be out there talking to as many people as possible

and it's a delight to be here in Coffs Harbour talking to you, Denise.



ANDERSON: Oh, thank you very much Senator Tim Ayres.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JOE MCKENZIE 0431 377 319







