1





The Hon. Christian Porter MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Industrial Relations  Leader of the House



TRANSCRIPT

6PR Mornings with Gareth Parker  Wednesday, 29th January 2020

E&OE

Subjects: Coronavirus, sports grants, Ensuring Integrity Bill, Commonwealth Integrity Commission

GARETH PARKER: The coronavirus situation. It appears to me, hearing what the Prime  Minister has said this morning, that there is now a level of seriousness or an extra level of  seriousness that the Government is now taking with this whole affair. There was a meeting of the  National Security Committee of Cabinet this morning. Obviously, some decisions have now been  announced. I'm already getting a bit of a sense from some of the community that they think that  this issue is a bit of a beat up. The announcement from the Government this morning suggests  otherwise.

CHRISTIAN PORTER: Well, we've always taken it seriously. We've had several meetings of the  National Security Committee meetings, on this topic. I mean, today's announcement is about how  we deal with people in the Chinese province that has been closed down, where the epicentre of the  virus is, and we think that there are hundreds, up to 800 Australians, potentially who are there, 600  citizens. We think there are some permanent residents. And it has spread outside that province but  that province has been closed down. So people who are in China outside that province, they can  come home and they need to make some really quick choices for themselves, I think.

GARETH PARKER: [Talks over] Yeah. So-

CHRISTIAN PORTER: As the Prime Minister said, we can do this, perhaps once, perhaps in these  circumstances, perhaps with this province, but it's not going to be something that's going to be  repeated.

GARETH PARKER: Right.

CHRISTIAN PORTER: The people in that province- that province has been closed down. So, us  having an assisted exit using a Qantas chartered jet, is something that we think that we should do  for the well-being of those Australian citizens.

2



GARETH PARKER: So is the concern there, if this outbreak spreads beyond that province, that  you may not have an opportunity to evacuate people from multiple locations if that's what  transpires?

CHRISTIAN PORTER: Well, it has spread outside that province but the Chinese Government has  only closed down the comings and goings from that particular province. Now, there's nothing to say  that they might not do that for other provinces at other points in time. But we now have an ability  on our best assessment - this still depends on a range of issues being sorted through with China, to  get a chartered jet in there, a 747, to prioritise people. And the Prime Minister's language was  around isolated Australians and those at risk and obviously, the virus itself is of greatest effect and  danger to the very young and the very old. But also, there are going to be people who are in the  province who may have been living there for many years, and notwithstanding that they hold dual  citizenship now. They'll already have their support networks and be very familiar with the Chinese  systems and medical systems. But some priority, I think, has to attach to people who were there for  a short period of time whether that was as a tourist or on business and all of a sudden find  themselves without a real choice in terms of coming back. But the travel warnings have been  changed for the rest of China. There are Australians in China, I would think that they would want to  make decisions very, very quickly about whether it's wise to stay. That's up to them. But this is  something which is very specific to this time and set of circumstances.

GARETH PARKER: When the official advice now from DFAT is to reconsider people's need to  travel to China and not to travel to that province. Should that work the other way as well? Should  we be considering whether we actually allow flights from China into Australia for a short period of  time until we understand what we're dealing with?

CHRISTIAN PORTER: Well, with the flight that we will attempt to organise out of the province  most affected, we will quarantine people who avail themselves of that at Christmas Island. Now,  other flights that are coming in from China, we're using all best efforts to screen and there are also  efforts at the Chinese end to screen people going onto planes.

GARETH PARKER: But the problem is it seems as though this virus is present in people before  they display symptoms, so, that makes screening of it very difficult.

CHRISTIAN PORTER: [Talks over] That's actually not known yet. So…

GARETH PARKER: That's what the Chinese authorities are saying.

CHRISTIAN PORTER: Well, our best information - and we are obviously being updated all the time  - that that is speculation at the moment, as far as our best medical information given to us stands at  present. And if that is-

GARETH PARKER: [Interrupts] So we don't know basically.

CHRISTIAN PORTER: Well, that would be an unusual set of circumstances. I'm not a virologist but  I understand that would be very, very unusual. It's not impossible. But when we receive advice to  that effect, then we would relook at some of the protocols that are in existence at the moment. But  we're being very, very careful. There's some scrutiny at the Chinese end. There's enormous scrutiny  at our end. But you know obviously, there are a lot of flights coming in from China. And again, we  want to see Australians who are outside the most affected province have the ability to come back,  subject to all the protocols that we have in place. But we think that for these 600 or so Australians,

3



they are in a very, very difficult set of circumstances because they have been, in effect, robbed of  the choice to come back.

GARETH PARKER: So that's what the Australian Government wants to provide them is that  choice.

CHRISTIAN PORTER: Correct.

GARETH PARKER: Okay. A lot of people are sceptical about information coming out of China,  whether it's fully accurate and the full picture. What does the Australian Government believe?

CHRISTIAN PORTER: Well, we obviously have had the benefit of the best people that we have on  this. We've replicated the virus in Australia…

GARETH PARKER: Yes.

CHRISTIAN PORTER: …which is of enormous assistance, I understand. We have multiple sources  of information. Obviously, many of those are official Chinese sources. But, if I can put it this way, we  stress test all sources of information with other sources of information to give ourselves the best  possible picture of what's going on. But it's clearly a very dynamic set of circumstances and not that  long ago, the Chinese were talking about 1000 cases. Now we're talking at over 6000. Some of that  might be what the virologists call catch up, which is information coming out late. Some of that is the  genuine spread of the disease, but it clearly is spreading at a rate which should cause concern.

GARETH PARKER: Okay. Bridget McKenzie - the Australian Sports Commission, according to  the ABC, a complaint about her actions in the case of the sports grants saying that it compromised  the appearance of their independence. It's a pretty damning complaint, isn't it?

CHRISTIAN PORTER: Well again, I've- as I said to you last week, I fundamentally think that  ministers have and should exercise their ultimate discretion over grants. I've had- I've done that  myself on many occasions and many times the department has not liked that at all. So it's not-

GARETH PARKER: [Interrupts] This isn't a department, this is an independent statutory  organisation.

CHRISTIAN PORTER: Well it's a Commonwealth Corporate entity.

GARETH PARKER: Yeah.

CHRISTIAN PORTER: It's an agency under the minister's authority and the minister has authority  under that- over that agency. So yes, it's a slightly different constituent body but again there is  ministerial authority. Now the fact that the rankings that were provided by the body itself differed  from those the minister, I would understand that might make the body itself unhappy.

GARETH PARKER: And ABC said she had a spread sheet that basically breaks it down  electorate by electorate, trying to find the marginal ones to dedicate the money to. I mean that's  not a proper way to allocate money, is it?

CHRISTIAN PORTER: Well again. I've not seen that spread sheet and I don't know the veracity of  that from the ABC, but-

4



GARETH PARKER: [Interrupts] If it were true that wouldn't be an appropriate way to allocate  the money, would it?

CHRISTIAN PORTER: Look the ranking that the Minister gave actually ended up with more Labor  seats getting the funding than would have been the case based on Sports Australia's assessment.  Now-

GARETH PARKER: [Interrupts] A whistle-blower told Sky News that was to cover their bums,  effectively.

CHRISTIAN PORTER: Well I've got to say whenever I look at grants programs you do have an eye  to whether or not the electorate, in an overall spread, represents a reasonable distribution between  Labor, Liberal, National electorates because otherwise you're liable for criticism that you're  favouring one over the other. So I mean, you really can't win sometimes in those circumstances.

GARETH PARKER: If the- if Philip Gaetjens, the PM&C Secretary comes back and says she's  breached the ministerial code of conduct is that it? Is that the end of the story? One she goes?

CHRISTIAN PORTER: We'll have to say what he says about that.

GARETH PARKER: Well if, if he finds that she breached the Ministerial Code of Conduct-

CHRISTIAN PORTER: [Interrupts] The Ministerial Code of Conduct is a matter for the Prime  Minister and he's Commission the head of Prime Minister in the Cabinet to look into that particular  issue. I've been asked to look into a narrow legal issue about where the authority for the ministerial  discretion, which was provided for in the guidelines, comes from - like what's its basis? Now, that  advice isn’t back with me yet and I'm sure it will be before the first sitting week and it will come  under scrutiny.

GARETH PARKER: First sitting week is next week.

CHRISTIAN PORTER: Yeah. Looks alright.

GARETH PARKER: It's on the Agenda. The Ensuring Integrity Bill, this is the, the bill designed to  make union officials behave properly. Have you been talking with the cross-bench over Christmas?

CHRISTIAN PORTER: Yeah. Well I mean we, we have been talking with the crossbench. I noticed  in The Australian today that Jacqui Lambie sort of indicated that she'd like to have further  discussions around her particular amendments. So there's still a potential passage for this  legislation. It's a very important legislation, the lawlessness on Australian construction sites is out of  control and the CFMEU just seem to take massive fines as the cost of doing business - that's the cost  of their business model. So this is very important legislation. I'll be talking with Jacqui, as I will with  Rex and I'll also talk again with Pauline. I think the case for the legislation is very, very strong but  obviously Jacqui is going to be a very important part of that.

GARETH PARKER: How far away are you from announcing details of a federal corruption body,  an ICAC or similar.

CHRISTIAN PORTER: Very close. It's a, it is a very large piece of legislation -over 300 pages, so it is  very close. It's not uncomplicated because we already have a pretty successful multi-agency  approach and we're not doing what the, the Greens bill would effectively have favoured which is to

5



put a line through that and create one body to do what many bodies were doing. So this body has to  fit into the existing architecture, so it's not uncomplicated. But-

GARETH PARKER: [Interrupts] Will it, will it actually have some teeth though?

CHRISTIAN PORTER: Absolutely. I mean the powers that it will have both on the law enforcement  integrity and the public sector integrity side will be will be greater powers than a royal commission.

GARETH PARKER: Greater powers than a royal commission. Will be able to do what the CCC  here does, and haul people in for hearings and those sorts of things?

CHRISTIAN PORTER: Yes. And hearings can be public on the law enforcement side. We don't  favour public hearings on the public sector side for a variety of reasons. But yes, people can be  compelled into hearings, they can be compelled to give evidence under threat of criminal penalty. It  will have the ability to tap phones, gather evidence, have warrants, greater powers than a royal  commission.

GARETH PARKER: When would you like it to be up and running?

CHRISTIAN PORTER: Well I think it'll, it'll take some consultation but the reality is that people  have different views about how these bodies should operate. They've been not uncontroversial in a  range of states and my observation there's better and worse ways of doing it which is reflected in  the model that we've got. But we want to have a genuine period of consultation. Of course then it  has to, itself, run the gauntlet through the Senate and receive support from cross-benchers and or  Labor. So I can't give a watertight guarantee as to when it might be operative because that's based  on matters outside of my control, but I think that after a genuine period of consultation if people,  whether they prefer slightly other models or prefer this model, this represents a massive change to  the Commonwealth landscape as to how you deal with integrity and criminal corruption issues. And  if people want to see an agency with enormous powers, incredibly well-funded, operating in this  area then we've got a model on the table and it's one that we took to the last election. So I'd hope  that we get Senate support for it.

GARETH PARKER: Christian Porter, thank you for your time.

CHRISTIAN PORTER: Cheers, thanks Gareth.

GARETH PARKER: The Attorney-General, the Industrial Relations Minister, Christian Porter.





Authorised by Christian Porter, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

