SENATOR TIM AYRES

SENATOR FOR NSW





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2NZ INVERELL

MONDAY, 17 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Emergency Broadcasting during the 2019-2020 Bushfires; Gas;

Renewable Energy.



MONTE IRVINE, HOST: I've been joined on the phone now by New South Wales Labor

Senator Tim Ayres. Good morning, Senator, how are you this morning?



SENATOR TIM AYRES:  Good morning. Good morning to your listeners.



IRVINE: Now Senator, we've got a few different things to talk about. The first thing is: you

were talking about issues with the ABC and in particular, power sites - the power backup

power for the ABC for, even in our area, there's no actual backup generators if something

was to go wrong.



AYRES: Yeah, that's true. I'm the Labor Chair of the Senate Bushfire Inquiry. We're

conducting a long running inquiry into the causes of the 2019 2020 bush fires, into the

management of the bush fires and the emergency response. And also, critically, we're

going to be examining over the coming months, the rebuild and reconstruction process:

how bushfire-affected communities have been looked after in the very long tough process

of rebuilding.



It came to light during our recent hearings that there are 291 ABC local sites, absolutely

critical for emergency management response. Remember how important the ABC and

local radio was, giving people the bushfire information they needed: what direction are the

fires coming from? What's the intensity of the fires? Should people evacuate or not? This is

absolutely critical information.



And it's become clear that a number of those sites, 291 of them around the country, don't

have the backup power or the other site hardening measures - making sure that hazard

reduction work is being done around the transmission site. That puts Australians at risk.

Before the bushfires there was a proposal in front of the Federal Government to deliver site

hardening and backup power for all those sites, and shortly after the bushfires, a full-costed proposal. It has sat on the minister's desk now for months and months and months

with no action from the Morrison Government on this question.



IRVINE: Yes, and just so people are aware, we're talking Armidale, Tenterfield and

Walcha. Now we know Tenterfield was really hard hit by bushfires last year, it actually got

to the town outskirts.



AYRES: Yeah, absolutely. So Tenterfield, Torrington, Wytaliba, the bushfires came right

through this region. They caused immense suffering and immense hardship and some of

those communities are still struggling. The prospects of rebuilding are a long way in front of

them.



And what those communities deserve, and all Australian regional and remote communities

in bushfire affected area deserve, is an absolute commitment from the Federal

Government to do what is necessary to ensure their safety. And a very basic element of

that strategy should be to ensure that people have got adequate communication structure,

that communications infrastructure is there for them when they need it. And the idea that

local radio could be cut off for people if a fire came through and they would not have

access to that information in time; relevant and important information would be cut off from

them and it really does put Australians at risk.



And the Morrison Government government has sat on their hands on this question since

since they've had the proposal in front of them. It's just not acceptable. And you know, it's a

bit of a measure of their commitment. They say, in response to me and others who have

been out there talking about this issue, that they're going to wait for the Royal Commission

to deliver its report before they deliver funding, capital expenditure funding, for this very

important program. It's just not good enough. It's very obvious, it should be obvious to

every Australian, that we've got to have excellent, safe communications infrastructure in

regional and remote Australia, particularly those areas affected by bushfires. And indeed,

in parts of the Northern Rivers and Queensland, affected by floods.



IRVINE: Absolutely. I mean, we know here in Inverell and Glen Innes and Tingha how in

those surrounding areas, how important it was for the local stations here. You had the

ABC, you had us here at 2NZ and Gem FM as well as the community station, all giving

regular updates on what was happening with the fire. And that's the advantage of radio: we

are able to go straight, live, done, get it out there as soon as possible. Television does a

great job as well, but they have other issues: they can't necessarily get it up and running

straightaway.



AYRES: It was really clear in front of the committee that I chair that ABC local radio,

commercial radio, and indeed, the local community radio stations were absolutely vital.

They supported each other and co-operated in the interests of all Australians in the

bushfire areas and they were absolutely critical to people making safe decisions about

whether to evacuate. They were absolutely critical in supporting the work of the Rural Fire

Service and giving local brigades some sense of direction, beyond the direction they were

getting from the Rural Fire Service command. A very, very important part of our community

infrastructure and it's absolutely shocking that these basic steps to secure it haven't been

undertaken.



IRVINE: Now something else that has come light in the last week since we spoke last

week. We were talking about a gas-led recovery for the post COVID economy. It does

seem that it has sort of come out nationally that they're within the Labor Party itself, there

seems to be a bit of a divide along ideological lines on whether to fully support that or not.

I'd be interested to get your reply on that.



AYRES: I'm not sure that there's a division based upon ideological or political lines.

There's certainly going to be differences of views and a proper debate within the Labor

Party about how we deliver the right policy for Australia, the right policy for our future

energy mix. Anthony Albanese has said we're going to take our time, use the processes

inside the Labor Party to make sure we're examining the facts and the evidence and that

we deliver the right outcome. Now that stands in really strong, strong contrast to where the

government's at.



What everybody's responding to at the moment is a secret COVID commission report that

hasn't been released to the public. The COVID Commission is Scott Morrison's big

business, taxpayer funded lobby group that he's set up, chaired by Nev Power the Western

Australian mining executive. And it apparently has a report that that puts gas at the centre

of the economic recovery from COVID. Well the Labor Party will have three priorities when

it comes to our future energy policy. One is lower prices. The second is lowering Australia's

emissions and the third will be delivering more jobs, particularly for the manufacturing

sector, and for regional Australia.



The challenge for Australian gas: it's a great irony that we are going to be one of the

world's largest gas exporters, Australia will be exporting petajoules of gas around the

world. But because decisions of the Howard government, in particular, and successive

governments have meant that we have not been able to reserve gas for the East Coast of

Australia. We have not been able to reserve that gas for Australian industrial and

household uses. What that does mean that gas is now very expensive on the East Coast

of Australia. And there are no easy solutions. If gas is going to be provided, it will be much

more expensive than the price that Australia exports gas around the world. And the

problem is, it's not a magic pudding. People would like it to be a magic pudding, but it's not

a magic pudding. If gas is going to be made cheaper, then it will either be funded by higher

prices to consumers and industry or it will be funded by the taxpayer. And it seems

apparent that if you read between the lines what the COVID Commission has leaked out

what it's proposing, well, it's no surprise that a big business lobby decides that it'll be

taxpayers who pay for higher energy prices. Higher household, higher business energy

prices will be propped up by taxpayers.



But we've got to be really focused on the objective in the Labor Party and across across

the country. The objective has to be to deliver low cost, low emissions sources of energy

that secure the energy policy framework and deliver more jobs and lower prices for

Australians. And it's very clear that in terms of the production of electricity, the lowest cost,

most reliable, commercially proven approach to delivering energy is renewables plus

storage. That's why we're seeing hundreds of millions of dollars’ worth of investment in

renewables and storage in your listening area. People in the New England, the New

England is going to be the largest Renewable Energy Zone in the country. In just a few

years’ time, it'll be producing more electricity for the country than the Lake Liddell power

station A few years after that it will be producing three times the amount of power that the

Lake Liddell power station has been providing. It's cheaper. It's going to drive down

Australia's emissions and it's in the interests of jobs and local employment. So these are

the issues that are going to have to be considered.



Now I don't think we should get too excited about secret report of the COVID Commission,

Scott Morrison hand-picked taxpayer-funded lobby group. But we've got we've got to work

carefully with the detail and have those priorities absolutely foremost in our mind Low

prices, low emissions, more jobs.



IRVINE: Absolutely, it has been if you like a third rail for the Labor Party has been the

energy policies have been the government the Liberal and National parties have been able

to attack the Labor Party over these policies in the past, so I can understand why you need

to take your time and get it right but also have the right balance to go with it.



AYRES: Well there's a real contrast there. The Morrison, Turnbull, Abbott governments

have had 19 attempts at having an energy policy. They still haven't still haven't got an

energy policy framework for the country and that's why prices keep rising. Prices have

gone up by 158% since Tony Abbott took the Prime Ministership - 158%. The energy

Minister, Mr. Taylor's out there pointing to the fact that wholesale energy prices have fallen

a little bit recently. Well, that's what happens in a recession: energy prices fall. But for most

Australians, for households and industry, they haven't fallen, they've gone up by 158%.



What would have been in the interest of all Australians would be if the Coalition stop

playing politics with energy policy and actually delivered an energy policy framework that

focuses on those outcomes: low prices, low emissions, and more jobs. That's got to be

where we take the Australian economy. We want to modernize our energy infrastructure,

lower our emissions, lower prices and secure a future for Australian manufacturing. That's

got to be the focus of future governments, and that where the Labor Party and Anthony

Albanese will be. Working with the world as it is not where we want it to be, focusing on the

facts and evidence and delivering an energy policy that delivers those three critical

objectives: price, emissions jobs.



IRVINE: All right, watch this space.



AYRES: Absolutely.





IRVINE: Senator, thank you so much for your time this morning as always very interesting

to have as a discussion with you about different bits and pieces that are happening

throughout the country. And we'll talk to you next Monday.



AYRES: Good on you Monte, I'll talk to you next week.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JOE MCKENZIE 0431 377 319



