Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





The Hon Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health

The Hon Mark Coulton MP  Minister for Regional Health

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

7 December 2020

Congratulations to Australia’s newest nursing and midwifery graduates

Hospitals, clinics, health centres and communities across Australia will be among those to  benefit from the graduation of 15,000 new nurses and midwives.

The Federal Government congratulates the new health workers who completed their studies  and placements in some of the most difficult circumstances faced in living memory.

This year’s graduates have succeeded in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic, lockdowns,  and a multitude of other obstacles.

The Federal Government and the broader Australian population appreciates the adaptability  the new nurses and midwifes have shown in moving to a different way of learning, and their  flexibility in completing clinical placements in challenging circumstances.

Minister for Health Greg Hunt said the graduates, “join a contingent of health professionals  Australians hold in the highest regard.”

“At this time in our nation’s history, knowing our health workforce will be bolstered by such  a resilient and adaptable group of new nurses and midwives is great news,” Minister Hunt  said.

“These new graduates have demonstrated just how responsive nurses and midwives are to a  challenge, whether it’s completing their studies and placements or caring for the community.

“The 15,000 new graduates will rise to the challenge of caring for Australians in hospitals,  clinics and other health settings around the country, and I wish them all the best in their  coming careers.”

Minister for Regional Health Mark Coulton said the pandemic had shown the dedication of  nurses in every corner of the country, as they continued to care for patients as the virus,  drought and recent bushfires presented challenges for families and communities.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





“Australians are rightfully proud of our nurses and midwives for their integral work during  COVID. So many nurses have continued in their roles despite the risk to their own health,”  Minister Coulton said.

“It is International Year of the Nurse and the Midwife, and it has taken on new importance  since so many of us have depended on their care, skills and professionalism this year.

“Nurses and midwives are integral to healthcare delivery in team based settings, especially in  rural and remote areas.

“I congratulate the 2020 nursing and midwifery graduates, and wish them well all the best for  the future.”

The Council of Deans of Nursing and Midwifery Australia & New Zealand have also  welcomed the new graduating nurses and midwives, acknowledging their resilience in their  final year of nursing and midwifery.

All of Australia’s nursing and midwifery graduates can be proud to have completed their  studies and contributed to the care of Australians at this challenging time.

ENDS



