

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT

LAUNCH OF THE KMART WISHING TREE  AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT HOUSE, ACT  MONDAY 7 DECEMBER 2020

EO&E…

PRIME MINISTER: Can I welcome my colleagues here from right across all or parts of our parliament.

It's tremendous to come together at this time of year. We all know that this has been the most  extraordinary year for Australians. It's also been a pretty extraordinary here in the Parliament. Anthony's  been here longer than all of us, and he understands that probably better than most, the changes to the  way parliament has had to operate this year. And I appreciate everybody's cooperation as we've worked  through this difficult year together.

But now is a time, importantly, to send a very strong message to all Australians, from all of us, that we  appreciate your great strength. And most importantly, your love and care for each other, as we've got  through this very difficult year.

And there's no better time for us as a country to reflect on that care and love for each other, amongst  family, amongst community, amongst friends.

And can I particularly thank Commissioner Donaldson for the great work of the Salvos and the wonderful  work they've done this year. It was pleasing just to hear that the Red Shield Appeal this year was their  most successful that they’ve had. And even at the time of COVID, that people understood that the Salvos  were one of those wonderful institutions in our country which is out there helping people at a time of  need. And they were in need this year. And we appreciate that as they were just mentioning to us, that  the supports that were provided to keep organisations like the Salvos going this year so they could do  their job, which means that they are here, again, for the 33rd year in a row, which is tremendous.

And I also want to thank Mr Bailey from Kmart for your great support of this tremendous event. Kmart,  I've learnt this year from my daughters is quite a thing that you go along to. It's become a social event to  actually go to Kmart this year as well as a shopping event. So well done to Kmart. I'm sure they'll be getting  plenty of people coming along in the run in to Christmas. And you can feel good about that because they're  a great supporter of this.

[END]

Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

