

THE HON JOSH FRYDENBERG MP  Treasurer

STATEMENT





12 November 2020

BILATERAL LOAN TO INDONESIA  Selamat pagi.

I am delighted to be here today with my colleague and friend, Ibu Sri Mulyani, Indonesian Minister of Finance.

Our commitment to working together as ministers, underscored by our mutual respect, will help to build  a prosperous, vibrant and stable region.

COVID-19 has had a devastating impact on the world.

Both of our nations have felt this impact and have experienced record economic contractions since the start of  the pandemic.

The impact on businesses, livelihoods, and jobs cannot be understated.

The health and human cost of this pandemic is our greatest shared concern and our responses have been  unprecedented.

Our two governments, led by Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison and Indonesian President Joko Widodo  have focused on protecting our citizens from the worst of the pandemic, developing programs to provide critical  fiscal and monetary support to lives and livelihoods.

In these challenging times, the strength of the relationship between Australia and Indonesia is more important  than ever.

This relationship is more than just our trade and economic ties, which are significant, it is the people to people  links and the true friendship that underpins our collaboration.

We are confronting this crisis as partners, and because of this we will recover, together.

We should all be heartened by the global commitment to cooperation, including through the G20, and to the  commitment to an equitable distribution of any successful vaccine.

It is in this spirit of partnership that we today announce an A$1.5 billion bilateral loan from the Australian  Government to the Indonesian Government.

This loan reflects the extraordinary times which we all must face together and is in recognition of Indonesia’s  record of sound fiscal management. Indonesia’s strong and quick recovery is critical for not only Indonesia but  for Australia and our region.

I also thanks the Australian Treasury and Indonesian Ministry of Finance officials for their assistance in  preparing this Loan Agreement and our Ambassador to Indonesia Mr Gary Quinlan who is here with me today.

Terima Kasih.

