



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

The Hon Mark Coulton MP

Minister for Regional Health, Regional Communications and Local Government  Federal Member for Parkes

MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au



31 July 2020

FUNDING FLOWS TO LOCAL ROADS AND COMMUNITY  INFRASTRUCTURE

The Australian Government has delivered the first payment toward crucial small-scale local road and  community infrastructure projects nationwide under a $500 million local government support  initiative.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development,  Michael McCormack, said local councils are well positioned to get projects under way quickly as part  of national efforts to boost jobs and support communities.

“This week we have got money out the door to the first of more than 40 projects to begin under our  $500 million Local Roads and Community Infrastructure (LRCI) Program,” Mr McCormack said.

“Uptake has been very strong, with more than 175 councils nominating nearly a thousand projects  between them.

“A diverse range of projects have been nominated so far, which will support a broad range of jobs in  local communities.

“Projects being supported include the sealing of more than five kilometres of Glen Davis Road by  Lithgow Council in New South Wales and the installation of accommodation units at Mortlake  Caravan Park by Moyne Shire Council in Victoria.

“Having only announced the program in late May, we are moving decisively to deliver the support  councils and communities need to get through this pandemic and get back on their feet.”

Minister for Local Government, Mark Coulton, reminded councils to submit work schedules to the  Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Communications.

“I call on all local councils to get the ball rolling on seeking support for their priority road and local  community funding initiatives,” Mr Coulton said.

“These projects will play an important role in improving local infrastructure, creating local jobs and  supporting the nation’s post-COVID recovery.



“Beyond investing in critical local roads, this initial funding will deliver footpaths, sporting field  lighting upgrades, tennis court sealing, improving green spaces, carparks, Wi-Fi networks and more.

“We expect councils to, where possible, use local businesses and workforces to deliver projects,  ensuring stimulus flows directly to local communities.

“Local Governments across the country are the perfect partners to deliver this economic stimulus as  they work directly with their communities to deliver outcomes for their communities.”

The LRCI programme is part of a suite of investments being made by the Australian Government in  Local Governments and is in addition to the $1.3 billion in untied funding from 2020-21 Financial  Assistance Grant Program, which was pre-paid in June.

For more information on the LRCI Program and the Australian Government’s $1.8 billion local  government COVID-19 support package, visit  https://investment.infrastructure.gov.au/infrastructure_investment/local-roads-community-infrastructure-program/.

Ends.

Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Minister Coulton - Douglas Rodgers 0411 658 056

