

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

TODAY SHOW

FRIDAY, 28 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Christchurch killer; foreign agreements.



KARL STEFANOVIC, HOST: New Zealand is this morning demanding Australia take back

Christchurch gunman Brenton Tarrant to serve out his life sentence on home soil. Kiwi

Deputy PM Winston Peters calling on Home Affairs Minister Peter Dutton to accept the

prisoner transfer. He joins us now with Deputy Leader of the Opposition Richard Marles.

Good morning gentleman, nice to have your company today. Pete, to you first of all, have

you received any official request yet?



PETER DUTTON, MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: No, we haven't Karl but obviously

this is a very sensitive issue. I've asked for legal advice but we will work closely with

New Zealand. We have a very special relationship with them. I think the first priority is to

make sure this individual and, I hope we don't continue to repeat his name because he

wants the notoriety that he doesn't deserve. But I hope that this individual serves the

longest possible sentence imposed in New Zealand. We will have to look at what

happens in terms of paroles or the way in which our legal system would work here. So, the

first priority to keep him in jail for the rest of his life and we will work very closely with New

Zealand on any requests they provide.



STEFANOVIC: Yeah, they are complications legally, aren’t there, given we have different

laws and sentencing in different states here. I think New South Wales might be the only

state to have life without parole, so it would have to be in New South Wales.



DUTTON: Well as I say, we will see if we have a formal request from New Zealand and we

will work very closely with them. But the priority is, as you point out, to make sure

that wherever he is, he never sees the light of day again and the tragedy that he has

inflicted on many, many lives both in New Zealand but around the world is tragic and

we should pay no homage at all



STEFANOVIC: You have no dramas him coming back here?



DUTTON: We have been very clear that Australian citizens who commit crimes overseas

ultimately, when they are deported back to our country we accept them, but we haven't had

a formal request from New Zealand as yet. We will wait to have that discussion with them

in private.



STEFANOVIC: Okay, Richard, do you have any dramas with it?



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Oh

look, I agree with what Peter said and I'm sure he will work this out with New Zealand.

I think really the significance over the last 24 hours, that in the face of just the most

appalling act of hate we have seen justice be done. Peter is right, this person should

be spending the rest of his life behind bars. And I just hope that the decision yesterday and

the justice that was served yesterday gives some solace to those who were the victims of

just the most egregious event.



STEFANOVIC: It was almost embarrassing to be Australian, wasn’t it? At the time when

we found out, it was such an awful thing and all our love and support goes to those victims.

Lets move on; Scott Morrison is warning China can no longer undermine national security,

making deals with states, announcing a raft of new powers in a proposed

Foreign Relations Bill. That bill turning up the already high tension between the PM and the

Victorian Premier. The love affair is over now Pete, isn't it?



DUTTON: I think Karl, I think on all issues related to COVID we are very keen to work with

Victoria or New South Wales, or wherever it might be. And the Prime Minister has

demonstrated that leadership through the National Cabinet, but equally we have been very

clear that we don't want state governments entering into arrangements with foreign

powers that are not in our national interest. And the announcement during the week that

the federal government will look at these individual bilateral arrangements and decide

whether or not it is in our national interest I think is a very welcome development.



STEFANOVIC: Dan Andrews said he was taken by surprise.



DUTTON: Well, he shouldn't have been because the government has been very clear from

day one, it's the only agreement if you are talking about the BRI agreement

between Victoria and China, it's the only agreement as I'm aware between a state

government or a municipality and a foreign power of that nature. I don't think there should

be any surprise. But we need to act in our national interest and it will apply to any deal, but

we need to have that proper process in place and we will.



STEFANOVIC: Okay. Richard, Dan Andrews needs to pay the bill somehow, does he

have a right to be upset here?



DUTTON: Look, Daniel Andrews is going to conduct things in his own way and that's fair

enough. At the end of the day though, I think the government needs to be applying this to

their own actions. I mean, the federal government signed its own BRI deal with China in

2017 under Trade Minister Steve Ciobo, so I just hope that whatever they are putting in

place ultimately applies to their own actions as well. We will look at the legislation when it's

given to us. It hasn't been given to us as yet.



STEFANOVIC: But you'll support it?



MARLES: Sorry.



STEFANOVIC: You’ll support it.



MARLES: We will have a look at it when it is given to us. But we are not going to answer

those questions unsighted, unseen. We want to have a look at what's being proposed

here. I would make this point; the way in which Australia makes its way in the world is a

matter for the Commonwealth Government. And, the expertise around that lies in

the Department of Foreign Affairs. I get that the Commonwealth has an interest here.

That's where foreign relationships should be done. But this needs to apply to their

own behaviour as well. They are the ones who have signed their own BRI agreement here,

so we shouldn't forget that.



STEFANOVIC: Basically what you are saying this morning is that Daniel Andrews should

never have done a BRI with China.



MARLES: Is that a question to me?



STEFANOVIC: Yes.



MARLES: Look, I'm not about to criticise Daniel Andrews, he can run his Government as

he sees fit. If Labor were in power federally we would not be doing a BRI agreement with

China.



STEFANOVIC: That's basically says it all, doesn't it.



DUTTON: Richard, you are locked up in that tiny little library under lock and key and

you've got no criticism of the bloke. What's going on?



MARLES: No, but I've got criticism of your government, you've done a BRI agreement with

China. We wouldn’t have done what the commonwealth government with the Port of

Darwin-



STEFANOVIC: Hang on, Richard you are saying that the Government’s BRI is no good but

you are not going to say that the Dan Andrews State agreement with the BRI with China is

no good. What is with that? I don’t know what you are saying.



MARLES: Yeah, I am a loyal member of the Labor Party.



DUTTON: Under lock and key.





STEFANOVIC: At least you are honest. Just going to toe the party line. Thanks

guys. Have a great week. Talk to you soon.



LAUGHTER



DUTTON: Thanks Karl, see ya.



MARLES: Thanks Karl.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













