THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP

MINISTER FOR POPULATION, CITIES AND URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE  ACTING MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP, MIGRANT SERVICES AND  MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

MEDIA STATEMENT

4 April 2020

Coronavirus and Temporary Visa holders

The Government is making a number of changes to temporary visa holder arrangements  during the coronavirus crisis in order to protect the health and livelihoods of Australians,  support critical industries, and assist with the rapid recovery post the virus.

There are 2.17 million people presently in Australia on a temporary visa.

All were welcomed to Australia on a temporary basis for different reasons including to fill  skills shortages; to study as full fee-paying international students; to visit family and friends;  or to work and holiday.

They are an important part of our economy and society. For example, there are over 8,000  skilled medical professionals on temporary visas supporting our health system right now.

While citizens, permanent residents and many New Zealanders have access to unconditional  work rights and government payments (including the new iobKeeper and iobSeeker  payments), temporary visa holders do not.

There has always been an expectation that temporary visa holders are able to support  themselves while in Australia. The changes announced today will help facilitate this for  those who may be stood down or lose work hours as a result of the coronavirus.

In line with changes being made for Australian citizens and permanent residents, most  temporary visa holders with work rights will now be able to access their Australian  superannuation to help support themselves during this crisis.

Temporary visa holders who are unable to support themselves under these arrangements  over the next six months are strongly encouraged to return home. For these individuals it's  time to go home, and they should make arrangements as quickly as possible.

Changes are also geared toward enabling temporary visa holders to remain in key industries,  such as health, aged and disability care, agriculture and food processing.

Importantly, they can help boost front line health numbers, get food from farms to our

shops and ensure critical services continue.

Temporary visa holders are extremely valuable to the Australian economy and way of life,  but the reality is that many Australians will find themselves out of work due to the dual  health and economic crisis we're currently facing, and these Australians and permanent  residents must be the Government's number one focus.

Visa changes

The following new measures will apply to the major classes of temporary visa holders. The

situation will be reviewed periodically and further changes made if required.

Visitor visa holders

There are 203 1000 international visitors in Australia, typically on a visa lasting three months  or less.

International tourists should return to their home country as quickly as possible, particularly  those without family support.

Thousands are already doing this and others should follow their lead.

International students

There are 565 1000 international students in Australia, mainly studying in the higher  education or vocational education sector. They are an important contributor to our tertiary  sector and economy, supporting 240,000 Australian jobs.

Students are encouraged to rely on family support, part-time work where available and their  own savings to sustain themselves in Australia. As part of their visa application,  international students have had to demonstrate that they can support themselves  completely in their first year.

Students who have been here longer than 12 months who find themselves in financial  hardship will be able to access their Australian superannuation.

The Government will undertake further engagement with the international education sector  who already provide some financial support for international students facing hardship. For  example, we understand there are some education providers that are providing fee  discounts to international students.

The Government will also be flexible in cases where Coronavirus has prevented  international students meeting their visa conditions (such as not being able attend classes).

International students are able to work up to 40 hours per fortnight.

International students working in aged care and as nurses have had these hours extended to  support these critical sectors.

International students working in the major supermarkets had also had these hours

extended to help get stock on shelves during the high demand. From 1 May, their hours will  return to the maximum 40 hours a fortnight as more Australians are being recruited into  these roles.

New Zealanders on 444 visas

New Zealanders and Australians have reciprocal arrangements whereby we can each stay  and work in each other's country. There are more than 672,000 New Zealanders in Australia  on a subclass 444 visa.

New Zealanders who are on 444 visas and arrived before 26 February 2001 will have access  to welfare payments and the iobKeeper payment.

444 visa holders who arrived after 2001 have access to the JobKeeper payment. They do not  have access to iobSeeker or other welfare payments.

New Zealanders should consider returning to New Zealand if they are unable to support  themselves through these provisions, work or family support.

Temporary Skilled visa holders

There are around 139 1000 temporary skilled visa holders, on either a 2 year or 4 year visa.  They were provided the visa to fill a skills shortage - a shortage that may still be present  when the crisis has passed.

Consequently, those visa holders who have been stood down, but not laid off, will maintain  their visa validity and businesses will have the opportunity to extend their visa as per normal  arrangements. Businesses will also be able to reduce the hours of the visa holder without  the person being in breach of their visa condition.

These visa holders will also be able to access up to $10,000 of their superannuation this  financial year.

Those visa holders who have been laid off due to coronavirus should leave the country in  line with existing visa conditions if they are unable to secure a new sponsor. However,  should a 4-year visa holder be re-employed after the coronavirus pandemic, their time  already spent in Australia will count towards their permanent residency skilled work  experience requirements.

Working holiday makers supporting critical sectors

There are about 118,000 people in Australia on a Working Holiday visa (or backpacker visa)  - a visa which provides conditional work rights.

To support the critical sectors of heath, aged and disability care, agriculture and food  processing, and childcare, some limited flexibility will be provided.

In particular, working holiday makers who are working in these critical sectors will be  exempt from the six month work limitation with the one employer and eligible for a further

visa to keep working in these critical sectors if their current visa is due to expire in the next

six months.

In general, working holiday makers that do not have the confidence to sustain themselves  over the next six months should make arrangements to leave the country.

There are another 185 1000 other temporary visa holders in Australia, about half of them  temporary graduate visa holders. They will also be able to access their Australian  superannuation if needed for support.

Further announcements will be made with the Deputy Prime Minister and Agriculture  Minister in relation to supporting the agricultural sector, including the operation of the  Seasonal Worker Program and Pacific Labour Scheme.

Media Contact:  Minister Tudge: Steve Kidner 0466 385 097 I Whitney Harris 0466 462 511

