

SENATOR PENNY WONG

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY IN THE SENATE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RADIO ADELAIDE MORNINGS WITH DAVID BEVAN

FRIDAY, 27 NOVEMBER, 2020



Subjects: Australians stranded overseas;



DAVID BEVAN, HOST: We're hoping to make contact with a guy by the name

of Ben. Ben is stuck in the San Francisco Airport. He's an example of what

we're discussing here. He was hoping to get on a plane and come to Sydney,

but then there was a problem with the plane and it was delayed for a couple of

hours, which pushed him into the next day, only to be told: sorry, you can't come

into Australia because that would push out the quota for Australians coming into

Sydney Airport for that next day. He's saying: but, hang on, I had permission to

get in on this day and it wasn't my fault that the plane couldn't fly out. And

they're saying: yeah, look, get back to us in a few weeks time. So, this is the

terrible frustration that Australians overseas are facing. In a moment I hope we

can make contact with Ben Kalman in San Francisco Airport. But, let's begin

with Penny Wong. Senator Penny Wong, good morning to you.



SENATOR PENNY WONG, Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs: Good

morning, David. Good to be with you.



BEVAN: What do you say is the situation? How many Australians are still trying

to get home?



WONG: The number simply keeps rising, David. It's now almost 37,000, and

more worryingly, the number of those who are considered vulnerable - people

who are at risk or who are in vulnerable circumstances - has actually doubled.

When I last spoke to you I think it was 4,000 Australians and now it is 8,000.



You started this segment by saying what should be done? I think it's pretty

simple. Mr Morrison promised to get stranded Australians home by Christmas

and it's time he did the work and took responsibility to deliver on it. The reality

is, the Commonwealth could boost safe quarantine capacity. Instead of doing

that, he's chosen to leave it to the states and to blame the states for the failure

to deliver on his own promise. So, I think the Prime Minister should simply do

what he told Australians he would do and bring these people home.



BEVAN: And at the same time Mathias Cormann is flying around in a plane at

taxpayers' expense trying to get a job.



WONG: I thought the really telling defence that Mr Morrison made of that is he

said: well, Mathias had to have a plane otherwise he'd get COVID. I thought

well, you know, it's pretty rough isn't it? When you listen to all the stories -

you've got Ben's story, hopefully later on, where people got stuck because a

plane didn't take off and so they missed their connecting flight; or whether it's

the hundreds of people that I've dealt with - and some of which you've spoken

to - who've been stranded and hear that there's a plane because we want a

former minister not to get COVID, but everybody else has to stay in, potentially,

very risky situations and catch commercial flights home.



BEVAN: But is there a conflicting message coming out of the Labor Party

federally that you're complaining you're not doing enough to get Australians

home? At the state level, the State Opposition Leader, Peter Malinauskas, is

calling for the medi-hotel system to be suspended and the indefinite end of all

international arrivals.



WONG: Well, what we're saying is the Federal Government should be taking

responsibility as they were advised to do. I mean, let's remember the Federal

Government got one of their former departmental secretaries, Jane Halton, to

do a very detailed report on quarantine some time ago. She made some very

clear recommendations, which have not been acted on. She said the feds can

run quarantine under federal legislation, they can do it safely and she

recommended the Government should stand up a federal quarantine facility for

surge capacity. That's the recommendation that has not been acted on by Scott

Morrison, instead he's just choosing to blame the states.



I think Peter has done the right thing in making his criticisms of the way in which

some of the state quarantine has been run. We've seen some problems there,

but instead of simply blaming the states, I think Scott Morrison should take

responsibility. He promised to get people home. The Federal Government

closed the borders - now, that was the right thing to do - but we do have a

responsibility to ensure Australian citizens - who through no fault of their own

are stranded overseas - can get home safely and be safely quarantined so the

rest of the community can stay safe.



The problem is, early on, what we heard from Scott Morrison was: ah look, you

know, they should have come home already; people should have listened to the

advice. The reality is, many of them just couldn't get home. You might

remember we spoke about Australians in South America who when the borders

were shut and flights obviously started to dry up couldn't even leave where they

were because there was a domestic lockdown; they couldn't even get to the

airport. So, I think this is very concerning. Not only are we not going to get

people home by Christmas - which is what the Prime Minister promised - but

we risk having Australians stranded overseas for very, very long periods of time

and that's simply not responsible.



BEVAN: What facilities, do you think the Federal Government should be

opening up if we're not going to be using - if I've understood you correctly - the

medi-hotels run by the states? Does the Federal Government have the

wherewithal to set up these kinds of facilities to get 37,000 extra people home

by Christmas?



WONG: I think the Prime Minister isn't even trying to get people home by

Christmas. He's blaming the states and he's now saying: well, actually when I

made that promise, it was only about the people who were overseas then -

about half of whom have come home.



I'll go back to what I said earlier. The Federal Government should do what was

recommended to them, which is to stand up a federal quarantine facility for

surge capacity. That was the recommendation in their own report.



BEVAN: But do you know where that would be?



WONG: Well, I'm not in government and I don't have all the information. We

made some suggestions early on to stand up Howard Springs as a federal

quarantine facility. Jane Halton raised other options. She talked about RAAF

Learmonth - that's in her report as well - that there should be further quarantine

centres opened up there. But the point is, as much as you and I might discuss

this, you're not the Prime Minister and I'm not the Federal Health Minister - and

these are things they could do and they're not doing them.



BEVAN: And you think they could be doing it or they've got to find a way of

doing it without the states running these medi-hotels? Or would the medi-hotels

supplement what a federal system...



WONG: I think the principle is safe quarantine and, of course, the states should

do everything they can to ensure that any state quarantine facilities are safe. I

think Peter Malinauskas has made very reasonable criticisms of the state

quarantine. I understand that the Premier has listened to that and is

commissioning a review and that's a good thing. But over and above the need

for safe quarantine in state facilities, the point here is the Federal Government -

Mr Morrison - has washed his hands of this and he's left it to the states and he

can't wash his hands of it because it is a federal responsibility and the feds do

have capacity to deal with this and they should. It simply hasn't been a priority.



BEVAN: Now, lots of texts coming in on this. We're talking to Penny Wong,

Labor's Shadow Foreign Affairs Minister; Leader of the Labor Party in the

Senate. One person says: Penny Wong, look, people chose to live overseas

and not in Australia for years - now they want to get back. People who are

travelling are the first who should have been brought back, others are settled

overseas. So, you're well aware that there's a portion of the audience that's not

very sympathetic?



WONG: Sure. Well what I'd say to that texter is this: first, 36,000 people who

are stranded is not the entirety of the number of Australians overseas. And

there are very many Australians are doing precisely what your caller or your

listener is suggesting, which is staying put. People who have settled overseas;

they're not on the list to come home. So, those stranded already is only one

component or one proportion of the people of the Australians who are overseas.

Your listener is right, not everybody overseas needs to or wants to come home.

So, these are people who have said: I want to come home. I want to come

home, I want to try and get on a flight and please reserve me a place in

quarantine. And that's the number that keeps growing as are the number of

people who are vulnerable.



I'd also made this point - that people's circumstances change. There was a

case that I dealt with of a woman who is a nurse. She was in the United

Kingdom, she was working at a public hospital there. She made a very decent

decision when the borders were shut that she didn't want to walk away from her

contract because it wasn't the right thing to do as a health worker to walk away

during a pandemic. Now, her contract has ended, but she can't get home. Now,

someone like that - and there are so many others who are stranded overseas,

not because they've been irresponsible, not because they are having fun, but

because they have been unable to get back to Australia. They've been unable

to get on flights; most people.



We had evidence yesterday at the Senate Select Committee where people - I

think it was a family in Canada who spent $50,000 on cancelled flights to get

them and their children home. So my experience is that Australians are

resourceful. They're not asking for everything to be done for them, but people

are getting desperate because they are booking flights, which have been

cancelled, and cancelled, and cancelled and they simply can't get home.





The story you raised today about Ben, which is a United Airlines flight from San

Francisco to LA, to connect to a flight to Sydney - and the United Airlines flight

was grounded for three hours so they had to spend the night in San Francisco,

which is why he came back late - no fault of their own. But the really sad thing

is the Facebook messages that I've read are that they called the Department of

Foreign Affairs and were told that they had to speak to the Department of

Industry.



BEVAN: That's the voice of Senator Penny Wong. Penny Wong, thank you for

you time.



WONG: It's great to speak with you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: CAITLIN RAPER 0432 522 598















