

ANIKA WELLS   MEMBER FOR LILLEY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA  THURSDAY, 6 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Queensland border closure; Victorian pandemic shutdown; COVID IR  reform; Parliament sitting in Canberra.

ANNELISE NIELSEN, HOST: Joining us live now is our pollie panel. Today we have  Liberal Senator Andrew Bragg and Labor MP Anika Wells.  Thank you both for your time.

ANIKA WELLS MP, MEMBER FOR LILLEY: Good morning.

NIELSEN: I’ve been looking forward to this chat because Anika, you’re up in Queensland,  Andrew, you’re down in New South Wales. This is where the border battle’s heating up  these days. We’ll start with you Anika Wells. Do you accept the PMs argument that if  Queensland’s going to shut the border to New South Wales and ACT, it needs to explain  why.

WELLS: The explanation’s pretty clear up here. The Premier is serving her people.  Queensland wants the borders shut. We’ve seen up to now a dozen instances of people  trying to sneak across the border. The Queensland Police are having to work very hard to  keep those cases in line. I think just this morning there’s reports that people have been  trying to fly in through New South Wales from Victoria to get into Queensland. Ultimately,  this is a question of stopping community transmission. And this is a tough decision that  Queenslanders are very supportive of.

NIELSEN: Andrew Bragg do you think that’s enough of a reason to shut the border or  should we start to see the medical advice from those Queensland Health authorities?

ANDREW BRAGG, SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES: Well Annelise I am sure that  there is medical advice underpinning this judgment from the Queensland Premier.

WELLS: There is.

BRAGG: I certainly hope that there is.

WELLS: There is.

BRAGG: Because you’d have to say that the very low level of community transmission in  New South Wales has enabled our state to continue operating almost as business as

usual. So it seems to be rather a draconian step but as I say it is a judgment that the  Queensland Premier needs to defend.

NIELSEN: Anika Wells when you say there is, we’ve seen W.A. come out with their  modelling and say look if we have the border open we’re going to have X-amount more  community transmission. Why aren’t we seeing the same from Queensland authorities?

WELLS: Well our Deputy Premier and Health Minister Steven Miles just confirmed this  morning that our CMO Dr Jeanette Young provided this advice. This is the advice she gave  the Queensland Government. And they announced it as quickly as possible after they took  the decision yesterday. So it is absolutely following medical advice. And something that  needs to be considered is that these things are very hard on our border communities and  having the Queensland police take hours to get through car by car in the process before  the borders are shut impacts those communities. They want the borders shut so they have  a bit more certainty as well. So it’s a decision that’s looking after those people along the  border as well as what the absolute majority of Queenslanders want.

NIELSEN: Andrew Bragg, do you think that’s enough to say that the Chief Medical Officer  says it’s a bad idea so we shouldn’t do it?

BRAGG: As I say,  I think it’s a draconian step but it is a judgment for the Queensland  Premier to defend. In New South Wales we have very low levels of community  transmission. In the last week, you’ve seen 10-12, 10-11 cases on each day. That is very  low level of community transmission for a state with 8 million people. So I think New South  Wales Health has done a great job in containing the virus here in this jurisdiction and of  course, that’s why New South Wales is performing quite strongly during this pandemic.

WELLS: Yeah, I think that’s all pretty fair to be honest. Happy to agree with Andrew where  I can but unfortunately a few bad eggs have spoiled it for the rest of the population  because with a dozen instances of Queensland police catching people trying to sneak over  the border, we have to act to prevent community transmission getting any worse up here.

NIELSEN: And this morning Steven Miles said on ABC Radio that they were shutting out  the ACT just because one person had been caught coming from New South Wales into the  ACT to try and evade those border restrictions. Is that a bit gratuitous Anika to be shutting  out an entire territory because of one person?

WELLS: I think it’s cautious and I suspect, based on my discussions with people in the  ACT ahead of parliament, you now, reconvening in Canberra, is that they are much more  keen to make sure that we all stay out of the ACT than vice versa.

NIELSEN: Andrew do you agree?

BRAGG: Well look there’s obviously a low level of community transmission in the ACT.  There’s more cases in Queensland so again it seems to be quite trivial. As I say it seems  to be a draconian judgment by the Queensland Premier but no doubt it’s something she  wants to live with and live by.

WELLS: A strong Premier making strong decisions I think, we’re very supportive up here.

NIELSEN: It’s almost like there’s an election coming. But just finally we want to address  what’s happening in Victoria today. It’s a really hard day, 250,000 Victorians expected to

lose their jobs with these shutdowns. Many businesses won’t reopen. Andrew Bragg do  you think this is the right call by the Andrews Government and what do you make of the  implementation of these Stage 4 shutdowns.

BRAGG: Well I mean obviously the national government would do all it can to support  Victoria get through this pandemic. I mean our role includes deploying the military, paying  JobKeeper and paying the increased JobSeeker rate. Really the State of Victoria has  gotten itself into this mess. Really it is now the role of the Federal and the State  Government to help try and help get it out. I mean I’m interested as a member of the  Morrison Government on what we can do to improve the level of private investment in  Australia after the pandemic. And so I’m very keen to see material changes fall out of the  Christian-Porter-led industrial relations reform plans. Equally in terms of the budget that  Josh Frydenberg will hand down in October I’m hopeful that we’ll see more on the tax front.  So I’m really interested in what the national government can do to spur private investment  over the medium to long term.

NIELSEN: Anika Wells what do you make of that idea that the Federal Government should  be taking over in Victoria?

WELLS: Well I think the Federal Government has a fair bit on its plate with respect to  executing policy on COVID as is. Something I’ve been noticing Melbourne businesses  talking about this morning with response to the closures is that they feel that they lack  certainty. That is something that workers are feeling across the board, not just businesses  in Melbourne. You’ve had the childcare policy announced yesterday. The number one  piece of feedback coming out of that was that there is still a lack of certainty for parents  and for educators out of that policy. What everybody wants is certainty. What Governments  and the Parliament, as soon as we can get back there, should be focused on is providing  that certainty with good specific policy response. Andrew is right that the Morrison  Government has now fired the starting gun on IR and have proposed that deregulating IR  is the best way to assist the response. I think that what COVID has shown us is what an  absolutely crisis state insecure work is now in this country. And I don’t think the answer to  insecure work is deregulating IR further. I think the answer is providing better pay,  conditions and certainty to workers. So we should start, Andrew and I can agree, we can  start on improving certainty for absolutely everybody is getting good COVID response  policy right now. And that requires getting parliament back to work.

NIELSEN: Andrew Bragg do you support parliament coming back? Including some of  those Victorian MPs would have to quarantine for two weeks under the current regulations.

BRAGG: Well, Parliament is going back.

NIELSEN: But do you support that if those Victorian MPs come up that they would have to  isolate for two weeks?

BRAGG: Well there will be arrangements that will be made to ensure that the people of the  Capital Territory are not affected and I’m sure that those arrangements will be worked  through in a bipartisan way.

NIELSEN: I hope they are because it’s a big impact on our business model as well. So I  have a bit of a vested interest in that one. But we will have to leave it there. Anika Wells  and Andrew Bragg thank you both for your time.



BRAGG: Nice disclosure.

NIELSEN: (laughing) I think it’s blatantly obvious when you’re watching but thankyou.

WELLS: Always a pleasure. Have a good day.

BRAGG: See ya.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: CATHERINE PALMER 0424 823 424







