THE HON MELISSA PRICE MP  Minister for Defence Industry  Member for Durack

750 construction jobs in WA for new Navy facilities

Western Australia will receive a timely, major economic boost with up to 750  construction jobs supported through works set to commence later this year on new  Defence facilities at HMAS Stirling and Henderson.

Minister for Defence Industry, the Hon Melissa Price MP, today announced the award of  a $365 million managing contract to Lendlease Building Contractors for the first tranche  of works at HMAS Stirling and the Australian Maritime Complex.

The new facilities will support Navy’s new Perth-based ships, as well as the increased  number of Navy personnel living and training at HMAS Stirling.

Minister Price said the Morrison Government’s record investment in defence capability  was more important now than ever.

“Major infrastructure projects like these will continue to support our defence and  construction industries at a time of great uncertainty during the COVID-19 pandemic,”  Minister Price said.

“The Morrison Government has ensured local industry is given maximum opportunity to  be involved, with Lendlease committing to an 85 per cent target for local sub-contract  work under our Defence Policy for Industry Participation.

“These works are the third package to be delivered under the Navy Capability  Infrastructure Sub-program, which will total approximately $2.1 billion of new facilities  and infrastructure to be delivered across Australia over the next six years.”

The facilities at HMAS Stirling include living-in accommodation and a specialist training  centre to train Navy’s crews in operating and maintaining the new Arafura Class  Offshore Patrol Vessels (OPVs).

The Australian Maritime Complex site will be used by Navy, in concert with key industry  partners, for operational maintenance and through-life support of the Arafura Class.

Today’s announcement follows the commencement of construction of the remaining ten  new Arafura Class OPVs, being built at the Civmec shipyard in Henderson. The first two  OPVs are being built in Adelaide.

No publication date: received by Parl Library 04/04/2020

The first of the Arafura Class vessels, HMAS Arafura, will be based at HMAS Stirling, is  planned to commence trials in 2021 and begin operational employment from 2022.



Media contacts  Kathy Quinn (Minister Price’s office): +61 468 369 301  Charlotte Butler (Minister Price’s office): +61 406 338 521  Defence Media: (02) 6127 1999, media@defence.gov.au





Authorised by the Hon Melissa Price MP, Minister for Defence Industry, Australia

No publication date: received by Parl Library 04/04/2020

