

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES

MEMBER FOR HUNTER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS

MONDAY, 10 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Coal prices; Gas for post-COVID recovery.



CHRIS KENNY, HOST: Labor’s Agriculture and Resources spokesperson, Joel Fitzgibbon.

Thanks for joining us again, Joel. Very quickly, there's a lot of talk about coal consumption

dropping globally. I know there's been some cutbacks in your own region of the Hunter

Valley. A lot on the left saying ‘oh, this is great news. This means coal’s on the way out -

renewables up’. This is just a global recession, isn’t it? And this is unequivocally bad news

for the Hunter region of New South Wales, and other parts of Australia?



JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: G’day Chris. Yes, that is exactly right and

the front page of the local newspaper here - the Newcastle Herald - screamed doom and

gloom this morning based on yet another report from an institute, so-called, funded, of

course, by people who want to - in quotes - accelerate the transition to renewables. And

what these people do is they don't so much analyse what's happening on the coal market

internationally - they scrounge around for information which justifies their public

statements. And it's as if they’re celebrating the fact that coal demand is in decline

because of the pandemic. Now if Cyprus Lakes, my local golf club, is doing it tough

through the pandemic because the tourist economy has fallen and people shed a tear,

rightly so. So do I. But when the coal industry starts laying off people because China,

South Korea and Japan and India are using less thermal and coking coal, rather shed a

tear they celebrate the vindication of their long-term public pronouncements, and for me it's

a source of great disappointment.



KENNY: People in your own Shadow Cabinet, your own party and your own Shadow

Cabinet, seem to run the same lines. Mark Butler your Environment spokesperson is

saying that we shouldn't be pushing for renewables now - we shouldn't be pushing for gas,

sorry - we should be pushing for renewables. He wants coal and gas off the agenda and a

focus on renewables. Surely, if we can exploit gas reserves around Narrabri in Western

New South Wales, that will be good for jobs in this country, as well as reduce emissions

compared to coal?



FITZGIBBON: We need to push for all of it, Chris. I mean renewables are currently at

around 23 or 24 per cent of the market. And it would be amazing if in the next decade or

two we could get that up to 50 per cent, or more. We'll have to increase it because of the

ageing nature of so many of our coal-fired generators. But even if we can get to 50 per

cent, then axiomatically 50 per cent of our electricity will by necessity come from fossil

fuels, either the younger coal generators and new gas peaking stations. So, we need to do

both, and we need to create jobs, and we can create jobs in all of those industries - gas,

coal- by extending some of the newer coal-fired stations with carbon capture and storage,

and of course building new peaking stations. So it has to be a mix of things in the wake of

the pandemic - we’ll need every job we can get our hands on.



KENNY: Well gas is a crucial transition fuel - is the term a lot of people use - but it is

absolutely crucial especially if you want power that can kick-in quickly and backup

renewables. Doesn't Mark Butler need to come out publicly and support that line? Doesn’t

that need to be Labor's approach?



FITZGIBBON: Well Mark Butler does not oppose gas, for use in electricity generation.

And, nor does he oppose gas as a feedstock, that feeds so many of our manufacturing

processes. People often don't fully appreciate that gas is not just something we use to burn

and produce electricity. Things like fertilisers, ammonia et cetera need gas as an ingredient

into their end products. And gas will be absolutely crucial, and you know we are an energy-rich country - we have so much gas just waiting to be tapped. We can do that in an

environmentally-friendly way, sticking to the science. We've done it successfully in the past

and we can do it in the future, but the ideologues have now moved on, Chris. They realise



that our coal-fired generators are in decline, but renewables can’t possibly offset the loss of

that generation capacity in the coming decades, and now there's an opportunity for people

like you and I and many other people in the manufacturing sector to promote the use of

gas, as we should do.



KENNY: Joel Fitzgibbon, thanks so much for joining us.



FITZGIBBON: It’s a please Chris.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













