

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  CANBERRA  FRIDAY, 14 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: 75th anniversary of Victory in the Pacific Day; aged care  Coronavirus crisis; Aged Care Royal Commission; Government  backflipping on Clive Palmer’s High Court challenge; Ruby Princess.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR  PARTY: Tomorrow morning I’ll be at the Australian War Memorial to  commemorate Victory in the Pacific, the end of World War II, paying tribute to  the veterans who put their lives on the line and so many who lost lives to  defend our nation. I must say, when I think of what is going on in aged care  facilities at the moment, some of the stories that I am hearing, the pictures that  we are seeing, my heart is shredded. The fact is, that too many of our sons and  daughters of our World War II veterans are saying their final goodbyes to their  parents over FaceTime. Our incredible aged care workers are holding the  hands of our precious elderly as they pass. The fact is, we as a country need to  do much better. When the Prime Minister stood in the courtyard on the  Thursday of a sitting week, after Question Time, and waved around the  document, saying that it was the plan to deal with COVID-19 and its impact on  Australians, that document said very clearly and I quote Section 4.1.4: “The  Australian Government will also be responsible for residential aged care  facilities.” Nothing equivocal about it. Very clearly there from the Prime Minister  saying that the Australian Government was responsible. The Australian  Government now needs to do more than say they will await a national cabinet  discussion, so that once again we can have lines drawn between whether  things are federal or state responsibilities. Because the Prime Minister has  already declared that it’s a federal responsibility. Now after the closing address  from the Council Assisting the Royal Commission who outlined the failure of the  Federal Government to have a plan when it comes to looking after our elderly  Australians in aged care, who said very clearly and pointedly that a number of  the deaths could have been avoided, who said very pointedly that the problems  in aged care could have been foreseen, particularly after the events we saw at

Newmarch House and other facilities in March and April, the Commissioner,  Tony Pagone, urged the Federal Government to create an aged care specific  national coordinating body. Labor is urging today the Federal Government to  ensure that it creates an aged care specific national coordinating body in line  with the statement of Commissioner Pagone. We urge the Government to act  on this as a matter of urgency and therefore to use that body to make sure that  there’s appropriate staff, there’s appropriate training and, importantly one of the  most astonishing facts that has come out through the Royal Commission and  other evidence and statements, is the fact that aged care workers haven’t had  access to personal protective equipment. The idea that in 2020, someone  looking after an elderly, sick Australian, who has helped build this country, has  to decide whether they will use a left glove or a right globe because they can’t  use both is simply not good enough. We need to do much better. We need to  be inspired by the stories that we will commemorate tomorrow and we will  commemorate this week about the effort that these Australians had done for us,  for our country. The least we could do for them is to give them dignity and  respect in their elder years.

JOURNALIST: Mr Albanese, the Prime Minister says that he did have a plan in  place for aged care, they have [inaudible] at various press conferences. How  do you think those plans could have actually been enforced because clearly,  they haven’t been?

ALBANESE: Clearly, the Prime Minister, to pretend there has been a plan, if  this is a plan, I would hate to see what it would be if it was unplanned. Because  quite clearly we haven’t seen the sort of outcomes that we would regard as  acceptable. And the Prime Minister himself half conceded that today.

JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister said this morning, he was asked specifically  about the Commission recommendation yesterday for a national body and he  said what’s in place in Victoria mirrors that. Is it good enough to have it in place  in Victoria?

ALBANESE: Quite clearly it doesn’t mirror that, because that’s not a national  coordinating body in place in one state. Quite clearly that’s not the case. So the  Prime Minister has answered his own question. Here we have a very clear  recommendation from the aged care Royal Commissioner. This is a Royal  Commission not instigated by the Government, but conceded to by the  Government after a considerable campaign. Aged care has been a major issue  for a long period of time. And we need to do better and the Prime Minister has  not responded, otherwise what’s he saying? That the Royal Commissioner  asked for something that was already there? I think the Royal Commissioner,  who has focused on these issues along with his co-Commissioner, Lynelle  Briggs, what they are doing is a good job of getting the information. What we  need is a government committed into actually implementing recommendations

and it’d be a start if the Prime Minister responded positively to what’s a  constructive suggestion.

JOURNALIST: Do you accept one of the arguments from the Feds today, that  the reason it is getting into aged care is because there is community  transmission in Victoria. And is the blame for community transmission ultimately  with the Premier of Victoria, Daniel Andrews?

ALBANESE: What I don’t accept is the blame game when the Federal  Government itself have said in their documentation that they are responsible for  aged care.

JOURNALIST: Why would a national coordinating body be better than one on  the ground in Victoria? The Government’s argument being on the ground in  Victoria where the problem is, is a more direct way to address the problem.

ALBANESE: Where was the problem before, two months ago, three months  ago? It was in NSW. That is the point. That’s the point. Put in place  mechanisms and systems that drive the change through. That you don’t wait for  there to be a problem. One of the problems with this Government’s response  has been that it has been that word, response. What we actually need across a  range of issues is preemptive action. That’s what this Government doesn’t  seem to understand and when it comes to, for example paid pandemic leave,  they say that paid pandemic leave should occur after there’s an outbreak of the  pandemic. No, what we need is structures put in place that minimise damage,  not that deal with the damage.

JOURNALIST: [inaudible] Does that say that there should be more of these  facilities run, with staff and patient ratios, by the states and not left to the private  sector?

ALBANESE: It is something that needs to be looked at, arising out of the Royal  Commission. And one of the things that happens, in general when you look at  service delivery, when service delivery is based upon making profits, you  change the dynamic of that service delivery. And in aged care, we are seeing a  real distinction between outcomes in publicly run facilities and those run by the  private sector for profit.

JOURNALIST: Can I just ask really quickly on WA, the PM said he wished WA  all the best in its battle against Clive Palmer, billion and billions of dollars of  arbitration, which is a big deal given WA and the rest of the country is facing a  recession. What’s your response to this whole saga?

ALBANESE: That Scott Morrison was in it up to his neck. Scott Morrison and  his Government where there supporting Clive Palmer’s legal case against

Western Australia. Scott Morrison said, indeed and Christian Porter repeatedly,  they had no choice but to participate in the legal case on the side of Mr Palmer.  They criticised Mark McGowan repeatedly for maintaining WA’s borders. This  Prime Minister opposed border closures before he supported them. He  opposed wage subsidies before he supported them. He opposed lockdowns  before supporting them. He opposed restrictions in areas like entry from the US  until he supported them. He opposed Parliament sitting, remember, for six  months before he supported them. This is a Prime Minister who changes when  the mood changes. This is not a Prime Minister who is showing leadership on  issues like the need to protect West Australians and West Australians should  be very grateful that they have Mark McGowan leading that that State rather  than Scott Morrison and his ally Clive Palmer. Thanks very much.

JOURNALIST: Could I just ask quickly on the Ruby Princess, on ABF?

ALBANESE: Sure, I was told you wanted a quick press conference. I just want  to make the point I tried to deliver for you.

JOURNALIST: So we’ve heard…

ALBANESE: Just as I get out, they dragged me back. Godfather Three.

JOURNALIST: We’ve heard that the ABF did not handover the details of Ruby  Princess passengers to the airlines to let them know whether they were  carrying the Ruby Princess passengers because of privacy concerns. Is that  acceptable?

ALBANESE: It's an absolute disgrace, is what it is. And it's an indictment of  Peter Dutton in his running of the Australian Border Force. It's also an  indictment of the fact that they say they're not responsible for health, Scott  Morrison said. When quite clearly the people involved in the ABF, I think the  figure that they used, I noted in one of the documents was, to do it accurately  920,000 medical checks a year, Australian Border Force do. I think it's an  outrage that the Australian Border Force were allowing people to come through  Sydney Airport and Melbourne Airport, get on planes to other capital cities and  to regional centres. Something I raised directly with the Prime Minister, directly  with the Prime Minister and which he said the medical advice was no problem.  People coming through Sydney Airport without so much as a temperature  check. So when we talk about checks of quarantine issues, the Commonwealth  clearly has responsibility for quarantine, people were allowed to come in and  allowed to spread throughout the country. And of course, the worst example is  the Ruby Princess, which saw 30 people lose their lives, and which was  responsible for hundreds of infections. And the idea that no one has  responsibility in Border Force for this is an outrage. And the idea as well, that  it's acceptable that the Morrison Government won't allow public officials to give



evidence before an inquiry that's been established by Gladys Berejiklian’s  Government is an outrage and it should make every Australian angry that that  is not happening. Thanks.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT:  LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053







