BILL SHORTEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT SERVICES

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE

SCHEME

MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

TODAY SHOW

TUESDAY, 20 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Melbourne hotel quarantine; U.S election; Josh Frydenberg’s

commentary on Victorian restrictions.



ALLISON LANGDON, HOST: Thanks for joining us this morning. Would you believe, there

has been another shocking development in Melbourne's hotel quarantine scandal. Now

more than 240 people are having to undergo tests for hepatitis and HIV after concerns

were raised that blood testing equipment intended for single use only was reused multiple

times. To discuss, I'm joined by Shadow Minister for Government Services Bill Shorten

who's in Melbourne. And in Miami, Ebony Bowden from The New York Post. Bill, this is

unbelievable. It's farcical. These poor people.



BILL SHORTEN, MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG: Yeah, it must be really stressful and

worrying for the people who've gone through this. I hope they can get the test results back

as quick as possible. I mean, I only know the details I've read in the paper, but it just must

be really stressful for the people involved.



LANGDON: But just, to read this in the paper this morning and think, I mean, what else

could go wrong with this hotel quarantine scheme? We now hear that the Chief Health

Officer may not have given entirely truthful evidence at the inquiry about the use of security

guards in regards to which emails he shared with the inquiry. He also knew the Kiwis were

coming. I mean, how can people have any confidence, Bill, in the leadership when there is

so much confusion?



SHORTEN: Well, I think the Chief Medical Officer is due to give evidence today or

tomorrow in the hotel inquiry, so we'll find out more about that. But, you know, I think this

pinprick test issue is just a timely reminder, not only have we got new viruses like COVID,

but we've got to keep our guard up against all of the old nasties that we know about.



LANGDON: But, Bill, how is it, though, that, you know, you had Brett Sutton, who allegedly

knew that the Kiwis were coming in. You had the Premier come out yesterday saying he

knew nothing about it and he was blindsided. How was it that they're not all talking to each

other?



SHORTEN: Well, I don't know. No doubt the facts will emerge on this as they gradually

come out on other matters. I mean, I've just come up to Canberra. I've been in lockdown

and restrictions for 110 days. I mean, Melbourne people are still doing it really tough. And I

just think they just want to get this done with and move on.



LANGDON: Is it good enough?



SHORTEN: Well, I look at America and what's happening there and what, they've lost

220,000 people. I mean, the mistakes aren't good enough. But I also look at what's

happened in Australia and for all our problems, I still think we're very fortunate compared to

many other places in the world. But it’s tough.



LANGDON: I'm sure you probably agree with that, Ebony. I mean, if you look at

Melbourne, we've got hospitality and retail, they're still closed. What do you make of that

when in the US you're recording, you know, 70,000 new infections daily?



EBONY BOWDEN, NEW YORK POST: Look, Ally, it's incredibly concerning. I'm here in

Florida on the campaign trail, and it's really interesting to see how different states are

approaching the virus. A lot of people down here still don't think it's a big deal. They still

don't think it's serious. Restaurants, bars are reopened. They're encouraging people to

wear masks, but there's a real libertarian streak in this country and people don't want to

wear masks. And I think, you know, cases are going up, sure. But we also have increased

hospitalisations. And I think the US still isn't prepared for another really big wave,

combined with the flu season as well. We're heading into winter here. So it's a really

worrying time.



LANGDON: Well, we just saw I mean, right now Donald Trump is holding a rally. We've

got some live pictures here at the moment. We also just heard him saying, look, you know,

there's a big crowd here, but there's twice as many people outside. Let them all in. I mean,

you're talking about a health crisis in the US. Ebony, how serious is your President taking

that?



BOWDEN: I mean, it's really remarkable, Ally. This President was in hospital with the

coronavirus three weeks ago himself. And he is 74 years old. And as soon as he got out of

hospital, he was back on the campaign trail. I think a lot of people thought him catching the

virus would really change his perspective, but it really hasn't. I was on a campaign call with

him this morning where he was talking really disparagingly about his own infectious

disease experts, calling them idiots and saying that the American people were tired of the

virus and wanted to get on with their lives. I think that he has a responsibility to set the

tone. And is he doing that at the moment? I don't think so.



LANGDON: Well, let's just take a listen. Let's have a listen to his tone. He's talking to the

rally now.



LIVE VIDEO; PRESIDENT TRUMP: We helped all of the states and the governors. Some

did a good job. Some did a horrible job. I'll tell you who they are, one day. Do I have the all-time great book? I have the real book. But like a lot of these other people, I don't like

writing books while I'm running.



LANGDON: I mean, Ebony, I mean, we know the polls look bad for Donald Trump, but do

you think he can pull it back?



BOWDEN: Look, anyone who tells you right now, Ally, that they know who is going to win

the election is lying to you. Obviously, we saw in 2016 all of the polls showed that Hillary

Clinton would win in a landslide. And, of course, Donald Trump eked out a win. I spoke just

a second ago about being on a call with President Trump this morning, he was telling his

campaign that he thinks they are going to win. They're going to win this thing, they're going

to do it again. The polls really do need to be taken with a grain of salt. I know many Trump

voters who are still in the closet about their support of him. So, look, it's going to be very

close. Both sides say it's going to be close. But anyone who's putting a lot of credence in

the polls and saying that Biden is going to do it and he's going to win and will be in the

White House in January, it's definitely not over yet.



LANGDON: Bill, I mean, we know that you love Donald Trump. How would you feel about

four more years?



SHORTEN: Oh, well, I mean, first of all, I think Ebony's right. Polls can be wrong [laughs].

But in terms of Biden, I've had the chance to meet the former Vice President. What's wrong

with a return to normal from the reality show? Reality shows are fine. But I mean, I think

Joe Biden is courteous. I think he's dignified. I think he's a return to that old school

courteousness. Not everything in politics should be about the destruction of your opponent,

should it?



LANGDON: I don't know. I don't know what normal is in the US anymore. Do you, Ebony?



BOWDEN: I certainly don't, Ally. I have a front row seat to this, and I, it's just… yeah.

We're lost.



LANGDON: Are you all right this morning, Bill? I mean, you've just come out of 15 days of

quarantine. I don't know why you had to do an extra one. You all good?



SHORTEN: Yeah. And listen, I just want to say to Melburnians that the rest of Australia's

moved on, but Melbourne's caught up in it. So, I really just want to see my hometown beat

this thing and get back to, I don’t know if we’d use the word normal but, I know what we're

in at the moment isn't normal.



LANGDON: So, does that mean you agree with Treasurer Josh Frydenberg and his stoush

with the Premier?



SHORTEN: Well, I've seen Josh, you know, chipping into Andrews like, you know, I think

people are sick of the politics. I mean, I can't help but think though, wouldn't it be good if

Josh knew someone who knew the Treasurer of Australia? [laughs]. I mean, there's things

that the federal government could do. I mean, how about childcare? How about having

JobKeeper for early childhood educators? And the sole traders and a lot of business



structures are not getting support from the Feds. But then again, I'm getting sucked into the

debate, which people hate. So I just want Melbourne and Melbourne companies to get

back into it.



LANGDON: Yeah. I think we just want everyone to get on and to sort it out. Well, thank

you. You're right there, Bill, and we're glad you're out of quarantine too - you can go out for

dinner in Canberra, that's nice.



SHORTEN: Thanks, I nearly had agoraphobia, fear of open spaces, all these people. And

they’re all sitting down, I’m like, what are you doing? You'll get fined.



LANGDON: Institutionalised. Alright, Bill, Ebony thanks for joining us this morning, good to

see a smile on your face this morning, Bill.



SHORTEN: Cheers guys.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM HOULIHAN 0438 366 400



