

JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN



NEW DATA CONFIRMS MORE THAN 100,000 OLDER AUSTRALIANS  STILL WAITING FOR HOME CARE

New data has revealed 102,000 older Australians are still facing a lengthy wait for home  care, confirming the Morrison Government has failed to respond to its Royal Commission.

The Royal Commission’s interim report described the waitlist for home care as ‘neglect’  and called for urgent action last year but there are still more than 100,000 older Australians  waiting for care.

Despite a series of splashy announcements on ‘new’ home care packages, the Morrison  Government has failed to deliver real change for older Australians waiting for care.

There were over 100,000 older Australians waiting for care when the Royal Commission  called for action and there are still over 100,000 waiting today.

The tragic failure of the Morrison Government to not better protect older Australians in  aged care homes from COVID-19 will only mean more people choose to receive care at  home.

The home care packages announced in the Budget won’t come close to fixing the lengthy  waiting list.

How is this acceptable that older Australians in their 90s are waiting years to receive the  care they have been approved for?

Older Australians face an anguishing and sometimes deadly wait for home care, but the  Morrison Government has not done enough to fix this crisis. The impact of this failure is  shocking.

Last month officials confirmed more than 30,000 older Australians have died waiting for  care in the last three years that they had already been approved for.

It has previously been revealed more than 30,000 went into aged care homes prematurely  in just two years while waiting for home care.

Day after day the evidence mounts of serious neglect in aged care and every day all we



see from the Morrison Government is running away, passing the buck and not accepting  responsibility for its own failures.

Neglect. That’s the legacy of this Government when it comes to aged care.

TUESDAY, 27 OCTOBER 2020

MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119







