Economic stimulus package for Norfolk Island and the Indian Ocean Territories

1/2

minister.infrastructure.gov.au/marino/media-release/economic-stimulus-package-norfolk-island-and-indian-ocean-territories The Hon Nola Marino MP 11/08/2020

I am pleased to announce the Morrison Government will provide $13.5 million of  additional economic stimulus to support the remote communities and businesses of  Norfolk Island and Christmas Island and the Cocos (Keeling) Islands, as part of the  COVID-19 response.

I am committed to delivering this economic support package for these territories as I  understand the significant impact the Coronavirus and associated restrictions has had  on tourism and the local economies.

This additional funding will support the delivery of local projects and create local jobs  on Norfolk Island and in the Indian Ocean Territories (IOT). The projects will help to  position your communities to be ready for the return of tourism.

The $13.5 million will deliver community infrastructure projects, and also includes  more than $400,000 for each territory for tourism promotion for Norfolk Island and the  IOT. These tourism promotion projects will ensure the territories are visible to future  travellers once travel restrictions are lifted.

The Government is continuing to ensure Norfolk Island, Christmas Island and the  Cocos (Keeling) Islands have access to a range of economic support measures, in  recognition of the impacts of the Coronavirus restrictions on the tourism sector and  related business.

Not only will this package support shovel-ready projects, it will assist in increasing local  employment and provide support to businesses and the local economies.

On Norfolk Island, there will be support for 22 projects ranging from revitalisation of  the Bicentennial Centre and Rawson Hall, to upgrades of sports facilities and  playgrounds and improvement of the footpath from the airport to Burnt Pine.

In the IOT, there will be 23 projects delivered including community initiatives  identified in the Christmas Island and Cocos Strategic Plans - including Flying Fish  Cove landscaping works and renovation of the Cocos retail precinct.

This tailored economic package has been made available in recognition of the  Commonwealth’s special role in the governance of the territories. The package is  provided in addition to national programs such as the JobKeeper and JobSeeker  payment scheme. I thank the Administrators of Norfolk Island and the IOT for their  input into the development of the package, informed by local stakeholders on island.



Further information on the key projects for each location will be provided in coming



weeks.



Media Contact:



Sophie Beeton (02) 6277 4293



2/2

