

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW   ABC AFTERNOON BRIEFING  MONDAY, 16 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; announcement of second stimulus package for  coronavirus.

PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: I'm joined now by the Opposition Leader, Anthony  Albanese. Anthony Albanese, welcome.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Good  afternoon, Patricia.

KARVELAS: Excellent. Let's just start on what the Minister for Trade has confirmed with  me, which is the Government now working on a second stimulus package. Clearly, it's  worth a significant sum of money, days after the first stimulus package was announced. Is  that something Labor would welcome and support?

ALBANESE: Well, it's confirmation that they didn't get it right the first time.

KARVELAS: Is it? I want to interrupt. But the minister said there's evidence in the last  couple of days that things are worsening. Is it confirmation that it was wrong the first time?

ALBANESE: Seriously, Patricia, for example, the airline industry put forward a proposal to  the Government at the end of last week. That was about what was happening. They knew  very clearly the pressure that they were under. And what we saw, for example, with the  tourism package was actually money taken off, money that had been allocated for the  bushfire crisis and given to the coronavirus response. So, in a range of ways I think the  first response has been inadequate. It hasn't been legislated, of course, at this point in  time. And it hasn't flowed out the door. We need to recognise here that early action will  mean that there's less action required. The sooner the move the better. And that's why the  Government needs to ensure that they get it right.

KARVELAS: So, are you surprised the Government is working on a second  stimulus this early on?

ALBANESE: Well, it says that they didn't get it right the first time. It's just days afterwards.  I think they were quite clearly gaps in terms of ensuring that some sectors that would be  impacted. We've said, repeatedly that casual workers, gig workers in the gig economy,

people who are sole traders, are very concerned that there's a big gap there. They're going  to miss out on income. And many of them are fearful over where they will get the money to  survive for them and their families from. There was one fellow who was working on camera  duty on my statement to the nation that was broadcast on ABC last night. He essentially is  a contract worker, the sole bread-winner in his family a wife and three kids and they are  very concerned, people like him, very concerned about the impact that this will have on  their capacity to just pay their bills and put food on the table for their families.

KARVELAS: The Reserve Bank this morning signalled it is preparing to move to  quantitative easing. Is that something you would welcome? Do you think it's necessary?

ALBANESE: Well, I think it's prudent to do so. And that's why the Reserve Bank have  done so. The Reserve Bank, of course, were warning a long time ago, many months  before the bushfire crisis and coronavirus that the economy was not doing well. They were  calling for stimulus and for stimulus and for fiscal policy to do some of the work that they  said monetary policy couldn't do all the heavy lifting. That's why this Government needs to  make sure, not just in terms of announcements, but the money flows out the door. We  know for the bushfires, the notional $2 billion allocation, just $200 million as of a week ago  went out the door. That doesn't make sense. When you have an issue like this, you need  to make sure that the money is spent and flowing around the economy, creating that  multiplier effect, as a matter of urgency. The Government does need to make sure that  they learn some of the lessons from the way they handled the bushfire crisis and ensure  that money does flow quickly.

KARVELAS: Just on the health front and what's now been described increasingly as  flattening the curve and for those who don't know what that means, it's so we don't have a  big spike in terms of the numbers of coronavirus. What else do you want the Government  to do? They've made some significant announcements in the last day. What more do you  want them to do?

ALBANESE: Well, I think for a start the rollout of pop-up clinics whereby people can get  tested needs to be done as a matter of urgency. The talk about that not happening until  May is of great concern. The confusing messages which are there. There are still people at  hospitals in my area, like Royal Prince Alfred, who were queuing last week for some 5-6  hours only to be told that because they had not been to China, they'd been to the US, they  weren't eligible for testing. That's really not good enough. It's quite clear that a number of  cases have come from the United States. We need to make sure that we're on the front  foot. We need to make sure that when we're in Blacktown last week, they were concerned  at the clinic there, they had run out of personal protection equipment, gloves, etc within the  next 24 hours. We need to make sure that happens. There's some good things going on. In  South Australia, there's a drive-thru testing facility. There's no reason why that can't be  rolled out around the country. We need to look at where best practice has occurred and  where the outcomes have been better than others, such as South Korea, for example, that  has rolled out a massive testing of the population. That seems to have been effective in  containing the virus more so than other countries.

KARVELAS: Another 37 people in New South Wales have tested positive to COVID-19.  The Health Minister, Brad Hazzard, says it's likely there will be an exponential increase in  coronavirus cases in the next few weeks. Given that, and given the fact that most people  concede that school closures are inevitable, why not close them now?

ALBANESE: That's a very good point you make, Patricia. I think we need to have an

abundance of caution here. Part of my concern with the mixed messages that have been  out there is, you know, on Friday, saying, that from Monday, people couldn't go to sporting  events, but go for your life on Saturday and Sunday. It just fails the common-sense test.

KARVELAS: Do you think schools should be closed now? I know many independent  schools are doing it. But it seems that that is not the plan. They say that they're waiting for  a bigger spike.

ALBANESE: Well, I think that in all areas, health. The lesson is that prevention is better  than cure. I think the medical experts, I'm sure are providing advice to the Government.  The Government should be acting on that. I think it's important that that occur, rather than  it be political decisions. We need to make decisions based upon health outcomes. And  certainly, people like Norman Swan have been very vocal about what is required.

KARVELAS: I want to nail this down, if I can. You think schools should be shut down?

ALBANESE: No, I think doctors should be, medical experts, should be making the advice  to Government.

KARVELAS: They're already saying, the Government would say, I mean, they would say  they're taking the advice and the advice is not to close. You're saying you want to err on  the side of caution. You mentioned Dr Norman Swan. You're right. He's been arguing you  need to shut schools down now.

ALBANESE: Well, if they're saying, and I'm not privy to the latest medical advice that has  happened today, to the Government, if they're saying that schools are going to shut in a  week or two weeks, or not come back after the next holiday period, then surely one of the  things that has to occur here is that just as people have to trust the authorities, authorities  have to trust the people as well. And bring them into their confidence. Let them know  what's going on. I think the flattening the curve, for example, has been a significant  breakthrough, telling people what the objective is there makes sense. It will build  confidence. Because if you don't have that, if there's not a trust in people, then people will  clearly respond in ways that we've seen in supermarkets, etc, whereby the buying of toilet  paper and other products doesn't make a great deal of rational sense and indeed has  consequences for people who actually need a smaller supply, poorer people basically can't  afford to keep weeks or let alone months, of supplies. So, we need to be rational about  this. The Government needs to be very transparent about where this is headed. I would err  on the side of caution here. In terms of the advice that the Government is getting, and they  need to act sooner rather than later. Whether it's on the health issues or whether it be on  the economic issues, we still haven't had Parliament sit. And that's one of the reasons why  I asked for the Parliament to come back this week rather than next week.

KARVELAS: The Government says there's no necessity, because of the start times of its  stimulus. And clearly it is working on more stimulus measures, they may not even be ready  next week.

ALBANESE: That's the point, Patricia. Why is the start point of the stimulus based upon  essentially spin of whether April is slower than March? If stimulus is required, it's required  now, to get out the door and surely if we can get some of that out the door, that would  make absolute sense. Because what's happening right now is that the economy is slowing.  So, activities such as the airlines, the arts industry, a range of businesses, are suffering  now. The Government, as of mid-March, are saying don't worry, we've got this, we will wait



until March 31.

KARVELAS: Briefly, before I let you go, do you think there should be a ban on people  coming from the United States?

ALBANESE: Well, I think the Government has got it right in terms of the announcement  that was made to, for people to self-isolate, regardless of where they're coming from over a  14-day period. I think that's got it right. There's an issue, of course, of Australian citizens  having a right to return to Australia, which is a pretty fundamental right. And I should  imagine that an overwhelming majority, I spoke to Alan Joyce today, and certainly the  airlines are under enormous pressure. They've seen an enormous drop-off in international  travel. And most people coming to Australia conducting international travel will be people  coming home rather than people coming here as a tourist destination.

KARVELAS: Thank you so much for joining us.

ALBANESE: Thanks very much, Patricia.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053





