

SENATOR MURRAY WATT  SHADOW MINISTER FOR NORTHERN AUSTRALIA  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DISASTER AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT  LABOR SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  MONDAY, 30 NOVEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: NSW and Qld bushfires; Scott Morrison unprepared for disaster season;  unspent $4bn Emergency Response Fund; aerial firefighting; Morrison ignoring royal  commission recommendations; Newspoll; Qld borders easing; State of Origin.

MURRAY WATT, SHADOW MINISTER FOR DISASTER AND EMERGENCY  MANAGEMENT: Obviously, all Australians were very concerned over the weekend that  already, even in November, we're facing heatwave conditions and bushfires around much  of the country. Right now, there are about 90 bushfires across New South Wales and  Queensland alone, and we haven't even started December. So that's a very worrying sign  about what we face this summer on top of cyclone and flood conditions further north in our  country as well. And I have to say, I'm very disappointed that this Government is clearly  woefully underprepared for the coming disaster season.

We saw what happened last year when they weren't prepared. Scott Morrison wouldn't  meet with the ex-fire chiefs, wouldn't listen to the warnings, and we saw so much of the  country burn. We're already seeing now the results of this Government being unprepared  for the coming disaster season as well. There are three ways in which this Government is  not prepared for the coming disaster season:

First of all, the Emergency Response Fund. This is the $4 billion fund that the Government  announced at last year's Budget - 18 months ago - to provide funding for disaster recovery  and resilience. Here we are, 18 months on, when fires are already starting - not a single  cent has been spent. That action, in this Government not actually spending money on  resilience projects to keep people safe, is going to put lives at risk this summer. And it's  going to be on Scott Morrison's head.

Secondly, aerial firefighting. We saw the royal commission recommended that the Federal  Government set up a national aerial firefighting fleet. Scott Morrison rejected that  recommendation. Again, we saw what happened last year when we didn't have the aerial  water bombers that we needed, tried to bring them in from overseas and they weren't  available. And now we've got a recommendation from the royal commission saying we  should have our own. Scott Morrison's too arrogant and too stubborn to take up the  recommendation.



And thirdly, one of the other recommendations from the royal commission is that the  Government have the power to declare a national emergency. Now, this is something that  Scott Morrison flagged back in January. So, again, it's sort of 10 or 11 months ago, he  flagged that he would legislate to give the Federal Government power to declare a national  emergency. We're now in the second last week of Parliament - we haven't even seen the  legislation yet. I don't know how many warnings this bloke has got to get before he takes  bushfires and other natural disasters seriously.

Warnings after warnings, 90 fires across New South Wales and Queensland,  recommendations from royal commissions, funds that are set up ready to go, he doesn't  spend them. Scott Morrison is not taking this issue seriously and he's putting Australians at  risk.

JOURNALIST: You mentioned disaster season, Senator, Anthony Albanese sits on 28 per  cent as better PM in the latest Newspoll, is it a disaster season coming up for the Labor  Party towards the end of the year?

WATT: No, I'm not concerned about the polls. As you would have heard many politicians  say, polls come and go, I don't keep my attention on them. When I'm out talking to people,  whether it be in Brisbane, the Gold Coast or further north in Australia, people are very  worried about the state of the economy. Only last week I was in Rockhampton and the topic  that everyone was talking to me about there was what is going to happen in March when  JobKeeper ends and when JobSeeker is cut again. So I'm more focussed on those kinds of  issues than anything about polling.

JOURNALIST: But is Anthony Albanese the right person to take the Labor Party to the  election, particularly in Queensland which damaged you so significantly at the last election?

WATT: I absolutely think Anthony Albanese is the right person to take us to the election. I'm  looking forward to having him back in Queensland later in this week. Obviously, it's been a  bit difficult to travel around if you're from Sydney this year, and I think he'll get a really good  reception when he goes to Queensland this week. The message that Anthony Albanese  has had particularly resonates in Queensland,  where we've been saying that Labor is for  traditional industries as well as new industries. That's not a message that either of our  political opponents is taking forward. They say you can only have the old industries or the  new industries, and that just damages Queensland. So Anthony Albanese and Labor is  standing up for all of them.

JOURNALIST: Should Queensland borders have opened sooner than tomorrow to places  like New South Wales, Greater Sydney and Victoria?

WATT: No, I don't think so. I think Annastacia Palaszczuk has consistently made the right  decisions about our borders. She's always acted on the health advice, as a result  Queensland has been largely COVID-free for a number of months now. Our businesses  have been able to get back up and running. We're really looking forward to all of you blue  jersey people getting back to our state. I bet you probably won't wear your blue jerseys after  we just smashed you in State of Origin, but you're very welcome as long as you wear a  maroon jersey while you're up there!

ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: TALI ELEY 0448 078 456





