JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

HOBART

WEDNESDAY, 16 DECEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Morrison Government’s aged care failures; Richard Colbeck.



JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS: What we've got today

from the Government with its announcement in aged care is 10,000 home care packages. This

is, again, the Government drip feeding packages when they've got over 100,000 older

Australians waiting for home care. There has consistently been, for over two years, 100,000

older Australians waiting for home care. This is care they have been approved for. This

Christmas there are 100,000 older Australians and their families who still have no idea when

they're going to get the package that they've been approved for and that they need. The

Government needs to stop drip feeding packages and actually have a proper plan to deal with

the waitlist.



We heard from the Government in the Budget just in October, just a few weeks ago, when it

announced 23,000 packages that it couldn't possibly do anymore because there was no

workforce available. Instead what do we see? Just six weeks later, the Government saying,

‘oh, well, maybe we can do a bit more.’ It's simply not good enough for the older Australians

and their families who are trying to plan, who are trying to organise their lives, for the

Government to keep drip feeding packages. It's clearly nowhere near enough. And over

100,000 older Australians to still be waiting this Christmas for their home care package.



JOURNALIST: We've been talking about the home care packages for a long time now with the

Royal Commission report especially. Why has it taken so long for the Government to act after

that recommendation?



COLLINS: The Royal Commission, over a year ago, its number one recommendation was for

the Government to fix the home care package wait list. The Royal Commission called it

'neglect' that there's still 100,000 older Australians waiting. And here we are just a week or so

before Christmas and the Government decides to drip feed some more packages. But what

does that actually mean on the ground, for the 95 year old woman and her family who have

been told they have to wait two years for a level four package. The Government needs a

proper plan and it needs to tell older Australians how long they have to wait for these packages

and why. To continually drip feed them is not good enough.

JOURNALIST: Do you think it's because there's not enough depth to this funding now?

COLLINS: What I think is that the Government needs a proper plan to deal with the wait list as

per its own Royal Commission's number one recommendation: to fix the home care waitlist.

The Government and Scott Morrison have failed older Australians when it comes to home

care. What we've seen from the Government is a whole heap of splashy announcements,

pretending that they're doing a lot more than they're actually doing. The reality on the ground

is, is that older Australians are still waiting excessively long periods of time for home care that

they need, that they've been approved for. And it's not good enough that this Christmas,

100,000 older Australians and their families are still waiting.



JOURNALIST: Is it disappointing that this funding has taken so long?



COLLINS: It's really disappointing that the Government didn't act properly when it got the

Royal Commission's recommendation, that it didn't actually set out a plan on how it was going

to deal with the wait list. It still doesn't have a plan for the wait list. The Government has been

missing in action when it comes to telling older Australians what is its plan to deal with the

home care wait list. Scott Morrison and his failed Minister Colbeck must do much better and

they need to be honest with older Australians about how long they actually have to wait for

their packages.

JOURNALIST: Is this funding going towards aged care too little, too late, given the situation

we've seen throughout the pandemic?



COLLINS: The funding for aged care, we've got a system in crisis. It has always been too little,

too late from the Government. To have over 100,000 Australians and their families who still

have no idea this Christmas, when they're sitting down talking about their plans for the new

year, have no idea when they're going to get that package. How long are they going to have to

wait for those packages? The Government needs to communicate better and it needs a proper

plan. Splashy announcements and the drip feeding have got to stop and we need some

serious action from the Government.



JOURNALIST: Would you have liked to have seen more funding go towards aged care homes

as well with the situation we saw in Victoria especially?

COLLINS: What I find astonishing is in the Mid-Year Update that we have had 685 older

Australians die in residential aged care, is that there is no substantial actual funding for aged

care, to deal with the system in crisis, to get us through to the end of February when we get

the Royal Commission recommendations. The Royal Commission has been highlighting some

of the devastating consequences that we saw during the pandemic. We saw older Australians

with ants coming out of their wounds, we saw older Australians who hadn't had food or water

for days. We have older Australians sitting in their soiled incontinence pads for hours and

hours on end. The Government needs to do better, Scott Morrison and Richard Colbeck have

failed older Australians.



JOURNALIST: Some of this money is apparently going towards allied health services and

mental health services. Is that going to go far enough? And how badly is funding needed in

that area?



COLLINS: Well those funds were actually recommended again by the Royal Commission's

special report into COVID and the Government had to report to the parliament before the 1st of

December to say that it had actually done this. But again, the Government is doing too little,

too late when it comes to older Australians and they're doing it without a proper plan on how to

fix the system in crisis.

JOURNALIST: Are you confident with how the Aged Care Minister has handled the situation in

the sector, particularly through the pandemic?

COLLINS: What we've seen from the Aged Care Minister is his failure to know how many older

Australians were dying under his watch when he was asked a specific question. What we've

seen from the Minister and from Scott Morrison is an absolute failure to deal with the Royal

Commission's number one recommendation that the aged care home care wait list should be

dealt with as a matter of priority. That was the first recommendation. The Royal Commission

made an interim recommendation for a reason, because it was urgent. And here we are over a

year later, still over 100,000 older Australians are waiting for home care. It's simply not good

enough.

JOURNALIST: Would you like to see him replaced as Aged Care Minister?

COLLINS: Richard Colbeck obviously has been censured by the Senate. Richard Colbeck has

clearly failed older Australians prior to the global pandemic, during the global pandemic and

since the global pandemic. And I don't know how the Minister survives the Prime Minister's

reshuffle and if he does survive, it says a lot about the Prime Minister.



JOURNALIST: And just one more on aged care homes, would you like to see funding

allocated to aged care homes as well as to the home care packages?



COLLINS: I think the Government had an opportunity in MYEFO to deal with the chronic

underfunding, but also with more transparency. What we need to make sure is is that any new

funding for residential care actually goes to care. We need to make sure that we have no more

instances of ants crawling out of people's wounds, that we have no more instances of older

Australians going without food and water for days. This has to end. The Government cannot

just sit on its hands and not do anything. The Government has a missed opportunity both in the

Budget and here to do something serious about making sure that older Australians are not

neglected.



JOURNALIST: Can you give us an idea of how much pressure home care packages take off

the aged care system?



COLLINS: Home care is better for the older Australians that can stay at home, better for their

families, and it's cheaper for the taxpayers. I do not understand why the federal government is

not actually developing a proper plan to deal with the home care wait list, the fact that over the

last three years, 30,000 older Australians have died while waiting for their home care package

that they never got, the fact that older Australians, families, people who have died, their

families are getting letters over a year after telling them ‘you've moved up the queue, a

package will be available in three months.’ What does that do those families? It's just not good

enough from the Government. They need to do so much better. The fact that 30,000 older

Australians went into residential care or hospitals when they wanted to stay at home, it's simply

not good enough from the Government.

JOURNALIST: What kind of plan would you like to see in the area? What plan would Labor put

forward?



COLLINS: Well, we're obviously not in government at the moment. This has been under the



Government's watch, seven and a half years they have been in government. We have known

for the last two years that over 100,000 older Australians have been waiting for home

care. The Government should have had a plan by now, two years later to actually fix the home

care waitlist.



JOURNALIST: In terms of that wait list, do you know, what proportion of those people are

Tasmanian or is there a particular state or territory where they're focused?

COLLINS: It's a national priority queue, and I understand there's about 2,000 older

Tasmanians on that wait list that are waiting for care. The problem we've got, of course, is that

the latest round of data from the Government, the September quarter, is now way overdue. So

the Government has not released the data. If the Government has been telling us the truth and

it has released almost 30,000 packages since the last lot of data, you would have expected

that list to have shrunk to about 70,000 older Australians. But the bottom line is, the latest data

we have says 100,000 Australians are still waiting for home care, about 2000 of those are

Tasmanians. Thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119



