Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health

MEDIA RELEASE



27 November 2020



$4 million for new COVID-19 research

The Morrison Government is supporting six new COVID-19 research projects across four  institutions, allowing researchers continue to examine the virus and our response to the  pandemic.

More than $4 million will be distributed from the Medical Research Future Fund (MRFF)  through two grant rounds to institutions including Monash University, Deakin University and  Macquarie University.

These grants aim to develop high priority digital health infrastructure, improving the speed  and features of health system responses during acute crises, such as the COVID-19 pandemic.

Each of these projects has the ability to assist and inform government responses to the  pandemic and continue our improvements to health outcomes for all Australians.

Three projects will receive funding through the 2020 Rapid Response Digital Health  Infrastructure Grant Opportunity, worth approximately $3.5 million.

This includes $1.9 million to support Monash University’s work to create a national data  management platform and Learning Health System, alongside real-time monitoring of  Australia's COVID-19 response.

A further three projects will also share in $600,000 through the 2020 Communication  Strategies and Approaches during Outbreaks Grant Opportunity, focusing on understanding  people’s communication needs, in order to improve community engagement and  responsiveness to information and advice about pandemics.

A project through Deakin University will identify communication priorities and effective  support for people with an intellectual disability living in high risk specialist disability  accommodation during disease outbreaks.

As part of the Morrison Government’s Coronavirus Research response, over $96 million  from the MRFF has been invested in COVID-19 research, including vaccine, anti-viral and  respiratory medicine research.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.

Investing in health and medical research is a key priority of our Government’s Long Term  National Health Plan. Research continues to play a critical role in ensuring Australia  maintains its world-class health system, particularly as the world continues to respond to  COVID-19.

The Morrison Government’s MRFF is a $20 billion endowment fund, allowing for long-term  investment and support for Australia’s best and brightest researchers. Further information  about the MRFF is available at www.health.gov.au/mrff.

ENDS





2020 Rapid Response Digital Health Infrastructure Grant Opportunity

Administering  Institution

Project Title  Funding

Sydney Local Health  District  Integrating remote monitoring technology into digital  health infrastructure

$670,406.00

Monash University Towards a national data management platform and  Learning Health System  $1,922,584.00

Monash University Real-time modelling of Australia's COVID-19 response $810,300.00

2020 Communication Strategies and Approaches during Outbreaks Grant Opportunity

Administering  Institution

Project Title  Funding

Monash University Effectiveness of tailored COVID-19 message for  vulnerable Australians  $315,961.00

Deakin University Inclusive Health Communication in Specialist Disability  Accommodation  $109,047.00

Macquarie  University

Harnessing the health communication power of the early  childhood sector  $174,992.00

