



The Hon Ken Wyatt AM MP

Minister for Indigenous Australians  Member for Hasluck

MEDIA STATEMENT

20 March 2020

REDUCING THE SPREAD OF COVID-19 TO INDIGENOUS COMMUNITIES

The Australian Government has ensured that states and territories can adopt a consistent  approach to protecting Indigenous Australians by restricting travel into remote Indigenous  communities to prevent the spread of COVID-19.

The National Cabinet provided in-principle agreement to the Commonwealth Minister for Health  taking action under the Commonwealth Biosecurity Act 2015.

This follows the decisions of a number of Indigenous communities and the Western Australian  Government to implement similar measures, and considerations by the Northern Territory  Government to phase up their response by restricting access to remote communities.

Isolation and remoteness offer opportunities for delaying or potentially preventing an outbreak  of COVID-19 in remote Indigenous communities. However, high mobility of community  members and a reliance on visiting and outreach activities and services increase the risk of  COVID-19 occurring in these communities.

Under this proposal an emergency requirement determined under the Biosecurity Act 2015 will  restrict persons from entering or leaving areas as nominated by states and territories.

The emergency requirement will also allow jurisdictions to nominate a decision maker who will  be empowered to permit additional classes of people to enter or leave the community in certain  circumstances such as:

• For the purposes of obtaining medical care or medical supplies  • In the event of emergency, including the purposes of providing medical care  • For the purposes of supplying or undertaking critical services such as medical (including  mental health and domestic violence support), police and emergency services, food and

medical supplies, educational, and maintenance and repairs of essential services, or  • In accordance with the remote community pandemic plan applicable to the particular  remote aboriginal community that the person wishes to enter.

Consistent with Australian Health Protection Principal Committee guidance, individuals will be  required to undergo a minimum period of isolation (currently 14 days) before entry or re-entry  into the area will be allowed.

These rules are aimed at preventing the spread of COVID-19 in remote communities and to  rapidly address outbreaks. Enforcement of the restrictions will be the responsibility of each  jurisdiction.

The National Cabinet agreed that these measures would be implemented as soon as possible.

I would like to thank the State and Territory Ministers who have worked to support these  measures, and the co-ordination work undertaken by the Department of Health and the  National Indigenous Australians Agency.

Media contact: Luke Nayna, Senior Media Adviser, 0438 231 687

Authorised by Ken Wyatt AM, MP, Member for Hasluck.

