

CATHERINE KING MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT AND REGIONAL  DEVELOPMENT  MEMBER FOR BALLARAT



INFRASTRUCTURE AFTER COVID

This crisis has once again reminded us why infrastructure is so important to our economy and  to the functioning of our society. Throughout the Covid-19 pandemic, our ports have kept  operating, our transport and logistics infrastructure has kept moving, our buses and trains have  kept running, construction workers have kept building, our airlines and airports have done  everything they can to keep planes in the sky, and Australians have moved about by foot and  bicycle in record numbers. Our nation’s high-quality and resilient infrastructure has allowed  essential workers to travel, medicines and other goods to be imported and delivered to our  communities, our exports to reach the world and Australians to maintain some semblance of  normality.

It’s increasingly clear that, just as infrastructure has kept us going throughout this crisis, it will  play a critical role in seeing us out of it.

Recessions are always brutal. More than a million Australians are out of work, their plans  changing before their eyes (ABS 2020). Financial stress and the pressure it brings hurt  individuals, families and communities. Through the hard lessons of past recessions, we know  that governments must act to limit the pain, to stop the damage and to regrow the economy.

Experience tells us that one way to escape from recessions is to invest in infrastructure, in  ways that provide immediate economic stimulus, but that also lay the foundation for future  wealth generation.

Even before this crisis we were facing challenges. Our pre-Covid economy was in the  doldrums with disappointing growth, stagnant wages growth and sluggish productivity (RBA  2020). In response, on at least 20 occasions, the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia  called for infrastructure funding to be increased, pointing to both record low interest rates and  the need to boost aggregate demand and support future productivity.

Without substantial investment in infrastructure, Infrastructure Australia was predicting that  road congestion costs to our major cities would more than double over the next decade, while  public transport would become ever more crowded. Infrastructure Australia found that, without  investment, the cost that congestion inflicted on our economy would reach almost $40 billion  by 2031 (IA 2019)

Unfortunately, before Covid the federal government wasn’t investing enough. While the 2019- 20 Budget did include an increase in total spending, 1.37% of total expenditure going towards

infrastructure was still below the decade average of 1.46% (IPA 2019). Over the forward  estimates, that would see almost $2 billion less infrastructure investment in Australia than the  long-term average (IPA 2019).

Australia needs to invest more in infrastructure, but, so far, we’ve been investing less. Instead  of articulating a plan for productive infrastructure across the nation, the government continues  to play catch-up through so-called stimulus packages and projects selected with short-term  political objectives as the main priority.

Not only is this lack of a plan for strategic investment hampering our economy, but it’s  exacerbating inequality. Poorer Australians on average are spending longer in their cars, and  that’s growing at a faster rate than it is for wealthier Australians. Commuters in outer  Melbourne spend 79 hours each year stuck in traffic, while 48% of a commute from outer  Sydney is spent the same way (IPA 2019).

Before Covid-19, all indicators pointed to a future in which Australians were less productive  and spent less time at home with their families. After Covid, we must ensure that things are  different.

We’ve heard a lot over recent months about how pandemics and recessions are turning points,  as our economy and society are thrown up into the air and new ways of working emerge.

While the ultimate impacts on our lives will be seen over the longer term, there’s abundant  anecdotal evidence that the experience of working from home—and the success that it’s been  for many of us—have led Australians to reconsider where they base their lives.

Free from being tied to big office towers in the capital cities, Australians might no longer rush  to work in peak hour; they might spend some of their working week in the home office, and  some might even relocate to the regions. As we move out of the pandemic, governments at all  levels will have to be aware of and responsive to the changes that have happened in our  economy and society.

That means that there will need to be more consideration of the types of infrastructure we  build. Australia’s infrastructure networks today are largely built to get commuters into the  centres of the cities in the morning and return them home to the suburbs in the evening. If the  use of our cities changes, our infrastructure will need to follow suit. The investments that  offered the greatest benefits in the past mightn’t be the same in the post-Covid environment,  and governments will need to be awake to those changes.

Regardless of the ultimate outcome, this crisis presents a rare opportunity to reset and break  the inertia and misplaced priorities that have defined infrastructure funding over recent election  cycles, while at the same time building a more resilient, more productive and more liveable  Australia.

The most exciting elements of any infrastructure plan are of course the big projects that  connect regions and cities.

When it comes to those big infrastructure needs, Australia needs a renewed determination to  invest in nation-building infrastructure, whether that’s getting on with planning for high-speed  rail down the east coast, fixing inland rail, stronger investment in public transport, or fast rail  and roads linking our regions to the cities or our regions to each other.

While the Morrison government has agreed to co-fund a number of those types of projects, the  reality before Covid was that most of that money was many years away. That wasn’t good  enough then, and it’s certainly not good enough now. While such ‘announceables’ may be  good during election campaigns, they do nothing to advance Australia’s productive  infrastructure.

Take fast rail to Geelong, for example. That project has the potential to shift the relationship  between Victoria’s two major cities. Rail patronage along the Geelong line has already  increased 97% since 2012-13 (Victorian Government 2020). Thousands of Victorians are  choosing to live in Geelong and work in Melbourne, and, even if Covid changes our living and  working patterns, people will always want to move between Victoria’s biggest cities. The only  thing holding this back is an increasingly overcrowded train line. Of course, that’s the problem  that fast rail is designed to fix—it will get people to work and home more quickly and in greater  numbers. However, under current plans it won’t be completed any time soon, as the funding  commitment is spread over 10 years and most of the funding falls beyond the forward  estimates.

Projects like this are good ideas that are needed now—not a decade down the line.

When it comes to large projects like this, we already have a significant pipeline, thanks to  Infrastructure Australia’s priority list.

Infrastructure Australia was created by Labor but has been allowed to wither under this  government. It must be returned to its position as the key infrastructure advisory body, making  decisions that stretch across the political cycle. A strong, trusted Infrastructure Australia would  take much of the politics out of infrastructure funding by determining projects determined on  need and their potential impact rather than the political interests of the government of the day.

At the same time as advancing nation-building projects, governments at all levels should now  be investing in smaller, community-based projects that build resilience into communities and  assist in generating wealth into the future. We have to be strategic about it: by expanding  investments in affordable housing, improving local telecommunications infrastructure,  improving the quality of our tourism product, funding regional airport upgrades, enhancing  water security for remote towns or improving rural fire stations, we can also create long-lasting  community assets. There are thousands of projects around the country that could be funded  and get underway quickly. They need to be funded across every community not just the ‘lucky’  few, as we saw with the Morrison government’s now infamous ‘sports rorts’ program (ANAO  2020).

Those projects, like all projects at this time, should be funded and designed with jobs in mind.

We should ensure that the infrastructure we build now creates new jobs and trains as many  young Australians as possible. At every point in the supply chain, the creation of Australian  jobs must be a key consideration.

Through this crisis, we’ve been reminded of the fundamental role and power of government.  This year, Labor led the calls for the government to introduce and then extend wage subsidies,  support people on welfare and increase business support.

If we’re to have the strongest recovery possible, governments across Australia must continue  to invest in infrastructure projects that create jobs, improve our communities and deliver a  stronger, more resilient and more productive economy on the other side of this crisis.





This piece was published in ASPI’s After Covid-19: Voices from the Federal Parliament on  Tuesday, 1 December 2020.

MEDIA CONTACT: NICK BEAVER 0419 709 266



