

The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au

30 March 2020



FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAWS CHANGED TO PROTECT  REGIONAL AUSTRALIA

Foreign investment review laws will be changed to ensure the interests of regional, rural and remote  businesses are protected through the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.

All proposed foreign investments into Australia subject to the Foreign Acquisitions and Takeovers Act  1975 (the Act) will require approval, providing a significant protection for agricultural land.

By bringing the threshold for screening down to zero dollars, the Australian Government will ensure  all proposed foreign investments are appropriately scrutinised.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack advocated for these changes as leader of The National Party and welcomed their  introduction.

“Foreign investment in Australia can be very beneficial, especially when it supports Australian lives  and Australian livelihoods,” Mr McCormack said.

“Through the changes we have announced, we will make sure any foreign investment is in Australia’s  national interest.

“This pandemic is placing extraordinary stress on regional economies and local businesses and we  will keep taking every measure possible to safeguard their future.

“Regional Australia is resilient and we will get through this crisis together.”

These measures will remain in place for the duration of the current crisis, with the Government  recognising foreign investment will play an important part in helping many businesses recover from  the pandemic’s economic harm - securing jobs and supporting our economic recovery.

Further administrative details to give effect to this announcement will be published on the FIRB  website in due course.

Media Contact: Dean Shachar 0418 202 860

