Media | Minister Hunt | Matt Kelly | 0417 101 712  Minister Colbeck | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania









The Hon Greg Hunt, MP  Minister for Health

Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck  Minister for Aged Care and Senior Australians  Minister for Youth and Sport



25 July 2020



Victorian Aged Care Response Centre

The Australian Government is establishing a Victorian Aged Care Response Centre to co-ordinate and expand resources to tackle the challenge of COVID-19 in age care services.

The Victorian Aged Care Response Centre will bring together Commonwealth and State  government agencies at the State Control Centre in Melbourne in a co-ordinated effort to  manage the impact of the pandemic across facilities.

Minister for Health, Greg Hunt and Minister for Aged Care and Senior Australians, Richard  Colbeck, said the Federal Government-led centre would offer a clear and direct oversight to  managing outbreaks.

Supported by the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) Victoria, Emergency  Management Australian (EMA) and Emergency Management Victoria (EMV), the response  centre will offer a scalable and coordinated response mechanism as we continue to respond to  the pandemic.

“This co-ordinated approach will not just prioritise the quality of care and protection of  residents but it will also ensure rapid and effective responses for providers and ensure  communication with families” Minister Hunt said.

The Response Centre will be led by an executive team including clinical and operational leads,  enabling a rapid response as required.

It will include staff from Department of Health, Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission,  DHHS, EMA, EMV and Defence.

In addition there will be stakeholder liaison arrangements with Older Persons Advisory  Network, Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation, the Australian Medical Association,  Leading Aged Services Australia, Aged and Community Services Australia, the Aged Care  Guild, Seniors Australia, Dementia Australia and Council Of The Ageing.

Media | Minister Hunt | Matt Kelly | 0417 101 712  Minister Colbeck | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania





Minister Colbeck said the co-ordinated response offered an additional layer of confidence for  residents in aged care, families and staff during an unprecedented time.

“We stand ready to offer the support needed to protect senior Australians, their families and  care providers in what is the greatest challenge the sector has faced,” Minister Colbeck said.

“We are listening and understand the complex issues that lay ahead. Together we can ensure  provisions are in place to reinforce the sector at every level and ultimately protect the lives of  those people we care for most.”

The Commonwealth is already providing a surge workforce and supplementation support of  more than 450 in aged care facilities.

Additional resources include undertaking a process for staff to work at a single site to minimise  COVID-19 spread, disbursement of PPE, testing in facilities where positive cases are identified  and additional testing in areas identified as high risk.











.







































