Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.







The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health

The Hon. David Littleproud MP  Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management

The Hon. Sussan Ley MP  Minister for the Environment



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

19 November 2020



$22 million investment to tackle the global health threat of antimicrobial  resistance

The Australian Government is taking strong steps to address the risk of antimicrobial  resistance (AMR) as part of World Antimicrobial Awareness Week.

AMR is a significant global health threat and is the result of viruses and bacteria changing  over time, which can lead to them no longer responding to medicines and medical treatment.

AMR makes it harder to treat common infections, which increases the risk of disease spread,  illness and death in humans and animals.

Misuse and overuse of antimicrobials are the main contributors to the development of drug-resistant pathogens, which can affect human, and domestic and farm animal health.

Minister for Health, Greg Hunt, said the Australian Government has committed $22.5 million  in this year’s Budget to address the priorities identified in Australia’s National Antimicrobial  Resistance Strategy - 2020 & Beyond.

“We are working to ensure Australian prescribers are turning to antibiotic, antiviral,  antifungal and antiparasitic medicines only when they are absolutely necessary,” Minister  Hunt said.

“Over-prescription of antimicrobials can contribute to antimicrobial resistance. This makes it  harder to treat common infections with our standard medicines, so among our actions in  response to the risk is continued investment in surveillance of antimicrobial use and  resistance.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



“We are also supporting the development of a Multi-Drug Resistant Organism (MRO)  outbreak response capability with health authorities in the states and territories. Just like the  response to the COVID-19 pandemic, quick action and intervention when MROs are detected  is critical to keeping on top of the situation.”

The Government investment is also helping develop a National AMR One Health Research  and Development Agenda to identify gaps and priority areas for research on the prevention,  detection and containment of AMR across all areas of research.

A new scoping study on pricing and reimbursement will also examine ways to support and  incentivise new products that prevent, detect and contain drug-resistant infections in Australia

Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management, David Littleproud, said  shared responsibility across health, agriculture and environment was needed to address  antimicrobial resistance.

“While AMR in human health remains the most pressing issue, there are steps which need to  be considered in agriculture as well,” Minister Littleproud said.

“Our livestock farmers and veterinarians need to also be aware their use of antimicrobial  medicine should only be for necessary cases, as agricultural use can also lead to resistant  disease in the future.

“The planning phase for a One Health Surveillance System will get underway soon in  consultation with stakeholders including in health and agriculture, to integrate resistance and  usage data from human health, animal health, agriculture, food and environment sectors right  across Australia.”

Minister for the Environment, Sussan Ley, said that interconnection between humans,  agriculture and the environment highlighted the need to tackle the challenges of antimicrobial  resistance.

“Antimicrobials enter the environment every day and can accumulate over time leading to  either harmful effects or increases of antimicrobial resistance in microbes,” Minister Ley said.

“Australia’s National Antimicrobial Resistance Strategy reflects a commitment to addressing  the threat that antimicrobial resistance poses across different sectors, including Australia’s  unique and diverse environment.”

The World Health Organization has declared AMR one of the top 10 global public health  threats facing humanity.

Around the world people die or are left with permanent disability because of AMR disease. It  can also lead to prolonged illness, longer hospital stays, the need for more expensive  medicines and financial challenges for those affected.

Antimicrobial Awareness Week runs from 18-24 November.

More information is available on the One Health antimicrobial resistance website -  www.amr.gov.au.

ENDS

