

JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC 730

THURSDAY, 5 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Impact of Coronavirus on the economy; Stimulus; Surplus;

Interest rates; Global Financial Crisis response.



LEIGH SALES, HOST: Jim Chalmers, thanks for your time.



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: Hi Leigh.



SALES: You've said previously that Labor would like to support the

Government's stimulus package. In a nutshell, can you tell me what you think

the elements are that it would need for Labor to back it?



CHALMERS: You're right, Leigh, we want to be as constructive as possible

because the best outcome here is that we get Australian workers, businesses

and communities through a very tough period. We'll be looking to make sure

the size and speed of the package is appropriate. We'll want to know that we're

getting maximum bang for buck, that workers, businesses and communities are

being supported. We also want to see some of the longer-term challenges in

the economy which have been apparent for some time dealt with as well.



SALES: When you say size, what do you think would be the appropriate size?



CHALMERS: I'd like to see what the Treasury advice is and I'd like to see what

the Government comes forward with before we come to a concluded view. It

needs to be substantial. As we've heard from the Reserve Bank and from the

Treasury Secretary the impact of this Coronavirus on the economy will be

significant. We don't yet know how significant but it certainly warrants a proper

response from the Government which is big enough and fast enough to do the

job.



SALES: Do you think that the stimulus package should include direct

assistance to individual households as well as business?



CHALMERS: There's many ways you can do that, Leigh. It needs to support

workers and employers and it needs to be targeted to where it can do the most

good. There are a range of ways you can boost disposable income for

example. We've said many times before that they should look at Newstart

because every dollar of a Newstart rise would find its way into the shops and

businesses of this country. That's an option to boost household disposable

income. But there are other options as well in the tax system.



SALES: You were a senior adviser to the Treasurer during the Global Financial

Crisis. What lessons do you think you learned, including mistakes, from that

period that you think are relevant now?



CHALMERS: Australians should be really proud of what they achieved together

under that Labor Government during the Global Financial Crisis in averting

recession and saving hundreds of thousands of jobs, something which is

admired all over the world.



SALES: It was an invitation to share some lessons, not to spread Labor's

credentials.



CHALMERS: Well I think that's something that we should be proud of. Clearly

no policy of that size is entirely without problems. We've expressed many times

our regrets, for example what happened with pink batts -



SALES: What are your lessons though that could be applied to today?



CHALMERS: You need to get in fast enough and it needs to be substantial

enough. One of the things about the early 90s recession, the last time Australia

didn't avoid recession, was that the stimulus kicked in too late. We avoided that

mistake in 2009 and 2010. That meant we got the assistance out the door. I’m

concerned that the Government has been dragging its feet on the economy.

Some of these challenges have been around for a long time. We want to make

sure that the package they announce is big enough and fast enough to save

jobs in the economy.



SALES: But let me ask you first principles question. I presume that you think

it's a responsible economic management to sometimes run a Budget surplus

and sometimes run a Budget deficit?



CHALMERS: Yes, I do.



SALES: So if the Government does go into deficit, I presume also that Labor

won't complain about that, given that you yourselves ran deficits when you

were in Government and you have just said that you think the economy

requires a big stimulus package.



CHALMERS: We think the highest priority is to support workers, businesses

and communities. That's the highest priority in economic policy.



SALES: So you won't go into a political attack on the Government if they post a

deficit?



CHALMERS: The point that we make about the surplus and the deficit that they

look like they're heading towards is that it's a test that they asked to be judged

on. That wasn't a test that we applied to them. We didn't print the mugs. They

went to the election saying, this is what you should judge us on, and they'll be

judged on it.



SALES: You're making a political argument there and what I'm asking you

about is if they do economically the right thing, why should you attack them for

that politically?



CHALMERS: I've already answered that part of your question and said the

highest priority should be supporting the economy. We've made that clear in

the context of the bushfires and now that the Coronavirus is exacerbating some

of the challenges that have been in the economy for some time. That's the

highest priority. It is equally true when the Government spent a long time

wandering around saying the Budget's 'back in the black' and the economy is

'back on track' they should pay a political price for neither of those things being

true now. Consider the rhetoric that they sprayed around during the Global

Financial Crisis, they should be held to the same kind of standard that they held

us to.



SALES: What's your assessment as to whether the Reserve Bank will cut



interest rates again?



CHALMERS: Certainly the market expects there might be one more interest

rate cut. We've already had four in the last 10 months or so. They're now down

at one sixth what they were during the depths of the Global Financial Crisis. So

they're already extremely low, the lowest that they've ever been. The market

expects that there might be one more interest rate cut in April or after that. We

don't make predictions about the Reserve Bank. We don't tell them what to do.

It's self-evident that a lot of the analysts are expecting one more.



SALES: Jim Chalmers thanks for your time.



CHALMERS: Thank you, Leigh.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













