Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.







The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health

Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Public Service and Cabinet

TRANSCRIPT

26 February 2020



INTERVIEW WITH ANDREW BOLT  SKY NEWS

E&OE…

Topics: COVID-19 outbreak;

ANDREW BOLT:  So much fear about a virus that has so far called fewer than 3000 people which, yes, is very serious,  but then every year related flu viruses kill up 650,000 around the world without causing a bit of  panic.

And speaking of panic, Australia’s share market today dropped for the third straight day. That’s  $130 billion of value gone in just three days.

Joining me to sort out the facts from the scare is Health Minister Greg Hunt. Greg Hunt, thank you  so much for giving us your time. Why is this coronavirus more frightening than the flu?

GREG HUNT:  So look, that’s a very important question, and there are really two elements.

One is the rate of contagion, and then secondly the rate of lives lost.

We know that around the world at the moment, it’s estimated that about 3 per cent of those who  contract the virus lose their lives.

That’s overwhelmingly been driven by the city of Wuhan and the province of Hubei.

Outside of Hubei province in China, it’s a lower figure of about 0.7 per cent, and then  internationally about 1.5. It’s averaged at about 3 per cent.

So it’s much higher- up to 10 times higher mortality rate than the flu, and if it were to spread  globally, we’d have a very large number of people infected because it’s more contagious than the  flu, but it’s far more deadly by a factor of 10 than the flu, then that’s why it would have such a  profound effect.





Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



ANDREW BOLT:  Yeah, it’s interesting that difference in death rates. And you just wonder whether China’s been- the  rate in China’s so high because, maybe, I don’t know, their medical system isn’t as great as in the  west.

Now, is the world getting on top of this, Greg Hunt? Or is it getting away from us? It’s hard to tell.

GREG HUNT:  So what we’ve seen is, in China, a slowing of- a significant slowing of new cases outside of Hubei.  So, outside of the epicentre of it.

And that in a way has been backed up by the fact that we’ve had over 30,000 people come to  Australia, returning Australians from China, and no cases have come with that.

They’ve all gone into- they’ve been tested and screened as they come through the airport.

They’ve been- they’ve all gone into self-isolation, and the program is actually working very well.

That’s not to say we’re immune. And I’ve said that, the Prime Minister’s said that, the Chief  Medical Officer’s said that.

But what that shows is that in our genuine belief- improving containment in China.

Internationally, however, exactly as you were saying.

We’ve seen in Italy, in Iran, in South Korea and Japan, breakouts.

And so they are all moving to contain those areas.

We’ve been able- so far, and I say so far, to successfully contain in Australia there were 15 initial  cases.

It’s remained as 15 in the general population with eight coming out of the Diamond Princess  passengers that have been in isolation in quarantine in Howard Springs.

ANDREW BOLT:  Now, which of these countries that we’re talking about- you know, outside China, is worrying you  the most?

I mean, you’ve got Iran - a death toll now that’s gone up to 15, at least, although there are  obviously lots of rumours about many more - and it seems so slack that even its deputy health  minister gets sick in front of the cameras.

I mean, it’s incredible. Or is it Italy, perhaps. Which one is worrying you?

GREG HUNT:  The situation in Iran is such - and the Chief Medical Officer has commented on this - that with a  death rate of that level, it is likely that there’s a very large number of unreported or unrecorded  cases, and so that’s significant.

And in South Korea, the numbers have grown very significantly, although they have taken quite  profound containment activities.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



And so all of these cases are concerning, that’s why what we’ve done in Australia is to put in place  very, very strong containment measures.

We were one of the earliest countries in the world to declare this on 21 January a disease of  pandemic potential, and we were criticised by some for that.

We were criticised by some for the very early, very strong actions on 1 February with regards to  closing the borders to non-Australians who have been in mainland China.

But those things have made a significant difference.

So we’re not immune, but we are incredibly well-prepared.

And previously unrecognised, but now bringing into action all of those things in the plan; the  National Incident Centre, the National Trauma Centre, the daily meetings of the Commonwealth  and state chief health officers, the pandemic plan which has been put into action.

All of these things have been prepared, and now been implemented.

ANDREW BOLT:  No it seems to have gone quite well so far.

But talking about countries that worry you, I’m particularly worried - tell me whether I’m jumping  at shadows here - Indonesia, I don’t think it’s credible at all that it has not reported a single case  when it’s got a large Chinese diaspora, so you imagine there’s been some contact between China  and Indonesia. Not one case?

GREG HUNT:  So we can only go off the figures.

We have been focused very, very closely on Indonesia.

We’ve been reviewing the statistics, we’ve been reviewing the testing regimes, and the testing  regimes are not as extensive as Australia.

Over 3000 tests in Australia so far, and that figure is likely to be updated very shortly.

But what we see in Indonesia is, at this point, no recorded cases.

However, we are simply working with the Indonesian authorities, I know the Americans are  working with the Indonesian authorities to help them with their testing, to help them with their  screening, to help them make sure that they are doing everything they can to identify any possible  cases.

ANDREW BOLT:  Yeah, well, I don’t quite trust them either. Now Japan, is it fair to say, as I have, that it’s bungled  the Diamond Princess- that whole quarantine process. 700 people on board get the virus, eight  Japanese officials are meant to help maintain the quarantine, they’re now sick as well.

GREG HUNT:  Well, it’s absolutely clear that the quarantine was not successful.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



And so much so that we made the very difficult decision, which again upset some people, but I  think was absolutely the right decision to say, nobody comes back to Australia from the Diamond  Princess unless they go into a supervised quarantine which is at Howard Springs, at the temporary  quarantine facility near Darwin.

As a result of that, eight people who might otherwise have gone into the community in Australia,  have developed the infection.

The community has been protected, they’ve been identified early through the daily screening  processes.

They’ve got the best medical protection.

So what we’ve done is with a very clear plan, managed to protect the general community but also  protect the individuals.

So we have taken a different approach, I accept and acknowledge that. We’ve taken a very tough  approach, but that was the right thing to do.

ANDREW BOLT:  Well the Japanese- of course, I mean, look how the Japanese weren’t handling that. Is there any risk  in your mind of the Olympics being cancelled?

GREG HUNT:  Look, at this point it is way too early to say.

This is really about the global condition of whether or not the virus begins to evolve into the  pandemic.

Some are predicting that; some are predicting a more benign outcome.

What that really means is, is there sustained human-to-human transition in a number of countries.

But our test is very simple; what is the risk to our athletes? And if there is a material risk, then we  won’t hesitate to protect them. That’s our test.

This decision I think is some months away and so I gave the advice today that at this point, our  travel advisory is Level Two, take precautions and be very alert but keep training, you know, keep  training. That’s what we’re going for.

ANDREW BOLT:  Obviously, yes, yes. And lastly, there’s now a frantic search to develop a vaccine. We’re involved,  Australia’s got scientists working on this. Have you got any progress to report?

GREG HUNT:  Well, it was the Doherty Institute in Melbourne, based out of Melbourne University, which was the  first institution to grow and share globally the coronavirus.

So that gives us a huge head start.

The University of Queensland is doing extraordinary work in conjunction with the CSIRO.

So we will get there, I believe, on a vaccine.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



It’s a question of time and the estimates are between six and 18 months with probably an emphasis  on the latter half rather than the earlier.

I think it’s very important for me to be completely upfront and honest about this.

So we would rather give an honest timeframe and then try to beat that target, but Australia along  with countries right around the world, but especially some in Europe and particularly the United  States are- those are the three hubs for driving forward the vaccine work.

ANDREW BOLT:  Greg Hunt, I just thought of something. Later on this show we’re going to be talking about the three  baboons that escaped in Sydney.

That’s now led to a protest about animal experimentations, because that’s what they were part of a  colony of, for medical experiments to make humans get better treatment.

Do you have any concerns with the animal experimentation programs you fund?

GREG HUNT:  Well I’d have to get information on this from what’s called the NHMRC, but my understanding is  the New South Wales authorities have been leading this.

I’ll be writing to the New South Wales Health Minister to understand what they were doing, what  happened in this case.

But I did say earlier today that my heart was with the baboons.

ANDREW BOLT:  Now, that’s a phrase I didn’t think you’d expect to be saying in politics. But yes, thank you so much  indeed for your time, Greg Hunt.

GREG HUNT:  It’s one I thought I’d never get to say. Thanks a lot.

ANDREW BOLT:  Good on you.

ENDS

