

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  TODAY SHOW  FRIDAY, 7 FEBRUARY 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; Angus Taylor; Weather conditions today; message to our  volunteers, firefighters and ADF personnel

ALLISON LANGDON, HOST: Joining us is Home Affairs Minister Peter Dutton and  Deputy Opposition Leader Richard Marles. Good morning, gentleman. Peter, if I go to you  first; has the government made any plans for an emergency evacuation for Australians  on board the Diamond Princess?

PETER DUTTON, MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Good morning, guys. No, obviously  the Japanese authorities, they have an advanced health system they are dealing  with what's a very difficult situation. We are worried about whether other cruise ships and  tour groups elsewhere might be affected as well. There are about 25 or 26 countries now  that have been affected where there has been presentations of people with coronavirus.  So it's a very serious situation and it's why the government has taken the measures we  have.

KARL STEFANOVIC, HOST: Can you be a little bit more specific about the areas  of concern for you?

DUTTON: Obviously still out of Wuhan province is the biggest concern for us at  the moment. And on all of the medical advice, Karl, that's where most of the cases are  presented. And obviously that city now has been cordoned off for a period now. And there  are now 565 deaths, over 25,000 cases around the world. But the big concentration is  within that province. Now, the question is whether or not other provinces within China will  also close flights and shut down perimeter borders but it is obviously a very serious  situation for people in those areas. And for us we are working with Australian citizens who  have registered with DFAT to make sure that we can provide whatever assistance is  possible. But I do reiterate this call; there are people travelling from Australia to China now,  even though we had in place travel advice, do not travel to China, and those people  frankly are putting themselves in a difficult situation. They would find it very hard to get  back to Australia in certain circumstances. You can't guarantee their return, particularly if  China shuts its borders. So we need to deal with the reality of what's a very serious  situation.

STEFANOVIC: So, basically what you are saying is, and you are open to nationals coming  back from certain parts of China, what you are saying now is- and maybe you should be  declaring it- you are not going to be allowed back if you go  those provinces, it has to go for Australian nationals as well?

DUTTON: Well, Karl, I think the Prime Minister has been very clear, we just have to  be realistic about the numbers involved here. We have to be realistic about the spread of  this virus which is by all projections going to continue at a significant rate. When you have  already got 25,000 people who have been infected with this virus, putting yourself into that  zone makes for a very difficult situation.

LANGDON: Something else I wanted to talk to you both about this morning; there will be  no federal investigation into Energy Minister Angus Taylor's alleged forgery of documents  which were referenced in a political attack against Sydney Lord Mayor Clover Moore last  year. Of course he said she spent $15 million on domestic and international travel when  she had not. Now, the AFP said there is no evidence the minister was involved in falsifying  any information. They are not going to investigate further. Richard, are you satisfied with  that?

RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: This is  hardly a clean bill of health. I mean, there still needs to be an explanation from Minister  Taylor and from the Government about where this document came from. And how the  Minister found himself trying to peddle this document around in terms of getting a story up  against a Mayor in relation to their travel expenses, which in turn says everything about  what this minister is not doing. For all the challenges that are facing this country he's  completely focused on a kind of low rent, student politics fight with a local council about  their travel expenses. Rather than dealing with his Commonwealth portfolio. That's the  fundamental issue here.

STEFANOVIC: It is still nonetheless, you are right, there are a lot more bigger issues  going on but it is still nonetheless important to hold account. The figures Minister Taylor  relied on, Peter from the council's annual report were wrong. Shouldn't there be a  responsibility on him to ensure those records are correct?

DUTTON: Well, Karl, it's a bit rich of the Labor Party to be complaining about the fact that  this has been referred to the Federal Police, when they referred it to the Federal Police  without any evidence. So there have now been 10 referrals in total presided over by Mark  Dreyfus the Shadow Attorney-General. And he uses it as a political stunts so there is a  dark cloud hanging over someone. Out of the ten he’s got none. Nobody has been found to  have a case to answer. The Federal Police have issued their statement to say that Minister  Taylor doesn't have any case, and the matter has been finalised. And honestly, there is a  presumption of innocence in this country and to use these referrals to the Federal Police  as a political point scoring tactic, not only wastes the time of the Australian Federal Police,  but I think frankly undermines the credibility of people like Mark Dreyfus and I think it  should be called out. I think they should apologise and they haven't done that yet.

LANGDON: But hang on, is the AFP saying he is cleared? They are saying there was a  low level of harm caused. He has apologised for it and the resources that would  be required to investigate just mean it's not worth factoring or processing or going ahead  with.

DUTTON: But, read the rest of the letter though, Ali. It says that there is no evidence and

that the matter is finalised. That's the advice from the Federal Police. They have looked at  it, there is no evidence to indicate that Minister Taylor is guilty of any crime. And the  presumption that he is until he's proven innocent is ridiculous. The police  have investigated. As I say, the referral to the police in the first instance was made by Mark  Dreyfus, it wasn't initiated by the Federal Police, it was sent to the Federal Police because  Mr Dreyfus wanted to try to taint Angus Taylor. It's backfired on Mark Dreyfus and it has  backfired on Labor.

STEFANOVIC: Okay, can I point something out behind you, Pete. And on a much lighter  note, how good is it to see the rain around, there will be lots of rain across  Queensland. Unfortunately there will be a fair bit of flooding. Is the government getting  ready for all that?

DUTTON: Firstly, mate it is great to see the rain. Coming in this morning, it is just  pretty widespread and the great thing is it's gone west as well. It's not drought-breaking in  a lot of places but hopefully in places like Warwick there is water going into the dams and  those towns were on the dams and those towns were on the cusp of running out of  drinking water. So exciting. But yes, localised flooding which as you know always  happened in South-East Queensland, and in northern NSW, is a concern and we have had  briefings and worked through what response we can provide if there is that flooding and  Emergency Management Australia has been doing that planning over the course of  last week or so.

LANGDON: Well I mean, we are seeing plenty of rain about but we still have bushfires  burning across the country. We have firies out and about. Do both of you, considering we  are here on Kangaroo Island, we are going to Batemans Bay next week. Do both of you  have a message to our firefighters who are still out there and our SES workers who are  now cleaning up after floods?

DUTTON: Richard, you go first.

MARLES: Yes. I think the simple message is thank you. For all the work and the  service and very sadly the sacrifice that has been made over the last few weeks. There is  a nation that is enormously grateful to all of you. And this has been one of the most trying  summers that our nation has seen. And the volunteers, the paid firefighters, the emergency  service workers, members of the Australian Defence Force and their Reserves, have really  stood out as the heroes of our nation. And I'm in Batemans Bay right now, you can see  the devastation that's come through here. But as Peter said, the rain which is happening  here right now as well is such a relief.

STEFANOVIC: Well we are going to be in that neck of the woods in the next couple of-  sorry mate, go.

DUTTON: Sorry, mate. Obviously endorse all of the words, thank you so much. But all of  these volunteers live in communities like Kangaroo Island, Batemans Bay, plenty of  other areas including across Victoria. They live in the communities and work in  communities. What we need to do, please is to support those local communities. If you are  thinking about going away somewhere at Easter, do a driving trip through some of the local  communities, spend money, at the local hotel or local motel, help support them and  help them to rebuild. If we can keep those economies going, because the last thing you  want to do is see the volunteers lose hours in their full-time job or be put off because there  has been a big down turn in that local community. That's a really good way to help as well.





STEFANOVIC: Agree. Good on you and that's why we are here as well to get  people travelling to the communities. Great to see you guys. Thank you so much. Well  done.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363









