





The Hon Ken Wyatt AM MP

Minister for Indigenous Australians  Member for Hasluck

MEDIA RELEASE

23 November 2020

CONNECTING AND ACTIVATING THE NORTHERN TERRITORY

Connecting and activating the Northern Territory will be the key focus of a visit to the Top  End this week by Minister for Indigenous Australians, the Hon Ken Wyatt AM MP.

Minister Wyatt will spend the week with events in Darwin, Alice Springs, Jabiru and Tennant  Creek.

“An impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic has meant I haven’t been able to be on the ground  with Indigenous Australians across the nation, as we emerge from this, there is  unprecedented opportunity to unlock and activate the Northern Territory through  strengthening existing partnerships and establishing new ones,” Minister Wyatt said.

Minister Wyatt will use a Keynote Speech on Tuesday Night in Darwin to explore these  partnerships, and outline new ways of working that will help deliver better economic  outcomes, new job opportunities, and importantly contribute towards Closing the Gap.

“We have tremendous opportunity before us, and the Morrison Government is committed to  working in partnership and having Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians at the  table to take full advantage of what’s before us.”

“My visits to Jabiru and Tennant Creek will reinforce the work underway by the Morrison  Government to unlock land opportunity, support tourism and deliver self-determination for  Indigenous Australians in the NT. As I’ve previously stated, land security is economic  security.”

Minister Wyatt will also meet with key stakeholders, including Chief Minister the Hon Michael  Gunner MLA, to discuss the key partnership between the Commonwealth and NT  Governments.

“The New National Agreement on Closing the Gap, signed by all Australian governments,  heralds a new era of joint decision-making, joint responsibility and joint accountability. I look  forward to hearing from the Chief Minister and his Ministers as to how the NT Government  will work to Close the Gap in the NT,” Minister Wyatt said.

Minister Wyatt will also receive updates from both the Northern Land Council and Central  Land Council on their plans, and visit projects established to support COVID-19  management and recovery.

“I’m also looking forward to re-committing our support to Indigenous arts and culture,  following the Morrison Government’s Consultation Paper on Growing the Indigenous Visual  Arts Industry. I’ll be meeting with local artists in Alice Springs to hear directly from them  about their industry and how we can best support it to grow and prosper.”

Further details of the Ministers engagements will follow.





Media contact: Luke Nayna, Senior Media Adviser, 0438 231 687

Authorised by Ken Wyatt AM, MP, Member for Hasluck.

