







The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology  Federal Member for McPherson

The Hon David Littleproud MP  Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management  Deputy Leader of the Nationals



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

$10M MISSION TO BUILD FOOD SUPPLY CHAIN RESILIENCE

28 July 2020

A $10 million mission has been launched to further secure Australia’s food supply  chains and build the agrifood industry’s resilience to shocks.

The Morrison Government-backed Food Agility Cooperative Research Centre today  launched its Mission Food For Life.

The three-year program will bring agrifood businesses, tech companies and the  research sector together to develop new data-driven technologies which will help  secure food supply chains.

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said the COVID-19  pandemic had accelerated digital innovation in the agrifood industry, with the  research and technology sectors swiftly rallying to support the transformation.

“Our food supply chains have taken some big knocks over the last 12 months,”  Minister Andrews said.

“The drought was still biting hard when the bushfires hit. Now we’re grappling with a  pandemic which has put incredible pressure on our supply chains.

“The reality is shocks and stresses like these will continue to happen, and are likely  to happen more frequently into the future.

“Increasing the agrifood sector’s adoption of data and digital technology is the key to  resilient food supply chains that can bounce back, adapt and harness opportunities.





“Further strengthening our supply chains is not only a good thing for us domestically,  it helps create opportunities for our farmers and manufacturers to build on our  reputation as a food powerhouse around the globe.”

Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management David Littleproud  says investing in cutting-edge work such as this delivers ongoing returns to farmers  and the Australian community.

“This is the new smarts of Australian agriculture which brings together the best  minds and technologies to enrich our food supply chains and diversity,” Minister  Littleproud said.

“By fully harnessing the power of data and digital technology, we are helping to  protect Brand Australia and build a buffer against shocks like COVID-19.

“The Mission Food For Life project will help farmers make better decisions and  strengthen the food and agricultural supply chains.”

The Mission Food For Life initiative will first identify vulnerable areas across the  supply chain in six key commodities - red meat, grains, horticulture, dairy, wine and  seafood. A series of research and development projects will then deliver new digital  tools to improve business and community resilience in these areas.

Longer term, the project aims to integrate digital and data technologies like  information systems, software platforms and sensing technologies across the supply  chains to improve quality management and capitalise on new market opportunities.

The Food Agility CRC was launched in 2018 to help Australia’s farmers, food  producers and food industry businesses embrace digital technologies to improve  their productivity, strengthen their branding, create new jobs and export  opportunities. It is backed by $50 million from the Australian Government, with an  additional $149 million in cash and in-kind contributed from 54 partners.



Media Contacts:

Minister Andrews’ office: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846

Minister Littleproud’s office: Douglas Ferguson 0455 448 985

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

