

The Hon Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development

The Hon Josh Frydenberg MP  Treasurer

The Hon Alan Tudge MP  Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure

Senator the Hon Zed Seselja  Senator for the ACT

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

Monday 5 October 2020

MORRISON GOVERNMENT INVESTS $155 MILLION IN TRANSPORT  INFRASTRUCTURE TO BOOST ACT ECONOMIC RECOVERY

The Australian Capital Territory economy will be boosted, roads will be safer and thousands of jobs  created, with a $155 million investment into transport infrastructure from the Federal Coalition as part  of our COVID-19 economic recovery plan.

The latest funding injection builds on a series of territory-wide infrastructure investments from the  Commonwealth in responding to the COVID-19 pandemic which now total more than $180 million.

Key investments for the ACT include $88 million for the Molonglo River Bridge; and $50 million for a  South West Corridor upgrade package.

Prime Minister Scott Morrison said Tuesday’s Federal Budget would deliver funding for infrastructure  which supports the Government’s JobMaker plan and help the ACT recover from COVID-19.

“We have been working closely with state and territory governments to invest in the infrastructure that  is ready to go and can help rebuild our economy and create more jobs,” the Prime Minister said.

"These projects will keep commuters safe on the road, get people home to their loved ones sooner and  provide better transport links for urban and regional communities.”

“As part of the COVID-19 economic recovery plan we have invested an additional $180 million focused  on shovel-ready projects across the ACT.

“This latest investment will provide another boost to the local economy and is part of our plan to  support an estimated 400 direct and indirect jobs across the state.”

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the Government is focused on delivering priorities and boosting local jobs as part of  Australia’s road to recovery.

“We will draw on local businesses to stimulate local economies through these projects,” the Deputy  Prime Minister said.

“Infrastructure means jobs, it means livelihoods, it means stronger local communities and it means  building a better and more secure future for our nation.”

Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure Alan Tudge said the Government was driving the  delivery of major infrastructure projects to map the economic road back from the pandemic, building  the economy and providing certainty for business over the long term.

“The Australian Government will continue to invest in the ACT economy in the coming years, through  projects such as $50 million for a Canberra - South West Corridor upgrade package,” Minister Tudge  said.

Senator for the ACT Zed Seselja said these investments will deliver on the Government’s economic plan  for a stronger and more resilient Australia, boosting the economy, meeting our national freight  challenge and getting Australians home sooner and safer.

“The Government’s commitment to critical infrastructure continues across the territory, including an  $88 million investment for the Molonglo River Bridge, supporting local jobs and businesses at the time it  is needed most,” Senator Seselja said.

Since being elected in 2013 the Liberal and Nationals Government have committed more than $975  million for infrastructure in the ACT.

[END]

Media Contacts:  Prime Minister’s office: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  Deputy Prime Minister’s office: Jo Williamson 0418 475 668  Minister Tudge’s office: Michael Bennett 0434 782 923  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

Press Office of the Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Prime Minister, Canberra



AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY - 2020-21 BUDGET PROJECTS

New projects

Project Federal Funding Total Cost

Canberra - South West Corridor upgrade package $50 million $100 million

Molonglo River Bridge $87.5 million $175 million

Parkes Way Upgrade - Planning and Design $2.5 million $5 million

Subtotal $140 million $280 million



Additional funding

Project Additional Federal Funding Total Federal Funding

Monaro Highway Upgrade $15.25 million $115.3 million

Subtotal $15.25 million $115.3 million



Total new funding $155.25 million







