

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

RADIO 4AC CAIRNS BREAKFAST WITH MURRAY JONES

WEDNESDAY, 4 MARCH 2020



SUBJECT: 100 businesses in 100 days; Liberals’ economic mismanagement, Scott

Morrison’s cuts to TAFE and training; Renewable energy.



MURRAY JONES, HOST: Well as we well know tourism's has been hit in tropical North

Queensland but of course, we need to consider some of the other industries. Just had

some figures that have come through, they are a little bit older, they’re from about a year

ago - March 2019 from Construction Skills Queensland - talking about a labour shortfall in

the far north equating to 3,246 workers. Plasterers, electricians and plumbers topping the

list of in-demand trades. Businesses are basically saying their hamstrung by just not

having qualified staff. It is an issue of concern especially when we have got some tight

economic situations in the tropical north as it is. To talk a little bit further about it this

morning, Shadow Minister for Education and Training, Tanya Plibersek joins me. Good

Morning Tanya.



TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Great to

talk to you Murray.



JONES: You too. This is concerning though. At the end of the day it's basically suggesting

that under the current government the availability of trainees and apprentices has dropped

by thirty seven and a half per cent in the last four or five years. How can business survive

without having that bread and butter at the bottom Tanya?



PLIBERSEK: Well they can't. I mean, this tradie shortage is really hurting businesses. I've

been doing this 100 businesses in 100 days consultation program. I've been talking to

businesses - small, medium and large businesses - and so many of them tell me that they

would love to expand, they’d love to offer more jobs, but they can't find the skilled staff they

need. And on the other hand we've got almost two million Australians who are unemployed

or want more hours of work. Now if we had a decent TAFE and training system linking

those two, we'd see businesses booming and we'd see those unemployed or

underemployed Australians getting the work they so desperately want. I mean, you were

talking about the Construction Skills Queensland figures. These are a real worry because

it's not just bad for the people who are missing out on work. It's not just bad for the

businesses that are trying to expand. But if you're someone who's building a house or

fixing up a house, you're paying more, you're waiting longer. If you're talking about the jobs

that come from the construction industry and the flow-on effect, you’re seeing the impact

on the local economy when that construction activity can't happen. So this is holding back

our economy and obviously it's not just in Queensland, this is right around the country. The

Queensland Government is trying to step in by offering free TAFE, and some of the other

state governments are doing the same, but they can't do it all on their own. The Federal

Government has cut more than $3 billion from TAFE and training and there's fewer

apprentices and trainees now than when the LNP first came to office federally.



JONES: Well, look, we have been promised a surplus but I guess it does beg the question,

at what cost? Because if the economy can't thrive because of this shortage, really that

surplus that we were promised is truly illusory in so many ways.



PLIBERSEK: Look, it's holding our country back. When you look at, what have we got at

the moment? We've got really low wages growth. People haven't seen a pay rise for ages.

We've got low consumer confidence. We've got low business investment. They're not,

business isn't confident. We've got interest rates going down and down, below the

emergency levels that we had during the Global Financial Crisis. All of these numbers are

very bad numbers for the Government and investing in TAFE and training, making sure

that we're addressing the skills shortages that businesses are telling us about, is a really

important first step to getting the economy ticking.



JONES: Is there a potential impact also from the Coronavirus? When you are talking

about, let’s say on average more than 30 per cent of a reduction in trainees and

apprentices here in Australia, we know that the education institutes have been impacted as

a result of the Chinese students. What about for apprentices and trainees, is there a

potential impact there as well?



PLIBERSEK: Look these numbers come before the Coronavirus. So the Coronavirus will

have an impact on our economy. But all of the fundamentals were bad before we ever

heard of the Coronavirus and frankly, these numbers are also before those terrible

bushfires, the floods that came afterwards, the drought that came beforehand. So you

really have to have a look at what was happening before any of these disasters and the

numbers were already so very bad. When you look at what happens after the disasters,

businesses will find it even harder. They are finding it even harder to keep the staff that

they're already got and the Government's really dropped the ball on that too. We've just

heard overnight in Senate Estimates down here in Canberra, we've heard that we don't

really have a Bushfire Recovery Agency. It's one guy at the desk in the Department of

Prime Minister and Cabinet. And the $2 billion fund that they were talking about, well that's

not really a fund at all. They called it a 'notional fund' and they may as well say it's a

fictional fund. It doesn't actually exist. There's a whole lot of bad things happening in the

economy. This shortage of skilled workers, the cuts to TAFE and training, just make it

worse.



JONES: And look I should imagine with these 100 businesses in 100 day,s and I believe

you are coming to Cairns as well, it will be interesting to hear from employers that this

shortage of actually having that labour and the pains that they are causing employers but I

guess we will find that in due course and hopefully when you come to Cairns, make sure

you make a point of dropping in.



PLIBERSEK: I will. I absolutely will Murray.



JONES: Look, on a different subject, we all need lower food bills. It's been an ongoing

issue here when it just comes to getting food on the table for the family. Electricity prices

continue to soar and insurance here in tropical North Queensland, whereas I noticed in the

last week or so it's seems like Anthony Albanese being accused by the Government of

being Bill Shorten 2.0, with respect to a zero net carbon emissions by 2050. How could we

possibly do this and try and keep electricity, insurance and food bills at an affordable level?



PLIBERSEK: Well, do you know what? The reason that we want to get to zero net

emissions by 2050 is because it will create jobs, grow wages and keep those household

bills down. The CSIRO has done modelling on this that shows that we will create jobs,

grow wages and keep bills down. When you look at food bills, that's one example you've

given. The National Farmers Federation, Meat and Livestock Australia, they already have

a target of zero net emissions because they know that if we continue to have these

worsening droughts, natural disasters, food prices will go up. You talked about insurance

costs. The insurance industry has estimated that unless we take real action to reduce the

dangers of climate change, our natural disaster bill is likely to double to $39 billion a year

by 2050. That cost just gets passed on to householders when they're buying their

household Insurance. You talked about power prices. The biggest problem with energy

bills at the moment is uncertainty. The Liberals and Nationals chaos and division on energy

policy is killing jobs because no one wants to invest in the cheaper power that renewable

energy brings. In fact, we know that renewables are cheaper than new coal already. We

know that the cheaper power that those renewables produce could be powering new

businesses, really bringing down the cost of electricity for families and for businesses, and

instead we've got all this internal fighting, we've got - they're on to their 19th energy policy

now, we still don't have a proper energy policy. I mean, it was actually Malcolm Turnbull

that said that the Liberals are incapable of dealing with this issue and that the

consequence of their internal fights are higher energy bills, so I'm not really going to be

taking the advice of Scott Morrison on this because his policies are a jobs killer because

they mean there's no certainty in energy policy in Australia.



JONES: Let's talk about costings because that was obviously something that the

Government jumped on straight away saying well Anthony Albanese hasn't costed the zero

net carbon emissions by 2050, playing into your hands to a degree but I mean has anyone

estimated the cost of not actually doing anything about climate change?



PLIBERSEK: Yes they have. The University of Melbourne have done a report that says if



we don't act, the cost by 2050 will be $2.7 trillion. Now that's a cost because your

household electricity bills will be higher, your household Insurance bills will be higher, your

food costs will be higher, but it's also the cost, I mean, you've got the beautiful Great

Barrier Reef on your doorstep - if we lose tourism jobs because of threats to the reef, you

think about the effect that has on our economy. What about the cost of the drought? What

about the cost of these more frequent, more severe bushfires? What about the costs of the

more frequent and worse cyclones. These added costs to our economy and to the

household budget, to your hip pocket, are enormous if we don't act. And one of the worst

costs is while we've got all this uncertainty about what's going to happen in the future,

people aren't investing in new power generation. So we saw a 60 per cent drop, close to

60 per cent drop, in new investment in renewable energy in the most recent figures we've

got. That's a jobs killer because it means that instead of power prices coming down with

more investment in renewables they're going to go up.



JONES: I guess when you consider the zero net carbon emission sure there's going to be

costs there but at the end of the day you're suggesting to me that those costs of the

transition certainly are not going to outweigh the $2.7 trillion that you've just mentioned?



PLIBERSEK: Well I tell you what, when we invest in new power generation, we're

investing in jobs. When we invest in carbon farming we're investing in jobs. I think this

transition has just enormous, absolutely enormous opportunities for Australia. We can be

an energy superpower and all of the modelling has said, the most recent CSIRO modelling,

shows that as we move to zero net emissions we will create jobs. Those jobs will have

higher wages and we'll keep household bills down.



JONES: Well it certainly seems like some interesting times ahead and will Labor be able to

sell this platform? Shadow Minister for Education and Training Tanya Plibersek, thank you

so much for your time this morning.



PLIBERSEK: Always a pleasure, Murray.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DANIEL DORAN 0427 464 350



