









THE HON JASON WOOD MP

ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR CUSTOMS, COMMUNITY SAFETY AND  MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS



MEDIA RELEASE

22 October 2020



Government announces $10.6 million to combat modern slavery

The Morrison Government has reaffirmed its commitment to tackling modern slavery with the  announcement of $10.6 million in the 2020-21 Budget to implement Australia’s next National Action  Plan to Combat Modern Slavery 2020-25 (National Action Plan).

The National Action Plan will guide the Government’s actions over the next five years to prevent  modern slavery in Australia and in global supply chains.

Assistant Minister for Customs, Community Safety and Multicultural Affairs, Jason Wood, said  Australia is taking a global leadership role in addressing modern slavery.

The 2020-21 Budget announcement includes $4.4 million over five years in grant funding for civil  society organisations, peak bodies and academic researchers to deliver projects that will assist in  preventing and eliminating modern slavery.

“Collaboration between Government, industry and civil society is key to combating this crime. This  investment will further enhance the Government’s efforts to address modern slavery, building on  the world-leading Modern Slavery Act 2018,” Assistant Minister Wood said.

This funding builds on the Government’s $6.2 million investment in grant funding since 2008.  It will  also support vulnerable individuals at risk of modern slavery as a result of the COVID-19.

The Australian Border Force (the ABF) is leading the design and implementation of the National  Action Plan. The National Action Plan has been developed through extensive community  consultation, including a public consultation paper which received 47 written submissions and 27  community consultation workshops with civil society, unions and academia.

The ABF leads the Government’s response to modern slavery, including overseeing Australia’s  criminal justice response to modern slavery and engaging business and industry to implement  the Modern Slavery Act 2018.

The new National Action Plan will build on Australia’s current efforts and initiatives under the  National Action Plan to Combat Human Trafficking and Slavery 2015-19 and the Modern Slavery Act  2018.

For more information on development of the National Action Plan, visit:  https://www.homeaffairs.gov.au/reports-and-publications/submissions-and-discussion-papers/combat-modern-slavery-2020-25



Contact: (02)62774982

