



MEDIA RELEASE



Greens welcome Grattan Institute approach to zero transmission and call

on Government to show national leadership and present a long term

national strategy



The Greens welcome the strategies proposed by the Grattan Institute Report

Go For Zero and support the goal of zero transmission.



Instead of passing the buck off to the states or getting into verbals with State

Premiers the Commonwealth Government must show leadership and look to

how we can get to zero transmission in our community and have a view to long

term planning and a strategic approach, rather than making vague

announcements about “opening up” in the media.



Wanting economies to open up isn't going to get us there, we all understand

that communities are hurting and businesses are hurting but just easing

restrictions is not the answer.



The Government is failing to consider the economic costs of lifting restrictions

preemptively.



If the Government is serious about getting the economy back to normal and

open they cannot just say lets open up, we need a plan for dealing with ongoing



community transmission.



We know that this Government is allergic to looking at the evidence but if they

really want to do what is best for the economy and our community they must

seriously consider a goal of zero transmission and they must be clearly

communicating their plans.



The current suppression approach means allowing restrictions to loosen while

there’s still virus circulating in the community. This is likely to mean a continuing

cycle of see-sawing lockdowns as outbreaks pop up across the country, which

means ongoing economic disruption and uncertainty.



Economic support to aid people forced to miss work due to COVID-19 isolation

must be extended.



We should be investing in the development of rapid testing technology so that

we can get 24  hour or even immediate results



The current uncertainty in the community about the possibility of future

lockdowns is bad for the community and bad for the economy. A clear roadmap

towards zero transmission of the virus in Australia would provide certainty for

both people and the economy.









Media Contact:

Lucy Cowcher-Guthrie; 0418 401 180





