

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

360 ON MIX 104.9 FM DARWIN

WEDNESDAY, 4 NOVEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Visit to Darwin, Coronavirus, Defence in the NT, Agriculture in the NT.



KATIE WOOLF, HOST: Joining us in the studio is the Federal Shadow Minister for

Defence, Richard Marles, good morning to you.



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Good

morning Katie, how are you?



WOOLF: Yeah, very well good to have you in the studio.



MARLES: We've all come up.



WOOLF: You have, usually in the dry season that happens, you’re all here in the hot

weather.



MARLES: So the Northern Territory opened up to regional Victoria midday on Monday, I

was here by five o'clock.



WOOLF: Couldn’t wait!



MARLES:  Could not wait. I was very pleased that there was somewhere in Australia,

which was willing to accept us regional Victorians.



WOOLF: Yeah.



MARLES:  I was literally on the first flight up here, so that's fantastic, notwithstanding the

weather, it’s great to be here.



WOOLF: Now, you're based in Geelong and I understand things have certainly been very

different in Geelong to what we're experiencing here in the Northern Territory at the

moment when you talk about COVID?



MARLES:  I mean, very different and not as, nowhere near as the sort of restrictions that

we've seen in Melbourne. That's, that's different again.



WOOLF: Yeah.



MARLES: But it is, it is pretty extraordinary really coming up here through a Victorian set of

eyes, and you know, you’ve got restaurants, you see people sitting around at the pub

shaking hands, having a beer, enjoying themselves. What last year, and obviously, right

now is the most normal thing in the world to see, from a Victorian point of view that, that

looks really extraordinary and it says something about the experience that Victoria has

been through. It's just yeah, it's very different, people are, and you know, there is a sense

of much greater distancing, isolation, people wearing masks, they’ve just started going

back to restaurants, and even there, very spaced out. But it's been a pretty difficult winter

is the truth in Victoria and I think people will recover pretty quickly, but it's been tough.



WOOLF: Yeah, tell you what, it's something that, that I think for us here in the Territory,

we've pretty much not, but we had a bit of a lockdown at one point, but we, I don't think

we've really experienced it in the same way that other Australians have, so it's always

interesting to get that insight I reckon.



MARLES: Yeah and like, I haven't actually been to Melbourne probably for six weeks now.

You know, at that point, on the occasions where I was going up there, like streets in the

city, the top end of Collins Street, completely empty, like in the middle of the day, really,

really extraordinary kind of sights. There's, you know, almost sort of a dystopian sense of

nothing there, you know and so to come to a place where people are smiling, happy, it's

normal, really is fantastic. I've got to say, there's almost a sense of euphoria when you get

here. So it's not a surprise, therefore, that you've actually seen I think a thousand

Victorians seek to quarantine out of the state during the winter through Howard Springs

and come enjoy what the Territory has to offer, but what the rest of Australia has to offer.



WOOLF: Do you reckon we’re going to end up with Victorians moving to the territory

permanently?



MARLES: What I do think is that Victorians have got a taste of what it is to live here and

the fantastic lifestyle that is to be experienced here. You ask that question, I caught up with

a friend who has been in Victoria, who's now living up here, been here since March, was

only intending to stay for six months, has just extended his stay now for another year,

potentially. I think you are going see something of phenomenon like that. And probably not

just Victorians, I think people from around Australia, and so for the first time in a number of

years, I think we've seen that the population numbers start to increase in Darwin. And I

would say, as someone who's been a pretty frequent visitor to Darwin over the last few

years, there's actually a sense of optimism and hope about this town that I've experienced

on this trip that I’ve probably haven't seen for a while and that's really encouraging.



WOOLF: Yeah, there does seem to have been a bit of a shift for us here. I don't know why,

you know why, but I think we're going to see some opportunity come out of the Northern

Territory as a result of COVID, which I know probably sounds quite strange, but I do think

it's going to mean we do rebound to some degree much quicker than, you know, than other

locations, given the fact that we are still continuing to operate as normal.



MARLES: I completely agree with that Katie and as I say people get to see what a

fantastic lifestyle this is. I was speaking with Luke Gosling, who's, you know, a fantastic

local member who does a great job representing Darwin in the federal parliament, I spoke

to him a couple of months ago from Geelong, at the kind of height of lockdown. It was

pretty grim, the weather was grim, we're all stuck inside, I'm ringing Luke, he was sort of

saying, I asked him what it was like and he said, ‘it's really sunny out here and I'm heading

off to the …’ and then he checked himself, realised who he’s talking to and he said, ‘no no

mate actually it’s terrible here, it’s about six degrees and raining’. I said, ‘you’re a terrible

liar Luke’.



WOOLF: Trying to make you feel better about being stuck somewhere else. Now you’re

here obviously visiting and doing plenty of different things in your role as the Shadow

Minister for Defence. Now one of those things yesterday was visiting the HMAS

Coonawarra and speaking with the crew on a patrol boat about Operation Resolute. You

know, it is all part of, I guess, finding out how things are tracking here in the territory, how

did you go on that visit?



MARLES: Well look it was great to meet that crew at HMAS Coonawarra, which is the

base at Larrakeyah and the patrol vessel we were on was the HMAS Ararat. They're part

of Operation Resolute, which is really the main operation that looks after border protection

around our northern waters. In many ways, you know, they are kind of the defenders of our

sovereignty, like they're the backbone of the operation, which protects our sovereignty, and

they do an incredible job, very selfless. It speaks, though, to how important Darwin is from

the point of view of defence and national security, I've always felt like there are two really

big garrison towns in Australia, one is Townsville, and the other is Darwin. And Darwin, I

mean defence is a very big part of Darwin, but Darwin is an incredible national asset for

our national security. Sometimes I feel like that's not properly understood down south, and

I think there needs to be, you know, a greater commitment, a kind of a decision to make

sure that we are investing in Darwin and the asset that it is in terms of keeping the nation

safe. And you go down and look at what those guys are doing, the men and women on the

HMAS Ararat, are doing, and you realise how important having a northern footprint is for

the defence of our nation.



WOOLF: Yeah, it is so incredibly important. And of course, over I guess you'd say over

recent months, there has been a lot of discussion about the China and Australia

relationship, and we've certainly seen some difficulties, I think, in that relationship, even

throughout the week, talking about the rock lobsters being, you know, stuck on the, on the

tarmac, and that kind of thing in China. How important do you think then Darwin is when

you talk about, when you talk about Australia's relationship with China and some of the

instability that we're seeing there?



MARLES: Well, it's really important. I mean, the relationship with China is a complex

relationship. And it's one we need to value, China is our largest trading partner, and really,

that trading relationship needs to be fixed. But it's also true that as a great power, China is

seeking to shape the world around it and that does create challenges for us. And it's really

important that we're in a position to be able to assert our national interest in the way that

we need to and it's in that sense that Darwin becomes really important. You've got the

three services based here in one form or another, Robertson barracks, RAAF base Darwin

and HMAS Coonawarra at Larrakeyah. It's a really, really important footprint whenever you

think about our strategic circumstances, and what that means in terms of our force posture.

So that is, force posture is where our troops are based - our soldiers, sailors, aviators

-  where our gear is based. Inevitably, you have a northern focus, inevitably, you start

thinking about this part of the country, but it does require a commitment from government,

from federal government to see that through. You know, in many ways, going right back to

the beginning of federation the establishment of Darwin is a federal decision, but it needs

to be followed through on and there's no -  you can sort of play that out on questions such

as infrastructure, but there's no more important place that plays out than in defence. And

it's really important to actually see that commitment to basing here, but also to defence

industry so the local industry in supporting those bases here.



WOOLF: Taking that into account, do you think that there should be more happening in the

Northern Territory? ie more troops based here, more of that infrastructure? And should we

really be looking more to the territory, particularly Darwin, as you know, the base for our

Aussie troops?



MARLES: Look, I do think that it's important that we're looking at Darwin as an asset and I

think there is absolutely a case for greater basing here. In fact, you know, what we've seen

is, is really the opposite over the last few years, people who have been based here in the

army, for example, being moved down to Adelaide. It is really important that we are

committing to this northern footprint. The other point is, as I mentioned, though, is that, you

know, part of the licence, really that defence needs to gain with the local community in

being present here is that -  it's to see the local community getting part of the economic

benefit of the presence of defence. We probably don't see that enough. There needs to be

you know, an active attempt to engage local industry in a whole range of economic

opportunities that go with that defence footprint, like buildings being built, there’s s new

Wharf being built right now out at Larrakeyah. But just simple things -  the mowing the lawn

around these bases, you know, a whole lot of maintenance that can easily be done by local

companies. It's really important that there is an active attempt to engage local businesses

in all the work that is generated by that defence footprint.



WOOLF: Yeah, I know that that's something that certainly the, the Master Builders here in

the territory have been pushing for and others as well to make sure that our local

contractors, particularly when you talk about that infrastructure, that they are winning, that

work.



MARLES: And can I say the Master Builders have done a great job up here in terms of

their advocacy around this, we've spent a lot of time with them and the policy that Labor

took to the last election on exactly this question about how you engage local businesses in

a place like Townsville, you know, the Master Builders were hugely impactful on us in

terms of our thinking and as has Luke been actually, to be honest. Luke Gosling has been

really forceful in his advocacy around this question as well. One of the things is, you know,

you kind of get into the weeds a bit here, but defence is a very big animal, like defence is

the biggest employer within the Commonwealth Government, by a long way and it

probably doesn't play very nice with smaller animals. And so, you know, you kind of got to

work out a way in which defence can be accessible to small businesses that want to

contract with it and engage with it and that's the sort of problem that we're trying to solve.

But it's not beyond our wit to do that and the Master Builders have done a whole lot of

really important thinking on that and I think, you know, to their credit and Luke's I think we

are going to get down a pathway where there's much more local content, meaning Darwin

content in the defence footprint in Darwin and that's going to be really good for the local

economy…



WOOLF: It certainly will.



MARLES: …and jobs.



WOOLF:  Yeah it certainly will be. Now I know that while you been here as well you've also

met with a number of representatives from the agriculture industry. Anyone talking

mangoes with you?



MARLES: Yeah, like we know the cattle story and that's obviously a really big and

important story and probably still the bulk of the agriculture story but there's a whole lot of

aspects to NT agriculture that I learned about last night. Mangoes is one of them and Luke

brought me down a couple of mangoes last sitting week. They were absolutely delicious,

you know, watermelons is another, African mahogany - who knew that? But that's a, you

know, a big crop that, if you call it that, or plantation is probably a better way to describe it,

but forestry is part of the agricultural mix here in the Northern Territory. When you look at

all of that there's such a huge potential because there's consistent rainfall up here. There's

a whole lot of opportunities to do, you know, a range of innovative agriculture, which I think

offers enormous opportunity for the Northern Territory and Darwin and it goes to that story

of kind of hope and optimism that I was describing before, in so many ways, you're hearing

that in a way, which I haven't for quite some time up here, which is really encouraging.



WOOLF:  One of the concerns at the moment, though, unfortunately, for some of our

mango farmers and it's being reported in the NT News today is that one of the owners of

Australia's largest mango farms in the Northern Territory say that they've lost about $14

million worth of crops this year, because they didn't have enough workers. Well, they

basically told the papers, they're in a situation where with some of those with some of the

-  their operations and locations around the territory, they're not able to keep up with the

demand because they don't have those workers. Now it does come down to those

seasonal workers having to go through quarantine. It’s been something that they've been

trying to work through with the Northern Territory government, but particularly with the

federal government. I know that you're in Opposition, of course, but has this been

something that's been raised with you? And do you think we need to try and make some

headways in here to ensure that, you know, our mangoes aren't being lost on the ground?



MARLES: Well, I guess it speaks to the complexity of the decisions that government are

having to make around the question of borders and I think actually, the Northern Territory

has done a really good job in managing its border. Firstly, for the health of Territorians.

There's obviously an economic benefit to that as well, I mean, the ability for the Northern

Territory to principally open internally has meant that its economy has been able to keep

going in a way that Melbourne’s has not, as a counter example. We've obviously got to get

to a point where internal borders around the country open up and again, the Northern

Territory has been, you know, pretty forward leaning. As a person from regional Victoria,

I've been able to come here. I'm not able to go yet to New South Wales or to Queensland

so the NT has been managing that well also. I think, though, in respect of that question, the

Commonwealth has a role to play here. Like the federal government actually can't pretend



that internal borders hasn't got something to do with them and they need to be providing

leadership on this question so that we can plot a pathway to getting our internal borders

open again within the country in a way which is safe, but in a way which is also as quick as

possible. And that then will see questions such as the mango farmers being able to be

resolved with people being able to come up here.  Like it's been a difficult year, that's to

sort of state the bleeding obvious, I guess and it’s impacts have been varied and

sometimes surprising and the mango farms is one of them. We really just need to now very

much focus on the recovery and getting our pathway back.



WOOLF:  Well, Richard Marles, Shadow Minister for Defence, we are going to have to

leave it there. Good to catch up with you this morning. Thanks so much for coming into the

studio.



MARLES: Great to come and talk Katie.



WOOLF:  Thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363







