

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER

TONY BURKE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ARTS  MANAGER OF OPPOSITION BUSINESS  MEMBER FOR WATSON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  SYDNEY  THURSDAY, 6 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Paid pandemic leave; the need for Parliament to sit; Victorian  coronavirus outbreak.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Thanks for  joining us. I'm joined by Tony Burke, our Shadow Minister with responsibility for workplace  relations and the Manager of Opposition Business in the House. There are two issues I  wish to raise today. The first is the issue of paid pandemic leave. And I want to make it  clear that the reason why we need a national paid pandemic leave scheme is because it is  a preventative measure. We do not want paid pandemic leave to be available after  infections have grown, we want it to prevent the spread of COVID-19. That is why paid  pandemic leave should be available on a national scale.

The second issue to go to is the sitting of the Parliament that's due to meet on the 24th of  August. Today, the President and Speaker will distribute, or have distributed, information  from the Chief Medical Officer advising of the conditions particularly for people traveling  from Victoria to sit in the national Parliament. What that requires is a fortnight of self-isolation either in the ACT or at home with strict conditions. That is the advice of the Chief  Medical Officer that we received yesterday afternoon. As a result of that, I convened  meetings this morning with my Victorian caucus members, as well as the Shadow Cabinet  and the full Labor Party caucus to determine ways in which we could put a proposition to  the Government that would ensure that Victorians were represented in our national  Parliament and that people were not excluded due to the particular emergency  circumstances which are there now. It has been Labor's view that our preference by far is  for Parliament to meet in the usual fashion, face-to-face, where people are able to hold the  Government of the day to account and scrutinise decisions on behalf of their electorates.  It's clear, though, that the current issues make that difficult across the board. And that's  why earlier this year, we provided for changes to the standing orders to allow for different

forms of sitting of the House of Representatives upon agreement between the Government  and the Opposition. What Labor is putting forward is that there be a hybrid system whereby  Victorian members, but others as well who are unable to travel to Canberra to sit in the  national Parliament, are still able to participate by video link in terms of speaking to  legislation, asking questions, answering questions. This will not interfere with the need for  there to be a quorum on the floor of the national Parliament for it to be convened, or with  voting patterns, which you will need to be present for. We believe this is a practical solution  to the emergency circumstances which are there now. And one which should be time-limited and restricted to where it is absolutely necessary. We think the changes should be  minimum. And as far as possible, Parliament should operate in the normal way. But these  are not normal circumstances. Which is why they require flexibility, which Labor is  prepared to engage with. I spoke to the Prime Minister just a short time ago and put this  proposal to him. And we had a constructive suggestion. He is not opposed to such a  proposal as a matter of principle and wants time to work through some of the practical  issues such as the availability of video links that I believe should be available by the time  we sit in a fortnight's time. This is ensuring that the Parliament can continue to function,  that people can continue to represent their electorates or their state and ensure that the  national Parliament can engage in the fundamental issues that we need to discuss such as  paid pandemic leave. Such as the continuation of both JobKeeper and JobSeeker. Such  as the operation of the COVID-19 app. A range of issues that require the national  Parliament to give consideration and provide leadership on. Labor has been constructive  throughout this crisis. And our actions today in putting forward a sensible, practical  proposition to the Government to allow Parliament to meet without disenfranchising one  group of people, is consistent with that. And I would ask Tony to make some comments.

TONY BURKE, MANAGER OF OPPOSITION BUSINESS: Thanks very much, Anthony.  As the Leader of the Party said at the outset, there is an issue for paid pandemic leave that  is urgent. At the moment the Government's proposal where they'd only provided it for  Victoria is really simple. Something that prevents the spread is only made available after  the horse has bolted. And that's not sustainable. We need to not be in a situation for  something that the Leader of the Labor Party was first calling for back in March, where the  only place where it's available is Victoria. Paid pandemic leave will save lives. And it needs  to become a national scheme. And the Government needs to use national cabinet as a  way of delivering that.

On the changes to the Parliament, Labor, in good faith, put forward a proposal some  weeks ago after Parliament had been unilaterally cancelled by the Prime Minister, to  establish a working group. The Presiding Officers, the Speaker and the President of the  Senate, allowed that working group to happen. I have to say, it's been really constructive.  People from both sides of politics have been working constructively to put together a set of  protocols that we could then put to the Chief Medical Officers to see if that found a way of  being able to protect public health but make sure that every Member of Parliament could  still turn up. The Prime Minister made a decision unilaterally just before that negotiation  was about to start in terms of the protocols being put to the Chief Medical Officers to  unilaterally seek his own advice. We now have written advice, and we have to deal with it.  Under those rules, and we don't dispute the medical advice itself, under those rules, the  reality of it is this; at a time in Victoria, in particular, where every member of a household is  pulling their weight, helping to make a household function, schooling and work at home, in  ways that no one could have anticipated, that the Member of Parliament within that  household effectively would have to leave the family for a month and say, 'You're on your  own, can't help you anymore'. Or, if they did the isolation at home, they may be in a



situation where if their partner is still working, they're effectively asking their partner to  leave their job for a fortnight in order for the whole household to isolate. The reality of that  means under these health orders, many people won't be able to attend the Federal  Parliament. And there has never been a time when the voice of Victoria is more important  to hear in the Federal Parliament. So, the reason we're putting forward the constructive  suggestion to the Government, because the standing orders that were moved by the  Leader of the House, Christian Porter, and in a similar way in the Senate some months  ago, it is possible to make this sort of change. And so, we are putting forward, to the  Government publicly, that we are now willing to have a situation, not a full virtual  Parliament, we're still opposed to that, but a situation where the Parliament sits in its  normal way and a few modifications are made to make sure that the voice of Victoria can  still be heard at a time when it's more important than ever.

ALBANESE: Thank you. In conclusion, can I just say that all of the non-Victorian thoughts  are with those people who are in Victoria today. That's why we need to consider measures  that enfranchise Victorians that give them a voice. And that's what this proposal is aimed  at. I look forward to constructively working through with the Government in the next day.  Because if people are going to isolate, self-isolate in Canberra, they will have to travel this  weekend. I'm confident that we can work through these issues and have a Parliament  that's functioning and a Parliament that is effective in the national interest at a time where  it's more important than ever. Thanks very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053





