

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



MINISTER MUST RECONSIDER PRIVATE HEALTH INSURANCE PREMIUM  INCREASES

New figures show that the Government must urgently reconsider the private health  insurance premium increases it has rubber-stamped for October.

Australian Prudential Regulation Authority statistics for April to June, released today, show  that the proportion of Australians with hospital cover fell for the 20th consecutive quarter.

With premiums up 30 per cent under this Government and many Australians struggling to  make ends meet during COVID-19, hospital coverage is now at the lowest level in 14  years.

The Private Health Insurance Act gives the Minister for Health the power to reject premium  increases that “would be contrary to the public interest”.

Greg Hunt must now explain why another 2.92 per cent average increase in October would  be in the public interest - or cancel that increase altogether.

Another increase would compound the pain that many policyholders felt between April and  June, when they were forced to pay for services they couldn’t use. Today’s figures show  that benefits fell by more than 20 per cent compared to the March quarter, reflecting  COVID-19’s impact on elective surgeries and dental, optical and other visits.

Labor acknowledges that claims are expected to recover in subsequent quarters, and  welcomes the steps some insurers have taken in response to COVID-19 - particularly  HBF, which has already cancelled its 2020 premium increase.

But with private health insurance already in crisis, and affordability and value further  undermined by the pandemic and recession, additional premium relief and comprehensive  reform are needed urgently.

Today’s figures follow yesterday’s warning by the Australian Medical Association that the  financial impacts of COVID-19 “will result in even more young people giving up their  insurance, increasing pressure on an already unstable system”.

The AMA has called for the October Budget to include reforms to improve the affordability  and value of private health insurance - consistent with Labor’s longstanding calls for  reform.





As a starting point, the Minister must reconsider October’s premium increases as a matter  of urgency.

TUESDAY, 18 AUGUST 2020

MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512













