

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



ANDREW LEIGH MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR TREASURY

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR CHARITIES

MEMBER FOR FENNER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

CANBERRA

FRIDAY, 30 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Labor’s Working Family Childcare Boost; Bushfire Royal Commission;

lack of integrity of Morrison Government; AusPost and Cartier watches; Chris

Hayes; terrorist attack incident in France.



ANDREW LEIGH, MEMBER FOR FENNER: My name is Andrew Leigh, Federal Member

for Fenner. And it's a delight to have Anthony Albanese and Katy Gallagher here at the

Harrison Early Learning Centre. I acknowledge the Ngunnawal people on whose lands we

are meeting today. I acknowledge the Indigenous culture that is so important to this early

learning centre. Well, the ages zero to five are 1,800 days. And they're an incredibly

important period in the lives of young people. It is that first five years that sets you up for

the next 80 years. The work that we've seen here in this centre is so critical. Labor is

committed to high-quality early childhood education, and to making sure that education is

affordable and accessible to parents across Australia. That's why Anthony's here in this

centre. And that's why childcare was at the centre of Labor's Budget Reply. It's a real

pleasure to have Katy Gallagher and Anthony Albanese here. I'll hand over now to Anthony

to say a few words.



ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Thanks very

much, Andrew. Thanks for joining us here today with Katy Gallagher, who has done an

amazing job in the Senate in the last couple of weeks, holding the Government to account.

And we're also joined by Summer, who has shown us what to do around the centre here.

How old are you?



SUMMER, CHILD ATTENDING HARRISON EARLY CHILDHOOD CENTRE: Four.



ALBANESE: Four. Summer is four and is a great example of the benefits of early

childhood education. It isn't just about people, our littlest people, being minded. It is about

their development. It's about their education. It's about how successful they will be in life.

We know that human brain development, 90 per cent of it occurs in the first five years. It

makes no sense, the current system whereby once your child turns five, it's recognised by

our society that we all have a responsibility to look after them in terms of public education,

to provide that universal service. Early childhood education should be just as universal and

available and affordable. And our plan to remove the cap on the childcare subsidy, to lift it

to 90 per cent, to improve the tapering off so that 97 per cent of families will be better off is

one that will make an enormous difference. This is economic reform. If we're going to grow

the economy out of the coronavirus crisis that we are going through, what we need to do is

to look at the three Ps. Participation, productivity and population. This is about women's

participation in the workforce. It's about boosting productivity. It's also about providing

people with the economic security to make decisions as families of when they're going to

have their first child or another child. Being secure in the knowledge that they'll be able to

afford to do so. At the moment, it makes no sense that there's a disincentive for many

women to work a fourth, or a fifth day in a working week. That holds back careers. But it

also holds back our productivity and our economy. And that's why this reform is good for

children, it's good for families, and it's good for our economy. All of the studies, since we

announced this policy, show that there's at least $2 benefit to every dollar of cost. That's

why it makes good economic sense.



This Government wants to return to what was there with a hoping and wishing. They don't

actually have a plan to grow our economy into the future. Labor has plans. At the centre of

it is this policy, as well as a Future Made in Australia, supporting our manufacturing sector,

supporting Australian energy prices to be reduced by improving the grid, making sure that

we make things here. That two-pronged policy announcement that we had in the Budget

Reply has been well received around Australia. Contrast that with what we've seeing over

the last fortnight where Senate Estimates has exposed a range of programs whereby

funding was announced, including one supporting women entrepreneurs, it was

announced in 2018, announced again later that year and announced again in 2020. They

announced the second round in the Budget two weeks ago, but a dollar hasn't flowed from

that program. And that's symptomatic of so many programs, including the Emergency

Response Fund that is there to look after people in terms of natural disasters. But at the

same time the Government can find money and money has flown for Clive Palmer's jet to

be flown around and other waste that we've seen including buying land around Badgerys

Creek for $30 million when it was only worth three. They are the wrong priorities. This

should be the priority of any national government looking towards the future because these

children deserve the best start in life. Happy to take questions.



JOURNALIST: The Bushfire Royal Commission is being tabled today, what do you expect

the Government's response is going to be?



ALBANESE: Well, the Government needs to do far better. One, it should acknowledge

that it got it wrong, that it was too slow to act. That despite the significant warnings that

were occurring in 2019, it didn't act on recommendations to the Government such as

increasing aerial firefighting capacity. It didn't address the significant issues that were

being raised by the former emergency fire chiefs, indeed, wouldn't even meet them. We

know that too many families are still suffering. We have people still living in temporary

accommodation. We have land that still hasn't been cleared. It's not good enough. And the

fact is, as well, the Government needs to address the challenge of climate change. We had

during last year, the Deputy Prime Minister say that it was just a, 'woke inner-city issue'.

Well, tell that to the people around Canberra here, the people around the Snowy Mountain

region, people around Batlow, people around the coast, who saw so much damage and

such a loss of life, as well as a loss of habitat, loss of flora and fauna. It was a devastating

period. And I hope that the Government adopts all recommendations from the Bushfire

Royal Commission. They've had it now for a couple of days without releasing it. We have

got through this crisis better than most countries in terms of coronavirus because we've

listened to the experts and listened to the science. We need to listen to the science and

listen to the experts when it comes to our natural disasters.



JOURNALIST: The Australia Post CEO isn't standing down. Do you think she is

(inaudible)?



ALBANESE: The Australia Post CEO, we made our views very clear, it was only Labor's

questions in Senate Estimates that exposed the four Cartier watches worth $20,000 that

were paid for with taxpayers' money. Christine Taylor probably looks at people like Angus

Taylor, looks at others who are sitting in the Cabinet of the National Government, and

thinks, 'Why should I step aside for the abuse of taxpayers' funds when this is a

Government that does it on a day-to-day basis'. Not just for $20,000, but in the tens of

millions of dollars. We had the Sports Rorts saga and abuse of taxpayers' funds with

colour-coded charts that came out of the Prime Minister's office. And no one accepting

responsibility. So, Christine Holgate has done the wrong thing. I support her paying a price

for that. But it's not surprising that she has a look at those people in the Morrison

Government from the very top who have abused taxpayers' funds and haven't paid any

price whatsoever. Indeed, the Government still refuses to give proper answers about a

range of those issues. And Scott Morrison avoids scrutiny at every single opportunity. We

have got taxpayers' funds are being used to fly around private jets at the moment to the

tens of thousands of dollars, much more than $20,000. And you have a Government that

says that's not a problem. You have a Government that says that it's a bargain buying land

that's worth $3 million for $30 million. It is not surprising that Christine Holgate scratches

her head at the hypocrisy of this Government.



JOURNALIST: Any word on how Chris Hayes is doing?



ALBANESE: He remains under care. There's still some tests to be done. He's such a

valued colleague. It was a very tough day for his family yesterday. Bernadette was in

Canberra. On behalf, I think it's fair to say not just the Labor Party, but all people who know

Chris, including people in the press gallery, we all wish him very well for a speedy

recovery. Chris has had a rough time in the last few years, crashing his motorbike, a range

of incidents. So, he's resilient. And he's tough. He's from Western Sydney. He'll come

through this.



Can I make just one final comment about the attack in France? All Australians stand with



the people of France today. This is a horrific act of terrorism that is simply barbaric and

deserves to be utterly condemned. It will produce a real shockwave through France. It

won't blunt the French values of liberty, equality and fraternity. And all Australians stand

with them today.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













