MADELEINE KING MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE

MEMBER FOR BRAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

WEDNESDAY, 26 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECT: The Morrison’s government’s decision to side with Clive Palmer on WA’s

border restrictions.



MADELEINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE: In relation to Clive Palmer’s intention

to smash the borders of Western Australia open for his own personal and political gain,

yesterday we saw what every Western Australian knows -- the Federal Court confirmed that

the government of Mark McGowan, his hard border that they have created in that state, is what

is keeping Western Australians safe. Without the hard border created by the McGowan

government, there may be catastrophic consequences for the health of all Western

Australians. What the Federal Court also confirmed is that the damage is done. The Western

Australian Liberals and this Liberal government have provided evidence in support of Clive

Palmer and against the interests of all Western Australians and the health of Western

Australians.



It is an outrageous thing for the Liberal government of this country to provide evidence against

the health and wellbeing of Western Australians so they could follow their ideological pursuits

of opening a border that the Federal Court has confirmed is keeping Western Australians

healthy. All Western Australian Labor MPs and Senators in this place, in Canberra this week,

support Mark McGowan and his government and the borders they have put in place to keep

Western Australians safe.



What we need to know is: do the Western Australian Liberals and this Liberal government now

accept the decision of the Federal Court that said yesterday these hard borders are what is

preventing a COVID outbreak that could have catastrophic consequences for the health of

Western Australians?  And I might add, a COVID outbreak in Western Australia could have

catastrophic consequences for the mining and resources industry of Western Australia that is

keeping this country going.  The Federal Court of Australia has confirmed that it is the hard

border put in place by the Western Australian government led by Mark McGowan that is saving

Western Australia from potentially catastrophic health consequences.  And it is helping to

protect the minerals and resources industry of Western Australia that is driving the recovery of

this country from the economic crisis brought on by the COVID-19 coronavirus.



As I said before, it is now a question for the WA Liberals to answer and let the country know

and let Western Australia know: do they support the decision of the Federal Court that has said

it is these borders that is protecting Western Australia from these potentially catastrophic

health consequences? As we know, they have gone out in support of Clive Palmer, they have

provided evidence against the interests of Western Australians. The damage is done. The

evidence is on the court record. That cannot be taken away. That evidence will go to the High

Court, and will work in support of Clive Palmer to try and smash WA’s hard borders. So the

WA Liberals need to ask themselves some tough questions on whether they want to stand for

the interests of Western Australians and protect the hard border that is keeping Western

Australians safe. Are there any questions?



JOURNALIST: Clive Palmer seems to always just be hanging around, doesn’t he? The papers

over there have called him a pest and a Grinch and a few other interesting things.  Is it time for

him to butt out of federal politics?



KING: It would be a very good thing for the people of Western Australia and for all Australians

if Clive Palmer butted out of the political scene. It would be a good thing if he dropped this

case against Western Australia, if he dropped his constitutional case which he is only running

for his own personal and political gain. It is time for Clive Palmer to take a back seat, he can

enjoy his property rights that he has over the mineral deposits - surely that's enough in this

world. In the meantime, I hope he does butt out. But more importantly, I hope he withdraws his

case against the State of Western Australia.



JOURNALIST: Keeping in mind your points about the health benefits that have been created

by the hard border closure, would you like to see Western Australia open up a bit more to

interstate tourism, or open up parts of the economy for entertainment reasons? What are your

thoughts around that, how long can that hard border stay in place?



KING: There is no doubt the hard border has severe consequences on many businesses. We

all know this, and all of us feel for those small businesses, large businesses, employees that

are suffering because of the hard borders, The priority is health. As the Federal Court said,

there could be catastrophic consequences for the health of Western Australians should the

hard border come down. No one wants this to go forever, we don't want COVID to go forever,

we don’t want the border restrictions to go forever. But they will remain and I support the

McGowan government in making sure they are strong while it is needed to keep that state

healthy so that the large business that is the mining and resources industry can continue, but

more importantly for the health of ordinary Western Australians.



JOURNALIST: Just one last one. The Prime Minister keeps talking about we have to learn to

live with the virus, we can’t keep economies closed and businesses closed, that sort of thing.

Is there some case for the Western Australian government to maybe go a little bit back along

on the spectrum, back towards what NSW and Queensland are doing, keeping the health

aspect very in check, but also opening up entertainment industries and concerts and tourism

and that sort of thing?



KING: I have no doubt that the McGowan government is considering this every time they meet

to discuss the potential of opening up the borders, as well as other activities in Western

Australia. As you may know, we've been able to hold large gatherings of the AFL football and

other things so Western Australians are generally leading - which is very lucky for them, and

for me - an ordinary life in times of COVID, which is very different from our friends and family

in Victoria who are suffering at the moment. But I'm sure they consider it. It has to be done

week in week out depending on what is happening in the rest of the country. And I think the

rest of the country understands that. It is important for each state to make its decisions based

on the health advice it gets and based on the matters that are occurring in those other states.

We all want the economy to open up, we sure do. There's no doubt about that. But health and

the health-led recovery from this virus has to be the priority. And these things that the Prime

Minister said, it beggars belief why they are not dealt through this national cabinet rather than

through the court system. So we have a national cabinet that he crows about and praises, and

it's a great thing that it's in place. Yet the federal Commonwealth government provides

evidence against the State of Western Australia in a Federal Court case to open up the

borders. Now that's not really a collaborative approach to the health and safety of all

Australians, and I think we really need to think what the Government wants to achieve in the



national cabinet and actually achieve something instead of just fighting and bickering and

making it a partisan issue. Thank you very much.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT:  ANDREW BURRELL 0437 290 112

