



SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women

THE HON GREG HUNT MP  Minister for Health

THE HON ALEX HAWKE MP  Assistant Defence Minister  Minister for International Development and the Pacific

MEDIA RELEASE  31 October 2020

AUSTRALIAN SUPPORT FOR COVID-19 VACCINE ACCESS  IN THE PACIFIC AND SOUTHEAST ASIA

The Indo-Pacific region is the engine of the new global economy. Ensuring it can recover quickly  will stimulate economic activity and restore jobs at home and abroad.

The Australian Government is committed to supporting access to safe and effective COVID-19  vaccines for the Pacific and Southeast Asia, as part of a shared recovery for our region from the  pandemic.  This will also contribute to Australia’s own health security and economic recovery.

We are securing access to COVID-19 vaccines for Australia, the Pacific and Southeast Asia  through a range of advance purchase agreements with manufacturers and through participation  in the multilateral COVAX Facility.

Through a regional vaccine access and health security initiative, the Australian Government will  provide a range of support including supplying safe and effective vaccine doses and delivering  technical support to our regional partners. Australia will assist with assessment of vaccine  safety, efficacy and quality by national regulatory authorities, informed by WHO advice.

We are committing an additional $500 million over three years towards this effort on top of the  $23.2 million committed in the Budget. The funding will further help ensure that the countries of  the Pacific and Timor-Leste are able to achieve full immunisation coverage, and will make a  significant contribution toward meeting the needs of Southeast Asia.

The funding is in addition to the Australian Government’s support through the COVAX facility  and the Australian Government’s existing Advance Purchase Agreements with Astra Zeneca-Oxford and CSL-University of Queensland.

Ensuring countries in our region can quickly recover from the health and economic impacts of  this devastating global pandemic is vital to ensuring our shared economic future in the post-pandemic world.

A fast, safe vaccine rollout in the Pacific and Southeast Asia will mean we are able to return to  more normal travel, tourism and trade with our key partners in the region.

This initiative is separate from, and additional to, Australia’s ongoing international development  assistance budget.

The funding complements Australia’s support for global efforts to help our region to access  vaccines, including through the COVAX Facility and its Advance Market Commitment (AMC) for  developing countries. Australia has already committed $123.2 million to the COVAX Facility to  secure access to vaccines for Australians and help bring down prices for all countries, and has  contributed $80 million to the Facility’s AMC for the benefit of high-risk populations in developing  countries.

The Australian Government has also entered into Advanced Purchase Agreements with Astra  Zeneca-Oxford and CSL-University of Queensland for over 84 million units of vaccines, which  Australia is able to donate to partners in the Pacific and Southeast Asia, should these vaccines  prove safe and effective, and units are available above domestic needs.



Media Contacts  David Wroe: +61 429 531 143 (Minister Payne)  James Perrin: +61 447 534 427 (Minister Hunt)  Wade Laube: +61 409 193 057 (Minister Hawke)

Authorised by Senator the Hon Marise Payne, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Women

