SENATOR MALARNDIRRI MCCARTHY

DEPUTY OPPOSITION WHIP IN THE SENATE

CHAIR OF FIRST NATIONS CAUCUS COMMITTEE

SENATOR FOR THE NORTHERN TERRITORY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

TODAY SHOW

MONDAY, 7 DECEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: NSW border security blunder; Australian anthem sung in Eora Aboriginal

language at Wallabies game; Freedom Monday.



ALLY LANGDON, HOST: Thanks for joining us this morning, some serious questions over the

airport security blunder which allowed two German travellers to fly into Melbourne from Sydney

without going into hotel quarantine. A Sydney police officer on only his second shift has been

blamed for the mistake, which has seen more than 170 people go into isolation. There is plenty

to discuss this morning. And I'm joined by Northern Territory Senator Malarndirri McCarthy and

Chris Smith from 2GB and 4CC. Nice to see you. Malarndirri, I mean, this is embarrassing for

New South Wales police, and we totally get that mistakes are made. But the issue here is the

consequences could have been catastrophic.



MALARNDIRRI MCCARTHY: Absolutely, Ally. And this is why that sense of vigilance is even

more so important as we kind of come to what's been an exhausting year and we come to the

end of it, we've actually got to be on even greater alert because this is when those sorts of

things can happen and become something that we don't want it to be.



LANGDON: Yeah. What were your thoughts on this yesterday, Chris? Because, I mean, the

mum and her son, they were only picked up by an eagle eyed security attendant at Melbourne

Airport who realised that they'd avoided hotel quarantine. We had the health minister, Greg

Hunt, saying that we have this fail safe border control. But to be honest, I mean, this was pure

luck, wasn't it, that this was picked up?



CHRIS SMITH, 2CC AND 2GB: It was. We don't have a fail safe border control. Humans are

involved. And when humans are involved, mistakes are going to be made. When you consider

they dealt with 100,000 returned travellers over the space of about seven months, it's not a

bad record. And I'm sure the police officer had his bum kicked. Like at the end of the day,

these things will happen. We've got great contact tracing and hopefully good contact tracing in

Melbourne. We could have handled it if we had to. I think at the end of the day, they've done a

pretty good job.



LANGDON: And look good on this police officer straightaway fessed up and said this. It was

only his second day. He's learnt from this. And and the police have learnt from this and they've

put more checks and balances in place. Now, I want to talk to you about the huge reaction to

the historic rendition of the national anthem by teenager Olivia Fox at the weekend's Wallabies

game. Just take a listen. And I thought it was just beautiful, the Newtown high school student

singing in the Indigenous Eora language with all the players learning the words, it was pretty

special in my mind, but it has been criticised by some former Indigenous sports stars who say

changing the language still doesn't change the meaning of the anthem. Malarndirri, what did

you take from this?



MCCARTHY: I thought it was absolutely beautiful, Ally. I think anything that does try to bring

our country together has to be a good thing. And hearing First Nations languages even more,

whether it's in the anthem or even spoken in other areas or even used in terms of the names of

suburbs and streets, brings about a better, I think, a better playing field for that respect and

understanding. Now, of course, there's questions around the words of the anthem, and that's

certainly a conversation that we've had on your program before. I mean, I've always said that I

love the version of Judith Durham and Kutcha [Edwards], you know, and I just think that that's

a great anthem. But this was a great moment. And I say well done to the Wallabies, you know,

well done for doing what you did.



LANGDON: Didn't you think it was amazing that they all learnt the words I thought was so

powerful.



MCCARTHY: Absolutely. And, you know, and all the commentary in terms of Australians and

anyone else who wanted to say whatever they thought, it was really a beautiful moment in

sport. And I do commend them for doing that. I hear what others are saying around the

meaning of the words in the anthem. But you know what? We are getting so much better at

having this conversation. And I think we're going to get to a point where we're going to discuss

that as well.



LANGDON: Yep. Chris, your thoughts?



SMITH: Well, the way the Wallabies played, they obviously spent too much time in singing

lessons and not enough time on the training paddock. But anyway, let's put that aside. I

thought it was wonderful. I think we've got to get rid of the word 'young'. We're not young. Our

habitation is not young. The land is not young. It's incredibly old. Get rid of the word. We've

already removed a word from the anthem previously. We can do it again. That's a good

conversation to have. As for Anthony Mundine, will we ever placate Anthony Mundine? No.



LANGDON: Yeah, that's a fair call. And you've been telling us what you think on Facebook.

Nathan from Caloundra in Queensland said, "It was beautifully done and nice to see almost

everyone singing in both languages". From David Grieve in South Sydney, "It doesn't matter

what language the anthem is sung in, it's some of the words that need changing". And Lynda

Marshall says, "In a lot of countries, the national anthem is sung in more than one language,

an excellent way of including everyone." keep your comments coming. What did you think of

those comments, Malarndirri?



MCCARTHY: Yeah, Ally, look, I was just going to say as well, and I think it's important that all

Australians recognise that First Nations people will have different views and it's important to

respect the different views of that too. And I think, you know, we talk about wanting to have a

Voice to the parliament of First Nations people. And that's why so that there can be an open

dialogue of the differences as well amongst First Nations people.



LANGDON: Yeah, I'm really looking forward to we've got the with the singer herself, Olivia

Fox, is going to be joining us on the show a little later. I look forward to that. Now, some

changes coming to our workplace laws. Casual workers who stay with the same employer for a

year must be offered permanent employment. But there is a catch. Employers have the right to

turn down the request if it requires a significant change to hours or is deemed unreasonable for

their business. Malarndirri, is there a danger here that employers will simply opt out of this? I

know the unions aren't happy?



MCCARTHY: Look, Ally, I've been certainly looking at the articles on it. We obviously haven't



seen the legislation here and I certainly haven't in our caucus, in the parliament. But one of the

things that I'm concerned about is that we've we have an issue with trust with the government

in terms of workers and whether this is really going to hit the mark on protecting the rights of

the current workers as well as those going forward is the area that I'll certainly be looking at. I

don't feel comfortable with what I've seen so far, and I've certainly heard what the unions are

saying. So clearly, we've got a fair way to go yet on this.



LANGDON: Sounds like your busy final week in Canberra too.



MCCARTHY: Absolutely.



LANGDON: And just very quickly, Victoria, New South Wales has been called Freedom

Monday when a raft of COVID restrictions come crashing down. Chris, you can finally hit the

dance floor with 49 of your closest friends.



SMITH: Oh, back to Nutbush city limits. I can't wait, you know, it’s going to be fantastic.



MCCARTHY: Why don't you start now, Chris?



SMITH: No, I can do that, [gestures hands in a roll] that's all I can do with the roll.



MCCARTHY: Give us a rendition, now.



SMITH:  This is really good. And it's a great commendation on the people of Australia who did

so well. But can I just say the masks - I think Victoria has buggered up badly, but what they've

done with masks has been a fantastic master stroke. And look at that person who was last

infected in Sydney. That person went on twelve trains, six light rail trips. And none of the

people at this stage, after four days of testing, have been infected. The mask was the thing

that she was wearing. It was a masterstroke.



LANGDON: All right. Well, Malarndirri, you enjoy your new freedoms. Hallelujah, we say.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MARTHA TATTERSALL 0417 387 775

