SENATOR THE HON LINDA REYNOLDS CSC Minister for Defence Senator for Western Australia

MEDIA RELEASE

DEFENCE SUPPORT TO VICTORIA

The Australian Defence Force (ADF) has expanded its support to Victoria’s COVID-19 response, with around 1,400 personnel deployed in Victoria at the request of State authorities.

The ADF’s current tasks include: Around 300 ADF personnel providing support to the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) in contact tracing, data management, logistics and planning; More than 200 personnel supporting Victoria Police, including at checkpoints, in logistics, planning, the Police Assistance Phone Line, and CBD community engagements; About 200 medical personnel supporting public health testing in Melbourne and four regional centres: Shepparton, Bendigo, Wangaratta and Horsham;  20 personnel are undertaking general duties training with Ambulance Victoria so Defence can support paramedics with the transport of non-emergency patients if required; Accompanying DHHS authorised officers who are visiting homes to provide infection notifications to those uncontactable by phone; Assisting Emergency Management Victoria’s Regional Control Centre and its Incident Management Team (IMT) in Colac and Castlemaine; and Planning support to the Victoria State Control Centre.

Defence has personnel ready to provide further support to aged care facilities and at the Victorian Aged Care Response Centre.

Minister for Defence, Senator the Hon Linda Reynolds CSC said Defence is well prepared to assist.

“This is a complex and evolving situation, but Australians can be confident Defence is always ready to assist in times of need,” Minister Reynolds said.

“In addition to the Joint Task Force personnel in Victoria, we have embedded senior ADF officer, Commodore Mark Hill RAN, in DHHS to provide advice on command and coordination arrangements to boost their capacity to respond to the crisis.

“The ADF has highly trained and capable personnel with their skills that can be used in a variety of settings depending on the task.

“When the call came, ADF nurses were on the ground in an aged care facility supporting residents in less than two hours, demonstrating their flexibility and professionalism.”

Defence is also benefitting from the partnerships it built with Victorian agencies during the devastating bushfires in Victoria.

“Whether it’s in frontline medical roles or in complex planning, Defence is expanding and amplifying the capabilities of Victorian agencies to stop the spread and save lives,” Minister Reynolds said.

Contributing to the Whole-of-Government COVID-19 response is Defence’s main effort.

No publication date: received by Parl Library 31/07/2020

There are currently about 3,200 ADF personnel deployed around the country providing support to state and territory authorities on Operation COVID-19 Assist.

More information can be found at https://www.defence.gov.au/covid-19/

Imagery is available at: http://images.defence.gov.au/s20201233

Vision is available at: https://innovatehub.sharepoint.com/:f:/s/mediahub/Ekg0EjNL5b1Epe3igKLDB04B8rkiTtUjFeh2ijaR1i1_HQ? e=H0YHDw

Media Contacts Ben Martin: +61 447 219 902 Nicky Hamer: +61 437 989 927 Defence Media: media@defence.gov.au

No publication date: received by Parl Library 31/07/2020

