

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE  MANAGER OF OPPOSITION BUSINESS IN THE SENATE  CHAIR OF THE SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON COVID-19

SENATOR FOR THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW   ABC RN BREAKFAST  TUESDAY, 11 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Federal Government response to aged care coronavirus  outbreaks in Victoria; ACT residents stranded in NSW.

FRAN KELLY, HOST: Federal authorities including the Federal Government's  stand accused of failing to prepare nursing homes for the coronavirus  pandemic, which has now infected more than 1000 elderly residents and killed  168. The accusation, which was made by the council assisting the Aged Care  Royal Commission, coincides with a damning admission by the Commonwealth  regulator the Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission. Commissioner Janet  Anderson has told Parliament's special COVID-19 Committee the regulator was  advised that the virus had entered Melbourne’s St. Basil's facility, but didn't  pass the information on to other agencies for some days. Information, of  course, which may have helped limit the deadly outbreak. Labor Senator Katy  Gallagher is Chair of the COVID-19 Committee. Katy Gallagher welcome to RN  Breakfast.

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER, CHAIR OF THE SENATE SELECT  COMMITTEE ON COVID-19: Morning Fran. Thanks for having me on.

KELLY: Commissioner Janet Anderson has written to your committee to  correct evidence she gave last week. She told you earlier the commission had  been advised of the St. Basil's outbreak on the 14th of July, she now says it  was the 10th of July. Do we know what difference those four days would have  made?

GALLAGHER: Well, Fran, this was raised at the committee as you say and I

put to the head of the Department of Health Professor Murphy that they were  four very important days or five days. What we knew then, that the  Commonwealth didn't know anything and everybody agreed they were very,  very important days. It was when there had only been one case identified and  of course now we know there's been over 170 cases at St. Basil's. So I think  there's a wide acknowledgement that those four days were crucial. And what it  seems is that the regulator after being told about the outbreak by a St. Basil  staff member actually took that information, put it in their COVID response team  and then identified it on their case tracker internally, but did nothing else. And it  wasn't until four days later that a testing team went in and started to do the  response work.

KELLY: Okay, so that's too slow, obviously. Janet Anderson's letter to your  committee points out the regulator is quote, not the first responder to an  outbreak. It's up to the nursing home to inform the relevant health authorities,  the local public health unit, the Commonwealth Department of Health, within the  first 30 minutes of an infection. So, I mean, the question is, who's at fault here?  Or is this a signal that the various- as the special prosecutor, special senior  counsel assisting said yesterday the various levels of our government are just  not working together. That's the problem.

GALLAGHER: Yeah, look, I don't think it really matters which part of the  Commonwealth Government knew about the outbreak. I think everyone would  expect the Commonwealth Government to respond. And they're the regulator,  they're the people in charge of aged care in Australia. Look, if one arm isn't  talking to the other arm, I don't think it matters to people at St. Basil's. What  they needed was that, that response to happen, and it didn't. And I think the  concerning thing about the letter is that not only does it try to shift blame away  from the regulator and just, instead of just acknowledging the mistake, it also  goes on to continue to accuse St. Basil's of failing to do what they needed to  do, and I don't think that's helpful. I think when we've got the situation we've got  with over 1000 people in aged care with coronavirus, many of them removed  from their homes, over 100 different outbreaks, I don't think it's helpful that the  regulator is starting to point the finger everywhere else except itself. And, again,  I would say to the Federal Government, we just need to get on and respond  and stop pointing the finger and saying it's not our fault.

KELLY: There has been some finger pointing at the Federal Government  though, Labor and others pointing out the Federal Government is in charge of  age care. If the Commonwealth Health Department, though, didn't know about  the outbreak until at St. Basil's until the 14th of July, the Government couldn't  have known about it before then either. This makes it clear that this really  wasn't a catastrophe of the Government's making.

GALLAGHER: Well again, I mean, the Commonwealth did know and they  should have responded. As to whether it was the Department of Health knows  that's a different matter. But in, you know, this isn't the first time this has  happened in response to the review. At Earl Haven it was clearly pointed out  that the different arms of the Commonwealth Government need to speak to  each other, otherwise people in the age care sector suffer, the residents  themselves. We've had review after review, this was pointed out to the Federal  Government, recommendations were accepted. And yet here we find months  down the track in relation to a, you know, COVID-19 outbreak that we've known  is particularly bad for people in aged care, we've got the same situation  occurring again. And I guess from our point of view, we're trying to scrutinize  this response and make sure it's as good as it can be. And this is an obvious  area where it hasn't been and we need to make sure the Commonwealth  Government responds properly, gets its house in order and starts doing what it  needs to do. And indeed, accepting and implementing the recommendations it  accepted months ago in relation to Earl Haven which raised exactly this issue.

KELLY: You're listening to RN Breakfast, our guest is Katy Gallagher. She's  Shadow Finance Minister and Chair of Parliament's COVID-19 Committee.  Katy Gallagher, you're also Senator for the ACT and a former Chief Minister, in  fact of the ACT. Currently there's about 100 Canberra residents stranded on  the Victorian border. They've been there since Friday when the Berejiklian  Government suddenly banned them from driving through New South Wales to  get home to the ACT and it looks like an agreement could still be some days  away. Why is this taking so long to resolve?

GALLAGHER: I have no idea I've been trying to work on this since Friday  when some of the people affected contacted me and my office and explained  the situation. I thought it would be relatively easy to resolve, it look like  administrative stuff up in terms of people being given permits, but then refused  access to New South Wales. It's turned into a much longer saga for those  people, many of whom are, you know, in hotels with animals and bag-loads of  stuff from, you know, returning home from trips in Victoria and they've been told  they've got a few more days to wait. I have no idea, it really is with the New  South Wales Government now.

KELLY: The ACT Government has offered to send police to the border to  escort Canberra residents directly home so they can reassure the New South  Wales Government these people won't be stopping along the way in that state.  Do you think that the New South Wales Government is being unreasonable  here?

GALLAGHER: Yep, I do. I think the ACT Government has tried to do  everything it can to persuade New South Wales that there's a good plan in



place to make sure that people are brought here and that they're no risk to New  South Wales and there is, you know, the sound of crickets from New South  Wales. We need, you know, I believe- I've spoken to a number of people in this  situation, deeply distressing. You know, and they just can't get home and have  no word from New South Wales about what's happening. We just need to, you  know, politicians had a similar problem, they were due to come through New  South Wales on the weekend, but those problems were fixed almost  immediately and people did move through New South Wales, got their way to  Canberra to self-quarantine for parliament. So, you know, it does happen, it's  just not happening for this group of people.

KELLY: It seems like madness on the face of it. Is it likely to be resolved by  ordering that the Canberrans drive back to Melbourne, bought a flight to  Sydney from Tullamarine, and then pay for two-weeks hotel quarantine? Do  you think or do you fear that's going to be the resolution here?

GALLAGHER: I think it would be crazy if you did. I mean, many of the people  haven't even been in Melbourne, they haven't even been in the, the COVID,  you know, the thick of where the pandemic is. And, you know, they've been in  safe parts of northern Victoria and to be told you've got to drive into where, you  know, where people are being told to avoid in order to get home when you've  got animals and a whole range of other things going on, just seems crazy to  me, particularly if there's a safe way. I'm not disputing that New South Wales  has legitimate concerns, but the ACT Government is promising to chaperone  these group of people into the territory. It seems like that is a sensible way  through for everybody.

KELLY: Katy Gallagher, thank you very much for joining us.

GALLAGHER: Thanks very much Fran.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: PAT CRONAN 0432 758 224











