

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  WEDNESDAY, 2 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: National Accounts; Tony Abbott’s comments on aged care; COVIDSafe  app; Government always there for the photo-op but never there for the follow-up;  Richard Colbeck’s performance.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: The National  Accounts will confirm today that Australia is in the first recession in three decades. And  still, we don’t have a jobs plan from this Government. The Government needs to address  the fact that there’ll 400,000 additional unemployed, on top of the one million who are  unemployed between now and Christmas. And the Government still fails to come up with a  jobs plan. They push through legislation through Parliament, which could see low wage  workers paid less than JobKeeper, a $300 cut, potentially, in their wages. And that is a real  concern, as well. And then lowering JobKeeper and JobSeeker prematurely, what they're  doing as well is taking money out of the economy, which will, of course, lead to a deeper  and longer recession. I want to also comment on Tony Abbott’s regrettable appearance in  the United Kingdom last night. The fact is, there are over 450 Australian families who are  grieving lost ones, who have lost their lives while being residents of aged care to COVID-19. Tony Abbott was never known for his compassion. This is a new low. This is someone  who was a member of the Morrison Government and had the privilege of being the Prime  Minister of our country. And to make the comments that he did, I think, will cause a great  deal of hurt for Australians who read those comments, particularly the families of those  who have been impacted by COVID-19.

JOURNALIST: Mr Albanese, if you were Prime Minister now, having spent millions of  dollars on the COVIDSafe app for contact tracing, does it check out?

ALBANESE: Quite clearly, this is another example of the gap that is there between what  the Prime Minister promised, and the reality. The Prime Minister said we should all get out  from under the doona if this app was downloaded. I downloaded the app. As did millions  and millions of Australians. And the truth is, it has been a dud.

JOURNALIST: Have you still got it?

ALBANESE: I've still got it. I've still got it, but I know that many Australians have asked  themselves, ‘What happened to the Government's rhetoric?’ I still have it and I still hope



that they get the technology better. But they paid a company from overseas for this app  and it simply doesn't work.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?

ALBANESE: Well, that's a decision for the Government. But this is a Government that  consistently had issues where they say one thing, they're very good at marketing, and the  Prime Minister is always there for the photo-op but never there for the follow-up. The Prime  Minister nicks off once the Nikon stops clicking. And that's something that characterises  this Government. There are gaps between big announcements. We heard yesterday that  the more than $300 billion support for the economy, according to Josh Frydenberg himself  during Question Time, was more like $85 billion that has actually flowed. We know we've  got HomeBuilder, we know Michael Sukkar has been busy on other things. But we know  that HomeBuilder essentially hasn't had a dollar go out the door. We know that the bushfire  $200 million that was allocated for recovery and for resilience, none of that money was  spent in the last financial year as well. This is a Government that has got to have a look at  what actually happens rather than what it says will happen. Thanks very much.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)?

ALBANESE: Well, it will be not much solace to the millions of Australians who are  unemployed. And it certainly isn't solace to those people who suffer from the failures of the  Government when it comes to aged care, for those people who look at Richard Colbeck  and his performance yet again in the Senate yesterday. Richard Colbeck left the Senate  rather than listen to Penny Wong speak about his failures last week. He should have kept  walking out of the Senate doors, into his ministerial office and packed it up. Because  Richard Colbeck should not be a minister. And I think that those on the backbench will be  asked themselves, ‘What is it that ministers have to do to lose their job in this  Government?’ Angus Taylor is still there. Michael Sukkar is still there. And Richard  Colbeck is still there as well. Thanks very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053







