

MICHELLE ROWLAND MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS

MEMBER FOR GREENWAY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS AFTERNOON AGENDA

TUESDAY, 1 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECT: Facebook’s response to the ACCC’s Draft News Media Code.



KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: Joining me now is the Shadow Communications Minister,

Michelle Rowland. How to win friends and influence people, Facebook style! They went

pretty hard in that statement. Are you surprised?



MICHELLE ROWLAND, SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS: I don’t think

that this would be unanticipated, Kieran. The stakes are very high. We saw Google only in

the last couple of weeks make similar statements about what its particular courses of

action would be if this code came into effect. So, on that front, it certainly is something that

was probably anticipated by the competition regulator. But, what I think it also points to

Kieran is that in his epic report, the ACCC Chairman found that there was market power

and an imbalance in bargaining power between the platforms and news media. I think the

fact that the platforms are able to come out with these statements probably proves that

conclusion in themselves.



GILBERT: Yeah, it certainly does. And you would agree that this is a heavy-handed threat

from Facebook?



ROWLAND: It is quite serious and particularly when you consider that an increasing

number of Australians are obtaining their news via the platforms, and in particular via



Facebook, around 50% of people obtaining their information about COVID through

Facebook, it would a substantial consumer detriment if this threat were to be carried out.



GILBERT: So, do you disagree with the way the Government is handling this because

what they want is basically fair payment for the stories that go onto those platforms. Those

tech giants, news journalism which is created by organisations like News Corporation

which owns Sky News, and other news agencies - Channel 9, whatever else - they are

using news which is being compiled, developed and reported by journalists not paid by the

tech giants.



ROWLAND: Well, the underpinning is sound, Kieran. There is content, and then there is

news content. For news content, it requires a certain level of journalistic skill, it is becoming

more and more expensive, and yet more and more Australians expect localism in their

news. The news media has been hit by really a triple whammy of this digital disruption,

there has been a leakage of advertising revenue over time to the platforms and we have

had the decline in advertising revenues as a result of the pandemic. So, it really is a tough

time for news media. At the same time also, we know that it is not novel to have industry

codes in Australia; for democratically elected governments, for policy makers, to determine

the rules of the game. In Australia, it is both a mix of competition policy but also internet

policy which does indeed have a global dimension. Equally, the whole process that’s been

proposed is not novel in that it’s a negotiate-arbitrate model in the event that commercial

dealings can’t be reached.



GILBERT: So, Facebook with this threat of coercion and Google with its own messages.

Basically, in layman’s terms: should they pull their heads in?



ROWLAND: I think they should do the pulling in of their heads but also they need to come

to the table and I think that works both ways as well. We need all parties to be constructive

in this because we need a workable code Kieran if news media is going to survive in

Australia.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ADAM BOIDIN 0406 009 019



