









SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate  Senator for South Australia



MEDIA RELEASE

27 October 2020

Australia to host virtual WTO ministerial meeting

Australia will tonight host a virtual meeting of 22 World Trade Organization (WTO) ministers, to  drive negotiations of global rules on fisheries subsidies and discuss the role of the WTO in  contributing to the global economic recovery from COVID-19.

Federal Trade Minister Simon Birmingham, who will chair the meeting, said maintaining open trade  settings would continue to support the quickest possible recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic.

“As an outward looking nation, where one in five jobs are trade related, Australia welcomes this  opportunity to discuss how WTO members can cooperate and work together to keep goods,  supplies and services flowing around the world,” Minister Birmingham said.

“Given the major disruption to the global economy as a result of COVID-19, it is crucial WTO  members continue to work on initiatives to maintain supply chains and keep markets open.

“With global merchandise trade, according to the WTO, expected to drop by 9.2 per cent in 2020,  where possible we need to intensify efforts to finalise key WTO initiatives including work to address  unsustainable fisheries subsidies as well as negotiations on agriculture, e-commerce and services  domestic regulation.”

Minister Birmingham said Australia continued to drive efforts to finalise negotiations on a new WTO  agreement to discipline fisheries subsidies.

“At a time when the world is facing a sharp decline in fish stocks, an agreement on global fisheries  subsidies would be critical to help to curb overfishing as well as illegal, unreported and unregulated  fishing around the world,” Minister Birmingham said.

“We are committed to finalising negotiations as quickly and substantially as possible and will work  constructively with major fishing nations to conclude a highly ambitious set of global rules.

“Ambassador Santiago Wills, Chair of the Negotiating Group on Fisheries Subsidies, with whom I  spoke last week, will also share his views at the meeting on how best to reach agreement on  outstanding aspects of the negotiations.”

The meeting will attended by representatives from Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, the  European Union, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Japan, Republic of Korea, New Zealand, Norway,  Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Africa, Switzerland, Thailand, United Kingdom and the United  States of America.

Media Contacts  Benn Ayre: +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs: +61 417 097 644







Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.











