





SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Finance  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Leader of the Government in the Senate

Senator for South Australia

TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Interview on ABC News, News Breakfast, with Michael Rowland.  Topics: Breach of quarantine rules in Sydney; Foreign Relations Bill; Lachlan Murdoch's Christmas party.  7/12/20  07:13AM

Michael Rowland: Speaking of Christmas, it is the final parliamentary sitting week of the year in  Canberra and there is a lot going on. Let's bring in the Finance and Trade Minister Simon Birmingham.  Minister, good morning to you.

Simon Birmingham: Good morning, Michael.

Michael Rowland: I want to start with the breach of the quarantine rules in Sydney. The Prime Minister  has long lauded New South Wales as having, in his words, the gold standard, when it comes to   responding to the coronavirus pandemic. So given that, how disappointed are you that this quarantine system  was so spectacularly breached over the weekend?

Simon Birmingham: Well it is disappointing, Michael. No doubt about it. And it is a reminder that the  relentless task of bringing thousands of returning Australians home each and every week as we continue to  do so, working closely with the states and territories, is a real challenge, and it is the greatest area of potential  vulnerability in terms of COVID spreading into the community. And it's why there needs to be continuous work  to make sure that all of the systems and checks and balances are in place to be able to do that safely. I note  that NSW Police have apologised for the failure on this occasion, and no doubt this will cause further reviews.  But today, we do welcome the fact that Victoria, for the first time since June 30, South Australia for the first  time in some weeks, will begin to do their part again in terms of repatriating Australians back into Australia.  But that all are doing so with much tightened rules around how that hotel quarantine works to try to make sure  that we can avoid any future failures.

Michael Rowland: Okay. One of key pieces of legislation set to be considered by Parliament this week is  that Foreign Relations Bill, which would give the Commonwealth the power to override trade deals done by  state governments with other countries, including China. If that bill is passed, will the Government step in and  seek to tear up the deal the state of Victoria has done with China?

Simon Birmingham:  So Michael, this Foreign Relations Bill ensures that states and territories, when they  are entering into agreements with foreign governments at a national level, they have to have those  agreements checked and signed off by the Federal Government as the right constitutional authority with  responsibility for Australia's foreign policy and how that works. I think all Australians would get that the  national Government enters into agreements with other national governments. And if states and territories do  so, it ought to be done so in a way consistent with our foreign policy, whoever the national government of the  day is. Now this law puts in place that framework. It will require the states and territories within a three-month  period to provide details of their existing agreements, of which there are quite a number - more than 100-  around 130, I think, existing agreements from memory, and of those agreements, we will then go through a  careful and methodical process of assessing them and the Foreign Minister will make an ultimate  determination.



Michael Rowland: Okay. The Federal Government has not been a great fan of this deal, the so-called  Belt and Road deal with China, struck by Victoria. Will the Government now, if this legislation is passed, step  in, and as you say, methodically go through it, but in the end, seek to tear it up?

Simon Birmingham:  Well, it wouldn't exactly be methodically going through these things in good faith if I  was then to say that there’s an automatic predisposition at the end to tear something up. We’re going to go  through it with the proper processes. That's why we're putting this law in place, not just for this agreement,  indeed the majority of these agreements that exist between the states and territories and foreign governments  at a national level around the rest of the world, are with countries other than China. And so we will go through  all of them, whomever they may be with and do it against the laws that have been passed against the foreign  policy of the nation, and decisions will be made in a timely but proper and considered way.

Michael Rowland: Speaking of the Foreign Minister, I found it interesting that Penny Wong, the Shadow  Finance Minister on Insiders yesterday, said she has had no contact with Marise Payne, the Minister, on trying  to come up with a combined position on China. She said Julie Bishop, the former Foreign Minister, was on the  phone to her quite a bit. Do you find that a bit odd?

Simon Birmingham:  Look, I find it perhaps a little bit odd that Penny chose to use national television to air  grievances about how often she has a conversation with a colleague. In the end, parliamentarians have  different relationships with one another...

Michael Rowland: They were useful conversations, though, by the sounds of it. We're talking about a  serious foreign policy and national security here.

Simon Birmingham:  And, at appropriate junctures, briefings are given to the Opposition. The Parliament's  Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence, a bipartisan committee, receives frequent and regular briefings in  relation to sensitive foreign policy and national security matters. There's a range of different formulations there  to ensure that the Opposition of the day is well briefed.

Michael Rowland: Okay. As Finance Minister, do you reckon it was appropriate for the Prime Minister   and the Treasurer to bill taxpayers nearly $5000 to fly up to Lachlan Murdoch's Christmas party last year?

Simon Birmingham:  Look, I can't say that I've seen those stories, Michael, but the rules-

Michael Rowland: It's been widely circulated. It was published in The Guardian last Friday.

Simon Birmingham:  The rules in relation to parliamentary entitlements are there. There's an Independent  Parliamentary Expenses Authority, and that independent authority makes sure that everybody abides by the  rules, regardless of which office any of us hold.

Michael Rowland: Okay. But they flew up, that has been established, after 6 o’clock, they returned  before 9am the next morning. One of the rules when it comes to using the special purpose aircraft, as was the  case with the Prime Minister's jet here, was that the dominant purpose of the trip had to be parliamentary  business. Was going to Lachlan Murdoch's Christmas party, in your view, parliamentary business?

Simon Birmingham:  I'm not aware of what other business may have been conducted in that. But the terms  and approaches around parliamentary business are clear, and the independent authority is there to be able to  ensure that all of us, whatever the office we hold, conduct ourselves in accordance with those rules.

Michael Rowland: Okay. We'll leave it there. Simon Birmingham, thanks for joining us.

Simon Birmingham: Thanks Michael. My pleasure.



Media Contacts  Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.

