

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS - AM AGENDA  THURSDAY, 27 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Aged Care; the failings of Richard Colbeck as Aged Care  Minister; Victoria dealing with COVID-19; Third party agreements with foreign  governments.

TOM CONNELL, HOST: To discuss this and more, I am joined by Deputy Labor Leader,  Richard Marles from Melbourne. Of course given the difficulties there, not all MPs making  here to Canberra. Thanks for your time. So we're going to hear from Anthony Albanese  today. Does he need to be careful about over promising? I mean a lot of the issues in aged  care in particular they're not overnight fixes.

RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: No one  suggesting they are overnight fixes, Tom. But the most important statement that will be  made today by Anthony Albanese is that a Labor Government would take responsibility for  aged care because it actually is the responsibility of the Commonwealth Government.  That's what we've failed to see on the part of Scott Morrison and his Government up until  this moment in time. I mean, there is no plan being put forward by the Morrison  Government. But before that there's not even a sense of responsibility taken by the  Morrison Government but what is going on in aged care facilities around the country and  obviously particularly in Victoria. And I think there are thousands of people around the  country and particularly Victoria who are crying out for the federal government to take  responsibility and articulate a plan and to explain what has gone wrong. Now the Aged  Care Minister will be standing up in the Senate in a few minutes, I really hope that he tells  those things, takes responsibility, starts articulating a plan, explains how things have gone  wrong, if he isn’t doing that he should resign.

CONNELL: Well on the call for him to resign, I mean Labor's saying he should resign or be  sacked anyway. They point to responsibility being taken away from the Minister, saying  there must be a lack of faith. What's your focus now? Do you focus more on the issues?  Can you keep up that call for him to go, even as people are very concerned within this  sector, does that sort of further erode confidence in society?  MARLES: Look it is about the issues for sure but we need a Minister who actually can  grasp those issues and make a difference and put in place a plan which gets the aged care  sector past the coronavirus crisis. But yet it is the issues. I mean for the thousands of  people who are in aged care working in aged or have families and loved ones in aged  care, what we want to see is the Commonwealth Government to take responsibility to

explain what has gone wrong and I think there actually is a sense of understanding that not  everything is going to go right in these pretty extraordinary circumstances with this  pandemic. But what you need to know is that someone is standing up and grabbing this  thing and taking responsibility so that you know that we can get past it. But right now we've  got more than 120 facilities in Victoria where there are active cases of coronavirus at the  moment. The Prime Minister is essentially saying that beyond those facilities you've got  nothing to worry about, I mean it's it beggars belief and it is an absolute slap in the face to  everybody who has a loved one in one of those facilities.

CONNELL: So if Richard Colbeck should go over the aged care mistakes who should go  over Victoria's handling of hotel quarantine?

MARLES: Well that is a matter which is being looked at by a judicial inquiry. I mean let me  make this point if you want to make those comparisons. Daniel Andrews has stood up  every single day and completely accepted responsibility for what's gone on. He has said  that the buck stops with him. He has answered every question that has been put to him in  press conferences on occasions which have gone on for hours. But that is in stark contrast  to what we've seen with the Prime Minister who is essentially pointing the finger at  everybody but himself and saying bar four facilities you've got nothing to worry about. I  mean that is astonishing and for people who have loved ones in every one of the 120  facilities around the country where there is an active case, to hear that from our Prime  Minister it is a complete disgrace.

CONNELL: But on the responsibility here it's fine to say the buck stops with me. There are  at the moment no consequences. Surely this mistake, that shut down the economy,  Victorians, Melburnians in particular under harsh lockdown for at least six weeks and even  the deaths you're talking about can also be at least in part attributed to the fact that the  virus got out. Now doesn't someone need to be accountable for that?

MARLES: Totally, and I've got no doubt-

CONNELL: Doesn't someone need to lose a job over it?

MARLES: In the fullness of time, there will be complete account held in Victoria for  mistakes and what you've got is a Government and a Premier who stood up and said  mistakes have been made. This virus got into the country to start with, let's be clear about  that and our border, is clearly the responsibility of the Federal Government. And so for the  Federal Government now to be saying look we're responsible for aged care but in Victoria  it's actually to do with all the background factors there which is why there's been a  problem, that doesn't cut the mustard because ultimately this virus comes to Australia  across the international border which the Commonwealth Government is responsible for.  At the end of the day, what we want is for the Commonwealth Government to take  responsibility for aged care around the country in whatever setting-

CONNELL: Okay.

MARLES: That includes in Victoria and we need to see the Prime Minister stand up and  take that responsibility.

CONNELL: I understand your point and that's what Labor can and should push for and  plenty of people have asked this of the PM. But just to clarify your view there in Victoria,  someone should be held responsible i.e. losing their job over hotel quarantine once that



particular responsibility can be ascertained, someone should be losing their job? It's fair  enough?

MARLES: Look, at the end of the day that is a matter that is going to play out within  Victorian politics. As a federal MP from the state, all I can say to you is I look at a Premier  who is taking responsibility each and every day and I think that stands in stark contrast to  the behaviour of our Prime Minister.

CONNELL: But there is responsibility and consequences isn’t there?

MARLES: Sure, and I think no one could suggest that the Victorian Government isn't  bearing consequences for what has played out. At the same time they’ve also stood up  and grabbed hold of this issue and you know I'm touching wood as I say this but the  infection rate is going down and there is a sense in which we're moving through this.

CONNELL: Alright.

MARLES: That has not occurred in terms of accepting responsibility by the  Commonwealth Government when it comes to aged care. That's what we need to see. And  if you want to align it with just Victoria, then let's get the Prime Minister doing those press  conferences every day as well.

CONNELL: Just a final topic and a very interesting one. Today the Federal Government  wants power to be able to cancel collaborations between universities or States and foreign  powers where they deem it's not an appropriate one. They're pushing national interest.  What's Labor's view on this?

MARLES: Well, we obviously need to have a look at the legislation and when we get that,  we haven’t got it at the moment, but we’ll have a good look at it and form a view.  I think it  is important first of all that the way in which we engage with the world is something that is  managed by the Commonwealth Government. That's its power and its responsibility so I  understand that. And what our national interest is and how it's given best expression in  terms of the way we relate to countries around the world is actually a matter of expertise  which resides in the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. I do think, we shouldn't  forget this Government's got its own form in relation to agreements, I mean it was this  Government that at the end of 2017 under Trade Minister Ciobo signed its own BRI  Agreement with China. It was this Government which signed a lease agreement in respect  of the Port of Darwin which put it in the hands of a Chinese State-owned enterprise. So, I  think the Government itself has its own issues in relation to agreements, but we'll have a  good look at the legislation and certainly we understand the role the Commonwealth  Government has in this.

CONNELL: Well, perhaps we'll go into more detail once that detail is available. Richard  Marles, appreciate your time.

MARLES: Thank you.

ENDS   MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363









