ALICIA PAYNE MP

MEMBER FOR CANBERRA





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2CC STEPHEN CENATIEMPO BREAKFAST SHOW  TUESDAY, 10 NOVEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Political panel with Zed Seselja; ACT Liberal pre-selection; ACT Labor Branch;  the strength of the Australian electoral system; bringing visitors back to Canberra’s National  Institutions; Morrison Government cuts to National Institutions; NAIDOC Week and Labor’s  commitment to the Uluru Statement.

STEPHEN CENATIEMPO, HOST: Now that I've said all that, we have two people that do work in  Parliament House. For the first time back since the birth of her second child, Alicia Payne, the Labor  Member for Canberra is on the line. Alicia, good morning.

ALICIA PAYNE MP, MEMBER FOR CANBERRA: Good morning, Stephen.

CENATIEMPO: And present company excepted of course, as I say with Liberal Senator, Zed  Seselja and Assistant Minister for Finance, Charities and Electoral Matters. G'day, Zed.

SENATOR ZED SESELJA: G'day, Stephen. G'day, Alicia.

CENATIEMPO: Firstly, Alicia, congratulations, we haven't spoken to you since you gave birth to your  second child. How's it all going?

PAYNE: Oh, very well, thanks, Stephen. She's a pretty happy baby. And it's a, you know, very  special time when you've got a new baby and beautiful to see her brother, Paul doting on her in the  way that he does. And yes, it's all going well.

CENATIEMPO: Outstanding. Excellent. Now Zed, you're apparently facing a pre-selection challenge  from a former Naval Officer. The reports are saying that he is from the moderate faction of the  Liberal Party. Why do we keep calling the moderates the lefties?

SESELJA: Oh, look, I mean, I'll let other people sort of throw around the various labels. I mean,  look, in the end, I'm really pleased that I'm part of the Canberra Liberals, which is a very democratic  party. And so people are free to put their hand up for positions from time to time. And in the end, the  members choose. So you know, if, if, when I go before the pre-selectors, I'll be I'll be putting the  case that as Assistant Finance Minister, I've had the opportunity to really help with the Government's  economic response, which I think has been very, very strong for both Canberra and Australia. And of  course, deliver on all sorts of infrastructure investment here in Canberra. This year's budget, $150  odd million, but the over $1 billion in the last couple of years. So look, there's a lot that I'm focused  on. Those democratic processes internally are really important. And I always welcome them.

CENATIEMPO: Zed. Alicia, I want to come to you for a moment and talk about pre-selections in a

roundabout sort of way. Obviously, there's been a lot of attention on the US electoral system. And  calling it a system I think is, is fairly generous. We're very lucky here in Australia that we have an  organisation like the Australian Electoral Commission, and the various state counterparts. But that  doesn't mean there isn't room for improvement in our system. Do we have to look at fixing up the  way pre-selections are conducted, particularly in both the major parties?

PAYNE: Stephen, yeah, well, here in the ACT, we have a really strong and democratic pre-selection  process in the Labor Party, in which every rank and file member who's been a member for a year  has a vote. So for example, in my pre-selection, there were over 700 eligible voters in that. And it  was a very fair and open process where we had several people running. I attempted to speak to  every single person who was eligible to vote, and we held multiple forums at our branch meetings  and other forums. And it was, I was very proud to have been part of that, that process. So that, you  know, I would say that the ACT Labor Branch has one of the best processes around the country, and  there are room for improvement in some, some other areas definitely

CENATIEMPO: Zed, where do you think our electoral system falls down? I mean, for mine, it's one  of the better ones around the world, but it can always be improved.

SESELJA: Yeah, look, I mean a comparison with the US at the moment is an interesting one. And I  think the best part of it, without a doubt is the fact we've got an independent electoral commission  that determines, you know, elections, that runs elections that does that completely free from political  interference. And that's not the case in most countries, and even the US, which I think is a very  robust democratic system, that's often delegated to state legislators. And obviously, there can be a  lot of politics in that from time to time. But I look, I think there's a number of things we can improve.  You know, we're always looking at, you know, I think we've seen some great improvements in the  last few years about just the accuracy of the count. Remember, we saw back in 2013, some  problems with lost ballots and things like that. I think the AEC is in a much, much better position with  that. But we need to continue to use technology better. So there's things that we can roll out and we  have rolled out to some degree like things like electronic lists, which of course, are important  integrity measures. I've always been a believer that other integrity measures like showing ID when  you come to vote, certainly builds confidence in the electoral process. And that's something I'd like to  see going forward.

CENATIEMPO: Alicia, what's your take on that? Because there seems to be this argument out there  that asking for ID disenfranchises certain voters. In a society, in a country like Australia, I can't see  how that can possibly be the case.

PAYNE: Yeah, I'd have to agree. I think showing ID is fairly reasonable ask when you go to vote.  Yeah.

CENATIEMPO: Now I want to talk about Questacon for a moment. Their visitor numbers are down  nearly 90% on expectations from the start of the year and I think we know why. COVID- 19 has  knocked a lot of things about. How, what, how do you think and I'll start with you Zed, how do we  bring visitors back to Canberra's National Institutions?

SESELJA: Well, look, obviously COVID has made that challenging. There's a couple of things. One,  obviously there's a big national campaign going on at the moment encouraging Australians to travel  within Australia. And so I'd be saying to people in regional New South Wales who may be listening to  this, but also well beyond, what a great destination Canberra is, and indeed, our National Institutions

are a really important part of that. Questacon is one of those. The War Memorial, the National  Gallery, there are so many great places to be. We're investing a lot of money to support those  institutions. But I think we do need to do better to get that message out. And as greater visitor  numbers are allowed, as, as restrictions are relaxed, I think people will see there are amazing  opportunities to come here and visit these institutions. I'd make one point about one of the smaller  measures in the budget, but an important one was the $6 million. And it goes to what we were  talking about before $6 million for the Australian Electoral Commission, to have exhibitions at Old  Parliament House, about Australian democracy. So the school students in particular, can learn more,  there's so many experiences like that, here in Canberra, and I think getting that word out far and  wide.

CENATIEMPO: Alicia, if you go to the Gold Coast, you can sit on the beach, go to the casino,  maybe do a bit of shopping. If you come to Canberra, there's so much to do. Do, do you think the  rest of the country knows what we have to offer here?

PAYNE: Yeah, I don't think we do, that we do take enough pride as a nation in our Capital and the  amazing things that we can do here. And part of that is getting the message out and I'll note that the  ACT Barr Government is committed to spend more than any other ACT Government in history, on  promoting the ACT through tourism advertising following COVID. But I just, on what Zed said there,  you know, part of it is obviously to take, to fund our National Institutions properly. And while there  has been a bit of a sugar hit announced in the, in the Government's Budget, these institutions are  still going to be worse off. And it doesn't make up for years of neglect under the Liberal Government.  You know, if you go to the National Gallery at the moment, there's water leaking through the ceiling  on a rainy day. And I meet with the Directors of these Institutions, and they are full of visions on how  we can you know, get the message out about the wonderful institutions we have and share their  collections more with the Australian public, but they can't do it when they're facing cuts to staffing  overall and their funding. For example, the Government's own Budget Papers project that the  National Gallery will lose $25 million in funding overall, and only get $4.5 million from the Morrison  Government under the COVID-19 package. So that's a shortfall of over $20 million.

CENATIEMPO: Zed, I'll let you respond to that.

SESELJA: Yeah, well, look, it's not a sugar hit. I mean, $80 million, just for the National Gallery extra  in the last couple of years. So we never saw those kind of investments under the previous  government. $500 million for the War Memorial is a lot more than a sugar hit, it'll bring hundreds of  thousands of more people to that Institution. So we're conducting the biggest investments in our  Institutions in a generation or more. So, you know, I think to dismiss $500 million for the War  Memorial, $80 million for the National Gallery, there was $60 million in just this year's Budget extra  for Institutions, frankly, just doesn't stand up.

CENATIEMPO: I did want to talk about JobSeeker. So we might have to leave that till next week.  Alicia, just quickly, you wanted to mention NAIDOC Week before we go.

PAYNE: Yeah, so it is NAIDOC Week this week, which we celebrate the continuing contribution of  our First Australians and Labor is again reiterating our commitment to fully implementing the Uluru  Statement. And it's just been disappointing that given there was an early commitment to  bipartisanship at the opening of this Parliament that we haven't seen much project, ah, process,  progress on that yet. And it'd be interesting to hear what Zed has to say about how that's going.

CENATIEMPO: Well, Zed, you can have a last word on that before we go.

SESELJA: Well, look, obviously Ken Wyatt is leading much of our response and doing an  extraordinary job as the first Indigenous Australian to be the Minister for Indigenous Affairs. And  obviously he'll have more say about it, but we're very committed to reconciliation. And you know, I  think no one could be better to lead that than Ken Wyatt.

CENATIEMPO: Alicia Payne and Zed Seselja. Thanks for your time this morning.

SESELJA: Thanks very much.

PAYNE: Thanks very much, Stephen.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TASMAN VAUGHAN 0435 933 313

