MEDIA RELEASE  AGED CARE CRISIS

Greens call for Government to fund pandemic leave for all aged care  workers across the country

The Greens say that Australians are losing confidence in the aged care sector  and that the Federal Government should stop at nothing to protect the most  vulnerable Australians in aged care. This includes ensuring pandemic funding  for all aged care workers if they need it.

“We keep hearing this narrative blaming workers for coming to work sick but the  Federal Government is not taking enough action to ensure that workers are  able to afford to stay home if they are sick,” Greens spokesperson on Ageing  Senator Rachel Siewert said.

“This outbreak is highlighting years of Governments failures to adequately fund  and support the aged care system, particularly when it comes to the workforce.

“It’s unacceptable for workers to not be properly supported.

“Prevention is better than cure. We should not wait for there to be similar  outbreaks across other states before the Government commits to funding  pandemic leave for all workers in aged care facilities.

“If the Government had acted on the numerous reports in regards to the aged  care workforce over years and years then we may not be in such a crisis. If the  recommended amount of care was being provided and more health care  workers such as nurses where a greater part of the care team we might see a  different picture - these issues need to be addressed urgently.

“The Federal Government can help employers meet the costs. It would be  money well spent and in fact money that should have been invested years ago.

“The Government must act to immediately double the hours of care provided to  residents.

“The situation is becoming worse with families even more worried and anxious

No publication date: received by Parl Library 28/07/2020



because they are not getting clear communications from aged care homes  about what is going on with their family members. Each aged care facility needs  to provide a clear point of contact and keep family constantly updated.

“The Greens will push our bill for 14 days paid COVID-19 sick leave when  Parliament resumes.”







Media Contact:  Lucy Cowcher-Guthrie; 0418 401 180



No publication date: received by Parl Library 03/08/2020

