

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS - SUNDAY AGENDA  SUNDAY, 29 MARCH 2020

SUBJECT: Further shutdowns; how to flatten the curve; national cabinet;  wage subsidies; quarantine measure; ADF support; global outlook;  support for health and mental health

KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: In the meantime let's go live to the Deputy Labor  Leader Richard Marles, the Shadow Defence Minister as well. Mr. Marles,  thanks for your time. First of all that warning from the Chief Medical Officer in  Victoria is very concerning. Andrew, reporting just now that he's hearing a shut  down- the third phase- could come as early as today. Retailers centres-  Westfield's and so on to be part of that. Would you welcome another step up in  terms of the restrictions here?

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY, RICHARD  MARLES: Well it's good to talk to you this morning Kieran. Our view has  always been that we need to be doing everything we can now. So whatever  we're thinking about doing a week, two weeks, three weeks from now let's do it  today because that's the proper understanding of what we're dealing with. This  is a virus which spreads exponentially. And you saw the very dire warning that  was given by the Victorian Chief Health Officer about the way in which those  numbers will grow. You only need to look at what the numbers are today  compared to what they were last Sunday to get a sense of this. And every  transmission that occurs, every extra person who gets this disease makes the  problem from a public health point of view that much harder to deal with. So the  logic actually suggests it makes much more sense to get on top of the problem  as quickly as possible rather than to be following the problem up the curve,  which is what the language of a proportionate response necessarily implies.

GILBERT: So, in this debate about a gradual step down of social interaction  versus a complete and total lock down, you are much more on that, harder  faster, that lockdown approach, now?



MARLES: Well I'm not going to grab onto particular words here Kieran, but it's  simply to say this; for those who are sitting in the chair and we're not but for  those who are getting these briefings day in day out, who are being advised  about what's possible and what's not possible and the kind of measures that  might be taken in the future and might not be; let let's not think about this in  terms of proportions because we're not trying to shape a human adversary  here. We are dealing with a virus which spreads at a mathematical exponential  rate. And when you think about a graph like that then the more you can do  before the graph takes off, the more likely you are going to be in actually  managing the problem. So what we're thinking of doing a month from now let's  do it today. And then that's got to be the principle that we're dealing with. And,  Andrew talked before about the border, I think he's right. You know the border  is a very good example of had we acted differently earlier on then the scale of  the problem we're now trying to deal with would be entirely different and much  smaller. It's got to be the signal for how we approach this going forward. And I  think this really goes to the broader point Kieran, I mean, I would be the first to  say that this is a wicked problem. And the sort of pressure that's being put on  world leaders in terms of how to deal with this is immense- and that's the same  for Scott Morrison and his Government. I mean it is a really hard problem for  him to deal with. And we are fundamentally there to try and support him which  is why we passed all the measures that were put to the parliament earlier in the  week. But part of that support is obviously to use our voice, and I do think that  what needs to be done here is a proper explanation to the Australian people.  Firstly about the scale of the problem we're dealing with and its context but also  bringing the Australian people into the confidence of the government about  what is the strategy, what's the guiding principle behind the decisions that are  being taken here with a view to what is the endgame.

GILBERT: Do you think that Australia- speaking of the end game- are we in a  position to get the outcome seen in South Korea? Maybe not Singapore, it's  probably gone past that but those nations that have been able to flatten the  curve so to speak or will it be worse from that?

MARLES: Well right now we're not on- our graph is not on the same trend lines  as those countries which have dealt with this the best. And it's why I think we  need to have an explanation of what is the strategy and what is the play here. I  mean if it is imagined that a significant proportion of Australians are ultimately  going to get this disease then we are talking about a very significant loss of life  and an enormous pressure placed upon our health system. If in fact the  strategy is to try and get our foot on the throat of this disease and actually try  and in effect stamp it out- if that is possible- to get to a point where  transmissions are brought down to zero. And if you look at the numbers in  Wuhan today, we're seeing virtually no cases coming through there now. If that  is the strategy then then let's explain that. But whatever is the play of the

government, are we trying to do what South Korea is doing with its results? In  which case that would seem to imply greater measures in terms of social  distancing, or exactly what is it that the government is trying to do? I think it's  bringing the Australian people into the Government's confidence about the  strategy and the guiding principles behind on which they are seeking to make  their decisions, rather than what we're seeing at the moment which is a series  of kind of iterative announcements every couple of days, often they don't  necessarily make sense; we can shake hands in the morning but we can't in  the afternoon; you can do haircuts for 30 minutes and then you can do them for  longer. I mean, and part of why that story is hard to make sense of is because  we're not being told what the ultimate strategy here is and that's where the  government needs to explain.

GILBERT: But it's not just the government- the federal government- it's the  state government as well. And most would suggest that the national cabinet  has been a good reform, it's been one of the very few good things to come out  of this and yet, you’re saying that fundamentally there are some mixed  messages and so on. But the general unity of purpose is a good thing, is it not?

MARLES: Of course. And then let me be clear here; there is a unity of purpose  across the country that’s shared between Oppositions and Government, shared  between Labor and Liberal. Scott Morrison is trying to do the best he can, I  would be the first to concede that he’s in the most difficult position that you  could imagine-

GILBERT: And the Premiers too.

MARLES: And the premiers too, of course. So it's not about saying that  people's hearts aren't in it, of course they are. And they're trying to do whatever  they can. But it is also trying to bring to bear the best advice and the best voice  that we can. I thought, Andrew's comments earlier were just really interesting  about the way he felt his role as a journalist in respect of closing, or having  tighter restrictions on the border earlier on. I mean the way he expressed  himself then, it is certainly how I feel. There is an obligation on all of us to  exercise our voice so that we get our views out there and they need to be  considered in the mix here. And it's not about doubting anyone's sincerity or  anyone's unity of purpose, of course that is there and we are all in this together.  And I think political differences have melted away here. But it is about trying to  make sure that where our best ideas and our best thoughts about how we  manage this are being put onto the table and being put onto the public table.  And that is why, I really implore those who are making decisions- and you’re  right it’s State Governments as well, to explain what is the overall game plan?  And what is the plan that we're trying to enact, so that we can have a sense of  understanding about where each of these announcements fit. And I think that's  what's missing at the moment.



GILBERT: On to, well a couple of issues that we've seen emerge over recent  days; the government looks like as part of its third economic plan to go to wage  subsidies- direct wage subsidies, like in Denmark the Netherlands New  Zealand the UK. You would welcome that initiative, but I guess the point is as  well that this is a new system. So it might take a bit of time, like in the UK where  the wage guarantee is not being delivered until the end of April.

MARLES: Well we do welcome a move in that direction and we've been  concerned about the absence of a meaningful wage subsidy. And I think that  the long queues that we've seen at Centrelink during the course of this week  have been a function of an absence of a proper wage subsidy in the way things  have currently been set up, and these points that we were making, whilst at the  same time passing the stimulus- the relief package- through the Parliament this  time last week. But there does need to be a proper robust wage subsidy so that  there is an incentive for employers to maintain their employment relationship  with their workforce during this difficult period. And you're not going to do that  unless you have a proper wage subsidy in place. We think there are  mechanisms that can be put in place so that you do this in a way which is  relatively seamless. But let's say what the government ultimately comes up  with. But at the end of the day if you don't have that there, well then there is not  much incentive on the part of employers to keep their workforce on and sadly, I  think that's why we've seen a whole lot of really cataclysmic decisions that have  been understandably made in the course of the last week, but which have  resulted in so many people heartbreakingly on the queues of Centrelink.

GILBERT: Yeah it is heartbreaking to see. Now, the Government might need to  come back to Parliament to pass this next package, if it's more than the $40  billion dollar envelope that was approved in parliament in recent weeks. Isn't  there a risk though, and I know Labor wants Parliament to return, because isn’t  there a risk if the parliamentarians do come back- we've already seen four  cases of MPs having coronavirus. Isn't there a risk inherent in that that it would  add to the spread?

MARLES: Parliament needs to be seen as an essential service here. That's  how- I mean obviously that's the case. There are decisions that have to be  taken on behalf of our nation, in a context of a fast moving crisis. And so the  ability to do that, I think is critical. I think there are ways in which we can meet  in order to do that which are safe. And there are ways in which we can do that  which put in place measures that enable us to do it in a way that's safe,  certainly not talking about bringing back all the people who would normally  make up the parliamentary contingent, in a normal sitting week of Parliament.  And that was even the case earlier last week. But there are ways we could do  this without giving rise to significant risk. You only need to look at the efforts  that are being rightly put in place to enable our health workforce to do its work.

And making sure that the proper decisions which guide us through this crisis,  has to be seen as an essential service as an essential part of how we manage  this.

GILBERT: The new quarantining measures came into force last night. I know  you've already discussed this as did Andrew earlier- the debacle around the  Ruby Princess particularly. Defence will play a role in ensuring these  quarantines are honoured and respected in the various hotels, where people  will go. Do you see a greater role, an increasing role for Defence as we battle  this pandemic?

MARLES: I do. And we've been calling for that for some time, Kieran. And I  think the Defence Force has a very significant role to play- and to be fair that it  is already playing a pretty significant role in helping make surgical masks  through to the planning capability that Defence has. I mean, Defence is many  things and one of the things is it is an incredible planning organisation. And its  planners are now embedded in various state control centres around the  country- within the Department of Health and the like. I mean there are a range  of ways in which Defence can help. But one of the points I would make is; the  very presence, the reassuring presence of the Australian uniform within our  community in the midst of a crisis has value. And we've seen that even during  the bushfires, we saw that in crises that the country has faced previously. I  think that alone is going to make Australians feel better. And so it is very  important that the Defence has a significant role to play here. It's of course  critical they are not politicised and we saw that during the bushfire crisis. But  having the Defence out there loud and proud, is I think a really important step  forward. And there are many many roles that Defence can apply.

GILBERT: I want to ask you the bigger picture now. The broader geo-political  relationships between the major powers, in the world, the impact this crisis is  having on those relationships. It's straining and will continue to strain  international, I guess positive relations. Richard McGregor from the Lowy  Institute told Paul Kelly in The Australian yesterday, that China might actually  amazingly emerge from this crisis more strongly than the United States. How  do you reflect on that?

MARLES: I think it's a really important observation, and it's the next discussion  that's going to be had here. This is first and foremost a health crisis. It's  obviously had a major impact on our economies. But this is also in time going to  rewrite the strategic landscape of the world. And how this then impacts our  national security going forward will be the next way in which we think about this.  And it's hard to know exactly how it is going to rewrite that landscape, but it's  hard to imagine it won't to a very significant degree. And what I think will be  critical here is that those countries that come through these best are going to  be in the best position to take advantage of whatever that new strategic



landscape looks like. And so it's not just an imperative in terms of  our health,  although it obviously is, in our economy it obviously is. But it's really an  imperative from the point of view of our national security that we are able to  deal with this as quickly as possible and get through it in the best possible way.  And we've got to be very alive to that.

GILBERT: So from that global outlook, I want to bring it back to the very local,  and if not the home. And that's what the Prime Minister’s going to do today. I  want to get your thoughts on his commitment $1.1 billion for mental health,  domestic support, domestic violence support services and also about $700  million for more telehealth services. What are your thoughts on these various  elements to this package to be announced today?

MARLES: We've been for some time making the point around telehealth and  that that has to happen. Getting to a position where we're taking people out of  the waiting rooms of doctors’ clinics, and doctors as much as possible are able  to do their work over the phone and be appropriately paid for it is a critical part  of how we're going to get through this. So we're pleased to see those  developments in relation to telehealth. And you're right, the mental health  impacts of this are very significant. This is a really scary time and it's obviously  having an impact on people's mental health. And domestic violence is of  enormous concern as well. And so we need to be covering off all of these  aspects. And more attention on each of those is very much welcome sign.

GILBERT: Richard Marles, as always, appreciate your time. Thanks.

MARLES: Thanks, Kieran.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363









