



SENATOR THE HON LINDA REYNOLDS CSC  Minister for Defence  Senator for Western Australia

THE HON MELISSA PRICE MP  Minister for Defence Industry  Member for Durack



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE



INCREASED INVESTMENT TO STIMULATE THE DEFENCE INNOVATION  SECTOR



The Morrison Government is increasing its support for the defence industry innovation  sector by providing an additional $32 million for investment through the Defence  Innovation Hub over the next two years.

This investment, which is part of the Government’s Defence COVID-19 investment  initiatives, will increase cash flow to Australian small and medium-sized businesses that  are developing innovations with the potential to enhance Defence capability.

Minister for Defence, Senator the Hon Linda Reynolds CSC said the additional funding  will provide innovative Australian small businesses with greater opportunities to develop  technologies for high priority Defence capabilities.

“COVID-19 has presented our defence industrial base with unprecedented challenges,”  Minister Reynolds said.

“Australian small businesses are a critical part of this sector and we are expanding the  funding available to help them develop their technologies and grow their businesses.

‘The 2020 Force Structure Plan is strengthening the link between the Defence Industry  Capability Plan and industry policy initiatives, bringing together industry, Defence and  technical experts to support the development of innovative ideas and shape future  capability.”



Since 2016, the Defence Innovation Hub has awarded more than $265 million in  innovation contracts, with more than 83 per cent of this investment going to Australian  small and medium-sized businesses.

More than 100 Australian small and medium sized businesses have benefited from Hub  funding, growing their businesses, attracting new investment and customers, and  employing new staff.

Minister for Defence Industry Melissa Price said investment through the Defence  Innovation Hub had already created more than 600 jobs for the economy.

“This additional funding will support further jobs growth in the sector at a critical time for  the nation and our economy,” Minister Price.

“It will strengthen the ability of our local defence industry to continue developing cutting-edge technologies as they navigate the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic.

“It is further evidence of the Morrison Government’s commitment to growing our  sovereign capability.”

To explore Defence’s innovation priorities and submit proposals please  visit www.innovation.hub.defence.gov.au



Media Contacts  Ben Martin (Minister Reynold’s office): +61 447 219 902  Ben Spencer (Minister Price’s office): +61 412 754 310  Defence Media: media@defence.gov.au

