

CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

CANBERRA

TUESDAY, 28 JANUARY 2020



SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; Bridget McKenzie’s Sports Rorts.



CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH:  Well, thanks for coming

everyone.I'll deal with two issues this morning before taking your questions.



This morning I visited the Department of Health’s National Incident Room. I want to thank

the staff of the Department of Health led by Chief Medical Officer for the work they are

doing in response to the Coronavirus outbreak. This situation is likely to get worse before it

gets better. But I do have confidence in the Chief Medical Officer and the steps that he and

his team are putting in place to protect Australians. It's very understandable that

Australians are concerned - they’re right to be concerned. This is a serious virus with a

mortality rate higher than you would hope for in a virus - with around four per cent as best

we can judge at this early stage. And it's important that information be made available to

people as to how to respond. I do think the Federal Government and the state

governments are working well together across the board to ensure that the response is as

good as it possibly can be. And of course if people have concerns or need advice about

what to do in relation to their daily movements, it's important to get that advice and people

of course can call Health Direct at 1800 022 222 for that advice. It's very understandable

that people are concerned as school goes back to make sure their children are safe. It's

also necessary to take the necessary medical advice. And if anybody has been to Wuhan

or to China more broadly and feels symptoms, they should ring ahead to their GP and let

them know they are coming in advance and be checked out as soon as possible. It's also

of course important that people follow the advice more broadly.



This is a serious outbreak. But Australia is well prepared for this incident and the

Opposition will continue to provide whatever support is necessary on a bipartisan basis to

the Government as they deal with this, the Chief Medical Officer providing the best advice

available at the time. This is fast moving. 2,800 cases now in China. Most of them or a

substantial majority in the Hubei Province. Five identified cases in Australia. But we are

likely to see more.



The second issue I’ll deal with today is of course the ongoing saga of Bridget McKenzie.



Things are pretty bad when you've got your own office engaging in whistle blowing against

you. When it gets that bad, it's time to look at yourself in the mirror and decide it's time to

resign. And if you won't resign it's time for the Prime Minister to sack you. This should not

go on one day longer. Bridget McKenzie should not have survived the long weekend as the

Minister. She should certainly not be Minister by this time tomorrow. Look in the mirror and

do the right thing and decide it's time to go. I understand the Prime Minister's holding a

press conference on drought this afternoon. You would normally think the Minister for

Agriculture would be at that press conference. Will Bridget McKenzie being at the press

conference with the Prime Minister about a matter pertaining to her portfolio? Well if she's

at that press conference, she should say two words “I quit”. That's what she should be

telling the Australian people this afternoon.



Happy to take any questions.



JOURNALIST: Is the Government underplaying what is a global emergency here? We're

obviously going to see more cases of Coronavirus in Australia, are we prepared?



BOWEN: Look, I don't mind giving the Government criticism or giving the Government

advice and if I do say things that I think the Government can be doing better during this

health emergency then I will do so. But at this stage I'm satisfied with all the - I’ve received

two briefings from the Chief Medical Officer, visited the Incident Room this morning. And I

thank the Government for making that available to me. And I'll also be responsible in

saying that the Government and the Chief Medical Officer I think have put in place the

steps that they should have at this point. I've asked questions for example about the calls

for thermal imaging and temperature testing, all the medical advice is that that would not

work. And so the Government should not put in place steps that will not work. I think it's

incumbent on the Government to provide as much information as possible to people -

factual information - not to be alarmist but to provide factual updates to people and to allay

people's concerns in a reasonable fashion as people return to school and work and I would

encourage them to continue to do so.



JOURNALIST: Is giving incoming passengers a pamphlet about Coronavirus really

enough though given it's now a pandemic potential?



BOWEN: What they're doing is providing people with the information as to what steps they

should take. The Chief Medical Officer also has powers under the Biosecurity Act to take

further steps if somebody presents with symptoms on arrival or indeed to take further steps

if the situation escalates. They are steps that would not be taken lightly. I do think providing

people with any information is important. All the evidence and all the advice so far - the

medical advice to us and I’m sure to the Government - is that people are not contagious

until they're exhibiting symptoms that's the best medical judgment at this point. Of course if

that changes I'm sure the Government will alert people to that fact. But I think providing

that information, of course that's not always happening, with the one flight that arrived from

Wuhan where everybody was reviewed. I do think providing information more broadly is an

appropriate step at this point.



JOURNALIST: Just on that note on providing more information. The Australian Medical

Association of WA have called for what a lot of other OECD countries have which is like a

National Centre for Disease Control. They're a bit worried about different messaging and

communication going state to state especially W.A. being as far away as it is and want to

be kept in the centre not on the periphery of this crisis. What's your response to that?



BOWEN: I think that could be examined in due course but at this point I'm aware that there

are daily briefings between the Chief Medical Officer of Australia and his state and territory

counterparts. Full exchange of information. The states have obviously control of the

hospital system and have powers under their own Acts, as does the Chief Medical Officer

under the Biosecurity Act and other federal Acts. So the Federation can work if there is

proper coordination and information sharing and at this point I've seen no evidence that

that's not the case.



JOURNALIST: We've still got over 100 Australian children trapped in Wuhan and Marise

Payne hasn’t been able to get them out at this point. The Americans are chartering their

own plane which I believe will arrive today back in the US. Will you or Penny Wong be

seeking a briefing from DFAT on what the government's doing to help those people?



BOWEN: Yes, but I am also - again, we don't want to overly politicise this situation. I don't

underestimate the complexity when Australia does not have consular representation in

Wuhan. And the city is quarantined. Of course it is incumbent on the Government to be

protecting the interests of Australian citizens wherever they are and whatever they facing.

But I do recognise some of the complexities in this case. If we reach the conclusion that

the Government is not doing enough then we'll be sure to say so, but I have not seen any

evidence to that point -



JOURNALIST: We do have an embassy in Beijing and we do, you know -



BOWEN: Of course.



JOURNALIST:  Ability to have those discussions. Is it, I mean, should the Government be

putting a bit more pressure on China to let them get their citizens out?



BOWEN: Well again as you say, we are not aware of what communications have been

had by the Ambassador to the Chinese Government. I would trust that whatever steps

could be put in place are being put in place. Again we will get more information on that.

And if we feel the Government not doing enough, we’ll say so. But I'm not going to just go

off half cocked. I'll do so based on the evidence before us. If the Government falling short

we’ll say so. But at this point, with all the information we have available - what necessary

steps could be put in place are being put in place.



JOURNALIST: As a former Shadow Treasurer, do you think the hit to tourism from

Coronavirus after a horror bushfire season will put the surplus in jeopardy?



BOWEN: I’ll leave Jim Chalmers to comment on the surplus. But the Prime Minister has

previously said whatever it takes in relation to bushfires and we know that's not necessarily

the case because there was a reasonable request from the New South Wales Health

Minister to the Federal Health Minister which was rejected last week which I commented

on then. Of course this will have impacts on tourism in particular, and the tourism sector in

some parts of the Australia is doing it particularly tough and we ask for more help for them.

But I think the focus of the moment needs to be on the human element and on the need to

provide people with as much information as possible. We can deal with the budgetary

impacts on another occasion but let's focus - or my focus is on the human element.



JOURNALIST: Is $160,000 for a report on the social benefits of shooting a good use of

taxpayer money?



BOWEN: No.



JOURNALIST: Why not?



BOWEN: And here we have just - I mean - it’s not daily updates to this saga, it's hourly

updates from Bridget McKenzie’s maladministration of the Sports portfolio. You know

there's the grants to the shooting club that she was a member of that wasn't disclosed.

Now we have this waste of a $160,000. Complete waste of money which from what I could

see in my reading of the report said that hunting and shooting might be good for you but it

was pretty hard to tell.



JOURNALIST: It is considered a sport though?



BOWEN: Sure. I'm not sure we needed $160,000 to tell us that. You just told me for free.



JOURNALIST: On drought - at the summit today - what does it say if the Minister doesn't

show up and what does it say about the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister and

all these senior Ministers that continue to stand by her?



BOWEN: Well they're all culpable. I mean as the old saying goes, the standard you walk

past is the stand you accept. And not only are they accepting it, they're actively defending

it. Peter Dutton was pre-empting the Secretary of PMC’s inquiry the other day saying she

has no case to answer. He also lied and said all the grants were recommended which

wasn't true. Which was just patently was a lie. So not only are they just saying “oh well

there’s nothing to see here”, they are actively defending this act of gross maladministration

of their Cabinet colleague. They are all culpable. And of course the Prime Minister is most

culpable as the person responsible for ensuring ministerial standards are upheld. When

you go down to the Government House at Yarralumla, you take an Oath and you sign up

for a set of standards and a set of expectations. And if you fall short, then there's one

course of action available to you and that's to quit. She should have done it days ago. She

should do it before close of business today.



JOURNALIST: And if she doesn't show up -



BOWEN: Oh I think that says it all doesn't it? If she doesn't show up, the Prime Minister

and the Government know that she has a case to answer.



JOURNALIST: If she’s still in her position you know, when sitting week starts next week

and for some reason, you know, if this inquiry comes down to nothing, what then is your

party going to do?



BOWEN: Well, you know obviously, you should expect us to pursue the matter with

particular rigour for the avenues available to us through the Parliament.



JOURNALIST: Mr Bowen, there's been a lot of focus on Bridget McKenzie and her office.

But what understanding do you have of the involvement of the Department of Health in

sports [inaudible]?



BOWEN: Well, Bridget McKenzie was the Minister responsible. Yes, sport is part of the

broader health portfolio. But you know again, I’ll be happy to throw out criticisms of Greg

Hunt from time to time. That's my job. But I'll also hold the Minister accountable

responsible. Minister McKenzie was the Minister accountable and responsible. In the

absence of any evidence to the contrary of Minister Hunt’s involvement, I haven’t seen any

evidence of that. I’m prepared - unless I see any evidence to say it's Bridget McKenzie

who should be offering her resignation and it should be accepted.



JOURNALIST: Given the report was passed on to the health department, though, does he

have questions to answer about what this is being used for, this report?



BOWEN: Well I haven't seen any evidence that he was involved in approving the grants.

And that is that is the point here.



JOURNALIST: But this $160,000 for this report -



BOWEN: Oh sorry - we were talking about the other matter -



JOURNALIST: Yeah. And it came back today inconclusive.



BOWEN: Yeah. Well if he - yes - he has questions to answer as to whether he knew

about $160,000 of waste on that particular matter. Yes.



Any other issues?



JOURNALIST: Just briefly on the Coronavirus should the Government start dipping into

the national stockpile of masks that GPs are saying they don’t have access to masks when

they’re treating patients that may have the illness?



BOWEN: I saw Dr Nespolon’s comments this morning and I asked about that in my

briefing at the National Health Incident Room today. I'm advised that the Chief Medical

Officer has been in contact with the college and compared notes. I'm advised that most

GPs would have a stockpile amongst themselves, that they would have just a normal

course of business but they did daily operations and that while you might have trouble

getting a mask from the chemist, a GP should be able to get a mask through the normal

supplier but if that is not the case, then of course the Government needs to continue to

interact with the AMA and with the Royal College of General Practitioners to ensure that

they would have access to those masks as appropriate.



It is important that the GPs have masks as they go about the task of diagnosing people

who present those symptoms of Coronavirus. Of course most will not have Coronavirus but

they need to take the necessary precautions. I've been reassured this morning that that

has happened. And I trust and expect that will continue to happen.



Okay, thanks very much.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512



