

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE

SENATOR FOR THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY





E&EO TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RN DRIVE

WEDNESDAY, 4 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: National accounts; Coronavirus; Sports rorts; Bushfire

response.



PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: Senator Katy Gallagher is shadow Finance

Minister and she joins me this evening. Senator Katy Gallagher, welcome.



SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND

THE PUBLIC SERVICE: Hi, and thanks for having me on, PK.



KARVELAS: Labor has been arguing that the economy was weakening before

the bushfires and before coronavirus. That's not what these figures show. Did

you overstate that case?



GALLAGHER: Not at all. I mean, the national accounts figures released today

do show that there was substantial weakening in the economy towards the end

of last year. The December quarter with a growth figure of 0.5% is well below

trend. And there were other indicators in that data in the national account data

shine that consumption was weak business investment had declined for the

third quarter in the row and the private domestic economy didn't grow at all. So

you know, I think there are certainly indicators in the accounts today which

support our argument that we have been putting forward for months now.

Indeed since after just after the election where the government was failing to

respond to the economic circumstances that were presenting.



KARVELAS: The RBA has been forecasting what Philip Lowe called a gentle

turning point. Isn't that what this looks like?



GALLAGHER: Well, again, I think if you go and have a look at the data in

detail, you'll see there are elements there that are very concerning. We've got

growth below trend, wages are below trend, consumption still weak and

business investment has tanked. So I don't think it paints a picture of a rosy

economy and you'll note that the RBA has also been cutting interest rates in a

response to the economic circumstances that Australia has been seeing. And

our argument has been, whilst that is happening on one front, our argument

has been that the government should be responding as well. Now they haven't

responded to date. We hear now in light of the developments around

coronavirus that they are looking at some sort of stimulus package. But we

would argue that we're going into these challenging times in a weaker position

than we could have been had the government acted earlier.



KARVELAS: The economy has taken a significant hit from the Coronavirus and

the bushfires. Do you accept that's out of the government's control?



GALLAGHER: We accept that there will be, you know, a significant impact on

the economy from both of those things. And we've always said that but we

maintain and these figures show today that there were problems in the

economy that were present prior to either of these events and that supported by

the December quarter’s data. So our argument last year and for some time now

has been that the government should have had an economic plan. They should

have been responding to a weakening economy and that is clear in this

quarter's results. But they chose not to now that we've got these significant

challenges presenting themselves and the government is looking to respond in

some way or though we don't know how yet or to what extent they will, they are

coming at it from a weaker position than they could have been.



KARVELAS: Yesterday we saw all four bank's pass on the RBA interest rate

cut and fall almost immediately. Do you see that as a sign of how seriously the

banks are taking this?



GALLAGHER: Well, we certainly welcome that. Um, we very much welcome

that passing on of the full cut, uh, from the banks. But I think yes, it represents

that there is genuine concern about, you know, the times ahead, the

challenging times ahead. And again, I mean, our position has been, that the

Government should have been working hand in hand with the Reserve Bank in

an effort to strengthen the economy, so that we would have been in a stronger

position than we're in now. But, you know, certainly I think for, for the support,

for the RBA’s bank cut. It only really, you know, that is supported when those

banks do cut in full and, and don't just pass on half of it or, or a portion of it.



KARVELAS: If you're just tuning in, this is RN drive. My guest is Senator Katy

Gallagher. She's the Shadow Finance Minister and we're talking of course

about today's national accounts. 0418 226 576 is our text line.



KARVELAS: The Government is expected to announce a multi-billion dollar

stimulus package in the next few weeks. The focus will be on, on tourism and

trade, industry, education, infrastructure, agriculture, the industries that have

been most affected, particularly by the coronavirus. Is that the right emphasis?



GALLAGHER: Well, we'll, um, we don't know what, what this package looks

like.

I mean, I think our starting point would be, you know, that we would prefer to

work with the Government and make sure that, you know, it is exactly what the

economy needs and offer that bipartisan support. But we haven't been able to

get a great amount of detail from the Government about that in the last few

days. I think if you read between the tea leaves of estimates appearances,

particularly from the Finance Minister, we're expecting an announcement in a

matter of weeks about what that will look like. And certainly we'll be open to, to

looking at it from that point of view that we want to do what's right for the

economy and what's right for the Australian people. But we, you know, we just

don't know what that is at this point in time.



KARVELAS: Given a big issue with COVID 19 is the disruption in supply

chains and, and in visitors coming to Australia, what sort of stimulus should the

government be looking at?



GALLAGHER: Well, I think they should be listening to, um, all affected

businesses, taking feedback about what they're actually seeing on the ground,

how it's impacting them, and taking further advice from, you know, experts and

agencies about what exactly is the best way to respond to the circumstances

that we find ourselves in. Obviously there are big impacts happening in

particular industries, but you know, right from small business to the tourism

sector, to the university sector, um, to, you know, specific geographic locations

across Australia. They are all having particular impacts from what we're seeing.

And I think the Government should be listening to that and responding to it.



KARVELAS: Unions are worried about the quarantine of workers who may not

have sufficient sick pay or even be entitled to it. Is it fair that workers might

have to wear the cost of quarantine themselves?



GALLAGHER: You know, look, I think this is a significant issue, particularly for

those on, you know, in casualised industries or industries where they're not

protected by particular employment conditions, often those people on lower

incomes. So I think this is a matter that the Government should be looking at

further to look at how they can offer protection to people, particularly in the

event of quarantining or being forced to stay home or not able to go to work for

whatever reason that, you know, we've got to take a common sense approach

to this. People shouldn't be penalised and out of pocket, particularly for those

people on low incomes who might struggle. But again, I think this is for the

Government to respond to. They're the ones in charge, and they should be

looking at this and looking at ways that they can sensibly support  people right

across the Australian community.



KARVELAS: Just on another issue Labor's been pursuing, it's been revealed

that Sports Australia gave the Senate inquiry into Sports Rorts wrong

information about when the Government requested changes to a project's

funding under the Community Grant scheme. How significant is that?



GALLAGHER: Well, it's very significant. I mean, the Senate relies on the

honesty of its witnesses in order to do the job that it's been asked to do by the

Australian people, which is to be the house of review and hold the government

to account. Now if the Senate is getting incorrect information or incomplete

information, then it compromises our ability to do that job and report back to the

Australian people. So it is something that historically the Senate has been very

protective of, and in this instance, it's clear there was inconsistency in evidence

or inaccurate information being given, and at this point in time that record still

hasn't been corrected. So ultimately that'll be a matter for the Senate to

consider further. But it goes to the heart of this whole Sports Rorts saga, which

is, you know, Government really not providing information, being secret about

withholding documents, not answering questions on time or indeed not

answering them correctly, and that goes to trust and honesty in government I

think.



KARVELAS:  Senator Katy Gallagher, just finally, regional chambers of

commerce are saying the $2 billion bushfire recovery fund is difficult for people

to access. The forms are hard to fill out and the money isn't flowing. What do

you think's gone wrong?



GALLAGHER:  Yeah, look, we've been getting similar feedback, I think, from

people who are either trying to access particular programs or funds within that

$2 billion. I mean, we know from estimates that only about $205 or $230 million

of that money has been released to date. So I think one of the big complaints

we've had is people not actually able to access that funding. It may be that the

agency's struggled to get itself on its feet. The Commonwealth doesn't usually

deliver a lot of service delivery at local levels, you know, so whether they have

the experience to do that.  I think there's good people trying to do a good job,

but there's obviously problems with the delivery arm and you know, we'll be

keeping a close eye on that. I mean, the Prime Minister made it very clear that

this was to get money, was to get out on the ground as soon as possible and

that's clearly not happening and people are complaining about it.



KARVELAS: Thank you so much for joining us.



GALLAGHER: Thank you PK.



ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: PAT CRONAN 0432 758 224





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.









