

MATT KEOGH MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE INDUSTRY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WA RESOURCES  SHADOW MINISTER ASSISTING FOR SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  MEMBER FOR BURT





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC, CAPITAL HILL  THURSDAY, 27 FEBRUARY 2020

SUBJECTS: Rate of Newstart; 2050 Emission Target.

JANE NORMAN, HOST: Joining me in the studio for the Thursday panel is Liberal MP  Jason Falinski and Labor MP Matt Keogh, who in record time made it to his seat!

MATT KEOGH, MP: I couldn’t give up the opportunity to be opposite Jason!

JASON FALLINSKI, MP: Jane wanted to go and I said we had to wait for Matt, we could  not start it without him.

NORMAN: Well I’ll let you catch your breath. Jason - Pat Conahan joining calls within the  Coalition to increase the rate of new start. How seriously should they be considering this?

FALLINSKI: Not seriously at all.

NORMAN: Why?

FALLINSKI: If you want to help people from low economic opportunity environments get  ahead, what you need to do is, you need to create pathways to work. We know that  Australia has the most generous tax welfare transfer system in the world, 29 times the  United States, 19 times France, 17 times the average of Nordic countries that we have  very generous welfare tax transfer system... 98% of people who are on Newstart also get  other forms of supplementary payments and the question is how to get people off welfare  into work because what we know is people come from low economic opportunity  environments, on welfare, life expectancy is lower. Incidental violent crime is higher. Drug  use is higher. All the sorts of markers we look at for people who live full potential lives are  absolutely lower across the board. We have to get people off welfare and into work. There  are programs we should invest in, to do that, I'm happy to talk about that.

NORMAN: No-one is disputing that. People say work is ultimately the goal but former  Prime Minister John Howard... Hang on... And a leading economist Chris Richardson and  people in the business community are saying it is so low at the moment that it’s a barrier to

employment.

FALLINSKI: Jane, I have heard that. Let me deal with each one. John Howard is just  wrong and if you have the opportunity to go through those discussions he would come to  the same conclusion the rest of us have who have gone through the process. The  argument of the BCA say it is difficult, because people turning up - public transport, their  clothes do not look great. I would say to BCA and its members that if they are serious  about people who are from a low economic environment getting work, look past the clothes  they are wearing, ask them if they can reach the job interview, you make the changes that  are necessary to help them off the welfare role and into business. Chris Richardson  undertook a report that was commissioned by ACOSS, ACOSS was doing their job frankly  put to make those arguments to people on welfare to get that. But the BCA can speak  directly to business about what business can do to help look past how people look and  help them into work.

NORMAN: Alright, Matt Keogh, Labor backs an increase now but has not put a figure on it.  The likes of Chris Richardson and ACOSS have said a $75 a week increase is what is  needed to allow people to purchase clothes, get to their job interviews. Is it the kind of  figure Labor would consider?

KEOGH: We absolutely think it should be increased. As hard as it is for people on my side  of politics to deal with, we are not in government. Government has to act. But just hearing  what Jason has just said makes my head explode. I had a guy in front of me at a mobile  office just this week, in his early 50s, unemployed for months, we know that older  Australians find it much harder to find work, they are the vast majority of people on new  start. Government has cut back and cut back on programs to assist elderly or older  Australians getting back into work and the thing is, I hear what Jason says about  investment into programs and absolutely we should! You should, your government to  assist elderly or older Australians getting back into work and the thing is, I hear what Jason  says about investment into programs and absolutely we should! You should, your  government should do that! In the meantime, when I have a man down to his last 86 cents  because the rate of new start is woefully inadequate, how is that fair? Jason says it is  generous but you cannot live on it. To compound the issue, we know that those on the  lowest incomes in Australia other want to spend the most. We have a set of economic  circumstances right now which last year, before bushfires and coronavirus the economy  was going into freefall under the government and not getting better. The economy would  benefit from the stimulus we would see by increasing new start but the individual, real  people on the ground, in my community, which are poorer communities you talked about,  they need this additional money and the government needs to seriously think about how it  delivers on it and needs to do it.

NORMAN: But you mentioned bushfires and coronavirus, we know both of these crises  have put huge pressure on the Budget. If you are going to increase new start it would cost  a couple of extra billion dollars a year, can the Budget afford this? Is that responsible right  now?

KEOGH: Clearly increasing new start would be an additional cost to government. As I  mentioned, people on the lowest incomes spend the most. Much of that comes back to  Government in the form of GST on goods and services, income taxes, economic stimulus,  and much of that comes back to government but at the end of the day, government has to  do what is in the best interest of the entire Australian community, and they said it  themselves, crab walking back from the commitment that apparently they are ready have a

Budget surplus when they have not. Government needs to do what the economy requires  and what Australians require of them and they cannot just go and blame coronavirus and  bushfires to say that is what is affecting the surplus. The economy was going down  beforehand. We saw figures coming out today which showed that we economic growth of  about 0.4% in September quarter and people predicting only 0.2 - 0.5% in the December  quarter before the crisis started, we know the March quarter will probably be worse, but the  government’s is mismanagement of the economy has been going for a long time.

NORMAN: Labor has put forward a number of ideas for stimulus, if it will get to that  because economy is worsening because of this series of crises and do you think the new  start allowance should be the first priority in terms of getting money in the economy and  should be the first thing to consider by the government?

KEOGH: I think it should be in the top list of what the Government considers, increasing  new start, bringing forward infrastructure spend, making sure the defence spend happens  with Australian businesses and Australian jobs being created but all of those things that  things government needs to be doing. Bringing forward infrastructure that unlocks  productivity would be a great start, looking at new start, putting money back in the  economy and looking after the most vulnerable people in Australia as well.

NORMAN: Moving on to another topic,...

FALLINSKI: (interrupting) I was going to say, this is voodoo economics and you know it!

KEOGH: It is hardly voodoo economics! The laffer curve is voodoo economics, we both  know that’s what George Bush called it.

FALLINSKI: Are we going to start arguing about the twin deficit theory? This is voodoo  economics because what we have in Australia is a productivity challenge...

KEOGH: Absolutely, under your government.

FALLINSKI: Well it started under your government and we’ve been trying to fix it and you  have blocked every single position on reforms...

NORMAN: Moving on now...

FALLINSKI: You are paying people not to work!

KEOGH: No, it’s looking after people who..

FALLINSKI: No looking after people is finding them work Matt.

NORMAN: Ok I accept what both of you have to say on this, I accept both arguments and  thank you for your time.

FALLINSKI: Aren’t you glad we waited for him?

NORMAN: It’s great, we always have a lovely chat! Lots of energy for a Thursday! Jason  Fallinski, picking up something your colleague Trent Zimmerman was saying about the  2050 target

FALLINSKI: I didn’t see it.

NORMAN: Well I think you know his views about net zero emissions by 2050, you are in  favour of adopting the target? Is that fair to say?

FALLINSKI: What I am in favour of is us getting a roadmap on the table. Look, starting  from the beginning, the big problem in the climate debate for the last 15 years is that the  electorate has perceived it as being, them being told what to do from on high. The  importance of a road map is so the electorate can see if we need to get to net zero, these  are things we need to do, those of us who are in favour of getting to net zero as quickly as  possible can start to have that discussion with the community and see what they are willing  or not willing to accept and then we can have an honest discussion with people engaged in  the issue. Just declaring that we will have net zero by 2050 is all well and good, as they did  in the UK and they legislated for that, and now they are going through the process of how  do we do that? And people are starting to realise they do not want to make one of those  trade-offs, and one of them is that instead of eight nuclear power reactors, they're talking  about building16.

NORMAN: So we know that under the Paris agreement we have locked into a 2030 target  and the next round of talks are happening later this year in Glasgow and the government  will have to have a decision by then. Wasn't it a 2050 target effectively what we signed up  to with the Paris agreement?

FALLINSKI: No, it talks about reaching net zero in the second half of the century and we  are committed to that.

NORMAN: Post 2050 target?

FALLINSKI: So, by, by 2099, we are committed to reaching net zero and we have to do  that under the agreement but people like me, people like Trent and many others in the  Liberal Party would like us to see us meet that target a lot earlier.

NORMAN: By 2050?

FALLINSKI: Even earlier if possible but one of the trade-offs and what is the roadmap and  what does it look like.

KEOGH: And that's a great endorsement of what Labor has just outlined.

NORMAN: Labor has..

KEOGH: We are committed to zero emissions by 2050 and before the next election we will  be consulting with the community, working with resources sector, unions, across sectors  across the community to develop exactly what the plan will be that would take us there.  The difference between Jason and I is that we are in Opposition and we have said what we  want to go to and that is the first thing, you need a roadmap and we need to go and we can  work out how to get there and that is what we would develop and release before the next  election. What the Morrison government is talking about is the technology instead of taxes  plan which is apparently a roadmap and have not said where we are going! I'm not sure  how you have a road map if you don't know where you are going, I’m glad to see people  like Trent and Jason agree actually that is a good target, I agree with them, but you need  to have a plan for that and we are doing that. We have been clear with the Australian



people and said this is where we will go and we’re going to work with you about going  about that.

NORMAN: Has Labor taken a risk by announcing so early on in Opposition what target is  going to be, are you exposing yourself to...

KEOGH: Exposing ourselves to the likes of Jason! We are being clear on saying this is  where we want to go and we want to work with the Australian people, all sectors of the  community and how do we get there in the best way and this takes time. If we said this is  what we're doing in two years’ time, people would say it has been sprung on them. And  Jason has just given a great example about why you do it the way that we’re doing it.  We’ve set out a target and that provides time to determine where do we want to go and  how are we going to do it.

FALLINSKI: Potentially why is an example of how you do not do it.

KEOGH: I want to just congratulate Jason about his great endorsement of the Labor  party’s policy.

NORMAN: Matt Keogh how do you allay concerns, particularly in the coal community that  people in those communities will lose their jobs under ambitious climate change targets?

KEOGH: We need to hear from the government. They are not being clear with coal  communities, all the resources community or the Australian public about what the effect is  on them and their policies. There is a complete lack of energy policy from this government  but even with the target they have outlined and where they are apparently projecting to go,  they have not been clear with communities with what that means for them and they are the  ones in government. They need to be clear about their plans and complete inaction in  areas will deliver for communities. We will work with those communities in developing our  plan and they will understand it and I have no doubt that they will feel safe under what  Labor is proposing under the next election, but what is the government saying to them?

NORMAN: Jason Fallinski, Matt Keogh, I’m very sorry but you’re going to need go to  Question Time now and shout it out because we have run out of time. Thank you for  joining us me for a very, very lively debate!

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHANIE MATHEWS 0430 595 700









