

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RN BREAKFAST

THURSDAY, 2 APRIL 2020



SUBJECTS: Cruise ships off the coast of NSW and WA; ADF Support to

tackle COVID-19; ADF support for Indigenous Remote Communities



FRAN KELLY, HOST: Well there's cause for a dramatic intervention to end a

standoff with eight cruise ships which are refusing to leave Australian waters,

off the coast of New South Wales. Police are calling on the military to land

doctors on each of the vessels to test the more than 8,000 crewmembers for

the virus. Under the plan, infected passengers would then be medevac-ed to

the mainland. But the ships would be forced into international waters. A similar

drama is unfolding currently in WA where a German cruise liner has refused to

leave the port in Fremantle. Richard Marles is Shadow Defence Minister and

Deputy Labor leader. Richard Marles. Welcome back to breakfast.



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR

PARTY: Good morning, Fran. How are you?



KELLY: I'm all right. Thank you. This stalemate off Sydney now, with these

eight cruise ships has dragged on to its third week. Is it now time to force the

issue, to get doctors out to the ships, extract the sick and send the vessels on

their way? That's what the New South Wales Police Commissioner is calling

for.



MARLES: It certainly is time to get a resolution to this. To have a situation

where this impasse has been going on for a number of weeks now, I think he's

unacceptable. And there needs to be a high degree of coordination between

the New South Wales and the Federal Government, they’ve actually got to work

together to resolve this. I've got to say, when I listen to Mick Fuller, he does

make sense to me. And my understanding, which I think is the appropriate way

for Defence to be engaged in the whole coronavirus crisis is through the

various State Emergency Control Centres. That's the basis on which Defence is

operating and those requests are made. So it seems to me that the rest would

follow. But I think it is a bit of- I would be the first to say that this is a diabolical

situation for all governments to try and work through. No one is saying this is an

easy issue. We've all seen what happened with the Ruby Princess and what

happened there; that was a disaster and Australians lives were put at risk. I

think getting an accurate assessment of exactly what the situation is on board,

in terms of the spread of the virus does make sense to me.



KELLY: Okay. Well that's what Mick Fuller, the New South Wales Police

Commissioner is calling for, to get that that accurate assessment, if there's

hundreds of people on board who are sick, they're going to have to be brought

off obviously to be to be helped. But you know those numbers could be large,

we don't know. And the Transport Workers Union want all crew apart from

operational- this is all crew of the sick of the 18 registered ships that are docked

or floating right around Australia- they want them to be disembarked and flown

home at the expense of this cruise companies, that could be around 15,000

people. But you know, others are nervous about landing 15,000 people on

Australian soil, and then what are they the states responsibility then?



MARLES: Yeah and Mick Fuller has made that point and I completely

understand the anxiety that he's expressing around that question. I think there

are a whole lot of very difficult questions to resolve about exactly what happens

with the people who are on board. But surely a starting point here is to work out

exactly the spread of the virus and to have a very clear and granular

assessment of that. And that's the first step that's being called for there. But

you know we really- I mean ultimately this can't be an ongoing impasse. The

Federal Government must sit down and work this out with the State

Government to get a an answer here. I mean, I think there has been more

progress in W.A. in terms of the German cruise ship there, and as a result I

think actually that the circumstances are a bit clearer. And it's an easy question

to answer.



KELLY: What is the latest there? Because as I understood it, the ship is called

the , it's German flagged and it's ignoring Border Force orders to leave the port

of Freo, what is the latest, do you know?



MARLES: Well I think that that is right. What Border Force is saying there and

that that coincides with the calls of the W.A. Premier Mark McGowan and I'm

very sympathetic to their calls as well. I mean that is a situation, as I

understand it, where the passengers are off, the ship is not domiciled in

Australia, it's a German ship. So I can certainly understand why there would be

calls and given everything has been done around the people who are on board

that ship for the ship to now leave. The situation off New South Wales is more

complicated. But what that then highlights I think, Fran, there's just got to be a

very clear plan that's articulated-  we actually need the Federal Government to

take the leadership here and to be talking to the likes of you and others about

what that plan is. But that's got to involve cooperation with the New South

Wales Government. Obviously, discussions with the cruise liners and the

operators themselves, and for there to be an answer here but the impasse

that’s been going on for weeks now, is totally unacceptable and what we clearly

cannot see is another Ruby Princess, which has seen a huge number of cases

brought into Australia.



KELLY: Okay, but there is a matter of international law, that's what the cruise

companies are citing, that maritime law is that ship's in distress can request to

dock on humanitarian grounds. As the Shadow Defence Minister are you

supporting, are you signalling to the Federal Government that Labor would

support the Navy being brought in, if it came to that, if ships refuse to follow the

Border Force advice? Will it come to that?



MARLES: Well sure. I think that the legal situation here is complex. I'm no

expert in it. I think ultimately that there does need to be a conversation- there

clearly is a conversation- but there needs to be a resolution to that conversation

between the New South Wales Government and the Commonwealth around

this. If the New South Wales Government are requesting Defence Support, I

absolutely would understand that request. And that's the basis upon which

Defence is being requested to engage in the coronavirus more generally,

through the emergency centres in each state. So I understand where the New

South Wales Police are at in relation to that. But this is an impasse that has to

be resolved. And the government is the one in the chair there, they are the one

which has all the information here and ultimately the buck stops with the

Federal Government. And we need to hear a plan from them in the context of

what are the legal obligations, or how this impasse is resolved. It must not be

another Ruby Princess.





KELLY: Okay and can I just ask you finally, we've only got a minute or so to

the news but I know you're very supportive of using the ADF in the efforts to

protect Indigenous- Remote Indigenous Communities from this virus. Has that

happened yet and if not is it time to send the army in there? To monitor people

movement, that's what some Indigenous leaders have been calling for.



MARLES: Yeah look, I think the Defence Force has a really significant role to

play there. And I think the sooner we get the Defence Force more involved in

that, the better. And again, I understand the need for the lead in relation to what

activities they engage in coming from the various State and Territory

Governments. So they need to be in the driver's seat here. And I completely

accept that. But at the end of the day, the ADF has significant capabilities here

and particularly when we're talking about remote communities. And the

consequences of the coronavirus getting into Indigenous Remote Communities

is completely dire, which is why it's just so important that we're doing everything

possible to make sure that does not happen.



KELLY: Richard Marles, thank you very much for joining us.



MARLES: Thanks, Fran.



KELLY: Richard Marles is Shadow Defence Minister and Deputy Labor Leader

and we did approach the Home Affairs Minister Peter Dutton, and the Defence

Minister Linda Reynolds, for comment on this but neither were available for

interview.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363



