

SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Leader of the Government in the Senate  Senator for South Australia



MEDIA RELEASE



14 December 2020



Export Finance Australia Board Appointments

The Morrison Government has today announced a number of changes to the Export Finance  Australia Board, as the organisation continues to support Australian exporters throughout the  COVID-19 pandemic and as our economic recovery continues.

Export Finance Australia Chair Mr James M Millar AM has been appointed for a further three-year  term, whilst Chair of Carbon Revolution Ltd Mr James Douglas and CBH Group Chief Executive  officer Mr Jimmy Wilson have both been appointed to the EFA Board for three-year terms.

Federal Trade Minister Simon Birmingham welcomed these appointments and said Export Finance  Australia continued to play a pivotal role in assisting Australian exporters to respond to the  challenges of COVID-19.

“Australian exporters continue to face significant challenges such as rising export costs, disruptions  to supply-chains or loss of markets that are making it difficult for some of them to access vital  commercial finance,” Minister Birmingham said.

“EFA’s suite of financial expertise and solutions, including the COVID-19 Export Capital Facility  which our Government established earlier this year, will continue to help exporters to get back on  their feet through helping to re-establish markets, provide working capital support or by helping  exporters purchase new equipment to expand their operations.

“The reappointment of Mr Millar and the appointments of Mr Douglas and Mr Wilson reflect the  Morrison Government's ambition to ensure EFA has broad perspectives on the Australian  economy and expertise in debt financing.

“These appointments will help ensure strong oversight of EFA as it continues to assist Australian  exporters, especially small and medium sized enterprises to boost their exporting operations and  support local jobs.

“I would also like to thank outgoing Deputy Chair and Audit and Risk Committee Chair Mr Rick  Sawers, Ms Denise Goldsworthy AO and Ms Laura McBain for their service to the Export Finance  Australia Board.”

The new and reappointed board members join Ms Jodie Baker, Mr Rob Chapman, Ms Swati Dave,  Ms Linda Cheng and Ms Frances Adamson on the Board.

Export Finance Australia is the Morrison Government’s export credit agency, providing financial  expertise and solutions to Australian exporters through loans, guarantees, bonds and insurance  options.



Media Contact  Benn Ayre: +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs: +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.





Biographies



James Douglas

Victorian based Mr Douglas is the Founder of Newmarket Capital, a late stage venture capital fund  established to support Australian innovation and help create an ecosystem where Australian ideas  are developed and commercialised by Australians.  He is also Chair of listed Australian company  Carbon Revolution and a Director of Acorn Capital.  Mr Douglas has more than 20 years of senior  investment banking and SME-focused venture capital experience in Australia and the United  States.

James “Jimmy” Wilson

Western Australian based Mr Wilson is currently Chief Executive Officer of CBH Group, a leader in  the Australian grain industry along the value chain from grain storage, handling, transport,  marketing and processing.  He was previously President of BHP Iron Ore.  Mr Wilson has  significant international infrastructure and supply chain experience in Australia, South Africa, the  USA, South America and Indonesia in multiple commodities.



