

THE HON JOSH FRYDENBERG MP  Treasurer

THE HON CHRISTIAN PORTER MP  Attorney General, Minister for Industrial Relations

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

Media contact: Leanne Jones — Office of the Hon Josh Frydenberg MP — 02 6277 7340  Kevin Donnellan — Office of the Hon Christian Porter MP — 0408 491 956  The Hon Josh Frydenberg MP | Treasurer | MELBOURNE





7 September 2020

EXTENSION OF TEMPORARY RELIEF FOR FINANCIALLY  DISTRESSED BUSINESSES

The Morrison Government will continue to provide regulatory relief for businesses that have been  impacted by the Coronavirus crisis by extending temporary insolvency and bankruptcy protections until  31 December 2020.

Regulations will be made to extend the temporary increase in the threshold at which creditors can issue  a statutory demand on a company and the time companies have to respond to statutory demands they  receive.

The changes will also extend the temporary relief for directors from any personal liability for trading  while insolvent.

These measures were part of more than 80 temporary regulatory changes the Government made  designed to provide greater flexibility for businesses and individuals to operate during the coronavirus  crisis.

The extension of these measures will lessen the threat of actions that could unnecessarily push  businesses into insolvency and external administration at a time when they continue to be impacted by  health restrictions.

These changes will help to prevent a further wave of failures before businesses have had the  opportunity to recover.

In addition, the Government is providing an unprecedented level of support totalling $314 billion to  cushion the blow for workers, households and businesses during the coronavirus crisis.

As the economy starts to recover, it will be critical that distressed businesses have the necessary  flexibility to restructure or to wind down their operations in an orderly manner.

The Government will continue to help businesses successfully adapt and restructure so that they can  bounce back on the other side of this crisis.

Ends.

