





SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Finance  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Leader of the Government in the Senate

Senator for South Australia

TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Press Conference        Topics: Victoria’s travel bubble with New Zealand, Australia-China trade relations; Clive Palmer High-Court  challenge   06/11/20  1:17PM

Simon Birmingham: Thank you very much for coming this afternoon. Firstly, I want to note the decision by  Victoria to enable flights from New Zealand to come to Victoria. This will be the first occasion where  international flights are welcomed back into Melbourne, traditionally Australia’s second busiest international  airport. It’ll be the first occasion where we see them come back for many months. It will be a very happy day  when we see international visitors safely returning to Melbourne because it will signal further progress on  Victoria’s pathway back to a post-COVID normality. We all face many challenges and we know that Victorians  and Melburnians have faced more than anybody else across Australia, and the opportunity to welcome people  from New Zealand will be one to reunite loved ones with family members, to help restore business ties. And  we hope that it, again, is a further step on the pathway to Australia-New Zealand relations becoming as open  as possible.

I also want to comment specifically, as Trade Minister, in relation to the circumstances of Australia’s trade with  China. There are many deeply troubling rumours about trade relations with China at present and deeply  troubling rumours about the way in which particular categories of Australian exports to China could be treated  in China by Chinese authorities. But I want to stress, these are predominantly rumours. These are often  unconfirmed, unsubstantiated rumours. And I would urge people to treat them as such, to exercise caution  and to not jump to conclusions at this point in time. It’s important for our exporters that we give them every  possible support in terms of their engagement with relevant Chinese authorities and their business  counterparts in China. The importers and customers who have such a huge demand for high quality  Australian exports. We want to make sure they can all work through any issues and resolve them as  effectively as possible.

As a government, we continue to give every possible assistance that we can at an administrative, diplomatic  and political level to try to make sure that our exporters do retain the type of access they ought to have into  China. Australia is a high quality producer of many valued goods and services. Goods and services that are  highly valued by Chinese consumers, and it's been a partnership built up over a long period of time that  provides benefits to both nations. Australia values our partnership with China, not just our economic  partnership, but the cooperation we have had over many years in other fields and endeavours, such as  cooperation in relation to health treatment, regional cooperation, scientific cooperation. These are important  areas that we have worked together. And our ambition would be to see that we continue to work together in  these sorts of areas, in manners that are respective of each other's sovereignty, in ways that acknowledge the  fact that we aren't the same types of countries, we don't have the same types of democratic systems, or  systems of government, but we have managed to work together to forge relations that are at a people-to-people level, a business-to-business level and even a government-to-government level have produced very  positive outcomes for peoples across both our nations and right across the region that we share.

We note the fact that Chinese authorities have denied some of the rumours of instructions being given to  businesses to ban Australian imports into China. We welcome those commitments and statements from  Chinese authorities that these rumours do not have validity. What we hope to see is that, given the denials  from Chinese authorities, they work as effectively as possible to help, where there are regulatory issues,



resolve them in a timely way. Clearly it's unacceptable for precious, fragile cargo like live seafood to sit on a  port for days on end waiting for clearance. We need swift action to address uncertainty for sectors like that. As  I’ve said before, Australia's wine industry is one which is world-class, not only in the quality of wine produced  but also in its economic practices. It’s not subsidised. It doesn't engage in dumping. It operates in a highly  commercial environment, and that's why it is treasured not just in Australia but around the world. And so we  hope that we can work through all of these issues. It would indeed reflect poorly, given the assurances that  have been made, were these issues not to be satisfactorily resolved, so that the trade between our peoples  and between our businesses can continue to be facilitated for the benefit of all.

Question: Is it likely, given the unofficial warning which had been circulating among industry groups and  importers, that some further sanctions will be placed on Australian exports to China from today? Is that your  expectation?

Simon Birmingham: These are questions and matters really for China. I note that Chinese authorities have  given assurances, both publicly through their media spokespeople, and privately, that there is no concerted  action of discrimination against Australia. And we want to make sure that they live up to those commitments.  We hope and trust that in living up to those commitments, they do so in a manner that continues to facilitate  beneficial trade for businesses in China as it is for businesses in Australia.

Question: Is it true that the Government’s convening an emergency roundtable with industry experts to  try to break into other export markets?

Simon Birmingham: No. The Government works with industry continuously. And in terms of diversification  and market expansion opportunities, we've been pursuing those through our entire seven years in office.  That’s why we've pursued trade agreements, not just with China but also with Japan, with Korea, through the  Trans-Pacific Partnership, with countries like Vietnam, Canada, Mexico, most recently with Indonesia, and are  actively pursuing trade agreements with the European Union and the UK. This is all about giving more options  to Australian exporters. We've done so continuously for years even as we pursue the trade agreement with  China because we realise that the best environment for our exporters to operate in is one in which they have  the maximum number of choices available to them.

Question: So there’s no emergency roundtable convening right now?

Simon Birmingham: No. We continuously talk to industry, industries of all different types. Of course,  sectors who, right now, are concerned understandably given the media speculating and the rumours  circulating about their trade with China, are getting the Government’s attention in terms of ongoing dialogue  and discussion with them about how they respond to that and how we help them in terms of their access to  other markets. That's the type of action that everybody would expect us to pursue. But it’s not in the context of  an emergency roundtable. It’s in the context of a government that has, for seven years, sought to open new  market opportunities for businesses from Australia right around the world and continues to talk to all those  industry groups about how we give them maximum support to access markets, be it in China or anywhere  else.

Question: Given the lack of contact with your Chinese counterpart, do you think you'll ever get a  response from China about what’s happening with Australian exports?

Simon Birmingham: Again, it really is a matter for China. It is disappointing that Chinese authorities refuse  to engage in a ministerial level. From Australia’s perspective, our door remains open to work with and talk to  our Chinese counterparts. We want to engage in a manner that is respectful of one another, that advances  our areas of mutual interests, but also acknowledges the fact that, yes, we have points of difference. We have  had for decades. We will have into the future. But it doesn't mean that we can't manage to advance the areas  of mutual and beneficial interest to one another. And now, in terms of contact from Chinese ministers or with  Chinese ministers and Australian ministers, the ball is very much in China's court. The Australian Government  stands willing to have that type of mature, responsible dialogue, and we would welcome that being  reciprocated by our counterparts.

Question: How many jobs are at risk if Australian goods continue to be blocked from export into China?

Simon Birmingham: China is Australia's largest trading partner, but we have equally phenomenal growth  in terms of Australian exports enter other regional markets like Japan, Korea, and Vietnam. We see enormous  opportunities in countries like in Indonesia and India. We're pursuing trade agreements with the UK and the  EU. Yes, there is always a threat to individual businesses from market disruption that may occur as a result of  the types of decisions that a government elsewhere could make. But what we’ve tried to do is create the best  possible circumstance for Australian businesses to be able to pivot. And our diplomatic and trade teams



across the globe will continue to work with those Australian businesses where they need to pivot, and to help  them to do so if that eventuates. And equally as always, to help them to expand in those markets. These are  not actions that we just do at this point in time as a result of certain rumours. They are actions in terms of the  opportunities of pursuing trade expansion and new business avenues overseas that we pursue on a day-to-day basis across every Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade post and every Austrade post right around  the globe.

Question: What’s your response to Clive Palmer losing his High Court challenge against the WA hard  border?

Simon Birmingham: Look, this is a matter that was a case between Clive Palmer and the West Australian  Government. We will, of course, review the detailed judgement and findings when they're available to the  Commonwealth. The Commonwealth did not ultimately participate in that case. We accepted the request of  the Western Australian Government not to participate. But in terms of borders, can I say that I welcome, very  much, the decision by Premier McGowan to partially open up Western Australia's borders to some other  jurisdictions, and to do so ahead of what he had previously said he would do. And I hope that that type of  common-sense, evidence-based approach continues as he looks at reconnecting WA with the rest of the  country.

Because as we can safely do so, and recognising now that all states and territories across Australia firmly  appear to have COVID back under control, then what we really want to see is that farmers can shift their  produce across the country at lower cost, that loved ones can be reconnected, that holiday-makers can help  our tourism and travel industry get off its knees and back on to its feet. And all of those things depend upon  having open borders. They should only open where it's safe to do so. That's why the Commonwealth has  supported the quarantining of Victoria. But as their situation is under control, we should be able to reconnect  the nation, and certainly to do so by Christmas as the Prime Minister has outlined as the ambition.

Question:  You mentioned Western Australia there- West Australia. Mark McGowan, the Premier, has  just- earlier today said that it is up to the Federal Government to repair the relationship with China. He said  urgently for the sake of jobs. Has the Australian Government actually done anything that could offend China?

Simon Birmingham: I don't believe the Australian Government has. We have acted always in Australia's  best interests, just as any sovereign nation does. We respect the right of nations around the world to protect  their critical infrastructure, to protect their communication systems, to have appropriate laws in relation to  managing issues of foreign interference, or indeed making sure that foreign investment is truly in their national  interest. Those are issues the Australian Government has pursued, just as those are issues that governments  right around the world, be they in China, across Asia, or any other part of the world, pursue.

I would hope and trust that Labor Premiers like Premier McGowan, Labor Shadow Ministers, indeed the  federal Labor leader, aren't in any way suggesting that Australia should compromise on our sovereignty, our  security, our values when we engage with other nations. We should always stand true to protecting those  interests, but we do so in a manner that is respectful of other nations around the world and that is certainly the  approach we take when it comes to our engagement with China, our largest trading partner, with the United  States, our largest investment partner, and with any other partners we have around the world.

Question: But is it possible that China’s trying to create uncertainty within its Australian export market?

Simon Birmingham: There’s little doubt that the number of regulatory actions and decisions taken by  China during the course of this year, such as the anti-dumping duties on barley, the restrictions on meat  processing plants, a number of the other interventions such as the holding up of the flow of live lobsters  through Chinese ports heightened the risk and uncertainty for Australian businesses exporting to China, and  for Chinese businesses importing from Australia. It does cut both ways. And that heightened risk environment  then, of course, changes the balance for those businesses in terms of who they trade with. The best outcome  would be for China, who has created these uncertainties, to act in a way that helps to ameliorate those  uncertainties so that trade can flow freely and consistent with all of the undertakings we've given to one  another.

Question: Just in relation to Chinese measures being declared [inaudible]… elsewhere when it comes to  trade. [Indistinct] necessary, if not forthcoming, is the Australian Government being at all disrespectful, then  how frustrating has it been for you not being able to forge a direct relationship with your counterpart in China?

Simon Birmingham: I don’t think that I, or frankly the Government leadership, the Prime Minister, the  Foreign Minister, could be any more respectful in our language, in our approach and in extending, very much,  the hand of friendship, highlighting the fact that the door is open to respectful mutual engagement. The



Australian government will sit down and pursue that respectful mutual engagement whenever China is willing  to do so and we urge them to come to the table and do so.

Thanks, guys. Cheers.

[END]

Media Contacts  Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.

