RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

TODAY SHOW

FRIDAY, 4 DECEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: State borders; China Trade, Pfizer vaccine.



ALLISON LANGDON, HOST: Well hopes of an open Australia by Christmas could be dashed

with a single new case in Sydney’s South West risking the closure of borders. Joining me now

is Deputy Opposition Leader Richard Marles in the studio and from Canberra, Home Affairs

Minister Peter Dutton. Very good morning to both of you. So Peter, how big a threat is this one

case to the opening of our borders ahead of Christmas?



PETER DUTTON, MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Ally, we will get further advice from

NSW Health today but we are talking about a single case as you point out and we can't close

down borders. People can't be forced to cancel their Christmas holidays or repatriation with

family members etc because of one case. I think we can be reassured by the fact that NSW,

like most of the other States, has a very strong contact tracing system and that really enables

them to get on top of it very quickly, to deal with it and for people to get on with work

and making sure that they can spend time with their family at Christmas.



LANGDON: Karl made the point earlier, isn’t it interesting, we got one single case and its

leading our news bulletin today. But Richard, WA, it was so close to letting in NSW

and Victoria. We do need to bring Aussies back from overseas, but hotel quarantine, it is

risky, isn't it?



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: It's

important that it's there, but you are right, we do need to be bringing people back. I think the

observation you made before says it all. One case now is leading a bulletin which in a sense is

an example of how successful we've been and NSW particularly has been here before.

Through the case tracing in this State they've managed to keep on top of it and I think

obviously we have to be vigilant and you can't take anything for granted but I think we can

have a sense of confidence that the same will happen here.



LANGDON: Would you encourage Mark McGowan to open the borders on Tuesday?



MARLES: I understand that Mark McGowan is going to make his own decisions in relation to

the borders. I’ve been saying for a while, I think the Federal Government needs to be showing

some leadership on the border questions. So, I certainly hope that is what is going to be

happening going forward. Obviously, we all want to see Australia's internal borders open up.



LANGDON: I am so glad you mentioned leadership because what is happening with Labor,

Richard? So, you say your party must embrace middle Australia. Party President Wayne Swan

believes you need to become ruthless about winning. There is clearly angst in the ranks, is

Albo's leadership in trouble?



MARLES: Anthony is doing a fantastic job.



LANGDON: Then why are you all saying the party is heading in the wrong direction?



MARLES: Because we all made contributions to a book which got published today so that is

why it’s all in the newspaper. But you could ask Anthony the same question and he’d be

making the same observations. The last election was a devastating result and you would

expect us to go through a process of trying to understand where we went wrong and how we

put ourselves on a better track going into the next election. But the person who is leading

that is Anthony Albanese and the most important step there actually was our election review

this time last year. We are a very different outfit going into this election than we were the last.



LANGDON: But it sounds like you are suggesting Anthony Albanese is on the wrong path

here. Peter, can you smell blood?



DUTTON: There's blood, don't worry, Ally. I've watched a few of these movies.



MARLES: That was a Dorothy-Dixer.



DUTTON: I've watched this movie before -



LANGDON: You were in it. You had a starring role.



DUTTON: I played a role so let me give you an expert witness account. Richard is up to his

neck in it. Somehow his name appears in every article talking about the prospective

Labor leader. Good on him, Richard is a good bloke and Albo is on his last legs. That's the

reality of it. Coming into the killing season, but they will probably wait until next year and

Richard is plotting and scheming. He's the silent assassin of the Labor Party. So, watch

this space.



MARLES: Okay, anyone who is wearing a tie like that has no credibility.



LANGDON: You’re wearing -



DUTTON: You’re wearing a pink tie what are you talking about?



LANGDON: Identical outfits this morning! I like that. But when are you going to man up and go

for the top job?



MARLES: Anthony is doing - he is doing a great job and it has been a really difficult time in

which to lead Labor. I mean, there was - you know, a crushing letdown after the last election.

And Anthony has led us through that. We are thinking about how we get to the next election

in truth, in a much more strategic way than we have in the past. And, you know, it's been hard

during COVID, obviously governments have dominated, as you would expect, the air waves

and the band width at a time where people are looking for authoritative information. That is not

an easy time to lead an Opposition. But we are in there and we are going to be presenting

an alternative at the next election and Anthony is going to be doing that.



LANGDON: He is trying to create a point of difference there with China. Do you think it was a

cheap shot to criticise Scott Morrison over his handling of China yesterday?



MARLES: I think what you have seen this week in respect of the tweets that came out of

China is unity across the political spectrum about the way in which the government has

handled it this week. The government has handled it appropriately. We absolutely think it's

important to have a conversation about how best to handle the relationship. This is a really

important area of public policy. There are hundreds of thousands of jobs at stake. So, we're

going to make our comments about that, but a time and a place for everything. Right now, in

the face of the tweets that China issued this week, which I'd never seen anything like it, it

was really important that the country speak with one voice and we did and Anthony was part of

that.



LANGDON: We needed solidarity, but I am not sure we got that from your Leader

yesterday. But Peter, did the Prime Minister go too far the other day, was he too emotional and

did that play into the hands of Beijing?



DUTTON: No, he didn't. And just to your point before Ally, I think the comments of

Anthony Albanese this week were cringe worthy, to be honest. I think most of the Labor Party,

to go to Richard's point, were very responsible. And there was a voice of unity, which is

incredibly important at this point in time. This is a very serious situation and for Anthony

Albanese to go off script, as he did, I think really sent a shudder across the Labor Party and

certainly across the press gallery here. I think people were quite shocked by his misstep. So,

from our perspective, the government has had a consistency. We want to make sure that

we continue to have a good trading relationship because it is important, particularly for

a country of only 25 million people, where we produce more than we can consume. We need

to export that. It underpins our economy and we will do everything we can to ensure that that

relationship continues, but at the same time we are not going to sacrifice our sovereignty or

our values or our rule of law and Australians would expect nothing else.



LANGDON: And China does continue to agitate, there's another cartoon in the Global Times

published on Twitter again. But I wanted to move on. Peter, the UK is rolling out the

Pfizer vaccine from next week. If they can approve it so quickly and have it now, why can't we?



DUTTON: Well Ally, for any drug that goes through the TGA approval process here, it will go

through a process with the United States or UK equivalent authorities and we don't have that

reciprocity. We go through our own process. We look at the efficacy, the claims that have been

made, whether or not it's gone through the human trials successfully and that process is under

way. John Skerritt, who is an outstanding Australian, heads the TGA. He has told us that he



needs, likely until the end of January before the approvals are provided and we will put an

Australian overlay and test to it. We will look at what's happening overseas but, ultimately, we

are not going to rush into a rollout. We believe that the timetable we've laid out is responsible.

And we're going to stick to that. But we will look very closely at what's happening in the UK.

The other point of course is that what's happening in the United Kingdom or in Paris, you

know, or any capital city across the world, any country across the world at the moment, frankly,

compared to Australia, it may be two or three other countries, is quite stark. We don't have

the deaths we are seeing in the United Kingdom or the United States. We haven't got the level

of infection that those countries have and we've taken decisions to close our border. We've

taken decisions to bolster our health response and that's served us well and we're not going to

deviate away from getting the balance right and I think we have got the right balance in

relation to the vaccine approval and rollout process.



LANGDON: Are you okay with the timeline, Richard?



MARLES: Well we obviously want to see the vaccine as soon as possible. I think that's about

making sure we have the right relationships with the pharmaceutical companies, and we are

able to manufacture here. The TGA does need to do its work and while we want to see this

as quickly as possible it obviously can't cut corners. It's a really important process, this needs

to be done safely. So, I think we have got to give the TGA the space to do what it needs to do.



LANGDON: Thanks for joining us gentlemen. It may have taken until December, but I love that

you are now dressing identically.



MARLES: Attention to detail Ally.



LANGDON: It just proves you’re great mates.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363

