

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING  MEMBER FOR SYDNEY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  TUESDAY, 25 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Aged care crisis; Border communities; Jobseeker.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Good  morning. I wanted to say a few words this morning about aged care.

For all of those people who have got loved ones in aged care, particularly in Victoria, this is  an incredibly stressful time. We know that hundreds of families have lost someone that  they love, living in aged care and then contracting COVID-19 in this terrible pandemic,  sometimes dying with no family around them. This has been so distressing for those  families, and for thousands of other families who are worried about someone they love in  aged care right now. My mum's 88 years old, she's still living on her own luckily. But my  mother-in-law who's 88 has been living in aged care for some time and it's been very  difficult. There are times when you can't have physical contact, you can’t go and visit, you  can't hug or kiss or show love to your parent or grandparent. That's been very difficult for  families. And what's made it even more difficult in recent days is the feeling that the  Minister who's responsible is not up to the job. The feeling that the Minister responsible  isn't paying enough attention, isn't keeping their loved ones safe.

It's even worse that we've got a Prime Minister who also seems absolutely disengaged  from this problem. We've got a Prime Minister who is so quick to take credit when anything  is going right, but never wants to take responsibility when times get tough. We've seen that  in the last couple of days with aged care in particular. Any questions?

JOURNALIST: You mentioned, you know, people really struggling through this pandemic.  What do you think people in aged care that have been shut in, maybe not able to see their  family, would have thought of Mr Colebeck's performances in the Senate yesterday and at  the Committee on Friday?

PLIBERSEK: Well, I think people who are in aged care who are separated from their  families are very distressed by that. What would be even more distressing is if you're in  one of those nursing homes where COVID-19 has broken out and you've got someone in  the room next to you, or the floor above you, or a floor below you, who's contracted this  highly infectious disease. You would expect the Government, the Minister responsible, to  be all over that. You would expect him to be absolutely clear about all of the details, and to  have seen the performances yesterday and earlier in the Inquiry, the Senate Inquiry, I think

would not give you any confidence at all. But as others have pointed out this isn't just about  COVID-19 and the Minister's lack of command of the details of the management of this  pandemic. This is something that has been going on for months because of the Minister  receiving numerous reports showing that aged care in this country is not up to scratch.

JOURNALIST: Just on the University of Adelaide's plan to bring in foreign students, I  believe. Do you understand the frustrations of some people in South Australia given they  can't perhaps see family through the border closure? Is this an appropriate time for the  University to be doing this?

PLIBERSEK: Look, I think we need to manage all of these things very, very carefully  indeed. So if the University, in co-operation with the State government and the Federal  government, can bring people in very carefully, observing all of the requirements of  quarantine, it is a way of restarting this stream which is a huge contributor to the South  Australian economy.

On the issue of border communities, I do think States and Territories have to co-operate  better to take a common sense approach where there are people living in those border  communities who are working across borders, who are farming across borders, who are  seeking medical treatment across borders, or who have other compelling reasons to travel.  As long as we can do that safely and with a common sense approach, States should be  co-operating to do that.

JOURNALIST: On confidence, if Richard Colbeck does resign or he leaves parliament for  whatever reason, or resigns from the Ministry, how will that transition work? Will that give  people in the sector confidence that the Aged Care Minister leaves in the middle of an  aged care disaster, in the middle of a Royal Commission into the aged care sector? Take  away your political hat for a second, as someone who has an older mother, will that give  you confidence if the Aged Care Minister left in the middle of this scenario?

PLIBERSEK: Well it's pretty hard to have confidence in the Minister that's there at the  moment. Obviously, a lot of Australians have lost confidence in that Minister, and it's up to  the Prime Minister to explain why he retains confidence. He has obviously removed some  of the responsibilities from that Minister and given them to the Health Minister, which is - I  don't think that particularly inspires confidence in Richard Colbeck. If the Prime Minister's  not prepared to back him, why should Australians believe that he is up to the job?

JOURNALIST: Should more of those powers be divested to the Health Minister?

PLIBERSEK: Look I think it's up to the Prime Minister to explain what his intentions are  here. This is a Minister who has performed very badly not just over the last few days, but  over the last few months. We've got an aged care sector that was in crisis before COVID-19 hit and that has only compounded during this pandemic. I think it's really up to the  Prime Minister to explain what steps he's going to take to restore the confidence of people  living and working in aged care, and their families who are desperately worried about them.

JOURNALIST: On JobSeeker - just one last one - obviously the Government is stepping  down the payments over the next couple of months, Labor would like to see that payment  not stepped down as much. Do you have a figure in mind for where you think the post-pandemic rate of JobSeeker should be? Or do you think Labor should outline a figure at  some point of what you hope that it will be? Like a line in the sand for what you'll start to  fight for.





PLIBERSEK: Well, there's two things I'd say. There is hardly a person in Australia today  who believes that the original rate of Newstart, as it was then, was adequate. Certainly no  one who's living on Newstart thinks it's adequate. Certainly none of the social and welfare  organisations believes it’s adequate. But the business community didn't believe it was  adequate either. Even former Prime Minister John Howard didn't think that Newstart was  adequate. So it must increase.

We've seen the difference that the increase has made during the pandemic. It's meant that  people who were previously struggling to pay their bills, struggling to put food on the table,  have been able to pay off their bills, afford decent food. We've heard reports of nutrition  improving in some communities, kids given new school shoes, being able to really afford  the basics for the first time in a long time. So we cannot go back to the old inadequate  measure of Newstart - it has to be higher. I'm not going to name a figure today.

But can I say one other thing - there are some people who go in this crisis straight to: can  we afford to have Newstart? Can we afford Jobkeeper? Can we afford the measures that  we've taken to support demand in the economy? We can't afford not to do these things.

If we want our economy to recover we have to support consumer confidence, aggregate  demand in our economy. The simple way of saying that is if you don't have 10 bucks in  your pocket, you're not going to buy a cup of coffee on the way to work. If you don't know  where your next paycheck is coming from, you're not going to take the kids out for pizza on  Friday night. For our economy to recover we need to invest in keeping people working, and  for those who can't work, making sure they have adequate income confidence to keep  spending.

For our economy to recover we need to focus on jobs. That means building things -  infrastructure. That means making things - making sure we've got a manufacturing base  with cheaper, cleaner energy. It means caring for people, so investing in caring jobs, like  aged care. We've got more than a hundred thousand people on waiting lists for home care  right now. And it means decent jobs, with the sort of pay and conditions and certainty that  would encourage you to invest and spend and create jobs for other people.

JOURNALIST:  Just speaking of Mr Howard, were you happy to hear he's okay after a bit  of a hospital scare yesterday?

PLIBERSEK: Yes, of course I am. Thanks everyone.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DANIEL DORAN 0427 464 350









