TRANSCRIPT

Monday, 23 November 2020

Minister for Education Dan Tehan interview with Chris Kenny, Sky News

SUBJECTS: US election, International students and pilot programs, COVID-19  and schools

Chris Kenny: Let’s catch up with the Federal Education Minister Dan Tehan now. He joins us  from Western Victoria. Good to talk to you again, Dan. I want to start on the President. Of  course, your leader, the Prime Minister Scott Morrison, has rung to congratulate Joe Biden.  You don’t want to interfere in American politics, but this makes it increasingly difficult to deal  with a country when you can’t assume that Joe Biden is the President-elect.

Dan Tehan: Oh, look, we’ve got full confidence in the US system. The fact that the United  States institutions will sort this out. The Prime Minister’s, obviously, moved to congratulate  President-elect Joe Biden, and we’re confident in the strength of the US political system, the  strength of its institutions, and we’re sure that there will be a proper transition in the United  States.

Kenny: You must be worried, though, about the damage that’s being done to those  institutions in the meantime?

Tehan: Well, look, we don’t want to comment on US processes. As you know, politics is  incredibly hard-fought in the United States, but we have full confidence, as I’ve said, in the  US institutions, and that’s why the Prime Minister rang President-elect Joe Biden to  congratulate him. And, we’re sure that there will be a smooth transition to Joe Biden. The  institutions of the US have been one of the, they’ve been a leader when it comes to ensuring  democracy is upheld right across the world, and we’ve got confidence that they’ll be able to  see this transition through, and that US democracy will be just as strong, as it’s always been,  after the transition.

Kenny: Yes. Let’s hope so. Those people who get too cocky about, of Australia need to  remember 2010 and a whole nation waiting days to see what reprobates like Tony Windsor  and Rob Oakeshott would do to decide the outcome. So, at least they’ve got legal processes  looking at this one. I want to bring you back to the pandemic management, Dan. And, I  showed earlier in the program comments from Gladys Berejiklian, who, in the past couple of  days, has been brave enough to suggest that in the new year, we need to open up more  places in our international quarantine for international students. This is sensible, isn’t it? The,  if we can, if we can find the quarantine places, we’ve got to try and bring more international  workers, and students, into the country.

Tehan: Well, the international student market is worth $40 billion to the Australian economy.  It creates 250,000 jobs. So, we do need to get international students back into the country.  But, we’ve got to do it in a safe way, and that’s why we’re working with every state and  territory to do that. Obviously, our priority has been to get as many Australians back before  Christmas. That continues to be our priority. But, we’ve asked every state and territory  government to provide us with a plan as to how they could safely bring international students  back after Christmas. We’ve asked for those plans by the end of this month, and we’re

hoping that we’ll be able to work cooperatively with all state and territory governments. But,  once we’ve got those Australians who want to return, back by Christmas, we can then move  to look how we can safely start to bring international students back into the country.

Kenny: Would you also look at different scales of quarantine or pandemic checks for people  from different countries? I’ve just done two weeks’ quarantine. It is pretty onerous. But, what  would I expect, because I was returning from North America. But, if you were coming in from  Japan or Singapore or China, wouldn’t there be the potential to have people present a  COVID negative test, and perhaps can consent to have one seven days after arrival, or  some such? Not, in other words, something, something less than two weeks’ full quarantine?

Tehan: What we’ve asked every state and territory to do is to, to put together plans to  present to the Commonwealth Government. And, as part of those plans, we want them  signed off, especially around quarantine, by their chief medical officers. So, we’ve said that  what we want to do is, as we have all along through this pandemic, is take the advice of the  medical experts. And, so, every plan that’s submitted by a state and territory government we  want signed off by the chief medical officers. Now, if they see that there are opportunities to  safely quarantine people outside of hotel quarantine, then that’s something that we’re  prepared to discuss and look at with them. But, they obviously need to be signed off by their  chief medical officers, because the ultimate responsibility for quarantine lies with states and  territories. And, so, we want to make sure that anything that they put forward has been  signed off by their chief medical officers.

Kenny: Now, it’s been a hell of a year, for not just the universities, but for education, from R  to 12, as well. Kids in South Australia just last week had a shutdown thrust on them, for no  good reason. Just how disruptive do you believe this education year has been for, for school  children, and, particularly, for those in Victoria and those doing Year 12?

Tehan: Well, one of the really great things, Chris, was that they’d finished Year 12 exams in  South Australia. So, fortunate for those Year 12 students in South Australia, they’d got their  exams out of the way, so it didn’t impact on them. And, also, fortunately, obviously, the  shutdown there ended up being a very, for a very brief period of time. In Victoria, we  obviously saw the pandemic hit and lead to that loss of face-to-face teaching for nearly four  months for some students. So, one of the things that we’ve got to do is we’ve got to look at  the evidence now, and get a real sense of what has been the impact. We know from what  the experts have told us that lack of face-to-face teaching will really impact Indigenous  students, students from low socioeconomic backgrounds, those with a disability, and those  from regional and rural areas. So, I, really looking forward for us to being able to monitor and  have a look at that. And, we’ll be able to do that, for instance, through NAPLAN next year,  and get a sense of, alright, has it led to students missing out? Do we need to provide  resources to help students catch up? And, you’ve already seen from the Victorian State  Government, for instance, an initiative to put tutors into the classroom next year to help  those students who might have fallen behind. So, we’ve just got to make sure we’re getting  the evidence, that we can monitor it, and then, obviously, from a Commonwealth  Government point of view, we want to work with states and territories to make sure that we  can help and support those students who have fallen behind.

Kenny: Yeah, good stuff, and hopefully with all the experience of this year some of those  states will be less trigger happy to shut schools down next year when there’s likely to be  more outbreaks here and there. Thanks for joining us, Dan. I appreciate it.

Tehan: Well, the, no problems, Chris. And, as you know, the medical experts have always  said it’s safe to keep the schools open. Good to be with you.

Kenny: Spot on. Thanks.

