

SUSAN TEMPLEMAN  MEMBER FOR MACQUARIE



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE CANBERRA   TUESDAY, 1 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECT: Aged care.

SUSAN TEMPLEMAN, MEMBER FOR MACQUARIE: G’day I’m Susan Templeman the  Member for Macquarie. Over the last few days we’ve heard the Prime Minister describe  aged care as pre-palliative and yesterday we heard the Minister say that dying was a  function of aged care. This is something that is offensive to the more than 200,000  residents in aged care and their families. You don’t go to aged care to die, you go there to  live a rich life where you’re cared for in your final years. I think this really shows the lack of  understanding of aged care that not only the Minister but the Prime Minister has, and that  explains why there’s been such an appalling response to Covid in aged care facilities, why  they dragged the chain on calling for a Royal Commission, bringing forward a Royal  Commission, and it really goes to the heart of why the Liberals have no plan for aged care.  That is fundamentally the issue; they really don’t understand that, and quite honestly, what  they’re saying is offensive to anyone like me who has a family member in aged care.

JOURNALIST: The Labor Party had the same agreement to increase funding in aged care  at the election, how would the aged care system be different if the ALP was in power today  versus the Coalition [inaudible]

TEMPLEMAN: We’ve known for a long time that there are problems in aged care and right  now you could make changes. That’s why we’ve said that there’s an eight-point plan.  Some of those things include improving the number of staff, all different levels - nurses,  care workers, at every level, you can look to improve the quality of aged care. The bottom  line is that families choose to have a family member in aged care for the hardest of  reasons. It can be because the partner at home can no longer care for them; in my case I  have a 90-year-old father and an 80-year-old mother, and my mother would hate the  thought that she’s just put my father in there to die. That is not what it is. It’s about  providing an environment that’s safe, that is, where they’re cared for. It’s all about caring in  aged care, and I’ve got to say the workers I see are there caring for people. What they  need to know is that there’s a government - particularly in these Covid times - who’s willing  to support them, who’s willing to make sure they have enough masks to wear, that there  are enough staff should an outbreak occur. Caring should be the heart of aged care. The  Prime Minister and the Minister need to understand that that’s what it’s about.

JOURNALIST: I believe the Royal Commission [inaudible] Is it time the for-profit aged care  centres to be reined in almost cut out entirely from the system?





TEMPLEMAN: What we need to see is accountability for the funds that are passed from  taxpayers to aged care facilities. Transparency and accountability is completely lacking,  and the Royal Commission’s shown that. That will go a long way to ensuring that not only  is the money spent where it should be, but that the people who are being cared for are  actually getting the quality of care that they deserve.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KRYSTYNA POLLARD 0406 693 735





