

THE HON KEITH PITT MP

MINISTER FOR RESOURCES, WATER AND NORTHERN AUSTRALIA

THE HON ANGUS TAYLOR MP  MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND EMISSIONS REDUCTION

MEDIA RELEASE



Tuesday, 27 October 2020

ENSURING AUSTRALIAN GAS SUPPLIES



The Morrison-McCormack Government is examining options for a prospective national gas  reservation scheme as part of its plan to make energy affordable for families and businesses  and supporting jobs as part of Australia’s recovery from the COVID-19 recession.

A gas reservation issues paper has been released for public consultation and the  Government seeks information and feedback for consideration, and follows the recent  announcement of our plan for a gas-led recovery.

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt said the paper will explore  possible costs and benefits of a gas reservation scheme and strongly encouraged  stakeholders to make a submission.

“The Government will consider issues including certainty of supply and investment  confidence in our oil and gas industry in assessing options for a national gas reservation  scheme,” Minister Pitt said.

“To do this, we will consult extensively with stakeholders - including states, territories,  industry and gas users - before a final decision is made.”

Minister Pitt added that other actions the Government has implemented to date had  assisted in lowering gas prices and ensuring gas supply.

“Both the Australian Energy Market Operator and the Australian Competition and Consumer  Commission have found the Australian Domestic Gas Security Mechanism (ADGSM) to be  effective in this regard with supply assured to 2021, which is why I have not triggered the  ADGSM,” Minister Pitt said.

“However, I want to ensure the continued effectiveness of the ADGSM.

“The ACCC Netback Price will also be a reference point for what is a fair price for domestic  gas.”

Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction Angus Taylor noted the importance of securing  domestic supply for driving down prices.

“It is essential we consider all of the policy options available that could help to ensure  Australian gas is working for all Australians,” Minister Taylor said.

“Gas prices and security affects the productivity and competitiveness of Australian industry.  We will work with industry and consider all feedback to ensure both gas producers and  users can thrive.”

Consultation on a new Heads of Agreement will commence shortly.

Submissions on the reservation policy paper close on 27 November 2020.

The issues paper can be found and submissions made at the Department of Industry,  Science, Energy and Resources’ Consultation Hub.

ENDS

Minister Pitt’s office:  Matt Dunstan, 0411 535 072  Minister Taylor’s office: Liam O’Neil, 0428 113 617













