

TRANSCRIPT  Senator James Paterson  Liberal Senator for Victoria



Monday 01 December 2020

Doorstop interview

Subjects: China



Journalist: Is China frustrated because it's losing the battle here with Huawei, with foreign  security right around the world?

Senator James Paterson: It's been a bad year for China and particularly for their foreign  ministry. Their reputation around the world has been shattered, by the way in which they  responded to COVID-19, the way in which they weren't transparent and upfront with the  world about what was happening in Wuhan. And there's no question that the world has  followed Australia's lead on Huawei. Country after country is coming to the same  conclusion that we have, which is that it's not in our national interest to allow Huawei or  ZTE into our 5G because our digital sovereignty is too important. And for the Chinese  foreign ministry, that's a KPI. If they can't convince countries to allow Huawei into their 5G  network, no wonder they are lashing out like this.

Journalist: This is lashing out. What do you say to the argument that this plays into  China's hand?

Paterson: Well, I think the prime minister's response was measured and appropriate  yesterday. He responded as every Australian would expect our national leader to respond.  That is to stand up strongly on behalf of the Australian people, on behalf of our defence  forces, and say that we will not tolerate this sort of childish mocking of our honourable men  and women who served this country with great distinction.

Journalist: Senator, if China doesn't apologise if Twitter doesn't take the tweet down. I  mean this isn't just about the tweet. This is about so much more than that. What is, in your  view, the next step?

Paterson: Well if the Chinese government doesn't apologise and if Twitter doesn't take the  tweet down then that reflects on both of them and people will make judgements about  them. It won't be just Australia which makes those judgements, it will be every other  country around the world. There's almost no country in the world that has diplomatic  relations with China that's not engaged in a diplomatic dispute with China, whether it's  India or Sweden or Norway or Canada or New Zealand, or Australia. So it is reflective of

them. And all we can do is to continue to stand up for our sovereignty and our national  interests.

Journalist: How do you see this being resolved in the long term. I mean Australia is not  going to give on that that laundry list of complaints that China had, but they don't seem to  be giving in either. Are we set to conflict for the foreseeable future?

Paterson:  Well, no Australian government, Liberal or Labor, left or right, would ever give  in to the 14 demands that were issued to us. They are core interests of Australia that go to  our sovereignty and our democracy. What we can do is we can learn from history. South  Korea had a very similar experience in 2016 when they agreed to an Obama  administration request to place THAAD missiles on their territory, and they were subject to  a campaign of economic coercion. Like them, we can't give into it. We can't concede our  national interests and eventually it will move on, but only when we demonstrate that these  tactics are not successful.

Journalist: What about the actual conduct of the Chinese diplomats? It's a bit  embarrassing for a diplomat to be making this kind of childish rant, isn't it?

Paterson: I would certainly be embarrassed if I saw our diplomats behaving that way. I  would expect a more mature response from a global power, but it is up to them if they want  to conduct themselves that way in the world who will make judgements about them.

Journalist: What else should the Australian government do, given the tweet from the  foreign ministry is not being taken down and in fact, they're doubling down on some of  their rhetoric overnight. What else is the Australian government to do in that situation?

Paterson: The most important thing we can do is show national unity at this time because  what this campaign has been designed to do, the campaign of economic coercion has  been designed to do, is to divide us, to open up cracks in our democratic political system.  If we show that we are united, then it will discourage them and that's the best thing we can  do.

Journalist:  James, this list of demands that the Chinese embassy issued. What message  do you think that is sending not only to Australia but to to other countries around the world  to five eyes nations, to countries like India, Germany and France?

Paterson: If you were a country like Australia five years ago, looking at the future and you  knew that this is where you were going to go, then you would have invested even more in  the diversification of your trade relationships to make sure that you can't be coerced  economically like this. So I suspect every country in the world right now is looking at how  they can reduce their dependence on trade with China and diversify their trade to other  opportunities so that they're not exposed like this. And that's exactly what Australia will do  too. Thanks everyone.

ENDS

