SENATOR TIM AYRES

SENATOR FOR NSW





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2NZ INVERELL

MONDAY, 27 JULY 2020



SUBJECTS: University of New England cuts; higher education; industrial

relations



MONTE IRVING, HOST: I've been joined on the line now by New South Wales

Labor Senator Tim Ayres. Good morning, Senator. How are you this morning?



SENATOR TIM AYRES: I'm pretty good Monte. How are you?



IRVINE: Not too bad. Did you have a good weekend?



AYRES: Terrific. Very quiet. Very quiet. Hope you're getting some rain up

there, its bucketing down here on the coast.



IRVINE: We're getting a few showers. Not as much as I think we'd like but it's

still something, let's put it that way. Now, Senator, I thought what we might do

this morning is, quickly, our first assertion point is: Barnaby Joyce has come out

in support of the University of New England's decision to slash jobs by up to

what they're saying is possibly 15%. I'm reading this from an article in The

Guardian Australia, they're going to cut from 12 to possibly 15%. That's around

about 210 jobs from the university's 1400 staff. That's a lot of jobs to go from a

community that is still reeling from droughts and bushfires and COVID-19. Do

you think this is the right decision for Barnaby Joyce to come out and say, 'no,

that's fine. Let them do what they need to do they need to look after their

budgets?'



AYRES: Well, you can be for or against job cuts in the higher education sector

and Mr. Joyce's decided he's for them. It is an extraordinary position. They will

be 21,000 according to the university 21,000 job cuts around the country in the

higher education sector. The government's refused to deliver a package to

support the sector. It's got big challenges - a wave of challenges that come

because of all the overseas students who can't go, but there's a series of other

Coronavirus-related challenges.



So 21,000 jobs around the country in the Liberals and Nationals haven't lifted a

finger. That's a very bad position for the country in terms of the future research

agenda, teaching and employment - and of course that hits really hard in

country areas. So the University of New England is... yes, it's a very important

employer and 220 good jobs lost out of the New England is a disaster for

employment. But it really matters in terms of the teaching and learning

opportunities for school leavers. You know, it is the most important university

for school leavers in your listening area, and its research agenda is absolutely

critical for the future of rural Australia. They do research into rural education,

they do research into water management. They do key research into breeding

and genetics in agriculture. Their research is important for jobs and

opportunities in the environment and for opportunities for kids in regional

Australia and Mr. Joyce is cheering on as 220 critical jobs are ripped out of the

university. I find it unbelievable.



IRVINE: Hmm. And this is partly because of the reform package that was

announced in June, where the overall government contribution to the degrees

from 58 to 52% and increasing the fees for some courses for them to pay for

39,000 extra university places. So they're removing or upping the fees for

certain courses and reducing the amount that they're paying to try and finally

money to open up more university places but in specific areas. Now one of the

areas that they're talking about is removing it from behavioral studies,

psychological courses, social work and things like that. And this is even caused

some concern within Barnaby Joyce's own party, the the Minister for Regional

Education, Andrew Gee, has come out and said these are important areas and

they need to be addressed and that should be looked at closely. And I know for

myself like I've got a degree, an arts degree, but my degrees in political

science. Now that is one of those ones that they would also be looking to up the

fees for and not contribute. Now, I know for myself, I use my degree my skills

for what I'm doing now. Do you think that they're being a little bit short sighted

with what they're looking at here?



AYRES: Mr. Gee's, right. Mr. Joyce is wrong. There's two big negative impacts

on the university sector: one is the Coronavirus and the second is the Federal

Government's changes. Now, the university sector is important for all

Australians. It's important, of course, for those kids in those families to attend

university and people want the best opportunities for their kids. And the

university sector and the TAFE sector are absolutely critical for giving people

the skills and giving people the well-rounded education that means that they

contribute in the way that you've described your university education has had

an effect on your capacity through your life to contribute.



But secondly, the research agenda is so important. The people who work in

higher education are experts who've done years and years of research into in

all sorts of issues that are critical for our future. When you jump on the

television, on a weeknight and see all of the experts who are talking about the

government response to the Coronavirus, advising the government response to

Coronavirus, doing the research into vaccines and the right PPE and all these

questions, they are all from the university sector. It's critical for our national

future.



And yet, the government's done nothing about the university sector because

they're sort of hostile to it. And even more, you've got Mr. Joyce cheering on

hundreds of job cuts in his own community. It's just a distorted and weird and

very damaging way of looking at the economy and looking at jobs and looking

at important institutions. We should be supporting Australians who can

contribute we should be supporting institutions that can help dig us out of the

crisis that we're in. Not cheering on their destruction.



IRVINE: Now another part of this package is a $5,000 payment for regional

students to relocate. Now the concern is that these students will not relocate to

regional Australia, but they'll relocate to city universities. Now, it's saying here

in this Guardian article that Mr. Joyce has brushed off these concerns and

saying they're going to go where they'll get the best degree. Now, it's one of

those things of, well, you know what, a lot of the times they'll go where they can

get in. And, and on top of that, the best degree can be looked at, well, I'd rather

go to the University of Sydney or those sorts of ones that have a real name for

them and get my degree from there.



AYRES: Well, all of these, these policy packages are really just a bunch of

talking points turned into a press release. Who knows what effect it will have.

The announcement that the government made about changing the fee structure

for degrees, I mean, it's not based upon the cost of delivery for the degree. So

it does mean and it's designed to drive down the cost of some science courses

as well. That is not going to change how students choose which courses they

do. Students will continue to, I hope, choose their courses on the basis of their

aptitude, when they love, what they are interested in doing. What it will do is

make it harder for the university sector to deliver courses in science and

engineering and all the courses that government says that it wants to support.



And really, there's a basic lack of understanding and a hostility to the university

sector that comes through the government's announcements. Nobody knows

what the real effect of those will be. And at the extreme end of this, we've got

the local member, Mr. Joyce cheering on cuts to jobs and cuts to the capacity

for research and teaching and learning, when he should be putting the pressure

on within the government and putting the pressure on publicly to try and make

sure that his local university is supported. Really it's very hard to understand

how people like Mr. Joyce have lost their way. Their job should be to support

their community and to support the local institutions in their community and the

University of New England is critical for the future of the New England.



IRVINE: Now, Senator, the next subject, and we're gonna have to be a bit

quick, I am sorry about this. But the next subject that I wanted to talk about is

industrial relations law. Now the unions, the Labor Party and big business and

the government all got together at the start of Coronavirus and basically

suspended a lot of the Industrial Relations laws to try and make sure that

people kept their jobs, that businesses could keep running, even those in

hibernation. Now that things are opening back up and moving ahead, the

unions are wanting to move back to putting in place that industry relations law,

again, the Fair Work and all that sort of stuff. And there's some resistance

coming from big business still wanting to make sure that 'no, no, we want to be

able to control the way our staff are there and the money that we're getting and

the money that we're making'. Do you think it's time for us to look at going back

to our awards the way that they should be? Or should we continue to suspend

them, maybe till Christmas, and then re-look at them?



AYRES: Well there's two sets of issues here. One is: what are the emergency

arrangements that are being made during the pandemic period? And there's a

series of changes that were made when the JobKeeper scheme was

introduced. And the unions have been working with employers right across the

country, working with the government, and that's how it should be every day of

the week. Labor supported that legislation through the parliament, there've

been changes, temporary changes, to awards. Whether or not that should

continue, the unions and government and the employers will will work those

issues through. We've got legislation coming to the parliament to extend the

JobKeeper scheme, you know, to cut the JobKeeper scheme which is a big

problem, but to extend the scheme.



Now the second set of issues is: what kind of industrial relations system does

Australia need for its future? Now you can go down two roads. You can go the

high road where we say, well, what we want is a system that encourages

unions and business and government to cooperate, to work together to deliver

the best kind of jobs. To deliver the best productivity outcomes, to lift national

productivity and deliver a better future for Australians, that's one road. That's

the road that successful economies, successful high wage, high skill, high

employment economies like the Germans, plenty of the European economies.

That's the road they follow.



Or you can go the American road, low skill, low wage, cutting basic rights. Low

job quality. And yesterday, I watched the Treasurer on the television. He said

that that's the road that they're going to go down. He said that Margaret

Thatcher and Ronald Reagan were his economic inspiration for the approach

that they're going to take. Well, I mean, Ronald Reagan delivered high debt,

low growth, low wages, drove the American economy off a cliff. Many of the

challenges that the Americans are facing now, with a public sector that that

can't deliver the Coronavirus response properly, with a with a labour market

that is full of precarious, temporary and insecure work that's really making that

pandemic harder has its roots in the period of the 1980s in the Reagan period.



That's not a prescription for Australia.



We don't want an Americanised economy. We want good jobs that support

families and communities to prosper, which certainly can't have industrial

relations changes that drive, more casual employment, more labour hire. These

are the things that are making this pandemic harder to manage.



IRVINE: Absolutely. All right. Well, Senator, thank you so much for your time.

Unfortunately we have run out. As always, it's very interesting to talk to you on

a Monday morning and to get your views on subjects that will affect us here in

Inverell and in the surrounding districts but thank you so much for your time.

We'll talk to you next Monday morning.



AYRES: No worries. Talk to you next week.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JOE MCKENZIE 0431 377 319



