

CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC NEWSRADIO

THURSDAY, 3 DECEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: COVID-19 vaccines; NSW Quarantine worker.



THOMAS, HOST: Chris Bowen is the Shadow Minister for Health and joins us live now. Chris

Bowen. Good morning. Thanks for your time.



CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Pleasure, Thomas. Good morning to

you.



THOMAS: What's your reaction to the UK moving ahead to get this vaccine to its people so

quickly?



BOWEN: Well, very encouraging the approval in the United Kingdom and the ability of the

United Kingdom Government to distribute the vaccine on this time frame is very encouraging, I

think, for the world. The situation in United Kingdom is very different, of course, to the situation

in Australia, so the regulators are going to respond differently. And I'm sure we can go through

that in more detail. But around the world, Thomas there has been enormous progress made in

vaccines for COVID-19 generally.



On different days, different ones will have different progress but I do think this is a chance to

celebrate the world's researchers. Normally a vaccine would take 17 years to develop. That's

the average, the fastest in world history is four years. Here we are within a year with almost,

every medical researcher in the world working on it, and has shown what can be done with a

big effort and when respecting the science.



THOMAS: Yes, as you've flagged there the Government seems to be taking a more cautious

approach. And we've heard from the Health Minister Greg Hunt, saying the advice remains that

the timeline for a decision on approval is expected by the end of January next year. Is that the

right strategy?



BOWEN: Well, the TGA in Australia is of course independent of Government and I respect as

the alternative Health Minister the independence and expertise of the TGA. So I don't question

the TGA’s timelines, I respect and understand it and yes, they indicate that they'll be ready to

approve probably by the end of January best endeavours. And as I said, the circumstances are

different, what we see in the United Kingdom is an emergency approval, which means

basically, the regulator in the United Kingdom has said even though the process isn't quite

finished, the situation is so bad that on balance, a better decision is to get the vaccine out.

We're in a slightly different situation in Australia. So as far as the TGA is concerned, absolutely

no second guessing of the TGA’s process, we should respect them and let them do their work.



In relation to the to the distribution in Australia, of course, the Government has an advanced

supply agreement with Pfizer, I had called for that. It only has been entered into a quite

recently compared to other countries. Obviously, if we do have TGA approval in January, the

agreement is the vaccine will be available from March. Obviously we'd like to see that done

more quickly if we do have approval in January. And also we've encouraged the Government

to provide more information on the distribution strategy. Because this is a vaccine, which is

difficult to distribute across the country. And of course, we only had 10 million doses  and it's a

two dose vaccine. So we have enough for 5 million Australians. So the more the Government

can get and the more information they can provide on both distribution and the numbers, of

course would very much welcome because Thomas vaccines don't save lives, vaccinations

save lives. So we need to get this vaccination programme out across the country for as many

Australians as possible.



THOMAS: Does it concern you though, that we actually don't, I mean, the numbers speak for

themselves, we have not ordered enough vaccines from Pfizer to be able to vaccinate the

entire population.





BOWEN: Well that's a statement of fact as we speak, that's right. 10 million doses, two dose

vaccine. So 5 million Australians will get it. The Government through the National Cabinet has

indicated health care workers and elderly Australians first, that's appropriate. I support that, but

obviously, I would also support and encourage the Government to procure more. They have

other vaccine deals in place. There is a deal with AstraZeneca for example, there's a deal with

University of Queensland, with more vaccines, but we don't know when or if they'll be

available. They may be available and can complement Pfizer, or they may not. So world’s best

practice Thomas is to have five or six deals in place. Australia effectively has four. So they

could do better. But of course, we're given bipartisan support to what they've done so far.



THOMAS: And we've just heard just this morning Chris Bowen there's been another hotel

worker who's contracted COVID this time in New South Wales. I mean, should there be a

national strategy in your view with regards to hotel quarantine?



BOWEN: Well, firstly, in relation to the news of New South Wales, Thomas, I'm going to take

the same approach for the New South Wales Liberal Government as I took with the Victorian

Labor Government and the South Australian Government, that is support for the State

Government in doing the work that they're doing in difficult circumstances. So this from my

point of view, will not be politicised. In relation to your question about a national programme,

yes, quarantine is ultimately a Commonwealth responsibility. The states have taken on the

load on behalf of the Commonwealth but we do-- we should recognise that quarantine is

actually constitutionally a Commonwealth responsibility.



Now, Jane Halton, the former Secretary brought down a report quite a while ago, which made

recommendations, those recommendations haven't been acted upon by the Commonwealth.

They should be.



THOMAS: Okay Chris Bowen, thank you very much for your time this morning. Appreciate it.



BOWEN: Pleasure Thomas, good on you.



ENDS



MEDIA: ELIZA MITCHELL (BOWEN) 0413 410 931

