

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  TODAY SHOW  FRIDAY, 28 FEBRUARY 2020

SUBJECT: Coronavirus.

KARL STEFANOVIC, HOST: Joining us now is Home Affairs Minister, Peter Dutton and  Deputy Opposition Leader, Richard Marles. Good morning to both of you. Nice to see you.  Peter, obviously the Prime Minister is getting out in front of this, it's only a matter of  time before it is a pandemic. What does that mean in practical terms?

PETER DUTTON, MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Well Karl, it means that the  Government needs to firstly deal with what we have got at the moment. We want to  contain it, we want to make sure we have got protections in our borders, make sure people  are quarantined that are isolated, if they are coming from mainland China in certain  circumstances. We are working through what is a very difficult situation. This will have a  big impact on the economy. It's not just a health response that's required as well-

STEFANOVIC: Huge

DUTTON: But the health systems across the country are some of the most advanced in  the world, so they are preparing themselves at the moment as well. This is a very serious  situation. It's now in 49 countries, I read just a few minutes ago. It continues to spread.

ALLISON LANGDON, HOST:  Interesting you were talking about the economic cost; I  think $141 billion wiped off the market this week. Do we need to stop harping on about  surplus and really focus on stimulus measures?

DUTTON: I think, Ali, the point is if you don't manage the Budget and the economy well  you don't prepare for these rainy days. We have made tough decisions over the course of  the last six years to bring the budget back to balance to make sure we can support  businesses, support families. Try and build up in a difficult economic time, particularly  when you look off the back of bushfires, the impact on tourism, but we are now  talking about supply chains as well. Manufactures here who are stopping processes. You  see in the United Kingdom where some of the car manufactures now are starting to wind  down production. So, you have those massive hits right across economies.



STEFANOVIC: Richard, You obviously navigated us through the GFC, depending on the  way which way you look at it, rightly or wrongly you invoked stimulus packages. At this  point would you support stimulus being introduced to the economy?

RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: We  have been calling for stimulus since the election. The fact here is that before we had  bushfires or corona we had a really sluggish economy. Last year we were talking about  bringing stage two of the tax cuts forward, we have been talking about bringing  infrastructure projects forward-

STEFANOVIC: So that is a yes. You do.

MARLES: We think the stimulus measures we have been calling for, for a while need to be  put in place and that continues.

LANGDON: Politically the Coalition has already tied themselves to this surplus. Say they  don't deliver on a surplus, is that something that you will accept that we are in  extraordinary times and let it go, or will that become a political point you make in the lead-up to the next election?

MARLES: Listen, corona is completely above politics, no question about that. The  only thing we have been saying about corona from day one is the Chief Medical Officer's  advice needs to be at the heart of Government decision making- and we think it has been.  So that is the thing to say there. The surplus is a test the Government set for itself. In the  Budget last year they didn't say ‘we are going to budget for a surplus’, they said ‘we are in  surplus’. They are the ones who are already making the mugs that say ‘black in black’  before they have brewed the coffee. They set the test for themselves. The politics around  that is completely framed by the Government's own behaviour.

STEFANOVIC: Peter, you come from Queensland, as I do. I think tourism in Queensland  is in real trouble. I hate saying that, because every time someone says it, it is negative and  it leads to people not going, but people need to go. There needs to be some help  for tourism operators at the very least. $40 million is not going to cut it- it is not enough.  And, I think even the State Government is saying that at the moment, of course they  would. What are we going to deliver to tourism? What are we going to deliver to small  business? Right now because this is only going to get worse?

DUTTON: Karl, I think the PM said yesterday; the Government is already doing work with  Treasury to look at ways in which we can provide assistance at the right time. I think  Richard is right; the priority at the moment is the health of the nation. We want to make  sure, particularly we are concerned about aged care centres and facilities at the moment,  making sure they are properly prepared. Making sure that our stockpiles are ready in  terms of medications. We are worried about people hoarding- if you like- or stockpiling at  home different medications and off the shelf personal protective equipment, masks,  etcetera-

STEFANOVIC: People are very confused by this. I'm sorry if I sound ignorant, but my mum  said to me yesterday, she is in Cairns, she goes; "I think it's the worst thing that's ever  going to happen or it's a media beat-up", that is my mum. And so I sit there and say well  hold on, I am in the middle of all this, we are seeing headline, we are seeing doctors come

out this morning and say it's only a matter of time before we have all got it, so let it go. How  should we feel about this and how nervous should we be about it truthfully?

DUTTON: From Australia's perspective, we should be reassured by the fact we have got  the best health system in the world. Now, already we have been able to contain and  to deal with the cases that have presented. So, there are 23 people in total, including eight  off the cruise ship just outside of Yokohama. The majority of those people are now cleared,  they are well, they are back home, and everything is back to normal for them. But the  reality is that the advice is from here and from the World Health Organisation, from the  interactions we’ve has with the United States, United Kingdom and other partners is that  we will move into a pandemic stage and the Government is preparing for that. So, I think  people should be reassured by the planning that's taken place, the response so far. We will  act in a measured way and we will deal with the threat as it comes. But people- let's hope  it's being overhyped. My sense on all the medical advice we have got is that that is not the  case, that this is a very serious issue. And we are dealing with it. And you would expect an  advanced economy like ours to be able to respond to try and provide support,  economy wide. It's not just tourism; you've got now seafood operators that can't get their  produce into China. You've got Coca-Cola yesterday announcing there might be disruption  to their supply of Coca- Cola. It affects every element.

STEFANOVIC: It is any business where there is a supply chain in China.

LANGDON: Richard, you said yourself there that this goes beyond politics, are you being  kept across the detail of what's happening and the decisions the Government is making?

MARLES: We have had access to the Chief Medical Officer, so we are getting briefings  there. I think it's really important that those briefings continue, particularly before any big  announcements are made. I'm a bit like you Karl, my mum is in an aged care centre,  so trying to understand what this means for her and what it means for us, I find really  confusing.

STEFANOVIC: They were told yesterday, prepare your farewells. If you are someone in an  aged care facility going "Oh my God, if I get this, this needs to be sorted out".

MARLES: You are absolutely right, the front page of 'The Daily Telegraph' yesterday, I  was on the phone to my sister straightaway. I found that very confronting. But I guess  to Peter's point, we are a modern, first world country with an excellent health system. We  are an island nation which I suspect is going to help as well. There is kind of agency here,  there is an ability for decisions to be made. Whatever it ends up being, I think we are  as well prepared as we could be.

STEFANOVIC: I think it would be good though, I mean you two talk off camera a lot, and  I saw you doing that, I had a conversation with you before we came on air.

MARLES: This is our dirty secret.

LANGDON: I was going to say, you shared that. They don't want people to know that.

MARLES: You are going to ruin the whole pantomime.

STEFANOVIC: Sorry. But on a serious issue confronting the nation, I think the most



perfect thing is to have bipartisan support for whatever we do to handle this. Because from  the publicity point of view, to the language surrounding this, to the language surrounding  this, to business, it needs to be bipartisan and everyone needs to be together.

MARLES: That is absolutely right.

DUTTON: And it's also a state and federal issue as well. So obviously the states run  hospitals, but there is a lot we have done to work very closely together. All the  Chief Medical Officers from the states and territories and the Chief Medical Officer meet at  least twice a week. And there is a lot of interaction, exchange of information, where there  are gaps we are plugging those. I think to your point before, Karl, about the response and  what we are reading in headlines, I think there is also across society, across the media,  a level of responsibility that's required here too. I think there needs to be not a panic, but a  calmness and understanding that we have prepared for whatever eventuality. We can deal  with this through the health system at our borders. And I think given how far we have come  already, I think that should provide reassurance to the public.

LANGDON: We need to be careful with the language we are using. Peter and Richard,  thank you so much for joining us this morning.

DUTTON: Thank you.

MARLES: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363









