



The Hon Stuart Robert MP  Minister for the National Disability Insurance Scheme  Minister for Government Services

MEDIA RELEASE





Authorised by S. Robert MP, Canberra

Tuesday, 15 September 2020

Changes to the Hearing Australia Board



The Minister for the National Disability Insurance Scheme and the Minister for Government Services,  the Hon Stuart Robert MP, today announced the new Board of Hearing Australia.

The Board is established under the Australian Hearing Services Act 1991 and reports to the  Minister.  In 2019-20, Hearing Australia helped over a quarter of a million clients across Australia,  including over 10,000 infants, young children, adults, pensioners and veterans each week.

The Government has appointed the Chair of the Board, Dr Seaton AM for a further two  years.  Dr Seaton has been instrumental in helping shape Hearing Australia’s highly successful  response to the COVID-19 pandemic, its transformation program and its drive to prevent avoidable  hearing loss, especially in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children.

The Government has extended two existing Directors, Ms Sarah Vaughan and Ms Jodie Currie, for  two years and appointed Ms Shirley Liew and Ms Elizabeth Crouch AM as new Directors.

Ms Vaughan has extensive experience in the public and private sectors with a strong background in the  ICT industry and application of emerging technology. Ms Currie has significant public health expertise  in relation to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities.

Ms Liew brings extensive public and private health experience to the Board with a strong commercial  background. She is a Fellow of CPA Australia as well as Chartered accountant with extensive  experience in leadership and senior technical roles as audit, assurance and advisory partner for major  accounting firms.

Ms Crouch has held a number of senior government roles and is a highly respected non-executive  director in various NGO and public sector organisations.  She is a Fellow, Australian Institute of  Company Directors.

The five Directors will join Mr Kim Keogh, a special purpose Director, and the Managing Director,  Mr Kim Terrell, on the Board.

[ENDS]

Media contact:  Minister Robert’s Office (02) 6277 7200

