

AMANDA RISHWORTH MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION AND  DEVELOPMENT  SHADOW MINISTER FOR YOUTH  MEMBER FOR KINGSTON





MINISTER MUST ACT TODAY TO SAVE EARLY LEARNING SECTOR

Labor calls on the Minister for Education to act with urgency today to save the  early learning sector.

Parents need clarity. Early Childhood Educators need clarity. Early Learning  providers need clarity.

The early learning sector is on the brink of collapse as they deal with the impact  of COVID-19, with the situation only expected to worsen.

Whilst the Government has announced the continued payment of the child care  subsidy to services that are directed to close, they have provided very little  support to centres that are forced to close due to rapidly declining enrolment  rates.

The sector has made public pleas for assistance from the Government  following plummeting attendance rates, which will threaten the viability of  centres and could force them to close permanently.  Attendance rates will only  get worse as more families choose to cease enrolment of their children if they  are working from home, lose their jobs, or make a personal decision about their  child’s attendance.

Through consultation with the sector, Labor has received an array of alarming  feedback from providers including:-

Since my email yesterday we have now lost 65 places a week! That’s $6825  down a week since last Wednesday with many more expressing that by next  Monday they will ceasing enrolments indefinitely.

I've had to send 4 educators home today, due to very low numbers. Parents  wanting to withdraw children. It's not financially viable to be open at the



moment.

We are losing enrolments rapidly in line with the change of employment  circumstances of our families. Therefore, at the time that we are mandated to  close, depending on the duration we are expected to remain open in the  interim, we may not have any remaining families, or may have so few families  remaining so as to be unviable to operate financially and therefore may not  have any entitlement to CCS.

If the Government does not provide urgent support to early learning providers  during this time, we may end up facing the widespread permanent closure of  early learning centres.

With 1.2 million families relying on the child care system, the permanent closure  of early learning centres will have serious and long-term economic, educational  and social ramifications for Australia.

There is no time to waste - every day that passes brings the sector closer to  collapse. The Government must act today and introduce adequate support to  ensure the early learning sector can survive this challenging time.

WEDNESDAY, 25 MARCH 2020

MEDIA CONTACT: JEMMA SLEVEC 0405 752 923









