

BILL SHORTEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT SERVICES    SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE  SCHEME   MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  TODAY  TUESDAY, 1 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Victorian coronavirus roadmap; Australians stuck overseas; Former  Labor PM’s on superannuation; AFL Grand Final location.

KARL STEFANOVIC, HOST: Welcome back to the show. A critical week ahead in the  nation's COVID recovery. Scott Morrison will use Friday's National Cabinet to ramp up  pressure on Premiers to reopen state borders and their economies. And just two days  later, on Sunday, Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews laying out his much anticipated  roadmap out of lockdown. Joining me now from Melbourne, Bill Shorten. And from  Brisbane 4BC’s Scott Emerson. Good morning lads, thank you for your time. Bill, those  pesky Premiers just not making it easy are they?

BILL SHORTEN, MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG: Well, I don't think it's as simple as  that. I'm now on day 62 of my Stage 3 or Stage 4 lockdown. I talk to a lot of people, a lot of  businesses. People want hope. Dan has said that he's going to outline a plan on Sunday.  So that's a tick. People are doing it hard in Melbourne with a lot of mental health pressure,  a lot depression, small business, joblessness. People just want to get it right. They've  come this far. What they don't want is politics. And they don't want to see the Prime  Minister or anyone just sort of trying to score points. What we just want is a plan out of this.  And I think Victorians are just going to go the distance and we're going to look for some  hope to Sunday's announcements.

STEFANOVIC: Well, there are some in Scott Morrison's cabinet now who are really  exerting maximum pressure on the Dan Andrews government. Is that not right?

SHORTEN: Well, I think if you ask most Victorians and I have lots of conversations, I've  seen different bits of polling. People do want to plan. They're worried about economic  recovery. What they don't want is politics being played. Mr Morrison doesn't seem to be  very vocal in his criticism of Tasmania and South Australia with Liberal administrations  when it comes to a state Labor government, he seems, he and his people seem, to have a  lot more to say. I would just encourage the Prime Minister to take the high road. We're all  in this together. Victoria's feeling pretty hard done by. We just want to get it right. We don't  need any more politics.

STEFANOVIC: Scott, the PM will have a bigger problem getting Annastacia Palaszczuk to  do anything in relation to the borders. I mean, she's in no rush and it's incredibly popular  for her to stick with what she's doing.

SCOTT EMERSON, 4BC: Oh, you’re right Karl. Look, we've got an election here on  October 31. This is very popular. The Newspoll out yesterday just showed that 80 per cent  of people supported the Premier's having control of the borders. I think that she's not going  to shift much on this, no matter what Scott Morrison says, until after October 31.

STEFANOVIC: And what does that mean for Christmas? Or I mean, why would she take  down the borders?

EMERSON: Well, it's extraordinary some of the comments she's made. She talked about  not opening the borders until those four weeks of no community transmissions in any of the  other states, four weeks of that. Now, even if you get back to Victoria getting its numbers  down, New South Wales have its numbers down, having four weeks free of community  transmission, that's not going to happen for ages. We're looking at 2021 before that would  happen.

STEFANOVIC: And it decimates business doesn’t it?

EMERSON: Oh, it destroys businesses and destroys jobs. And this is, don't forget, tourism  is such an important sector up here for Queenslanders. But look, there is clearly  -  Queensland has done it well in terms of COVID. I don't think anyone is complaining  about that. But clearly, also there’s politics at play here as well, with an eye very much on  that October election.

STEFANOVIC: Yeah, Bill, there's no incentive, though, is there either, for the Premiers to  do that, when the federal government's picking up the bill?

SHORTEN: Well, again, I think what the state premiers are doing - Annastacia, I mean,  she can be the whole back line of the Queensland State of Origin team, she's that pro  Queensland. But the same with Dan Andrews, is that we want to get it right. And listen, I  do speak to a lot of small businesses doing it tough. This is hard. The economic recovery  is going to be crucial. But, I mean, one area which I'm getting inundated by constituent  correspondence in is that we've got Australian citizens overseas who were told not to come  back in March, but who for various circumstances beyond their control, need to get back  and yet what we've got is a situation where international students are able to come to  Australia. I've got a bloke in Singapore, all his contracts are finished. He's an Australian  citizen, can't get home. But we're taking international students. International students are  good, but we've got a lot of Aussies stranded abroad. And I just think that we should be  prioritising Australian citizens. And that's something Mr Morrison can work on without  bagging the state Premiers.

STEFANOVIC: Okay. Let's move on. And Labor's old guard were wheeled out of the  political crypt yesterday. Former Prime Ministers Paul Keating and Kevin Rudd launching  fierce attacks over fears the Morrison Government is planning to dump superannuation  increases. Bill, it was lovely to see the great Paul Keating yesterday, it made us pine for  charisma and expensive suits. But where was your man Albo?

SHORTEN: He's been out there every day. He's been out there every day. This  superannuation delaying by the government - I mean, I was the Minister in 2012 when it

was agreed that we would pass a law then to lift superannuation nine to 12 per cent, Tony  Abbott said he'd do it. He welshed on his promise when he was Prime Minister, Malcolm  Turnbull welshed on his promise to lift the super and then, of course, unfortunately, Scott  Morrison seems to be going down the same copybook. The importance of increasing super  by half or one per cent over the next few years is very clear. Our young people are having  their economic futures destroyed by COVID. It is important that we have some money, that  they save a little bit of money for the future. These increases are modest, they’re tiny, but  it'll make a big difference in 20 and 30 and 40 years’ time.

STEFANOVIC: Isn't it fair enough, though, for the federal government to go you know  what, let's put that on hold just for a few months? I mean, we were going through COVID  right now and everybody needs every little bit of cash they can get.

SHORTEN: You'd believe it, except they've been saying that now for many years. And on  this one, I have to say that it's more politics than reality. This is a small amount of money,  but the beauty is compound interest over 50, 40-50 years is we're not abandoning our 20  year olds and our 30 year olds. I mean, if we don't save it in super, we're going to pay it in  the pension. So there's no free lunch.

STEFANOVIC: Okay. Some were comparing Kevin Rudd yesterday [comparison image on  screen of Kevin Rudd and Colonel Sanders], perhaps a little unflatteringly to another great  leader. Not of the GFC, but of the KFC (panel laughter). Scott?

SHORTEN: Social media is so harsh, there is no thing.

EMERSON: There’s no finger lickin’ good there Karl, I can tell you that.

SHORTEN: Goodness me.

STEFANOVIC: Scott?

EMERSON: You are so cruel there. At least it’s not Ronald McDonald..

SHORTEN: Kevin rocks a beard!

EMERSON: Politicians start to grow beards when they're not planning to come back to the  leadership. I'm pleased to see that Bill there hasn't started growing. So I wonder about  that.

SHORTEN: No, me shaving is a sign of mental health. I've gone days in this virus and not  shaved. And I felt like, I am not giving it to COVID depression, I will shave.

STEFANOVIC: Whatever you need to do to get through the night. And it's a long night,  isn't it Bill? And finally, could Brissy have it in the bag? AFL chiefs meeting today to decide  to pick a Grand Final venue with the big announcement happening tomorrow. Scott, the  Gabba is the red hot raging favourite.

EMERSON: And why shouldn't it be Karl? You know the Gabba well. Look, 16 of the 18  teams are based up here already. Gil McLachlan I think after tomorrow is coming up into  the bubble up here. Of course we should hold it. There's no way Victoria's obviously going  to hold it, and W.A. and South Australia, they've done their run. Queensland will be named  tomorrow.





SHORTEN: Well, I do think AFL owes a big favour, and all supporters, to Queensland,  you’ve helped save the season. So I suspect Queensland's the favourite and all my in-laws  live in Queensland, they'd want me to say that. But Gillon McLachlan has invited people -  do you know, he's an ideas man, Gillon McLachlan, he had the square footy oval, you  know, whatever. So how about this? How about this? It's winner takes all, if you are the top  of the home and away season table. So, Port Adelaide, maybe if they are on top, South  Australia gets it. If the Eagles get on top, they get it. Geelong is only in Stage 3, you know,  they're not even Melbourne, so maybe they could get it. Just putting it out there.

STEFANOVIC: You’re an ideas man, Bill Shorten.

EMERSON: And Bill, that is why you lost so badly in Queensland.

STEFANOVIC: You leave Bill Shorten alone.

SHORTEN: Yeah. Don't you want to spice it up a bit? Just putting it out there as an idea.

EMERSON: Well go Queensland, that’s all I can say. Go Queensland, we saved the AFL.

SHORTEN: Yeah no, that's fair. You have. And thank you, Annastacia.

STEFANOVIC: Yeah, he's the Today Show’s Bill Shorten now, Scott, you gotta be careful.  Thank you, guys. Appreciate it.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM HOULIHAN 0438 366 400









