













THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP

MINISTER FOR POPULATION, CITIES AND URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE

ACTING MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP, MIGRANT SERVICES AND  MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS





18 November 2020

Citizenship appointments resume in all states and territories

More people now have the opportunity to become Australian citizens, with citizenship testing  and appointments now available in all states and territories following COVID-19 shutdowns.

In-person citizenship tests and appointments resumed in Melbourne this week, after COVID-19  restrictions in Victoria eased.

Testing has progressively resumed in other states and territories as COVID-19 restrictions have  allowed.

More than 30,000 tests have been administered since testing resumed in July 2020. There are  currently 117,000 people waiting for an appointment nationally, of which almost 40 per cent  are in Victoria - with Melbourne being the second largest testing centre, after the combined  Sydney sites.

While citizenship processing continued during COVID-19, the pandemic has contributed to an  increase in the number of people waiting for their citizenship applications to progress. The  Government is providing additional resources and is increasing its opening hours at key  locations to ensure that as many applications can be finalised as quickly as possible, while still  maintaining the integrity of the citizenship program.

Despite the restrictions of the COVID-19 pandemic, since 31 March 2020, more than 90,000  people from every state and territory have become Australian citizens in online ceremonies.

As at 31 October 2020, a further 14,000 people had become citizens through in-person  ceremonies since they resumed in June 2020.

In-person ceremonies have resumed in a number of states and territories as restrictions have  eased, and local councils are encouraged to resume in-person ceremonies in a COVID-safe  manner.







Everyone who sits the citizenship test from now on will sit the updated test, which has a greater  focus on Australian values, including the rule of law, freedom of religion, freedom of speech,  freedom of association and equality of opportunity for all people in Australia.

An updated version of the Australian Citizenship: Our Common Bond publication is available  online in English and in 40 community languages to help people to prepare for the test.

For more information on citizenship tests and appointments visit  immi.homeaffairs.gov.au/citizenship/test-and-interview.

Media contact: Steve Kidner 0466 385 097

