

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

TODAY SHOW

FRIDAY, 31 JANUARY 2020



SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; Huawei; Sports Rorts.



KARL STEFANOVIC: Turning now to our breaking news this morning and the

World Health Organisation has declared the coronavirus outbreak a public

health emergency of international concern, as hundreds of Australians wait to

be evacuated from the epicentre of the outbreak in China.



ALLISON LANGDON: Those Australians have been told they'll have to pay up

to $1,000 and sign a waiver allowing them to be quarantined on Christmas

Island for up to two weeks. The Morrison Government is working with Qantas

on the emergency operation but is yet to gain approval to land a 737 or 747 jet

in Wuhan, one of the dozens of cities in lockdown in the Hubei province.



STEFANOVIC: For more we're joined by Home Affairs Minister Peter Dutton

and Deputy Opposition Leader Richard Marles. Nice to see both of you time.



PETER DUTTON, MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Morning.



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR

PARTY: Nice to see you.



STEFANOVIC: And let's go straight to this World Health Organisation elevating

things, Peter, this morning. How does that change our government's response?

How does it change how we move forward right now?



DUTTON: Well, Karl, obviously you know we've had the National Crisis

Coordination Centre established now for a long period of time and that is led by

Health. So all of the information that we get from the Chief Medical Officer of

Australia, he meets daily with the medical officers from each of the states and

territories, they'll look at the international advice and evidence out of the WTO,

out of their counterparts in China etcetera. They're working very closely

obviously with labs, looking at ways in which our scientists here can contribute

to some sort of an outcome here as well. But look this is a very serious issue

and the government is treating it as such but we're doing it in a calm way as

you do as you'd appreciate.



LANGDON: I mean this is only the fifth time that the World Health Organisation

has declared an international emergency like this. They didn’t do it with SARS.

The last time was the Ebola outbreak. Do we now need to be looking at closing

our borders to China, shutting down all flights?



MARLES: Well I think we do have to go about this in a calm way. And we need

to be taking the best medical advice and really that's what's got to lead the

decision making here. Obviously this has to be above politics. This can't be

about Scott Morrison making decisions in his bubble. Whatever is the medical

advice is what we should be following. But I think it is really important that the

government is explaining to the Australian people about the decisions that it's

making. If Christmas Island is what should be used, fair enough. But there's got

to be an explanation to that community about how it's going to work, the

logistics, the cost. These are really important measures.



STEFANOVIC: The issue, I think and we're starting to see it more and more is

that we're saying that we're following World Health- sorry the world medical

procedures. But some governments are moving in a much faster way. And

we've seen Hong Kong in the last 24 hours close its borders to mainland China.

That's significant. When do we as a nation go; okay we're going to protect

ourselves at all costs here. We're going to do things like shut down flights.

We're going to have to make those very difficult but very necessary move.



DUTTON: Well, Karl in Australia at the moment we've got nine confirmed

cases. This is a very serious situation but if you look at the health outcomes,

with people who contracted Ebola for example, there was a much higher death

rate. It was a very difficult issue to deal with. We aren't seeing the people to

people transmissions in countries like Australia so-



LANGDON: But America has just had a confirmed human to human

transmission.



STEFANOVIC: It's only a matter of time.



DUTTON: As you'd expect in our country as was pointed out before, the Chief

Medical Officer provides that advice. Now, we're not taking flights from Wuhan

and if we need to take further steps beyond that we will.



STEFANOVIC: Are you taking them from Guangzhou? And other provinces

where it's pretty prevalent and this coronavirus and they're coming in every

day? And I wonder at what point you go; okay, we live in an island country.

There's only one way it can get in unless it's on a boat as well.



DUTTON: And this is the difference of course with Hong Kong, they are a land

border and obviously significant people transfers every day. So they're in a very

different situation than an island nation like ours. So look, I just think we've

looked at all of those steps. We have contingencies ready to go if we make

additional decisions about what we should do to provide further protections and

that's what we've done so far and what we'll keep doing. As Richard says,

we've got to rely on the medical advice.



STEFANOVIC: Yeah.



DUTTON: It's not just what's happening internationally but we are recognised

as one of the most advanced countries in the world, in terms of our

preparedness to respond to a crisis like this.



LANGDON: So the Australians that are currently stranded in Wuhan, you're

trying to get approval from the Chinese just to get them out.



DUTTON: Yes, we are.



LANGDON: When do you think that is likely to happen and how soon could

those evacuations take place?



DUTTON: Well DFAT's been a conversation with the people, so there are

roughly about 600 or so Australian citizens who have registered with DFAT.

Now some of them will want to come. Some of them will decide to stay with

family-



STEFANOVIC: Not many are going to want to go to Christmas Island.



DUTTON: Well some will decide because they've got business interests there

that they'll stay and ride it out. I mean there'll be different conversations taking

place right now. But there needs to be clearance from the Chinese authorities

and DFAT is in discussions with Qantas and obviously the Chinese

Government at the moment.



STEFANOVIC: I mean, how does it even work logistically? I mean we've

heard- both Ali and I, both heard independently that it's difficult to land a 737 or

a 747 on Christmas Island. So it's just, you go somewhere else then you stop

there and then you go onto Christmas Island?



DUTTON: Well, Karl, obviously there's, you know, depending on the numbers

that come out as to what aircraft is used. So one of the options for us is to base

people at for example at Learmonth or in Darwin at the RAAF base and we

would transfer people and shuttle them to Christmas Island. So all of that

logistical stuff is not extraordinary and that’s being done-



MARLES: I think there does need to be a full explanation here to the Australian

people and also what medical care is going to be provided there? What medical

services can be deployed on Christmas Island? These are all the questions that

have got to be answered by the government, I mean you've got bodies like the

AMA out there raising questions-



STEFANOVIC: You don’t mind them going to Christmas Island, or would you

do something else?



MARLES: I think ultimately it's a matter of taking the best medical advice and if

that's what the medical advice to this government is then fair-



STEFANOVIC: Senator McCarthy was on our show earlier and she went so far

to say that they weren't consulted about Christmas Island and Christmas Island

residents and they've got every right to be concerned about their health. Would

you say categorically okay, you know what let's not take them Christmas

Island?



MARLES:  I think you've got to take the advice from the medical advisers. But

people on Christmas Island have got rights as well. There needs to be a proper

explanation to them about how it's going to work and what impact, if any, there

is on their health. But I think how the logistics of this is going to work, what the

cost for those involved is, like how much are you going to be expected to pay to

do this. All of these are questions which are for the Government to explain to

the Australian people very clearly.



LANGDON: Is there a precedent for making Australians pay for their rescue?



DUTTON: Yes there is. So DFAT has done a number of uplifts over the years

and there has been a payment made and that's consistent with other countries

as well. So the United States, I think lifted about 157 people out of the province,

predominantly they were as I understand it the consular staff there, they had

quite a big presence there. Now they've gone to Anchorage. And so the

isolation- if you like- is in Alaska. And we're taking a decision but we don't have

a hospital that we can find 600 beds in, we're not emptying one of our hospitals.

We want to provide an isolation. And there's a lot of politicking going on with

the Mayor on Christmas Island but he always has, right. But this is a

Commonwealth asset, people will be isolated there. There's a declaration made

under the Biosecurity Act which keeps those people in situ for up to 14 days

and to Richard's point before; the medical advice might be that there's a

clearance within 10 days or whatever it might be, and we rely on that.



STEFANOVIC: Just in relation to businesses; I've got a number of friends who

run businesses that are in China, they have manufacturing there and producing

there. They've got they're going to have significant issues and there are big

businesses all around the world, they're going to have some significant issues

out of this. Have you looked at yet the possibility of providing financial support

to businesses or is it just up to them?



DUTTON: Well I don't think we're at that stage but we're particularly concerned

about the tourism industry off the back of the bushfires. But what compounding

impact this might have as well, so all of that's factored into the discussions we

have.



STEFANOVIC: Okay. One final on too, just in relation to Huawei, they want to

end that 5G ban, the UK has lifted. Are you going to have a look at it, even

though there are some security implications?



DUTTON: No, we're not.



STEFANOVIC: Ever?



DUTTON: The government’s made a decision based on the advice from ASIO,

Australian Signals Directorate-



STEFANOVIC: But ever?



DUTTON: They are a high risk vendor. We have been very clear about it. The

United States has made the same decision. And we believe it's in our country's

best interests not to have our telecommunications network compromised.



STEFANOVIC: Richard?



MARLES: It is the right decision.



LANGDON: And if we've got time, no one is telling us to be quiet. Bridget

McKenzie, I mean we just heard in the paper today that the Deputy Prime

Minister’s son; three funding applications were rejected. He still received the

money. And you've now got the Prime Minister saying that some of these

funding projects that missed out, they'll look at funding them. Is that an

admission that the Minister did get it wrong?



DUTTON: Ali, I think the Prime Minister's got a process in place now. Wait for

that. And I don't know the details of the Deputy Prime Minister's son or the

application or anything of that. So I think, wait for the independent umpire to

come back and that's the right approach.



MARLES: Well they haven’t been listening to the independent umpire from day

one here. Most of the recommendations of Sport Australia were ignored.

What's really clear now is the Prime Minister and his office are up to its neck in

it- they’re right in the centre of it. They're not going to cut Bridget McKenzie

loose because they're scared that if they cut her loose she's going to sink the

entire ship. Now that's the issue that they have now got.



STEFANOVIC: And are you going to give back the money that was given to the

sporting club in your electorate?



MARLES: Give back the money that was given-



STEFANOVIC: If you've been that aggrieved by where the money went and

everything.





MARLES: There's not a question about the worthiness of community sport but

what we're talking about here is-



STEFANOVIC: That’s the balance isn’t it.



DUTTON: I think that is a no.



MARLES: There is a finite amount of resources and it's the basis upon which

they're distributed and they should be distributed on merit not on the basis of

politics. But that's what this mob has been doing.



STEFANOVIC: Okay. Thank you guys.



DUTTON: Thanks.



MARLES: Thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363







