

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT

INTERVIEW WITH ALAN JONES, 2GB  FRIDAY 20 MARCH 2020

EO&E…

ALAN JONES: PM,  thank you for your time.

PRIME MINISTER: Good morning, Alan.

JONES: And thank you as well for everything you're doing. I don't think anyone in your position in recent  times has had these sorts of demands. It's difficult stuff. You said last Sunday, the truth is that while many  people will contract this virus it is clear that, just as people get the flu each year and this is a more severe  condition than the flu, but for the vast majority, around eight in 10 is our advice, it will be a mild illness  and it will pass. Is that still the advice?

PRIME MINISTER: Yes, it is and that’s the experience of people who are going through this virus now and  there will obviously have a lot more Australians now are going through the virus and that's still exactly  what's occurring. And so for the more healthy amongst us, when we do the right thing and with all the  rules that are being put in place, life has to change for some period of time, that is protecting the most  vulnerable in the community, the elderly in particular but all those who might be undergoing chemo or  things like that, they're a lot of people with immunosuppressed situations and we're helping them, we're  protecting them.

JONES: Good on you. You're closing the border to all non-citizens and non-residents and you have said  quote, “Our Government has taken this unprecedented step because around 80 per cent of coronavirus  cases in Australia are people who caught the virus overseas before entering Australia or people who have  had direct contact with someone who's returned from overseas.” Do you think perhaps in hindsight you  should have done that earlier?

PRIME MINISTER: No, we were acting on advice on those things too, Alan. I mean, these are always  balanced decisions and we're able to slow the viruses at the start as it spread in Australia through these  early periods. I mean, the country which has actually been responsible for a large number of these has  actually turned out to be the United States, at the end of the day. But that is a function of the number of  people that travel between Australia and the United States as well. This virus has spread to more and  more countries. I mean, Australia called the global pandemic more than two weeks ahead of the World  Health Organisation. I remember the press conference I gave at the end of the parliamentary sitting day  and I was saying we now need to prepare for a pandemic and at the time I think people thought I was

being a bit alarmist. Well, not at all. The plans we started putting our place and those plans ultimately  took us to where we are today.

JONES: No, you’re doing a good job, absolutely. Look, a tough one here and I'm getting a stack of  correspondence about this and the sorts of things that I suppose are too delicate and sensitive to raise  but it is about China and people are saying, well, hang on, China brought this disaster on to what is now  the world economy. China will never be able to compensate the world, but how do the world's leaders  make sure China does not now come in and buy assets at a huge discount? Should we have - I’m asking  you as Prime Minister of Australia - a global policy excluding China from bidding now for devalued assets  around the world?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, Alan, Australia will make decisions for Australia and the foreign investment review  arrangements are the same as they were yesterday and the Treasurer, ultimately, will have those calls  about any investments that are made in Australia. But, I mean, those decisions are made in Australia's  national interests and I don’t think there’s any suggestion that any country, including China, has  deliberately done something here. I mean, this is a global, this is a virus that the originated In Wuhan,  China and it has gone around the world and it's had a devastating impact and I'm not aware of any of that  practice that's happening in Australia, Alan. I’m sure the Treasurer will be watching it closely.

JONES: Good on you. We’ll be talking to the Treasurer on Monday, by the way, to our listeners out there.  You’ve asked all businesses to do their bit to keep people in jobs, as I keep calling it the trifecta. You've  already mentioned one, you’re going to look after the health of the vulnerable. Secondly, keep business  in business and keeping people who still have jobs at work. The airlines have been given $715 million  immediately. Now, I don't know whether you're aware but Qantas aren’t using that money to help people  pay their mortgages and support their families. These people have been stood down on leave and they've  been told that they can take the leave to which they are now entitled or they can take long service leave  or they can take their annual leave and if they don't have any leave, they'll be given four weeks pay. Now,  when people are stood down on leave if this goes on they may well be unemployed in no time and the  worker seems to be underwriting the company. Did you give that money for the benefit of shareholders  or for the benefit of employees?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, let's go through what we did. What we did is we waved aviation fees and we did  it for all airlines, whether it was Virgin or REX Airlines or Qantas or any other. We’re just not going to  charge aviation fees. Now, it's not immediate either, by the way, there is a partial backdate til the first of  February but that was going forward. Now, with Qantas actually not flying anywhere effectively at all  overseas and with their domestic fleet also not flying anywhere like they were before, I mean, a lot of  those fees would be moot because they wouldn’t be paying them now anyway because they're not flying  anywhere. So, it's a lot less than that. The second point is, Alan, I mean, these are difficult decisions. I  mean, there are 10,000 employees still at Qantas each and every day, all the commitments of keeping a  large airline like that running every day is also big. Now, obviously, I’m very concerned about the 20,000  who have had to stand down. I'm pleased that so many are in a position where they can access those sort  of leave arrangements to keep them going and on the other side of that, obviously the government is  working very hard to put in a new arrangement to cushion the blow more for anyone who's going and find  themselves out of work. I'm sure that…

JONES: But don't you understand, and I’m sorry to interrupt you, but you’ve got to understand, don’t you,  that if people take leave and use their own leave entitled, their only employees or their long service leave

or their annual leave, they are effectively looking after themselves with what is their entitlement. The  $715 million, none of that they see.

PRIME MINISTER: Alan, again, it's not $715 million that Qantas is seeing, I think it's going to be nothing  like that that the whole industry sees because it's aviation fees they won't be paying anyway, that's just  an accounting arrangement as to what the normal level of fees thereabouts would have been. But I mean,  that that money is going to help the aviation industry just keep alive. I mean, these are companies that  will have not a lot to do in terms of what their business is going to be. But people can access leave at the  moment, well, these are extraordinary times. I mean companies are going to go through incredibly difficult  times over the next six months, we're going to help them as much as we can and help them keep in jobs  wherever we can, where people can access those arrangements what we want them to be able to do is at  the end of this which could be six months or seven or eight months, we want to stand these organizations  up again, we don't want people to leave these organisations and my understanding is what Qantas is  doing, they’re saying people will leave the organisation but stay connected to it so on the other side,  they'll be able to stand up again when the airline is going again and off we go again and that's what we,  we're looking for companies and employees and employers to work together to see how they can best  arrange, as I said, we are on this bridge, to get from where we are now, to the other side.

JONES: Yeah I know, everyone understands it.

PRIME MINISTER: I know it's tough, I know it's tough. And people are having to draw into their leave but  these are extraordinary times and we need to use every resource, our own in the government, no one is  holding back here, I mean this is a- they’ve got 10,000 people they're still employing Alan.

JONES: Right. Now yesterday you you made this announcement and we won't go into the detail of it and  I've just covered it in the programme, about a hundred billion dollars to the banks and basically the  principal there’s okay, there'll be more money available to the banks to assist small businesses you made  that point and the, it will be cheaper than otherwise would be the case however you do- would  understand would you not, that you can't pump prime the economy which you’re simultaneously shutting  down for example, these loans are no good to someone if there is no business and I just take one example,  if I might, of correspondence I have received, just take for example a wedding, the stylist, a person who  runs weddings now I've got letters from people they employ, you know over a hundred people and  basically this involves florists and stylists and prop hires and sending out invitations, wedding dresses and  suits. But when you then restrict the crowd at the wedding to 100 people most venues are closing so a  cheap loans not going to help them there is no business.

PRIME MINISTER: No I understand that Alan and what I mean through a crisis like this people will still  have rent, they'll still have a range of fixed commitments and things that they're gonna seek to try and  meet because they know on the other side they're gonna need all of these things they'll have lease  payments and there'll be a whole range of things and so what this means is it’s keeping the banks in the  position where they will be able to continue to lean forward to support businesses where they’re seeking  that support and we're working on a range of other measures that will synchronize with this we've been  working very closely with reserve bank over the course of many weeks now but particularly most recently  and so what you want is in a crisis like this you want the banks to be able to keep extending credit where  there are those who are seeking it and to be able to do it on very very good terms. Now Josh has been  working with the banks very closely especially over the last couple of weeks, we're working on a package  together with them he indicated that yesterday. I think we're getting very close there, very very close,

JONES: Yes I saw though you were working on a package, when will that package, when will you be, that’s  the second tranche?

PRIME MINISTER: Well no there’s the second tranche of what we're announcing in terms of what the  government is doing but the work we're doing with the banks, see Alan the government isn’t just the  economy as you know, it's the private economy, there’s the government, everyone is working together  and Josh has been doing a great job working with the banks to see what we can do to help people with  their existing commitments and so this is all happening each and every day.

JONES: Well just to take your language, sorry to interrupt you, if I could just get you to clarify the point  you made yesterday, you said we'll have more to say about the broader measures that we want to put in  place to cushion the blow and to support small business and to support individuals directly impacted by  the coronavirus economic impacts so could you just amplify a bit about supporting the individuals because  they are on the bare bones of their backside?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah income support, what, that's exactly what we're looking at. At the existing range  of income support measures and particularly for those who would find themselves no longer in  employment or have reduced hours of employment or sole traders in particular who find themselves  where they had a business which was keeping them employed through their own efforts and looking at  particularly their situation as well, but we're still working on the final details back of that.

JONES: Well on that, PM on that issue now for example, you already, not you- previous governments way  back to Paul Keating underwrite university education, we don't deny education to people on the base of  the fact their parents can't afford it and currently that will HECS debt of HELP debt is about $66 Billion  dollars, it's paid when the graduate gets to about $45,000 so it's paid back, why not a business HECS, if a  business made applications and said well look $40 grand, will keep us going, will keep my business going,  will keep my employees in employment, why wouldn't you then do exactly to business what you're doing  to university students?

PRIME MINISTER: Well Alan, what I can tell you is that what we're working on with the banks I can, I'm  very confident we are going to be able to get a situation where we're achieving the same objective.

JONES: Righto, on travel, it's another issue isn’t it. I mean tours can't go ahead, people are not traveling,  some people want their money back, smaller tour companies are going broke, they’ve had tours booked  all over the world, customers want refunds, what you say to the travel industry, Flight Centre’s closing  100 stores?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah I noticed they did that fairly quickly too and there'll be businesses that make  decisions Alan and some of them may have had issues before this hit,  I don't know whether that was the  case with Flight Centre or not but they did seem to move very quickly on those things, but putting that to  one side, look the travel industry has been terribly hit and that's why the government it will be moving to  having a much much bigger package of support to cushion the blow for the many of those who are  employees in those, working in those travel agents and you know, we all know people who work in that  industry and the travel industries and pick the, right up the coast, and right across the country, and that's  why there's a billion dollar fund which the Minister of Tourism, and and the Minister for Industry as well  and others are working to see how that that support can be delivered but Alan this is this is a global  coronavirus. This is what happens.

JONES: People understand that. I mean, we all know you've got a tough job we all know it's tough so we  do appreciate the fact that so,

PRIME MINISTER: And I appreciate that. So we're providing support as broadly and and deeply as we  possibly can to help people get through what will be certainly the next six months and if it's longer than  that, then it'll be longer than that but you know,

JONES: PM though, why would a hundred people in a restaurant be a greater risk than a hundred people  in a train carriage?

PRIME MINISTER: Well there's two issues here, first of all people being on a train carriage going to work  to work at a hospital or get to where they need to keep the country functioning is essential. Absolutely  essential that we keep doing those things. There are other activities that in times like this are not essential,  and they're very important I have no doubt, someone's big day or wedding it's important. I understand  that.

JONES: But are you going to cap, are you going to cap this? There is a story today that you’ve got a meeting  today to cap one person per four square meters for indoor gatherings, which has been recommended to  you which I understand is going to the National Cabinet today. So that could mean a one hundred square  metre venue would be restricted to 25 people- you'd go broke?

PRIME MINISTER: Well Alan the National Cabinet will meet today and I'm not going to go into what they  are or aren’t..

JONES: No I don’t expect you to,

PRIME MINISTER: Discussing, because they're the rules of the National Cabinet but what we are doing  and what the health advice is, is to practice this social distancing, and when people are in closer contact  particularly enclosed spaces that spreads the virus. We spread the virus, if that happens too quickly then  elderly people are under great threat, and so there's no doubt that having to impose this social distancing,  what that's actually, travel bans of people coming in, or people in venues, or in outdoor gatherings, we  have to slow the virus and that means there are circumstances where we'll have to restrict the number of  people that are in enclosed space. It’s what you have to do to save lives.

JONES: Okay we're very grateful, this communication is really important to the people out there grateful  for what you're doing. We'll talk again next week.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks a lot Alan.

[END]

Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney



Press Office of the Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Prime Minister, Canberra





