SENATOR THE HON LINDA REYNOLDS CSC Minister for Defence Senator for Western Australia

THE HON MELISSA PRICE MP Minister for Defence Industry Member for Durack

NEW DIGITAL DIPLOMA TO SUPPORT SHIPBUILDING CAPABILITY

Australia’s first digital shipbuilding course has commenced today as part of the Morrison Government’s $90 billion Naval Shipbuilding Plan.

The Diploma of Digital Technology will change traditional shipbuilding in Australia by educating participants on digital technologies, and connecting workers and information systems to build the $35 billion Hunter Class Frigate Program.

Minister for Defence, Senator the Hon Linda Reynolds CSC said with the Air Warfare Destroyer Program coming to an end last week, this new course will retain important shipbuilding capability.

“This Government’s $90 billion Naval Shipbuilding Plan is creating thousands of jobs in South Australia, with the workforce expected to grow from 2,500 workers today, to more than 6,300 by 2030,” Minister Reynolds said.

“As we build the world’s most advanced digital shipyards in South Australia, the Morrison Government is focused on fostering a world class Australian workforce that can leverage digital information and intelligence systems to facilitate greater innovation.”

Funded by the Commonwealth and South Australian Government, the Diploma of Digital Technology is being run in partnership between the prime contractor for the Hunter Class Frigate Program ASC Shipbuilding and Flinders University.

Minister for Defence Industry, the Hon Melissa Price MP said the program will create more opportunities for local workers to benefit from the Morrison Government’s commitment to continuous naval shipbuilding.

“More than 60 shipbuilding workers from the Hobart Class Air Warfare Destroyer Program will take part in this program - teaching workers the digital technology skills that are required to work on the Hunter Class Frigate Program,” Minister Price said.

“The broader skills that participants will develop will also support continuous naval shipbuilding in Australia, and will be a boost to workers in terms of their future employability.”

With the challenges posed by COVID-19, students will be able to complete coursework online, and when permitted, attend classes at Flinders University at the Tonsley Innovation District.

No publication date - received by Parl Info 31 March 2020



Media Contacts Nicky Hamer (Minister Reynolds’ Office): +61 437 989 927 Kathy Quinn (Minister Price’s Office): +61 468 369 301

