

The Hon Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development

The Hon Josh Frydenberg MP  Treasurer

The Hon Alan Tudge MP  Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

Monday 5 October 2020



MORRISON GOVERNMENT INVESTS $360 MILLION IN TRANSPORT  INFRASTRUCTURE TO BOOST TASMANIAN ECONOMIC RECOVERY

The Tasmanian economy will be boosted, roads will be safer and thousands of jobs created, with a $360  million investment into transport infrastructure from the Federal Coalition as part of our COVID-19  economic recovery plan.

The latest funding injection builds on a series of statewide infrastructure investments from the  Commonwealth in responding to the COVID-19 pandemic which now total more than $410 million.

Key investments for Tasmania include $150 million for the Midway Point Causeway (including McGees  Bridge) and Sorell Causeway as part of the Hobart to Sorell Roads of Strategic Importance corridor, and  $65 million to upgrade the Tasman Bridge.

Prime Minister Scott Morrison said Tuesday’s Federal Budget would deliver funding for infrastructure  which supports the Government’s JobMaker plan and help Tasmania recover from COVID-19.

“We have been working closely with state and territory governments to invest in the infrastructure that  is ready to go and can help rebuild our economy and create more jobs,” the Prime Minister said.

"These projects will keep commuters safe on the road, get people home to their loved ones sooner and  provide better transport links for urban and regional communities.”

“As part of the COVID-19 economic recovery plan we have invested an additional $410 million focused  on shovel-ready projects across the state.

“This latest investment will provide another boost to the local economy and is part of our plan to  support an estimated 2,200 direct and indirect jobs across the state.”

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the Government is focused on delivering priorities and boosting local jobs as part of  Australia’s road to recovery.

“We will draw on local businesses to stimulate local economies through these projects,” the Deputy  Prime Minister said.

“Infrastructure means jobs, it means livelihoods, it means stronger local communities and it means  building a better and more secure future for our nation.”

Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure Alan Tudge said the Government is driving the  delivery of major infrastructure projects to map the economic road back from the pandemic, building  the economy and providing certainty for business over the long term.

“Key investments across Tasmania include $150 million to upgrade the Midway Point Causeway,  including McGees Bridge, and the Sorell Causeway as part of the Government’s Hobart to Sorell Roads of  Strategic Importance corridor investment,” Minister Tudge said.

“Building on our substantial investments under the Hobart and Launceston City Deals, the Australian  Government will continue to invest in the Tasmanian economy in the coming years, including through  new projects such as $65 million for the Tasman Bridge Upgrade.”

Since being elected in 2013 the Liberal and Nationals Government have committed more than $3.2  billion for infrastructure in Tasmania.

[END]

Media Contacts:  Prime Minister’s office: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  Deputy Prime Minister’s office: Jo Williamson 0418 475 668  Minister Tudge’s office: Michael Bennett 0434 782 923  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

Press Office of the Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Prime Minister, Canberra

TASMANIA- 2020-21 BUDGET PROJECTS

New projects

Project Federal

Funding

Total Cost

Freight Bridge Upgrades $12 million $15 million

Hobart to Sorell Corridor - Midway Point Causeway (including McGees  Bridge) and Sorell Causeway  $150 million $187  million

Midland Highway Safety Works Package - Powranna Road to South of  Symmons Plains and Tunbridge  $7.1 million $10.2  million

Tasman Bridge Upgrade $65 million $130

million

Tasmanian Roads Package - Bass Highway targeted upgrades between  Deloraine and Devonport  $40 million $50 million

Tasmanian Roads Package - Bridport Road freight efficiency and safety  upgrades  $16 million $20 million

Tasmanian Roads Package - West Tamar Highway targeted upgrades  between Exeter and Launceston  $16 million $20 million

Subtotal $306.1

million

$432.2  million



Additional funding

Project Additional Federal

Funding

Total Federal  Funding

Tasman Highway Intelligent Transport Solutions $1.5 million $11.5 million

Tasmanian Midland Highway Upgrade - Future  Priorities  $52 million $113.9 million

Subtotal $53.5 million $125.4 million



Total new funding $359.6 million



