

MICHELLE ROWLAND MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS  MEMBER FOR GREENWAY



DEALING AWAY OUR DIVERSITY

As far as photo-ops go, this one was a doozy.

The year was 2017. The place: Parliament House in Canberra. Then-prime minister  Malcolm Turnbull and then-communications minister Mitch Fifield were all smiles, flanked  by a veritable who's who of Australian media executives, in a show of support for some  changes to media law.

With typical inflated conceit, Turnbull's media release heralded "A new era for Australia's  media", claiming that "the government is strengthening Australia's media industry,  enhancing media diversity and securing local journalism jobs, particularly in regional  areas".

Flash forward to today, and reality reports a different story. Over 200 newspapers have  closed and hundreds of journalism jobs have been lost. There are 21 local government  areas without coverage from a single local newspaper, either print or online, including 16 in  regional Australia. Media diversity in regional and remote areas is already at or below the  minimum number of voices in 68 per cent of licence areas. The government recently  admitted signs of market failure in regional commercial broadcasting.

Regional media organisations have now launched a campaign to "Save Our Voices"  begotten by years of government inaction and neglect.

So what went so wrong? How did we go from a "new era" to "market failure" in three  years? Well strike a light, stone the crows, but it turns out that short-termism and flimsy  backroom deals don't serve the nation very well.

Labor, along with many others, warned that the government's so-called "media reforms"  were piecemeal and inadequate. Tinkering at broken analog-era laws drafted decades ago  wouldn't cut it when an overhaul for the digital age was necessary.

Relying on secret deals with crossbench senators to pass legislation, rather than decent  policy, wouldn't stand the test of time. And the government's argument that it had to kill  diversity to save diversity would see industry, citizens and consumers suffer.

Regional media has weathered drought, cyclones, floods, bushfires and digital disruption.  Policy neglect left the sector exposed to external shocks, so it has been hit hard by  COVID-19 and the recession.



But one of the biggest obstacles facing regional media is this government, which feels no  urgency to do its job to modernise and harmonise the regulatory framework.

In response to the hefty final report of the ACCC digital platforms inquiry last year, the  minister committed to starting a staged process to reform media regulations covering both  online and offline media. He even released a "roadmap for action" - something Labor had  been calling for for years - but it's a road to nowhere. The map is blank.

It makes no mention of regional media reform and has no media reform processes or  timeframes beyond 2020, let alone any guiding principles or markers.

It does mention content regulation, but the Minister has already squibbed on that, leaving  broadcasters subject to watered-down regulation for Australian and children's screen  content while letting global streaming services like Netflix off the hook.

It also mentions taxpayer-funded grants for local journalism, but the Minister only managed  to rustle up $55 million when the ACCC said $150 million would be needed, and the  allocation criteria dudded small and independent outlets who serve large areas of regional  Australia.

The recession offers a huge chance to reshape the nation, but we could miss it if the  government doesn't get it right or follows a path of narrow self-interest.

Similarly, renewed attention on media reform towards a platform-neutral regulatory  framework provides an opportunity for a fundamental rethink of our whole media regulatory  construct to secure the health of our media and the democracy, community, culture and  identity it sustains.

Australia already has one of the most concentrated media markets in the world.

News deserts are emerging and digital platforms threaten to scale back services or remove  local news services in Australia, despite the fact around 40 per cent of Australians obtain  online news via search or social media. We need Aussie ingenuity to work out how to  promote media plurality and industry sustainability from this compromised position. And we  need a regulatory framework that withstands scrutiny and the test of time; one that takes  account of algorithms as much as ownership.

To achieve that, we need best-practice policy development, where evidence-based and  rigorous reform options and models are consulted on then refined before being agreed to  by Parliament on their merit.

The Department has commissioned no less than three taxpayer-funded reports into the  media in the last year. The outputs should be released.

The ACCC has published commissioned research that emphasises the narrow approach to  diversity taken in Australian media regulation, and points to measurement systems in the  EU and UK that take account of consumption and impact, offering a richer picture of  choice.

A solid contribution from the ACMA can too be anticipated, given its work to measure  media diversity and local news.





Whether it's bushfire rebuilding, recession recovery or media reform, it's the delivery and  outcomes that matter.

Photo-ops and handshakes won't cut it.

This opinion piece was originally published by The Burnie Advocate on Monday, 19  October 2020.

MEDIA CONTACT: ADAM BOIDIN 0406 009 019







