



SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women



MEDIA RELEASE  HELPING AUSTRALIANS OVERSEAS



The Australian Government will provide additional support to the most vulnerable Australian  citizens whose return to Australia has been impacted by the restrictions arising from COVID-19.

Building on our existing Traveller Emergency Loans program, the Department of Foreign Affairs  and Trade (DFAT) is making available a Hardship Program with further emergency assistance  for the most vulnerable Australian citizens overseas. The loans are intended to cover temporary  accommodation and daily living expenses until they can return. Loans may also be available to  help vulnerable Australians purchase tickets for commercial flights.

Applicants will have to meet strict eligibility criteria to access a loan, and only the most  vulnerable Australian citizens still overseas will be provided financial assistance. All loans must  be repaid upon return to Australia.

The Government, including through our embassies and high commissions around the world,  continues to work with airlines and other governments to help Australians return on commercial  flights. Consular officials are also assisting Australians overseas impacted by the COVID-19  pandemic.

In order to manage and maintain quarantine arrangements in Australia, the National Cabinet  agreed to international passenger arrival caps. While critical to the integrity of Australia’s  quarantine system and the safety of the whole Australian community, the caps have restricted  the availability of flights home for Australians overseas.

Australians overseas in need of consular assistance can register with DFAT via  covid19.dfat.gov.au. We encourage those seeking to return to Australia to remain in regular  contact with their airlines or travel agents to confirm their arrangements.

Further detail about the assistance, including eligibility criteria and how to apply, are available  on Smartraveller.gov.au.

Media Contact  David Wroe: +61 429 531 143  Melanie Ruiz: +61 427 888 392

