





SENATOR THE HON LINDA REYNOLDS CSC  Minister for Defence  Senator for Western Australia

MEDIA RELEASE

US MARINES COMPLETE QUARANTINE

More than 1,000 US Marines have completed quarantine in the Northern Territory, with  training now well underway as part of this year’s Marine Rotational Force - Darwin  (MRF-D).

Minister for Defence, Senator the Hon Linda Reynolds CSC said the release of the last  US Marines from quarantine marked a significant milestone for this year’s rotation.

“The discharge of the final group of personnel from quarantine demonstrates the  effectiveness of the testing and monitoring regime established with the Northern  Territory Government,” Minister Reynolds said.

“With one positive result captured at initial entry and no further infections, the successful  management of the arrival of the US Marines reflects the efforts and planning by the  Australian Defence Force (ADF), the Northern Territory Government and MRF-D.

“The regime of screening, quarantine and testing underscores the priority placed on  protecting the local community from COVID-19.”

MRF-D medical personnel will continue to monitor and oversee the health of the  Marines for the duration of this year’s visit.

US Marines have been undertaking a modified training program at various Defence  training facilities around the greater Darwin area, including Mount Bundey and  Kangaroo Flats.

This year’s program will culminate with Exercise Koolendong, running from early to mid-September.

This annual exercise will showcase US and Australian interoperability in a range of  activities, from humanitarian assistance through to high-end warfighting activities,  including large-scale live fire.



Colonel David Banning, Commanding Officer, Marine Rotational Force-Darwin said  MRF-D’s close coordination with Australian counterparts was key to the successful  completion of the quarantine process.

“As we progress in our training, we will demonstrate our crisis response capability and  continue to improve interoperability through our long-standing exercise, Koolendong,”  Colonel Banning said.

“The strong relationship between MRF-D and the ADF enhances regional security.”

The US Marine who tested positive to COVID-19 remains in isolation at the Royal  Darwin Hospital pending confirmation of a negative test result.

For more information visit https://www.defence.gov.au/Initiatives/USFPI/



Media Contacts  Ben Martin: +61 447 219 902  Nicky Hamer: +61 437 989 927  Defence Media: media@defence.gov.au



