TRANSCRIPT

Friday, 3 April 2020

Minister for Education Dan Tehan interview with Amber Austin-Wright, Studio  10

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus and Early Childhood Education and Care Relief  Package, National Cabinet

Amber Austin-Wright: Well, Tash, as you mentioned, the National Cabinet will meet this  morning. The PM will host another round of crisis talks with that National Cabinet, and rental  and commercial tenancies is on the agenda. But, the Government will also be looking at the  framework for those child care changes we saw yesterday. I’m joined by the Education  Minister Dan Tehan. Dan, what will be discussed at this morning’s National Cabinet  meeting?

Dan Tehan: So, obviously, what we’ll be discussing is the announcement we made  yesterday around free child care, which will start as of next week. But, also, the regulatory  environment with states and territories. They obviously govern those regulatory requirements  for state and territory child care centres. So, we’re looking at those. And, also, making sure  we’re keeping to get that continued updating of advice from the medical expert panel around  what requirements we need to put in place when it comes to keeping child care centres safe,  and school environments safe. So, it will be a big agenda for the National Cabinet today.

Austin-Wright: And, I guess many people are asking, how will these child care changes  work?

Tehan: So, how they’ll work is there will be a priority given to those who are working. So, we  want them to be able to get their children cared for in the normal environment, at their  normal child care centre. Also, for vulnerable children, we want them to get that continuity of  care. And, also, for those who were engaged with the sector, we want them to reengage. So,  they’re the three priority areas that we want to see for this new free child care, which will  start as of next week.

Austin-Wright: Lots to go through [audio error] …

Cassandra Thorburn: We have some audio problems there. We’ll cross back to Amber a  little later this morning, there with the Education Minister.

