Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.







The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health

Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Public Service and Cabinet

TRANSCRIPT

18 March 2020



INTERVIEW WITH PETER OVERTON  CHANNEL 9 NEWS

E&OE…

Topics: Coronavirus update; schools; food supply

PETER OVERTON:   With a sixth death today in Australia the Prime Minister has certainly taken the helm on battling the  corona outbreak. But he is not a one-man band and right beside him is Health Minister, Greg Hunt.

I spoke to him earlier, and began by asking the Minister about the pressure this crisis has generated,  and how he was coping personally.

GREG HUNT:

Look I’m fine. For me, so long as I can exercise - I’d love to get a run in each day but mostly I'm  doing a lot of walking because I'm on the phone - and if I can see my family.

But none of my travail’s matters compared with the challenges that Australians are facing either  with their health, or so many Australians have economic uncertainty - and so that’s our focus and  look, it’s an every waking moment question.

But all day it's focused on just this intense set of needs of the Australian public - a once in, not just  in a generation, a once in a century challenge and so that keeps you totally focused and totally  motivated.

PETER OVERTON:   Minister, your job is entirely based on the welfare of the nation. When you came into this job did  you ever expect something as challenging or as big as this?

GREG HUNT:

Well, I hadn’t ever contemplated this particular situation but you prepare for all circumstances. One  of my very first briefings on coming into health was the potential for pandemics - the role of the  National Incident Centre, the National Medical Stockpile, the National Trauma Centre.

And every day we’re thinking; tests, masks, ICU’s, what are the things that are going to protect  Australians? And what are going to keep them safe? And how do we manage? And that is- it's an  intensely motivating and powerful task.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



PETER OVERTON:   Take us into the War Cabinet. What’s the atmosphere like when you’re weighing up decisions that  will have a drastic impact on the people of Australia?

GREG HUNT:

I was sad that it had come to this for the nation but very focussed as to what this means in terms of  the responsibilities. We have a task together to let people know. This is six months, might be a bit  longer, might be a bit shorter.

It will be a wartime challenge on a scale we’ve not known since the Second World War but its  limited - we will get through it. And to be able to give that sense of hope and reassurance, and  confidence that as difficult as it is there’s a pathway through.

PETER OVERTON:   This must be a daunting job though, not only for you, but for the Prime Minister as well?

GREG HUNT:

Our job is to protect people as best as we can. We can't prevent all the challenges that are global  challenges from having an impact on Australia but we can support, we can give them a pathway  through and then we can give them a recovery at the end of it. And there will be difficulties and  there will be immense economic challenges.

PETER OVERTON:   Okay. To the school debate, are you comfortable with children being at school?

GREG HUNT:

At this point the best thing is for our kids to be at school. There’s low risk of infection and low risk  of consequences for our children but there is a much higher risk if we are putting kids with  grandparents, that the vulnerable - because this particularly affects our elderly - that the vulnerable  could be exposed.

And as well as that, that enforced school closures could take up to 30 per cent of workers out of the  health and medical workforce.

PETER OVERTON:   Many independent schools are already or about to close up - do you see it as the schools defying  the government?

GREG HUNT:

Well we have given the strongest, clearest guidance, they are called independent schools and so we  respect that independence. But our guidance is that the best place for kids, if it can be managed, is  in schools.

Individual schools will have challenges with particular infections and I understand that in which  case it’s appropriate to take the necessary actions.

PETER OVERTON:   Can we expect more bad news in the days ahead and how our lives will be impacted even more?  And could it be as bad as lockdown?

GREG HUNT:

That’s not proposed at this stage - we are not ruling anything out. But one of the things that we are  very mindful of is protecting supply lines for food and the production of food.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





Now we are fortunately, one of, if not the best set up country in the world for maintaining our food  and essential supplies.

PETER OVERTON:   Will it get worse before it gets better?

GREG HUNT:

There will be more cases. We are at the earlier stages of the caseload - that’s an honest assessment.  And right from the outset we’ve said that this is a condition which will go around Australia and  we’re not immune - that it will have an impact on Australians.

But remembering this, for the vast majority of Australians who do contract coronavirus it will be  mild to moderate. Then some will of course have intensive care, and some - and this is our great  task to reduce the rate of lives lost - some will lose that battle as we’ve seen.

But we’re going to fight for every single life, we’re going to fight to minimise the number who have  complications.

You asked, how do I feel? This is the fight of my life. This is the fight of our lives, and we’re going  to do it. We will get there.

PETER OVERTON:  Health Minister, Greg Hunt.

-ENDS-

