

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2CC LEON DELANEY DRIVE SHOW  FRIDAY, 6 NOVEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: China Trade; Foreign interference, Commonwealth Ombudsman report.

LEON DELANEY, HOST: Joining me now is Deputy Opposition Leader Richard Marles.  Good afternoon.

RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Good  afternoon, Leon. How are you?

DELANEY: Very well, thanks. Thanks for joining us today. How exactly do you think  reached this point?

MARLES: Well, it's a really good question. But what I know is this; that there are hundreds  of thousands of jobs which are dependent upon our trade with China. The Government  signed a free trade agreement with China back after it was initially elected, and at that  point it touted iself as being one of the best trade governments in our history. It's now  throwing its hands in the air and saying there's nothing it can do and it's all beyond its  power. There is no doubt that with a free trade agreement in place with China, China has  obligations in relation to this, which we would expect them to meet. And I think what the  hundreds of thousands of Australians who rely on that trade would be asking of the  Morrison Government today is how are they going to hold China to account to that? There  is an expectation that our government is going to have some plan to make sure that the  trade relationship is put back on the right path, and that China is held to account against  the obligations which it undertook when it signed a free trade agreement with ourselves.

DELANEY: Many would say that it is China that is being difficult. Why lay the blame at  Australia’s feet?

MARLES: Well, it may well be China that is being difficult, and we're not absolving China  of any blame here. But at the end of the day, the representation -  the representatives of  the hundreds of thousands of Australians who have their employment dependent upon this  trade relationship are the Australian Government. I mean, they're the ones who represent  us. And the Australian Government touted itself as being the great trade government when  it signed the free trade agreement with China. It's unimaginable that we get to a point now,  where they claim they have no agency, they have no ability to deal with the issue as it has

transpired. I mean one of the things I find completely astounding, is that we're seven years  down the path of the Morrison Government and there is not a single personal relationship  of substance which exists between any member of the Morrison Government and any  senior member of the Chinese government. I mean, that is astounding. And it's at odds  with every previous Australian government since the recognition of China under the  Whitlam government. And so there's no ballast in this difficult moment.

DELANEY: Sure. And a lot of observers though, are assuming or interpreting this as some  sort of move by the Chinese to respond to Australian criticisms of China over things like  the coronavirus, Hong Kong, the South China Sea, the suggestion that Chinese  Government agents or operatives are attempting to interfere with the Australian discourse.  All of these things have obviously caused some concern amongst the Chinese authorities.  Does that mean we should stop offending China, in order to make a dollar?

MARLES: Well, we should never alter what is our national interest, and we should never  change our values. I mean, those are completely non-negotiable. It's absolutely critical that  we stand up for them-

DELANEY: Well if that is so, isn’t this unavoidable then that the Chinese will respond?

MARLES: Well, I think that's the point; to draw the link between standing up for our values,  standing up for our national interests, and that necessarily means you can't have any other  kind of relationship with China- I don't accept that rationale at all. And if that is the rationale  that this Government is asserting, well then it begs the question, what it was doing when it  signed a free trade agreement with China in the first place. But the truth of the matter is  that, you know, it is actually possible to be in a position where you assert what is our  national interest, where we stand for what our values are, whilst at the same time  maintaining a productive relationship with China. That's what's been able to have been  achieved under previous governments. That is why it was right to engage with China and  to set up a free trade agreement with China but it does mean managing the relationship.  Other countries around the world are able to deal with this. The-

DELANEY: Well, I think other countries are actually having some difficulty with China at  the moment, not least the United States, Canada, Germany, lots of people are having  trouble with China at the moment.

MARLES: It is right that China is presenting challenges around the world but it is also right,  that what we are experiencing appears to be something particular to Australia, and really  that's the point. You know, we need to be making sure that our diplomacy is being done  well, that we have relationships in place, that there is the ballast that exists to deal with  what is a very complex relationship. And no one is suggesting that it is anything other than  a complex relationship. But you can't find a set of guiding principles that the government  will articulate about how it deals in its relationship with China. And as I say, there are no  personal relationships in place, which give ballast in these moments of difficulty. And that's  part of the story of why we end up where we end up now. But at the end of the day, we  have this simple fact; this government signed a free trade agreement with China, it meant  to do business with China, and that's completely appropriate. We're now at a point where it  would appear that the trading relationship’s in real difficulty. This government does need to  hold China to account in terms of China's obligations in relation to the China Free Trade  Agreement. But the hundreds of thousands of Australians who are dependent upon this  trade, will be looking to their government, to the Morrison Government, to come up with a  plan to get this relationship back on track.



DELANEY: Do you accept that there are legitimate concerns about Chinese government  interference in Australian affairs, and if so, how do we deal with that without upsetting the  trade relationship?

MARLES: Well, I think it is right that we deal with questions of foreign interference very  carefully. It is why laws were amended in the parliament with the support -  with the  bipartisan support - of the major parties to give the Commonwealth greater powers in  terms of protecting our democracy and protecting our sovereignty. That is totally  appropriate. We saw yesterday, for the first time someone be charged under those new  laws. So you know, there is absolutely a legitimate concern about foreign actors engaging  in interference with our democracy, which is why the laws were put in place and the wheels  of those- of justice, we're now watching them turn. But I come back to this point, it is  possible to stand up for our values as we must, and to stand up for our national interest as  we must, but also to be able to do diplomacy well, have relationships in place and continue  the trading relationship, which is what the government sought to do when it entered into  the free trade agreement with China back at the beginning of its Government.

DELANEY: As China become more ambitious, some would say more belligerent, isn’t that  more and more difficult to accommodate and to defend our values without insulting or  offending theirs? Because, increasingly they’re becoming incompatible, aren’t they on the  political front, military front, human rights values- all of those are areas we have grave  differences with the Chinese authorities.

MARLES: Well, if we work on the assumption that the situation is becoming more  complex, all the more the need to get the diplomacy done right, to have the relationships in  place, so that the difficult waters can be traversed. And if all of what you have said is true,  and the relationship is becoming more complex, that only heightens the need to get the  diplomacy right. And that's where the government has failed. I mean, let's remember this,  during the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union, there were personal  relationships which existed then which were able to broker some of the most difficult  moments in history. And we're talking about two almost belligerents in the context of the  period of the Cold War. We're talking about a relationship with our largest trading partner,  our largest trading partner, and you can't point to a single personal relationship of  substance that exists between any member of the Morrison Government and the Chinese  Government. I genuinely think that is unbelievable.

DELANEY: President Xi has told a conference in Shanghai that it is ill-advised for China to  adhere the interest of others, is this the case of the Chinese Government saying one thing  but doing another?

MARLES: Well again, if President Xi is making that point and he has made that point I  think it's really critical that the Morrison Government are holding China to account against  that. You know, if that's the stance of- that is the stance of the Chinese Government, if  they're serious about that, this - the Morrison Government needs to hold China to account  against that. And against the obligations that China has signed up to in the China Free  Trade Agreement. I mean, let's be clear;  we support the China Free Trade Agreement, it  was a really important measure that was taken that we were pursuing when we were in  government that was actually initiated under the Howard Government. And so it's right that  we have gone there. The fact of the matter is we've been pursuing trade with China over a  very long period of time now, that means that we need to be making sure that, that this  relationship is handled very carefully, because there's a lot at stake here. And to think that



there is not a single personal relationship in place, says everything about how this  government's been getting it wrong.

DELANEY: And very quickly, the Commonwealth Ombudsman has reported an increase in  the number of complaints about abuse in the ADF. What is going on there?

MARLES: Well, it's very important that, you know, that's responded to. The Ombudsman  plays a really important role and it's very important that the ADF is a place that is safe in  that respect. And that, you know, people can make the decision to serve the country, as  significant as a decision as that is, in a way where they can do so with confidence that that  won’t be a part of their service. And so, you know, it's very important that the ADF  responds to this.

DELANEY: Thanks very much for your time today.

MARLES: Pleasure, thanks Leon.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363





