MEDIA RELEASE  ADAM BANDT 2 APR 2020 DEMOCRACY SHARE

Set up a COVID response committee to keep democracy healthy: Greens

The Australian Parliament should set up a cross-parliamentary commiee to oversee the government’s pandemic and ensure democrac checks and balances are maintained, Leader of the Australian Greens Adam Bandt MP said today.

The Greens Leader has wrien to the Prime Minister and Leader of the Opposion, as well as crossbench MPs and Senators, to request the formaon of a Joint Select Commiee at next week’s si ng of Parliament.

“We need more democracy during this crisis, not less,” said Mr Bandt.

“This pandemic is perhaps the greatest challenge Australia ever has faced on its home turf. Now is not the me to be pu ng democracy on hold.

“The Greens want parliament to resume and sit through this crisis, potenally online, as far as the health advice permits.

“The government has cancelled Parliament, but that’s no excuse for rule by decree.

“The Greens’ pressure in Parliament has already contributed to students ge ng increased payments and wages guarantees being legislated, and with connued oversight we can ensure even more people are helped and no-one is le behind.

“A Joint Select Commiee will help us make sure the government’s response is fit for purpose and meets the challenge before of us.

“A similar approach has been set up to oversee New Zealand through its lockdown. It needs to be cross-parliamentary and powerful, while not diverng resources that are needed to tackle the pandemic.

“We’ll only get through this crisis if we work together, but too many people have sll been le behind by the government’s smulus package. Casual workers in new roles and migrant workers won’t get a cent of the $130 billion Sco Morrison is offering businesses.

“Given the eye-watering amounts of public money being spent, the major changes to Australian law and people’s lives, as well as the potenal for unintended consequences, it’s vital that we have an opportunity to scrunise the government’s acons.”

A copy of the leer is aached.



Letter from Adam Bandt - Establishment of Joint Select Committee on the Government's Response to COVID-19 Letter from A. Bandt - Establishment of a Joint Select Committee.pdf PDF201.51 KB

