SENATOR PENNY WONG

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY IN THE SENATE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS

LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA WONG



JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

THURSDAY, 3 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Censure of the Aged Care Minister; International arrivals cap; Morrison

Government failures in aged care.



PENNY WONG, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY IN THE SENATE: Well,

censure motions are rarely moved, and censure motions are rarely supported by the majority

of the chamber. That is because they are a serious statement from the parliament about the

lack of confidence in the Minister. The last censure motion that was moved and resolved was

almost five years ago. Today, the Senate censured Richard Colbeck. Today, the Senate

censured Richard Colbeck, the Minister for Aged Care, and every crossbencher supported this

censure. That's almost unheard of. Senators from the Labor Party, from the Greens, from One

Nation, from Centre Alliance, and the independents Jacqui Lambie and Rex Patrick, all

supported the censure of the Minister. It is an expression of the lack of confidence in his

handling of his portfolio, which my colleague Julie will speak to shortly. It is a reflection of the

lack of confidence that the community feels for Richard Colbeck. It is a reflection of the lack of

confidence the community has in this Minister. Now it is up to Scott Morrison. He can either

continue to run a protection racquet for a minister whose failure are demonstrated. Or he can

do the right thing and respect the Parliament’s censure motion, but most importantly, respect

what that demonstrates which is the loss of confidence in a Minister who demonstrably has

failed to act where he should have with tragic consequences. I’ll hand over to my colleague

Julie Collins.



JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS: Thanks Penny. This

Minister has had multiple warnings, he has failed the Australian public, and importantly, he has

failed all of those people in residential aged care, particularly the families and the loved ones of

the 474 older Australians who have died. When you had warnings from the northern

hemisphere, you had warnings and reports from Dorothy Henderson Lodge and Newmarch

House. The Government should have done more and it should have done it sooner. When we

are still getting transmission in aged care facilities in Victoria today, clearly, the Government

has not done enough. The Government's own Royal Commission said the Government did not

have a plan. This is not the Labor Party saying it, this is the Government's own Royal

Commission. The Liberal Government in New South Wales, in its response to what happened

in its facilities, said the Federal Government did not have a plan, that is laid squarely at the

Minister, Richard Colbeck. It is absolutely clear to everyone that Richard Colbeck is not up to

the very serious job he had of protecting older Australians. It is time for him to go. The fact that

the Senate has censured the Minister, as you've heard from Penny, is a very serious thing. If

the Minister won't resign, the Prime Minister should sack the Minister today. We need to have

confidence going forward that older Australians in residential facilities and in home care in

Australia receiving services are getting the best possible quality care. But when we're getting

stories of just a few weeks ago, ants crawling out of somebody's wound, when we're getting

stories about maggots in wounds, when we're getting stories still of malnutrition, clearly the

Minister and the Government have not taken their responsibility seriously and enough is

enough. It's time to go to the Minister.



JOURNALIST: Will Labor support opening up camps in northern Australia and remote

Australia to help lift the caps?



WONG: Now I’ll make a few points about caps. The first is the announcement like so many

from the Morrison Government was made without a plan. It was another announcement about

a plan. The caps were imposed but there was plan as to how to manage that. What was the

consequence? The consequence was we have 23,000 Australians stranded overseas, 3,500

who are vulnerable. We have our missions, high commissions and embassies suggesting

people crowd fund.  We have people not being able to get flights. And we had airlines

behaving unfairly, cancelling economy seats and only allowing people to book first class or

business class. We have people who haven’t been refunded, we have people sleeping on their

cars. That’s the consequence. Now what we have said is “how about you have a plan?”. The

reality is, we are not even reaching the cap on current arrivals. The Government should look at

what it needs to do the maintain the integrity of the quarantine system - we all agree with that -

but instead of simply leaving Australians to go and fundraise to get themselves home, they

should come up with a plan to assist them.



JOURNALIST: Would sacking Richard Colbeck make the aged care system any better?



WONG: Well, I think a minister who did their job would make the aged care sector better yes,

and I think everybody knows that.



JOURNALIST: Research from the University of Queensland for the Royal Commission

suggested $600 million a year is needed in extra funding in the system to get it to the best

quality possible. How much more does Labor think need to be put in?



WONG: Look, I’ll make a few points. What we have is a Minister who has failed to act on key

reforms following the interim report of the Royal Commission, the quarterly reports which he

received which shows that standard were not being met. Failed to act on warnings from the

Northern Hemisphere (inaudible). Now nobody is suggesting - and I’m happy for Julie to take

this as she knows so much more that I do about these things - nobody is suggesting this is an

easy problem to fix, it is not. But how about we have a Minister who actually responds to what

people are saying by doing something? How about we get a get a Minister who responds to

warnings? And the responsibility for that is ultimately Scott Morrison. He can run a protection

racquet, or he can do the right thing.



COLLINS: There is no doubt that the Government needs to act and needs to act quickly when

it comes to aged care. That's why Labor outlined what we think the Government should do

today. Labor is not in government. The Government is responsible for the care of older

Australians. It funds aged care, it regulates aged care and it needs to respond and respond

quickly to what we are seeing in aged care. As I said, the Government should have done more

and should have done it sooner. That is the point. The Minister did not act when he should

have acted. And now we are seeing the tragic consequences of that in aged care in Australia

today.





JOURNALIST: Julie, the aged care regulator stopped unannounced inspection visits of

nursing homes for 11 weeks at the height of the pandemic. They’ve said they’ve now resumed

those visits.Is that good enough for you? Are you I guess happy that things are now working to

the best it can be?



COLLINS: I said at the outset when the Government combined the complaints commission

and the safety commission that I didn't think the regulator had the powers it needed to do its

job. Clearly what we are seeing now is the sad consequence of the Government again not

listening to warnings, not ensuring that the regulator was able to do the job it was being asked

to do. We also don't have enough transparency around what the regulator is or isn't doing. The

fact that these visits stopped during COVID-19 and the public was not told, I think is a failing of

the Minister. Another failing of the Minister. It is incomprehensible that we did not have the

regulator looking at aged care facilities during COVID-19 outbreaks. Now the Minister said that

was based on health advice. The Chief Medical Officer said he's not aware of being asked

about that advice. We need some transparency and we need some honesty but most of all, we

need a Minister that is up to the job.



WONG: Okay, thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACTS:

CAITLIN RAPER (WONG) 0432 522 598

LIAM CARSWELL (COLLINS) 0438 469 119

