



SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women



MEDIA RELEASE



FUNDING TO SUPPORT WOMEN IN FINANCE AND  ECONOMICS

11 November 2020

The Morrison Government is investing $1.5 million in a new scholarship program to  grow the numbers of women studying finance and economics and to support their  career development.

Organisations are invited to apply for a grant under the scholarship program to assist  women to enter, re-enter and achieve leadership roles in these fields.

Successful organisations will identify and select suitable candidates and distribute their  share of the funding for scholarships in accounting, business, finance and economics.

Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Women, Senator the Hon Marise Payne said  the program will help secure more employment opportunities for women as well as  create a talent pool and pipeline for diversity in business leadership for the future.

“The Government remains committed to ensuring women are well-equipped to make the  most of employment opportunities and pursue careers in finance and economics,”  Minister Payne said.

“The scholarship program will help address the 22.4 per cent gender pay gap in  financial and insurance services - one of the largest gaps across all industries.

“As Minister for Women, I am committed to continuing to rebuild women’s workforce  participation after the impacts of COVID-19, which is one of the key priorities of the  Government’s 2020 Women’s Economic Security Statement.”

As the Australian economy reopens, it is important that women have more choice to be  able to reach their full potential.



This funding expands on the Women’s Leadership and Development Program, which  delivers a range of projects specifically for Australian women to improve women’s  economic security; women's workforce participation; women's leadership; women's  safety and international engagement.

The open competitive grants process will close at 11:00PM AEDT on Tuesday 17  November 2020. For more information about the grant opportunity, visit GrantConnect.



Media Contacts  David Wroe: +61 429 531 143  Melanie Ruiz: +61 427 888 392

