

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

TRANSCRIPT

Tuesday 25th August 2020

Minister Littleproud media conference Press Gallery  Parliament House

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, morning everybody. Look, I welcome this morning the fact  that I'm hearing that the South Australian Government is now looking at the border  restrictions that they have for Victoria, and I think that's another positive move and a step  in the right direction of common sense. That's what I call it for, and in fact Queensland has  delivered for the agricultural sector for New South Wales.

But I have to say that it would be hypocritical of New South Wales not to sit down with  Victoria and trying and do the same for the agricultural production systems for Victoria and  New South Wales. They were very quick to whinge and to go hard at the Queensland  Government about border restrictions, of impeding their agricultural production systems in  New South Wales coming into Queensland, and the health system of those people in New  South Wales that rely on Queensland. They were very quick to criticise yet they've done  three parts of bugger all in trying to help Victorian regional Australians in getting those  borders in practical common sense solution.

So now, it's beholden on the New South Wales Government to do what South Australia is  doing and showing some leadership, showing some common sense in sitting down with  their Victorian counterparts to get a workable solution. That's all we're asking for. I'm not  asking for them to tear down all their restrictions and say that it's all wrong. I'm saying be  practical, use common sense, listen and understand - that's what the Chief Medical Officer  in Queensland did. And I lay the challenge down to every chief medical officer to go out, to  sit down and listen, and understand.

And the Chief Medical Officer in Queensland sat down with Lawrence Springborg, the  Mayor of Goondiwindi, and worked out a solution that now has opened up the borders  between Queensland and New South Wales. That's leadership, that's what you do when  you lead through a pandemic, when you lead through a national crisis - that's all I'm  asking. And this is the challenge that I lay to the New South Wales Government. South  Australia looks to be taking the challenge and I congratulate them for that as well. There is  one last bastion to break and that is New South Wales - it is now beholden on them,  otherwise, it would look very, very hypocritical.

QUESTION: Who does the buck stop with? Is it Gladys Berejiklian?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well I leave that for the New South Wales Government to  determine. They have to work through this in a practical way that also gives their  community confidence around community health - but there's been a proven way to do

TRANSCRIPT



TRANSCRIPT

that. Queensland has shown that, South Australia is trying to work through that. So there is  a practical common sense way through this but you've got to have the intent to go out, and  to listen, and to understand, and to learn - not to make city centric decisions without  understanding the impacts that has on regional Australians. So I challenge the premiers,  and it is ultimately the Premier who will have to imply and enforce the Chief Medical Officer  to sit down with her Victorian counterpart, and I implore the Premier to show that  leadership.

QUESTION: Minister, is Michael McCormack the right person to lead the Nationals to the  election?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yes.

QUESTION: Do you believe he has the support of the everyone in the party?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yes. And that was proven in February.

QUESTION: Do you want to be leader someday?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: It would be a lie for any of the 151 members of Parliament to say  that they do not have ambition - they would be lying to you. But there is a time and place  for everything and sometimes in politics, it is about timing and opportunity - and  sometimes, the political gods are not shining. And so long as I can walk away with great  comfort and knowledge that I've been bestowed the honour of Deputy Leader of the  National Party and a Cabinet Minister, I can walk away happy if it is never bestowed on  me. But obviously, everybody in this place aspires to, to lead their party, but there's a time  and place and you've got to understand very few have achieved it.

QUESTION: [Indistinct] dividing forces in the Nationals?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No. There are journalists that are bored about reporting on COVID  matters and are now looking for something new to draw attention and to have some fun  with. The fact is while they might be bored with COVID, we're not. We're going to continue  to focus on COVID. We've got to focus on Australians, not ourselves. The National Party is  100 per cent behind Michael - he will lead us to the next election. He made that clear to  the party room and that's why he put his hand up in February and won the ballot.

QUESTION: Well to be fair there was a leadership challenge in February. So are you  confident the people who moved against him then will now support him?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yes. Thanks, guys.



Media contact:  0455 448 985

