

CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RN DRIVE

TUESDAY, 3 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; Interest rate cut;Johnson and Johnson

damages; Sports Rorts.



PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: Chris Bowen, welcome.



CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Evening Patricia. Good

to be with you.



KARVELAS: So these powers have not been used yet but they would allow for

large gatherings to be banned, people to dob in their neighbours, forced

quarantine and treatment. They do sound rather extreme. Do you see them as

extreme?



BOWEN: Well they are powers that exist under the Act and the Biosecurity Act

allows the Director of Biosecurity who happens to also be the Chief Medical

Officer to declare a disease, a listed disease, a listed human disease. He

actually did that on January 21. It joins five other diseases which have

previously been listed. You're right that the powers, these particular powers

aren’t used very often, haven't been used before other powers of course under

Biosecurity Act used. The Biosecurity Act is based on a bill that we actually

introduced in office and this Government renewed that bill and passed that bill

with our support. I wouldn't expect Patricia that these powers would be used

lightly. Well to put it more clearly I'm sure they would not be used lightly and

they would be used in limited circumstances in the vast majority of cases. So

the Director of Biosecurity, again the Chief Medical Officer has these powers

that could be used at a geographically specific location if there was an outbreak

of the disease in a particular place or a particular building that can apply to

particular people. And they're really designed to be used if they are needed in

extreme circumstances. So I have no quarrel with the Attorney-General raising

the prospect. As I said this was listed as a human disease under the

Biosecurity Act back on January 21st. That was the right thing for the Chief

Medical Officer to do, to give himself these powers going forward and I'm sure

the Chief Medical Officer who is also the Director of Biosecurity would

implement them appropriately.



KARVELAS: Well this is why I was at pains to make the point that they exist

but haven't been used yet but the Minister did say this morning to my colleague

Fran Kelly that it's likely that they'll be used.



BOWEN: Well that's a matter for him to explain. Obviously we would hope that

it's not necessary that they be used but they would be used by the very senior

official Dr Murphy under advice. I'm sure he would consult with his State and

Territory colleagues. I don't think it's likely that they're going to be used in a

general way across the board affecting all Australians at once. But it's it is

distinctly possible that they’re used to deal with a particular location, a particular

event, a particular incident in dealing with this coronavirus.



KARVELAS: Labor offered the Government bipartisan support for the 2015

Biosecurity Act but what checks and balances does the legislation contain?



BOWEN: Well as I said it's actually based on a Biosecurity Bill that was

introduced by the last Labor Government which didn't pass before the 2013

election. The Act is actually an updating of the old Quarantine Act. Of course

there's always been powers you know since the Quarantine Act passed I think

in 1908 the Government and the various senior Government officials have had

serious powers. Often more Patricia to manage risk of pests and diseases

entering with a more agricultural focus of course. But of course in the modern

era it was appropriate to update those powers again.



They are applied by the Director of Biosecurity who is by definition also the

Chief Medical Officer and they are designed to being implemented carefully

temporarily and in extreme circumstances. And I think most Australians facing

this health challenge knowing that we are facing this health challenge, that

needs to be seen proportionately and in context but it is a very significant

challenge around the world. I think the response so far by the Chief Medical

Officer and his State and Territory colleagues has been a good one and has

seen the number of cases in Australia be lower than you might otherwise

expect. And that's why we've provided bipartisan support to the institution of the

Chief Medical Officers working together because that is as it should be.



KARVELAS: It's unclear who the final arbiter of a decision like placing an entire

apartment building under quarantine or forcibly detaining people or cancelling

an AFL game would be. Do we know?



BOWEN: As I understand Patricia these powers are held by the Director of

Biosecurity who is the Chief Medical Officer



KARVELAS: …and ultimately has the power to make that decision?



BOWEN: That's my understanding. That's correct.



KARVELAS: Does it need more oversight power because the law Council says

there needs to be more checks for controlling this.



BOWEN: I think Patricia know when we are through this issue there'll be

appropriate opportunities to review the response across the board including the

legislative framework. Including our response more broadly and whether we

need to change our institutions. Whether we need a Centers for Disease

Control for example. I think the time will come to have that conversation and to

check and see what has worked and what hasn't and what needs to be refined.

But at this stage as we enter this significant challenge the appropriate thing for

us to do is to engage constructively with the Government of the day which

we're doing. I don't think Australians need to see political ping-pong about this

issue. Where I see constructive suggestions for the Opposition to make I have

made them and will continue to make them. Where I see things I think the

Government is doing wrong I'll point that out but I will also not just criticise for

the sake of it and I will also engage very productively and constructively with

the Government because I think that's what Australians would want a

constructive Opposition to do. We've been engaging with the process through

the Chief Medical Officer and the State and Territory colleagues. We've been in

the situation where wherever I have received a briefing and have had the

reasons for a decision taken so far and I've seen the logic for that. I've

supported that both publicly and privately and I'll continue to do so where

appropriate.



KARVELAS: We've seen more infections in fact 13 cases of coronavirus have

now been confirmed in New South Wales. Are you concerned by the rising rate

in the spread today?



BOWEN: Well I agree with the advice that’s being given that we now need to

prepare not for if more infections will come to Australia but when and managing

that. And that is that is the situation that we're facing. The travel bans have

been put in place for China and Iran have been the right decision but it was

never the case that we could isolate ourselves completely from this virus and

we do need to prepare for more diagnoses going forward. And we do need to

put in place the things that are being put in place through the pandemic plan. I

think that is, that is right now we need to again see this in context. While some

of the modelling about the numbers of people who might be infected is very

concerning we also need to remember that 80 per cent of cases will be mild

based on all the evidence we've seen so far and in fact that's part of the

challenge because a case can be so mild that you don't know you have it. You

can be infectious but not know you have it because you’re feeling slightly

unwell perhaps but not really feeling sick and still going about your business

and that is one of the challenges. That's one of the differences to the virus as

we've seen in recent years like SARs which you see a large percentage of the

people very severely impacted. So this is a significant health challenge. It will

have challenges going forward. There are risks going forward. That's why I'm

making constructive suggestions to the Government as we go about how to

manage those risks. I've had discussions with the Government for example and

based on the advice of some of our MPs like Warren Snowdon the Member for

Lingiari and Linda Burney the Shadow Minister for Indigenous Australians

about how we might prepare best remote communities that are already

overcrowded. What happens if the virus gets into one of those? I've provided

that feedback to the Government very constructive leaders say We think this

needs to be a focus. We can we make these suggestions and I'll continue to do

so on that and other matters.



KARVELAS: If you're just tuning in this is RN Drive. I’m Patricia Karvelas and

our guest is the Shadow Health Minister Chris Bowen. The RBA has cut

interest rates to a new record low to boost the economy which has obviously

taken a huge hit from the coronavirus. In fact it cites the coronavirus as a

reason for this decision. How effective do you think that will be?



BOWEN: Well let's not say it's all down to the coronavirus. I don't for one

second…



KARVELAS: segment to mention it quite a few times in their decision.



BOWEN: I don't…. If you'd just let me finish the sentence. I don't for one

second deny that the Coronavirus has an economic impact but let's not pretend

that the economy wasn't already tanking before the bushfires and before

coronavirus and in reality we are dealing with these challenges from a position

of economic weakness and the Reserve Bank also today indicates that wages

growth is not expected to pick up for some time despite all the rhetoric of the

Government about wages growth and about how it’s the next train to leave the

station that we've been hearing now for years despite every single Budget

getting the wages projections wrong.



This Government has no plan when it comes to wages, no plan when it comes

to economic growth. When they're now talking about an accelerated

depreciation. Well Labor went to the last election with a policy for an investment

guarantee, accelerated depreciation regime. Josh Frydenberg just dismissed

that out of hand arrogantly and said it wasn't necessary. Well now we've got

businesses calling for exactly that policy, that upfront deduction, accelerated

depreciation for investment. We said it would be necessary to spur investment

then. The Government said “Nothing to see here. Economic growth is strong”.

They were wrong. We now have interest rates at record lows, much lower than

during the Global Financial Crisis, the biggest economic crisis we've seen since

the Great Depression and down to very very low levels indeed and people are

right to say and the Reserve Bank itself has previously said sometimes these

reductions in interest rates aren't all that effective but they're the only game in

town at the moment because the Government appears to have absolutely no

plan when it comes to wages, to economic growth and to investment.



KARVELAS: Just finally Johnson and Johnson has been ordered to pay almost

$2.6 million in damages to three victims of its pelvic floor mesh. Do you think

that's a sufficient amount in damages in your view?



BOWEN: Well it's not for me to comment on whether a court has made the

right decision when it comes to damages other than to say Patricia that this is

very welcome for the women who've been through so much for so long. And

this is if you like part two as I understand of a class action, a large number of

women received compensation last year. This payment goes to a much smaller

number of women who've been very severely impacted. There was a Senate

inquiry into these products in recent years. The Government, the Federal

Government issued an apology which we very much welcomed at the time.

They accepted 12 of the 13 recommendations of the Senate inquiry which I

also welcome again. Again, these women have been through so much and it's

a very substantial pay out today. And it just, it does show the seriousness of the

issue and and the appropriateness of the process that was undertaken through

the class action.



KARVELAS: Chris Bowen, Thanks for coming on.



BOWEN: Thanks Patricia. We didn't even get to sports rorts but there's so

many Government scandals for you to cover I'm sure you will cover that.





KARVELAS: Well actually we are speaking tonight to Andrew Probyn our

political editor a little later about what's been revealed to that Senate estimate.



BOWEN: There’s been a lot revealed including decisions open and shut made

during the caretaker process which is a complete abrogation of responsibility

and tradition. And the Prime Minister's Office personal involvement during the

caretaker transition period. So this is a rolled gold scandal and Scott Morrison

just shrugs his shoulders like it's going to go away. News for him: it's not.



KARVELAS: Chris Bowen, thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512



