

ANDREW LEIGH MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR TREASURY

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR CHARITIES

MEMBER FOR FENNER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC NEWS RADIO

FRIDAY, 6 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Morrison Government’s lack of a plan for

productivity; wages; innovation; investment and growth; debt doubling under the

Abbott-Turnbull-Morrison Government.



MATT O’NEIL, HOST: Labor's Andrew Leigh is a former economist, now Federal Member

for Fenner in the ACT, and joins us now. Good morning, Andrew. Thank you for your time.



ANDREW LEIGH, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR TREASURY AND

CHARITIES: Good morning, Matt. I always figure once an economist, always an

economist.



O’NEIL: [laughter] Andrew, what would Labor be doing to shield the economy from the

coronavirus fallout?



LEIGH: I think it's pretty clear that the economy does need appropriate stimulus. What we

did during the Global Financial Crisis was to move quickly, even before the first impacts of

the global downturn were apparent in Australia, with stimulus that saved around 200,000

jobs and tens of thousands of Australian businesses. The trouble is that we're entering this

challenge with an the economy which is much weaker than it should be. We used to have

growth sitting between 3 and 3¼ per cent, and now we're getting 2 to 2¼ quarter per cent.

We've had years of wage stagnation - not by accident, but through deliberate government

policy, as the Finance Minister has pointed out. Anti-union attacks, penalty rate cuts - all of

that has acted to dampen down wage growth, which of course then flows through to

household spending because earnings flow back into the economy. You cut pay packets,

you cut household incomes, and there's a negative spiral as a result of that. Business

investment is lousy and construction and retail are in a very bad way at the moment.



O’NEIL: Andrew, many comparisons have been made with Labor's 2009 response to the

Global Financial Crisis, but this is a very different beast, isn't it? Surely would require a

different response?



LEIGH: I think the principles of fiscal stimulus are pretty well established, Matt - that you

want to make sure you're doing things which are as timely as possible and you recognise

there's some lag in money flowing into the economy so you've got to act quickly. You want

to take measures which are temporary, and which have multiplier effect wherever possible.

One of the useful things we did in the Global Financial Crisis was to invest in infrastructure,

which then not only has the short term payoff in construction - which is the most cyclical

sector of the economy - but also the long term benefit in terms of productivity. We really

need that right now, because productivity actually went backwards last year. The average

Australian worker produced less than they had the year before - the first time that’s ever

happened. So some of these deep seated problems in the economy really mean that we're

approaching the challenges now from a position of weakness rather than a position of

strength.



O’NEIL: Your critics say the scale of Labor's response to the GFC was excessive and the

components like the pink batts scheme were disasters. It will be necessary for the Morrison

Government to avoid a fiscal overkill on this issue, won't it?



LEIGH: Our political critics say that. If you look at what the experts say - the OECD, the

IMF - they're strongly praiseworthy of what Labor did during the Global Financial Crisis.

Nobel Laureate Joe Stiglitz described it as perhaps the best designed fiscal stimulus

package in the world. We were able to avoid going into recession, one of the very few

countries that managed that through the global downturn and the economy was growing

strongly a couple of years afterwards. We had 3.3 per cent [trend] growth in 2011. We

haven't got anywhere near that under this Government. In fact, we haven't got [calendar

year] growth above 3 per cent. So the problems that we're seeing in the economy are

being reflected in the household experience of many of your listeners. They'll be aware that

their incomes just aren't growing to keep pace with prices, that a lot of the growth we're

seeing in the economy is coming out of population growth, not because living standards

are rising.



O’NEIL: So why hasn't Labor been able to put a particular figure to the size of the stimulus

package you want? One would assume you have a rough estimate of the dollar amount.



LEIGH: The right construction of the stimulus package will always be a matter for

Treasury. We’ll work cooperatively with the Government, as the Liberals did not do while

we were in government. But we recognise that it's important to deal with some of these

more long term challenges. When you've got investment in the lousy state it's been, when

you've got a fall in new business formation, a reduction in the rate of job switching and

geographic mobility, you really are in a situation in which the economy is less dynamic than

it used to be. It’s not just me saying that - that was reflected in testimony from the Reserve

Bank Governor when I was speaking to him a couple of weeks ago. I think many people

recognise that there are serious structural challenges that the economy needs to address.

The Government hasn’t been interested in that. They have a one point test of good

economic management - to run a nominal surplus. It looks as though they may even fall

short on that.



O’NEIL: So is Labor going to blame the Government if the Australian economy tips into

recession as a result of this crisis?



LEIGH: The Australian economy has been weak throughout the period this government

has been in office. We're witnessing a reduction in the share of firms who say they produce

innovations that are new to the world. We're having a slump in wages, the likes of which

we've never seen before. A reversal in labour productivity for the first time on record. And

all of this predated the bushfires and coronavirus. So we do think that the Australian

economy can be doing much better. I'm ambitious for Australia, I'm ambitious for the

Australian economy. I've been really disappointed at the lack of focus on some of these big

structural issues over recent years, at the same time as the Government has allowed



government debt to skyrocket. Now net debt’s at $430 billion - a record amount, most of it

accumulated by the Liberals. So a majority of Australia's debt has been taken on since the

Abbott-Turnbull-Morrison Government came to office.



O’NEIL: Andrew Leigh, we’ll have to leave it there. Thank you for your time this morning.



LEIGH: Thank you, Matt.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHANIE ANDERSON 0431344056





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.









