

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

MACKAY

THURSDAY, 12 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: The McKell Institute’s ‘Wage-cutting Strategies in the Mining

Industry’ report; impact of coronavirus on casual employees; coal

exports; renewable energy; Souths vs Cronulla; Tom Hanks and Rita

Wilson testing positive for COVID-19.



ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY:

This is an important report about casualisation of the workforce, the impact it’s

having on miners, on mining communities. I’m very proud to be launching it and

congratulate the union and the McKell Institute in providing some factual data

about what this impact is. It means for some miners they can be working next to

another miner, doing exactly the same job, and earning some 40 per cent less.

We should have a principle here of same work, same pay. A simple principle

that I think is irrefutable and is a part of the Australian way. But it also means

something for mining communities. It means some loss of some $297 million

from this community. It means the loss of some $245 million in economic

activity for the Central Queensland region. And over $200 million in the Hunter

Valley. Just three regions that have been looked at. There’s also an impact on

occupational health and safety. The survey shows that because of

casualisation of the workforce, they’re less likely to report safety issues. It’s

more likely for people to be concerned about whether there’ll be retribution for

raising safety issues in the workplace. This report should be a wakeup call for

the Federal Government to actually do something about addressing these

issues. We know with the Coronavirus issue that there’s been a focus on

casual employment and the fact that casuals have less entitlements in terms of

sick leave, in terms of annual leave, and in terms of their conditions. And yet

that’s been dismissed by Christian Porter, an Industrial Relations Minister who

is completely out of touch, who seems to think that casual workers have all

these extra entitlements that they put away for a rainy day. This report exposes

the fact that the opposite is the case. Happy to take questions.



JOURNALIST: You mentioned that the report is ammunition. What are you

going to do with that ammunition?



ALBANESE: What we’re going to do is raise it in the national parliament. We’ll

use this to reinforce a view that we’ve had for some time about same work,

same pay being an essential principle going forward. We think that there’s a

great deal of concern around the country about the insecurity of work. It’s an

issue that I raised in my first vision statement which I did in Perth at the end of

last year on jobs and the future of work. We need to identify for young people,

and also for people who are looking at retraining, where the opportunities are

that provide that security of income, security of employment going forward. And

I think that this is a valuable contribution. I’d like to see the current Government

make changes. And if they did they would have our support. But if not, we’ll be

campaigning on this issue, as we have today, every day, in the lead up to the

next election.



JOURNALIST: Just on that, George Christensen said the Morrison

Government will reintroduce a bill to Parliament which would enable casual

workers who have been doing the same shifts for 12 months or more, to go to

the boss and request a move to permanent employment. Would Labor support

that bill?



ALBANESE: Poor George. Always there, always missing the play, and he’s

missed the play here as well. Because the fact is that legislation is flawed

legislation. What it would’ve been able to do was to give more power for

employers, not for workers. There’s nothing in that legislation that would have

ensured that someone, a worker in those circumstances, would have to be

listened to. It was all about the benign position of employers. What we actually

need is laws that make it very clear that if people are doing the same work, they

should be paid the same. That will take away the incentive that’s currently there

in the system for casualiSation of the workforce.



JOURNALIST: You voted against the Fair Work Amendment (Right to Request

Casual Conversation) Bill in 2019. Can you talk a bit about that and why?



ALBANESE: That was what the last question was about, I assume. It was

flawed legislation. What it did was just give more power to the employers,

rather than to workers and their organisations. George Christensen has been

part of a rotten government that’s presided over seven years, which has seen

that greatest increase in casualisation in Australia’s history. That’s his record. In

which, very clearly, the Government has given a green light to employers to

casualise their workforce. And indeed the Government is supporting, with

taxpayer’s money, the case that the CFMMEU won about saying that Mr Skene

was entitled to the same rights in terms of a payout of his leave entitlements as

if he was a permanent worker. The Government not only is reinforcing the

current laws, which aren’t good enough, they’re actually appealing that decision

with Government support. So Mr Christensen has to explain why it is that his

government, the government of which he’s a part, is in court trying to

undermine this case that’s been determined which would make a different, a

positive difference, to workers’ entitlements.



JOURNALIST: Mr Albanese, a compliment. About three weeks ago you were

on the Insiders and David came in first to call with a climate change policy, then

came a second - 50 years from now, will we still be exporting coal? And the

answer you gave is one we went ‘Hallejulah, finally someone said it.’ Because it

drives us nuts every time someone says coal is dead. Because you said, you

need to realise that in places like Cape Point, south of Mackay, the great

percentage of coal that is shipped out of there is metallurgical coal for making

steel. Until we find a different way of making steel, there’s going to be a hell of

a lot of coal into the future.



ALBANESE: And indeed, a majority of Queensland’s exports is metallurgical

coal. But demand for metallurgical and thermal coal - the export of those

products doesn’t create the demand. The demand is created internationally.

And the demand for metallurgical coal will continue for a long period of time.

You can’t build a wind turbine without steel. You can’t build structures without

steel. And Australia is making a substantial contribution. Now there are various

theories have been floated, alternatives, but none of them are in play at the

moment. And that’s just a fact. So there’s a lot of misinformation about what is

actually happening in this industry out there. A lot of simplification. And what we

need to do is actually analyse things as they are. And when it comes to

industrial relations as well, another point that I’d make is that the Government’s

priority at the moment, they say they’re going to reintroduce legislation - well

they haven’t. They’ve been there for almost a year. What they have done

though is reintroduce the Ensuring Integrity Bill, have it voted down in the

Senate, and then reintroduced it again in the House of Representatives without

a single word being uttered. That is designed to destroy the trade union

movement. That’s why it’s there. And George Christensen and other LNP

representatives have all voted for that. So they go and talk to union members

and pretend that they’re concerned about their interests. In fact, what they’re

doing is pushing through legislation and an agenda that’s designed to remove

unions from workplaces.



JOURNALIST: Perhaps a more difficult question is obviously thermal coal. You

were surrounded by friends today, all those people want their jobs into the

future. Now we know that thermal coal in both the Galilee and Owen Basin is, in

terms of ash content, some of the lowest on the planet. So if we stop mining

thermal coal on a global basis they’ll get their coal from places where the coal

is worse. So your thoughts on the future of thermal coal on expanding nations

like India and so on where they want the lifestyle we want?



ALBANESE: Well I’ve said very clearly that if you were to stop Australian

exports of thermal coal tomorrow what would happen would be that global

emissions would rise, not go down. And the future of thermal coal is

determined, in terms of exports, by international demand. And that will be a

product of various nation states. And as part of the Paris Accord, there are no

restrictions on the exports of any particular products. That’s an agreement

whereby nation states agree on a policy going forward in terms of energy and

other issues to deal with the challenge of climate change, that does have to be

dealt with. But there’s a reason why that doesn’t include exports. Because if

you did that, for example Japan would be liable for the emissions of every

motor vehicle that was used in another country other than Japan. Quite clearly

that’s absurd. But also, it is the case, as you have said, that because the quality

of Australian coal whether it be in Queensland or in the Hunter Valley is a

higher quality. If you stopped exporting it tomorrow emissions would go up, not

down. So if you’re serious about reducing emissions, which I believe we have

to be, then you need to have policies that actually make a positive difference to

that.



JOURNALIST: And just on that, what scope is there for further renewable

projects in Mackay, do you think?



ALBANESE: I think there’s an enormous capacity here. One of the things that

we have capacity for as well, I believe, is not just in terms of producing energy

from renewables, but using that energy to develop high value manufacturing.

We have an extraordinary abundance of what are seen as new minerals but

which in effect, some of them have been around for a long period of time.

Copper, of course, a bit further west than here. But minerals like lithium, and

other high value minerals that can be used to promote high value

manufacturing. We produce everything that goes into a battery. We produce

everything that goes into a solar panel. Why is it that through a port like

Townsville, the big imports we’re seeing are wind turbines and solar panels. I

want to see those things manufactured here. I also want to see the opportunity

for industries like hydrogen to grow. There’s an enormous capacity in the

future. What we need to do is to not be scared of the future. We need to make

sure that we channel every opportunity that will be there from the changes in

the global economy, and use it in a way in which we compete to create jobs.

And the important thing is that it is regions rather than capital cities that stand to

benefit most in terms of those job opportunities. And this region, a fantastic

place to live, a fantastic place to work, has an incredibly bright future. But only if

we embrace the opportunities that are there. Yes, give support to existing

industries, but also think about the policies that need to be put in place for the

growth of new industries. Thanks very much.



JOURNALIST: Just back on the casualisation, and I’ve got a question for

Canberra as well. Can we get some questions from Canberra about

Coronavirus?



ALBANESE: If we go quick, yeah. I did do a press conference earlier today.



JOURNALIST: Very quickly, serious, I mean. Tonight you’ll be sitting down with

the greatest coach in the world. Couple of colours in green and red. How are

you feeling right now?



ALBANESE: Looking forward to Saturday, to the Souths playing Cronulla. I will

be going unless there’s some advice that somehow puts that off. But I’m always

optimistic. Every March I think we’re going to win the comp. I thought that for

the 43 years in which we failed between 1971 and 2014. But I am looking

forward. Wayne Bennett is a great coach, a great manager of young men, and

a great Australian. And I’m proud to call him a mate, and I look forward to

catching up with him in the sheds after the game.



JOURNALIST: Just on Coronavirus, the Government’s released their package

on the issue. Were they too slow to act?



ALBANESE: Well what we have is a Government that is defined by its

complacency. Whether it’s last year, in terms of the economy was very flat. We

had three interest rate decreases, monetary policy was doing all the heavy

lifting. The Reserve Bank said there was a need for fiscal policy to do some

assistance and we had consumer demand down, productivity growth going

backwards in the negative. We had wages that are stagnant. And what we

needed at that time was greater government concern. Then the bushfires came

along, they were complacent there, they said ‘We’ve seen fires before, it’s a

state issue, no need to act.’ And now on Coronavirus, we’ve seen after, just

days ago the Government was saying that cash payments were inappropriate

and should never occur and no government should ever do them - today we

had an announcement of cash payments to pensioners and people who are

Newstart recipients. That’s a good thing. We need to stimulate the economy

and it needs to be done right now.



JOURNALIST: Just on those payments, you say the sickness payment won’t

be enough to stop people going to work even if they are sick. So what would

you propose instead?



ALBANESE: Well I haven’t said that.



JOURNALIST: Okay, we’ll skip to the next question, apologies. Tom Hanks

and his wife have tested positive to Coronavirus. How worried are you about

public figures getting infected and then obviously passing it on through their

daily lives?



ALBANESE: Well I’m worried about every person. No one’s famous or not

famous when it comes to a virus, and we’re all equal. And it is unfortunate that

anyone contracts this virus. We need to do whatever we can. This is first and

foremost a health issue. The economic issue comes as a consequence of that,

but we shouldn’t forget that this is a health issue and that’s why the

Government needs to respond in terms of the health of our citizens. I’ve been

somewhat concerned, and we expressed concern, that people weren’t able to

get to see their GP because if they thought they might be susceptible, or

vulnerable, or have this disease. They were then sent to hospitals, who were

then sending people away, certainly in NSW, because they hadn’t travelled to

China, or South Korea, or Iran or one of the countries that was on the list. That

is a real concern. We need to get on top of this. I visited a medical facility in

Blacktown in Western Sydney yesterday whereby, they were as of today going

to run out of personal protective equipment. We need to make sure that we

keep on top of this to deter the spread of this disease.



JOURNALIST: Are there any other countries that should be reviewed to be

banned or restrictions placed on their travel into Australia?



ALBANESE: What we should do is listen to the medical advice. I’ve taken a

view with this that I haven’t sought to politicise this issue. I’ve said we should

listen to all of the medical advice but governments need to make sure the

resources are there. And they need to make sure, as well, that the messages

are very clear. We had mixed messages out there about whether people should

go and get tested if in doubt. But then they couldn’t get tested when they tried

to. And I think that has created a great deal of disruption in the community.



JOURNALIST: 10 second question, 10 second answer.



JOURNALIST: No, sorry, can I just ask a question about casualisation.



ALBANESE: This lady here. Sorry.



JOURNALIST: So just back to casualisation, this is a question from

Rockhampton. We’ve spoken quite a lot about legislation and what

governments can do. But what can corporations do? Are there regulations that

can be put in place to stop this? Or calling the corporations?



ALBANESE: Well corporations should be doing the right thing as well. And one

of the things about this report is that for a company like BHP, they should be

embarrassed by this report quite frankly. They should be embarrassed that a

company known as the Big Australian is employing people through a labour

hire company that they own on less conditions working next to people who are

their permanent employees. I don’t think that’s on. And I think they should be

embarrassed by that behaviour and it should be called out, and I’m calling it out

today.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT:  LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053



