



AMANDA RISHWORTH MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION AND

DEVELOPMENT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR YOUTH

MEMBER FOR KINGSTON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC AFTERNOON BRIEFING

THURSDAY, 26 NOVEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: South Australia cluster; stranded Australians; SAS; Kylie

Moore-Gilbert.



PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: I'm joined from Sydney by Liberal MP Trent

Zimmerman and in Adelaide by Labor MP Amanda Rishworth. Amanda, let's

start with you in Adelaide, another case of COVID-19 has been diagnosed in

South Australia. Now we are finding out more details that this pizza shop seems

to be the centre of pretty much everything, it seems. There are a lot of

connections you all have in Adelaide. What do you make of the way the State

Government is managing this issue?



Amanda Rishworth, Shadow Minister for Early Childhood Education and

Development: I think the health advice has been really important to us

managing it and I think the State Government has been taking heed of that

advice. I had expressed concerns about hotel quarantine and making sure that

we had learnings from that. I certainly welcomed the Premier’s announcement

yesterday about the changes to hotel quarantine, including ensuring that

positive COVID cases were put into a hospital like setting and guarded by

SAPOL police officers. We need to make sure we take the learnings of the

problems in hotel quarantine. There have also been calls around having testing

before people travel here to Australia, and a range of other suggestions put on

the table. I think we need to explore all of those, but overall, I think the health

advice has been followed and South Australians in particular have really heeded

that advice. So I'd really like to thank all South Australians for doing that, but do

we need to make sure that the mistakes in hotel quarantine - and I'm not laying

blame anywhere - but they do need to be addressed moving forward.



KARVELAS: Trent Zimmerman, the Federal Government made promises about

getting scores of Australians home who want to be home by Christmas. 30,000

Australians could fly home this year, but clearly Labor has been critical that

there hasn't been enough effort made to get the Australians who want to come

home to get home. Are you disappointed that there isn't an acceleration of this

issue?



TRENT ZIMMERMAN, LIBERAL MEMBER FOR NORTH SYDNEY: Yes, I am.

It is an issue we have spoken about before because I do feel strongly about it,

because it is unacceptable that many Australians are still stuck overseas that

are desperately wanting to come home. But not just want to come home, in

some cases are facing a range of issues from financial stress to health issues

that really mean they do need to get home. And of course the Australian

government is providing low-interest loans to people in financial need and we're

helping to subsidise the cost of the airfares. Fundamentally, this is an issue of

the State caps remaining in place at the levels they are. We are only seeing

Victoria come back online I think next month and that’s obviously a big segment

of the jigsaw which is the hotel quarantine system. We've put online the facilities

in the Northern Territory but really, the Commonwealth can't act alone. We do

need the States to be leading the way on this.



KARVELAS: Sure but the Commonwealth could do more, right? You think the

Commonwealth could do more, don't you?



ZIMMERMAN: I think what we have done in terms of providing flights and

quarantine facilities in the Northern Territory, using all of our resources through

DFAT and Human Services to be in contact with people. Also providing

whatever support the States need and you have members of the ADF

supporting the hotel quarantine facilities and health officials are able to do that.

But the limitations the Commonwealth has is that we don't have massive on the

ground police force, we don’t have massive frontline health workers at our

disposal, and these are the elements of hotel quarantine which are as important

as the bricks and mortar in which someone's sleeping for two weeks.



KARVELAS: I will give you write a reply on the point Amanda. Trent makes the

point that States have those caps and it is hard to increase the numbers on

Australians coming home if you have those caps on.



RISHWORTH: Firstly, the Prime Minister promised he would do more on this.

This was a solemn promise made by the Prime Minister in September, and then

he goes around blaming the States and Territories. There are Commonwealth

assets you could use, there are Commonwealth facilities that you could use.

Ultimately, there are a number of extra things that the Commonwealth could do.

And, quite frankly, I think this Prime Minister comes up with many excuses

about why he can't keep his promises. He promised he would have Australians

registered in mid-September home by Christmas, that is far from being able to

be delivered. I think blaming the States and Territories when there are

Commonwealth assets available is not good enough.



KARVELAS: Alright. I want to move onto a breaking story this afternoon and to

get your response if I can, Trent Zimmerman first. At least 10 current members

of the SAS implicated in the Afghanistan war crimes enquiry have now received

termination notices from the Defence Department we’ve confirmed at the ABC.

They are being basically asked to leave and they have got a couple of weeks to

respond, is our understanding. What is your response to this news?



ZIMMERMAN: Firstly, I don't have any more information on this than what I

have heard on your program this afternoon, which is always a very reliable

source. Therefore I am a little reluctant to comment on the actions the ADF

might be taking, other than to say I have faith in their determination to listen and

implement the response that is required to the Brereton report, and I'm happy to

let them work through these issues. Because I do think they are treating it with

the absolute seriousness that they should and must.



KARVELAS: What was your emotional reaction, if you like, when you saw this

report?



ZIMMERMAN: A bit devastated, frankly, for Australia, for our reputation abroad,

for those communities that were obviously impacted in Afghanistan, where

people, innocent people lost their lives. There is nothing that can justify some of

the actions we have heard about. It is, of course, always important to stress that

it does seem that this was an incredibly small minority of the thousands of active

forces we have had deployed overseas over the last two decades. But it only

takes the actions of a few to undermine the extraordinary reputation that

Australia's defence personnel have, and that is part of the tragedy of this whole

episode.



KARVELAS:10 SAS current serving members have been issued these

termination notices. I’d love to hear from you as well, Amanda Rishworth, what

do you make of the way the Australian Defence Force is handling this?



RISHWORTH: I can't comment on the specific 10. But what I would say is they

seem to be taking this very seriously, and as they should. I think this has been a

very thorough investigation from what I can tell, and there are further

investigations going on. Certainly I think that the Defence Force has taken this

very seriously and should. I feel quite similarly to Trent, this has been a very sad

episode and something that we need to take very seriously and need to reckon

with. I would say though, I also feel for all those other serving personnel who

have done work in Afghanistan, something they’ve been very proud to do and

have done a lot of good there. They are being tarnished by these reports, and I

would really like to say that we need to recognise the good work that was done,

but also hold to account those that have really behaved very poorly in

Australia's name.



KARVELAS: Just on the other big story today, the Australian academic Kylie

Moore-Gilbert has finally been freed. Trent, a lot of questions still on what

Thailand got out of the deal and also on this hostage diplomacy that Iran seems

to use which we have been part of. Are you concerned about those elements

and should we get answers on what Thailand has received in exchange for this?



ZIMMERMAN: The great news is that Kylie is on her way home and that is the

key outcome that we want to achieve. It was obviously intolerable and we

disputed and rejected all the claims that Iran made against her. Foreign Affairs

is a bit like making a sausage, sometimes it is not best to ask too closely what

the ingredients are. I can't comment both because I don't have personal

knowledge, but secondly, I think it would be inappropriate to comment on the

processes that led to this, other than to say it has been a massive effort by our

diplomats, our Foreign Minister, and our partners and allies around the world to

secure this outcome.



KARVELAS: Amanda to you, of course it is fantastic that Kylie is coming home.

I don't think anyone would contest that but, of course, as Trent put it, I actually

like to know what is in the sausage myself, but I am a journalist and that kind of

process matters. Do we deserve to find out?



RISHWORTH: I can't comment on what has actually happened. I know just

what is in the news. I think as much transparency as we can in these situations

is always useful, but obviously diplomatic channels need to be respected at the

same time. It is a careful balance that we have got to make. In terms of hostage

releases, that is something we do need to take advice from our security

agencies and our diplomats on - I'm making this comment in general about

prisoner swaps and those sort of things - we do need to take advice from our

diplomats and our security agencies, and I think Labor on the whole will be

guided by that and by that advice. I would say a big shout out to those diplomats

that I know who have been working around the clock to secure Kylie's release, it

would have taken a lot of work and a great outcome.



KARVELAS: Absolutely a relief. One of the rare positive moments for 2020 we

all had this morning, we felt 2020 gave a something good. Thanks to both of

you.



ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: JEMMA SLEVEC 0405 752 923





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











