

THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&EO TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC NEWS 24 AFTERNOON BRIEFING

TUESDAY, 3 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Scott Morrison loose with the truth on Brian Houston; RBA Interest rate

cut; Coronavirus; Sports Rorts; AAP closure.



PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: I'm joined now by Labor's Deputy Leader, Richard Marles.

Richard Marles, welcome.



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARY: Good

afternoon Patricia, how are you?



KARVELAS: I just want to start on this revelation about Brian Houston and the Prime

Minister now confirming that he was put forward to be on that list and subsequently

the White House did not approve him. What do you make of that confirmation?



MARLES: Ultimately the Prime Minister is not a straight shooter. That's the only thing you

can make from this. It's good that he’s answered the question; he should've answered it

a few months ago. But I think in your introduction, you made the point absolutely; when he

was asked about this a few months ago, he said that this was just gossip. Now he accepts

this is actually true. So back then, when he said it was just gossip, he wasn’t being

straight with the Australian people and that has been the hallmark of Scott Morrison since

he's been the Prime Minister of this country. He is simply not being straight with the

Australian people. If he's asked a difficult question, he will always double down and the

truth frankly is not his friend.



KARVELAS: Okay, well he has confirmed it now, so he has been straight with people now.

Does it matter that he sought to invite the Hillsong Pastor, Brian Houston?



MARLES: Ultimately, that's a matter for his judgement. And when we were asking the

questions last year, we thought it was reasonable that the Australian people get to see

the judgements that our Prime Minister makes. It's a matter for him to justify the steps that

he took in relation to that invitation. But I think the critical point is, last year he said this was

gossip. When he said that, he was not being straight with the Australian people. What we

have seen with sports rorts and a range of other mattes since, is when he's put in a difficult

position, he does not tell the truth. I think Australians are absolutely seeing that now.



KARVELAS: I want to talk about this interest rate cut; the RBA has cut interest rates by

25 basis points, to 0.5 per cent. The RBA says this is a response to the coronavirus

outbreak. Is this the right call, given what are clearly very significant head winds for

the economy, as well as obviously people's health?



MARLES: Well, I think there is obviously going to be a significant impact to the economy

through corona, so I think this is a completely understandable call on the part of the

Reserve Bank and it's absolutely right the banks should pass this rate cut on. But we

should also in the same breath just remember that in the last ten months, we've seen four

now, emergency rate cuts to the interest rate level- much lower than it was during the

global financial crisis, and whilst this particular cut can be ascribed to the coronavirus, it

would be interesting to hear from the Government about how they explain the previous

three. Because the fact of the matter is, this economy was very sluggish last year, coming

into this summer, before there were bushfires, before there was the coronavirus, and

back then, we were saying there needed to be a plan from the Government to get the

economy going and that fell on deaf ears. And so, the challenges to the economy now, that

we see with both bushfires and corona only puts into stark relief the negligence on the part

of the Government in failing to act on the economy last year.



KARVELAS: Interest rates cuts only offer direct relief to people with mortgages, they don't

help if you're renting or if your debt is credit card debt. Do we need assistance for the

whole economy?



MARLES: As I said, we’ve been arguing this for some time. We've been suggesting that

the second stage of the tax cuts be brought forward; we've been suggesting that

infrastructure projects be brought forward. We think it's important the government

actually comes up with some plan in relation to wage stagnation, which continues to be the

stand-out feature of this economy. We've been calling for that from the middle of last

year through to now, and we continue to call for that. The Government actually need to do

something in terms of getting the economy going. The particular challenges which are

faced now, as I say, only highlights the negligence on the part of the Government in failing

to act in relation to the economy last year.



KARVELAS: The Prime Minister does say there will be financial support for

businesses affected by COVID-19. Will Labor offer the Government support for those

measures, whatever they might be?



MARLES: We think there needs to be assistance. So obviously we need to see what

the Government comes up with. We absolutely acknowledge there is a real issue here

in terms of the impact that coronavirus will have on the economy. And we need to be

bipartisan about this- and we are. What is really important in terms of how corona

specifically is managed is that the Government acts on the basis of the medical advice

that it is receiving and we think it has.



KARVELAS: Let’s just talk about the coronavirus outbreak because the Attorney-General

says that biosecurity legislation which gives authorities sweeping powers in the event of a

pandemic will be a new experience for many and no doubt it will. Do you have any

concerns around these laws or how they may be used?



MARLES: Well again, I think the first point to make is that it is really important the way in

which this is managed in seen as being above politics. In relation to that legislation, it was

actually first introduced by Labor back in 2012 - it became law in 2014 with our support. So

this is legislation which has the bipartisan support of the Parliament. And I just come back

to what I said before; it’s really important that the way that the Government goes about

its business in managing this, that they have in mind and put into the centre of their

decision making the advice which is provided by health authorities and they're among the

best in the world. And we think, to be fair, that that is what the Government is doing and

we'll continue to offer support to the Government in the way in which this is being

managed.



KARVELAS: Do you agree with the Government that this is the most important issue that

should be pursued because the Prime Minister has made the point this is his number

one issue and it should be and it is for all Australians.



MARLES: I think this is a major issue, Patricia in terms of the challenges facing Australia

today. That's why we want to make sure that this is seen as being above politics and the

Government in terms of the way it's handling this, enjoys our support. And in doing that, we

will continue to make sure that we keep ourselves informed and we appreciate the

briefings that have been provided to us by the government about this. But let me also say,

not for a moment does the world then stop, it's not as though other issues aren't dealt with.

In the political domain and in the rest of our lives. And there are a whole lot of other

things going on in Parliament right now, and in federal politics. And we'll continue holding

the Government to account for what they're doing, and sports rorts is an example of

that. The coronavirus is really important, it's really important the Government enjoys

bipartisan support in the way in which it manages it - we are offering that. But the idea that

it provides a blank cheque in every other field of public policy to not be held to account is

patently ridiculous.



KARVELAS: Senate Estimates has received evidence that the list of approved projects

under the Community Sports Grants Scheme was still being changed after the election

was called. I know Labor has been pursuing this, you did it again today, you have been

doing it every day. Is there much Labor can do other than just consistently ask the Prime

Minister the question. What are you trying to achieve here?



MARLES: We're trying to get to the bottom of this. We are trying to understand what

actually happened. Because what is really clear is this Government has a problem with

transparency. And so, if we are waiting for the Government to- for example -release the

Gaetjens report, or actually come clean about what’s happened here, we'll be waiting for a

very long period of time. Fundamentally we are trying to get to the bottom of it. What we've

seen in the last 24 hours is that the claims by the Prime Minister that the only role he and

his office played were to pass on the representations of his MPs is clearly wrong. It's mean

it is actually a patent lie. The Audit Office itself has made clear that the final spread sheet

of projects which were going before Sport Australia got there having been- having had the

input of the Prime Minister's office. So really, the Prime Minister's office have been caught

red handed here, it's his office which have made decisions. And that means he's

made decisions. And that means what he has said previously, that nothing to see

here, he's just passing on representations, is completely wrong, and is another example of

this Prime Minister not being straight with the Australian people.



KARVELAS: Today we've heard news that the national news service; Australian

Associated Press will close, 180 reports will lose their jobs. You are actually are a regional

MP.  Geelong. What is your reaction to this news?



MARLES: I think it's really sad. We heard today that AAP have had a place in the

Parliament I think since the mid-1930s. You are right, as a regional MP, I end up reading a

lot of their material, as regional newspapers around the country, including the Geelong

Advertiser use a lot of that material in terms of the reporting that they provide to

our communities. I think it is a very sad day that we have heard that AAP will be closing

in June and it's a reminder again that journalism is a really important profession. It helps

keep Governments to account, it helps tell the story of our nation and I think it's a really

sad day for Australian journalism that AAP have gone the way they now have.



KARVELAS: Can anything be doing about it?



MARLES: I think that’s ultimately a matter for those companies. But you can't help but feel

for those journalists who are working with AAP. Today, a number of whom were sitting in

the Press Gallery in the chamber during Question Time today, and my thoughts are very

much with them. And in saying that, we absolutely acknowledge the great service that

they have provided to national public debate, but also to our country.



KARVELAS: Thank you so much for your time.



MARLES: Thanks, PK.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











