1





The Hon. Christian Porter MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Industrial Relations  Leader of the House



TRANSCRIPT

6PR Mornings with Gareth Parker  Wednesday, 25th March 2020



E&OE

Subjects: Coronavirus

GARETH PARKER:  (greetings omitted)  Christian there is a lot going on. Clearly, the economic impact of this is clearly going to be  profound and given the decisions that government’s taken to close certain businesses, it means  that the unemployment impact has sort of really hit hard and all at once. You're starting to see a  strain of commentary and questions emerge that says, why didn’t the government come up with  an alternative to Centrelink to try and sustain these jobs. A lot of people are pointing to the  British example and Boris Johnson, where 80 per cent of wages were guaranteed by the  government. Was that considered and why wasn't that option taken?



ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   Yeah it was considered and a range of options were considered. The Treasury recommendation  was heavily against that option. And yes, there are problems with Centrelink and yes they are  about high volume. Yes, we are working furiously to fix those. But imagine, and that is a delivery  system of greatly enhanced welfare which in a moment if I get a chance I'd like to explain to you  exactly how that works.

GARETH PARKER:  Yes we will go through that,

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   But that is an option about using an existing delivery mechanism for greatly enhanced welfare  directly to people who've been stood down or become unemployed, so that uses government  mechanisms, architecture, Centrelink offices, known calculations, application forms and you can  see that that is under strain. Having to invent from scratch, an entirely new system of calculation,  application, delivery mechanisms, totally outside anything the government’s ever done before  was put to us as simply being too difficult and complicated to do in all of the circumstances as a

2



practical measure. The lessons that Treasury and the government's learned during the GFC is  that if you step outside the normal realms of delivery mechanisms, you run into all sorts of  problems. But keep in mind that, that another issue with that is that you're putting all of your  eggs into one very complicated basket. What we have done is go up through the worker and  deliver greatly enhanced welfare directly to the worker. We've come down through the business  by offering up to $100,000 to eligible small and medium sized businesses which they can use to  stay open and obviously it's expected they will use to keep staff on. So, we have had two delivery  mechanisms that are known, simple, that will work and pushed enormous amounts of funding  into them, to ensure that workers are looked after, not merely if they find themselves out of  work but also that the businesses have got every chance in incredibly difficult circumstances to  keep workers on, even if it's in slightly modified forms. On which point I also note we had a  major breakthrough yesterday with the union and the Australian hotels Association varying a  modern award to drive flexibility into it, which will save jobs. So we want to try and keep people  connected to their jobs, even when the demand has gone down. If they can't be connected to  their jobs, we're pushing massive amounts of welfare into looking after them over this very  challenging period.

GARETH PARKER:  Okay, we'll come to Centrelink in a moment, but just to explain what you're talking about there,  basically the Australian hotels Association and the union, United Voice (United Workers Union),  agreed with each other, almost as an emergency measure to set aside some of the provisions of  the ordinary award to say hey, it's better to keep some sort of job, rather than no job.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   That's about it, so they agreed to give flexibility by allowing reduced hours to be worked by full  and part time employees and obviously demand has dropped down so it's better to have less  hours but to be connected to your employer than strictly abide by the award and what it said  about the minimum number of hours. It'll allow employees to work across different  classifications in an award. It'll allow employees to be directed to take annual leave and in certain  circumstances, including at half pay so that they can keep the business going. This was all agreed  to between the union, United Workers Union and the Australian Hotels Association, they  worked with the Fair Work Commission in record time. It is an excellent outcome. Two  organizations that haven't always cooperated perfectly are now cooperating like people's jobs  depend on them, cooperating because they do, and it's a great outcome. I think that there'll be  more to come, certainly something that we're working to facilitate and encourage and intervening  in supporting the Fair Work Commission but we are obviously in the territory of doing things  that we've never done before, cooperating with people we've never really cooperated with  before, compromising to save jobs.

GARETH PARKER:  Centrelink has been smashed by demand. We've all been distressed by the scenes of people lining  up outside of Centrelink for two reasons. One because it's distressing to see that many people  suddenly lose their jobs but two because it's not particularly compliant with what we're being  asked to do with social distancing. Can you talk me and listeners through the latest arrangements  to try and speed up the queue? The virtual queue and the physical queue?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   Well, look, the short answer is that we're just pushing as many resources into our usual processes  as we can. And, you know, why is the demand higher? Obviously because people are losing their  jobs. What has been provided for is a payment for singles of in excess of a thousand, $1124.  Partners just over $1000, $1,060 a fortnight. That's available to you if you've been stood down, if  you've lost your employment, if you're a sole trader without work, if you're self-employed

3



without work, if you're a casual worker, if you're a contract worker. If you're required to care for  people. The ordinary one week waiting period is gone. The cash in the bank waiting  period is gone. The newly arrived residents' period is gone. The mutual obligations relax for  the time being. So obviously we've had both demand for the payment and then a massive  increase in the payment, a total relaxation of all of the, the usual access rules for the payment.  Clearly, that is placing strain on the system. That's been worked at by everything and everyone  we've got inside the Department of Social Services and Services Australia. You know, we are  getting on top of it but there will need to be a slight amount of understanding that the huge  influx was something that was very difficult to plan for, even though we were expecting,  obviously, a large influx, but it's about resourcing and every resource we've got being pushed into  it.

GARETH PARKER:  I think a critical point that would give people some comfort is that even if you can't get onto the  Centrelink website until today or tomorrow or Friday or next week, Centrelink will be back-paying to Monday, like, three days ago won’t they?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   That's right, so that the notice of intention period if you like, as soon as you get on. That's  correct. So, even if it's taking you a while to get on online and it's preferable to come through the  online portal to being physically out there waiting in a queue for the obvious reasons that you've  pointed out about social distancing. This will get done. But obviously, the volume has been  utterly extraordinary and we're pushing every resource we have got into it. We're moving people  who’ve lost their job in other call enters into our call centres and retraining them as quickly as we  possibly can.  It is obviously a system under strain. But back to your original point. Imagine if  that was a system trying to cope with an entirely new delivery mechanism for welfare, pinning it  to a percentage of often hundreds of employees individualized wages in a particular business.  That would have been just an astonishingly difficult organizational task.

GARETH PARKER:  What we're witnessing at the moment. And I think the Victorian premier Daniel Andrews has  alluded to this, and what's coming down the pipe this morning. But what we're basically doing at  the moment is a staged shutdown of the economy to try and control the pandemic risk. What's  the inflection point at which, you know, which we start to unwind these measures? Is it, is it a  measure of virus progression, is it a calculation by national and state and territory governments  that the economic pain is becoming too much to bear? What's the endgame for this? What are  the sorts of considerations and inputs that go on to that decision?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   Well they all start with health advice and the best possible advice through our Chief Medical  Officer through our Department of Health for the chief medical officers of each of the states  and territories working collectively about the epidemiology and spread of the disease. What we  are doing in terms of restrictions on economic activity are all designed to slow the spread, to  flatten the curve, to allow us to best prepare and be totally hardened for the increased demand  that we know will come into the medical system. And yes, you're right, there'll be points in time,  in which advice will change about the nature of restrictions, but that will be advice that has as its  first point of call, and its first intended outcome, health outcomes. So, you know that advice has  been updated on a literally daily basis. We through the various subcommittees of the Federal  Cabinet, the National Cabinet, the National Coordination Mechanism, they are being run  multiply, over, over a single day. But ultimately, the key issue is preserving the best possible  health outcomes in all of this. So what is happening in terms of staged restrictions to movement

4



and to enterprise, as tragic and difficult as they are, they are designed based on the best medical  advice as the most necessary measures to save lives in the longer run.

GARETH PARKER:  Okay. I know this is outside your portfolio, but you're in all the meetings. The issue that is  causing I think most consternation among parents, and among teachers is the advice on schools.  Can you as succinctly as you can relay to people what the health advice is on the decision to keep  schools open because a lot of people are looking at it I'm getting feedback and they're saying, we  think this is incongruous with everything else that's going on.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   Well there was a question asked of the Prime Minister last night by a journalist where he  describes schools in a, in a way, which was totally against the best medical advice that we are  getting.

GARETH PARKER:  I agree. For people who don't know, well maybe I won’t repeat it…

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   Well you can say it but I won’t…

GARETH PARKER:  Okay, well look, the journalist described schools basically as a petri dish of infections, I thought  it was ridiculous. I know the journalist personally and consider him a friend but it's the wrong  thing to say.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   Well that description, that is a, a laboratory solution, specifically designed by medical scientists to  hyper spread a disease. That as a description to schools is totally against all the medical advice  that we've got. And what Brendan Murphy I think has said repeatedly, is that children, first of all,  don't seem to be getting this disease in the same numbers as adults. Secondly, do not seem to be  affected to anywhere near the degree, which thirdly means that they're not coughing and  spluttering if they get it. So, being asymptomatic, they spread the disease less. So schools are a  safe place. In terms of striking that balance that you described earlier about having the best  health outcomes, but also not unnecessarily and prematurely damaging the economy and the  ability of our health services to provide the services that we are needing and will further need to  deliver good outcomes in terms of lives saved, schools for the moment, based on all the advice  that we have, should remain open. Now obviously parents will make their own decisions and  school should be making their best efforts to educate children if they are not in school, but that  ultimately is a responsibility that rests on parents. And finally there's an education issue here.  You can't let, whether it's a five year old with preschool education, or someone in at high school  just lose large chunks of their education. So, like all these things we're making decisions about  when you restrict economic activity or educational activity only when we need to, only based on  the best advice, and only for the purposes of securing a better health outcome for all of us in the  long run and we're not there yet with schools.

GARETH PARKER:  The only thing I'll add to that is I think that teachers in particular needs to be supported and  communicated to by all levels of government at this time because that's where I'm seeing the  anxiety rising and I understand it completely.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:

5



Yeah, and look there is anxiety and some of that anxiety is caused by injudicious, excessive  comments, whether it's from commentators or people on Twitter and miss information. The  best information is coming from the Health website, is coming through the Prime Minister and  the Health Minister and Premiers and state health ministers on a daily basis. So take information  from official sources, and teachers are doing a remarkable job, and they're doing a great job for  kids, they're doing a great job for their education, they're doing a great job for our economy and  society, and they're doing a great job for our ability to plan and strengthen our health response.  So, they're just doing a remarkable job and schools should stay open.

GARETH PARKER:

Christian, thank you for your time.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   Okay, thanks very much Gareth. Cheers.





Ends///





Authorised by Christian Porter, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

