

TONY BURKE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ARTS  MANAGER OF OPPOSITION BUSINESS  MEMBER FOR WATSON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC 24 WITH PATRICIA KARVELAS  MONDAY, 6 APRIL 2019

SUBJECT: Coronavirus; wage subsidy.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: Tony Burke is the Shadow Minister for Industrial Relations and  the Manager of Opposition Business in the House of Representatives, and he joined me a  short time ago. Tony Burke, welcome.

TONY BURKE: Hi, PK.

KARVELAS: Labor has suggested some changes to legislation, but will Labor oppose any  of the COVID-19 response measures the government is introducing to Parliament this  week?

BURKE: The bills that are coming to the Parliament will be supported by Labor. The issue  of whether or not we seek to amend them in different ways - we still don't have all the  legislation but, like last time, there were different amendments that we put, but we made  completely clear that we'd be supporting the measures. Let's not forget, with this one - like  last time, the government had come forward with proposals - this time, the wage subsidy is  something that we had been campaigning for, arguing the government should do during a  period that they were ruling it out. And so, you know, while we've wanted to get all the  measures through, this one - it's particularly important to us to get this one through,  because we've been arguing for a long time that if you can keep the relationship between  an employee and an employer, it doesn't just help you during the crisis, it helps you on the  other side as well.

KARVELAS: Doesn't it essentially really... ..kill off any attempt you have to be able to  influence legislation if you've already told the government you're going to vote for it  anyway?

BURKE: Well, no - I mean, we still seek to amend, and let's not forget - and we've been  pushing at the moment for different ways in which it can be improved. Anthony Albanese,  within about an hour of the government announcing it, stood up and said, "We would be

supporting a wage subsidy." I don't think it's open to you to argue that there needs to be a  wage subsidy, get frustrated when the government's ruling it out for so long, and then the  moment they do it, say, "Oh, I'm not sure if we'll back it in." So, you know, we're in a  situation where - yes, the wage subsidy will go through this week. It will happen. But it's still  incredibly important for us to be pointing out, in advance of it being introduced to  Parliament, the areas where it does fall short. And because there'll be, part of doing this  quickly in Parliament - it does limit your capacity to move amendments. It does limit your  capacity to have the full debate. You know, there won't be a Senate inquiry. A whole lot of  checks and balances that we'd normally have won't be there because of the speed with  which we need to act. That does put the obligation on the government as well to be  listening to arguments that are put forward about who might miss out. And to be  responding. And that's why most of the responses have been very constructive, we had a  bit of a weird moment this morning when Christian Porter, for reasons I don't understand,  went on the attack.

KARVELAS: Let's go to that, because the government says you're refusing to back  changes to the Fair Work Act, which would allow an employer temporarily to reduce a  worker's hours in line with the JobKeeper payment. Have you asked for changes there  and, if the government insists on changing the Fair Work Act - it is being backed by the  Business Council of Australia and others - will you vote for that change?

BURKE: All that's happened so far is the government and Labor have agreed that a  change needs to be made to make sure that, if an employer, if a business, can only keep  its doors open because of the wage subsidy, then both sides agree you can't cut  someone's hourly rate, so the only way you'd be able to deal with it in those extreme  circumstances is to be able to have a system by which there's an agreed reduction of  hours. And we've both agreed - they've said they would rather use the Fair Work Act to do  it. We've said if you use a sledgehammer, you'll probably get it wrong for a whole lot of  awards, because they're different. If there's an expedited process through a commission,  that's a smarter way to do it. That's as far as the conversation had gone. We can't talk  about whether we'd seek to amend clauses because they haven't been provided to us yet.  Overnight, we got a draft copy of the government's amendments. And, under this section,  we just got the heading. None of the detail is there. And then this morning while we've  been saying, "OK, we'll wait till we see the detail," Christian Porter goes on the attack. I'm  always one for political argument, I never resile from arguing it through when there's a  difference, but I also just think to have a fake argument at the moment over words that  haven't even been written - you know, we're in a serious crisis. People are relying on us  getting this done to make sure that they keep their connection with their employers over  the next six months. I just think the games that happened this morning are - they weren't  just immature, they just weren't smart.

KARVELAS: Let's go to some of the things you do want changed. You want casuals to be  able to access this. You say a million casuals are missing out. The ACTU proposed a  reasonableness test for whether a casual has a reasonable expectation of 12 months'  work. Where does Labor think that cut-off should be?

BURKE: Well, the way we've been approaching it is to say, "Who currently, there's a really  strong argument they should be getting this, and they're missing out?" The government  says - and I respect the government for, you know, when Christian Porter says you have to  draw the line somewhere, that's true. You do. But the way they've drawn the line at the  moment creates some really weird anomalies. So, you know, if you - at the supermarket,

I've got a Woolies downstairs from where I am here at the moment - if someone on the  checkout's there, works every day as a casual, and that's what they're using to support  their family, if they've only been there as a casual for 10 months, they won't get anything  out of this scheme. But the person who does one shift a week as $70 effectively as pocket  money, they're suddenly going to see their income multiplied by 10. Now, I appreciate  you've got to draw a line somewhere, but it's a pretty weird outcome if the kid who's just  getting some extra money while they're at school is going to go from $70 a week to $750 a  week, and the person who's there every day trying to support a household is going to fall  out of the system completely and is told their only option is Centrelink. Of course, it  wouldn't happen with Woolies, because they haven't had a downturn. But if you have that  exact situation in an industry where there has been a downturn - like clothing stores, for  example, which will probably all qualify for something like this - those sorts of differences.  It's not a well-enough-designed scheme yet.

KARVELAS: Is it fair - just on on some other issues - is it fair that someone on  a temporary work visa who can't access super or support themselves - is asked to go  home?

BURKE: Depends on the capacity to which they can go home, it depends on a whole  range of circumstances. There are many people who are temporary workers who have  already gone home. The government put out a call a while ago encouraging people to do  that. The challenge that we have is a whole lot of people can't. It might be because flights  have stopped. It might be because they previously could afford an airline fare and the fares  are through the roof now. There can be a range of reasons.

KARVELAS: And if they can't, what should happen?

BURKE: Well, ultimately, the government has to make sure that we don't end up being a  country which has a number of people within it who have no means by which to live. You  can't have that. And we also can't have the situation during a pandemic when you have a  significant section of Australia, a significant section of our community here - where there  are individuals who feel that they can't go to the doctor. So, if we end up with people who  feel they can't go to the doctor, feel they can't support themselves or feel, when they  should isolate, they can't afford to isolate - if you've got any of those scenarios, it's in  nobody's interest.

KARVELAS: So should temporary work visa people be able to access the JobKeeper  payment?

BURKE: There are a series of different ways to do it, whether it’s that payment or a  different payment. Linda Burney's our expert on all the different rates that exist. The  bottom-line principle with everything is we need people if they're feeling sick to be able to  seek medical care. We need that as a nation. It's not some benefit that only affects a  person. It affects everybody's health. And, we need to make sure that people can afford,  when they should be isolating, to be isolating. And we can't have a period of six months  where we've got a significant number of people living here and who have no means by  which to live. So they're the objectives. Which payment and exactly where they should fit in  is something that Linda Burney would be better across than me.

KARVELAS: I know Labor's been pushing for the Parliament to continue sitting rather than  having this long period where it doesn't. So, on the technicalities around all of this - I know

that Senator Rex Patrick would like, perhaps, the Senate to consider a motion to look at  the Senate continuing to sit - is that something Labor has talked to him about, and are you  prepared to vote  for that?

BURKE: Look, I'm aware of Rex Patrick's suggestion. With respect to the House of  Representatives, what he's arguing is not that dissimilar to what I argued on the floor of the  Parliament when Christian Porter moved that we don't meet again until August. Which is,  you keep a sitting calendar in place and if you get to the point that for some reason we  can't meet for a public health reason, the government can already cancel the sitting. They  have that power. But to presume that we won't meet till August - not good for democracy,  and it's also ridiculous. I predicted when we sat more than a week ago, that we would be  back, because there was no way we had the settings right yet  and that during a pandemic you can’t think that legislation won't be required for five or six  months. Well, two weeks later, we are going to be back. And this is going to keep  happening. We're about to spend $130 billion with legislation that, two days before we  have to vote on it, still hasn't been written. Now, in those circumstances, even with the best  intentions, the government's going to get some of this wrong. They will. And that's why, if  you have the regular sittings, you get two things. One, you keep coming back, and you can  gradually update and fix legislation - because some people will game the system, we know  they will, and you need to be able to stay on top of   that. And other people who we wanted to help will fall through the cracks, and we don't  want that to happen. Secondly, you need to...

KARVELAS:, Okay, you don't have the numbers in the House of Representatives but you  could, of course, work with a couple of other groups and get them in the Senate. Is that  what you'll work towards?

BURKE: Look, as I've said to you before, I've learnt long ago as the person in charge of  the tactics of the House of Representatives, to never presume anything with the Senate  and believe...

KARVELAS: But is that a strategy more broadly? I want to pin you down on what Labor  wants to work towards - perhaps keep the Senate meeting in a pared-back way to  scrutinise the government's work on COVID-19?

BURKE: If I put it in order, I guess, the main thing that we want is for the whole Parliament  to be meeting. It can be, you know, it can be not full weeks, but regular sittings are really  important for accountability and for us doing our job to serve the Australian people. That's  the first thing. Second thing, if that has to be scaled back in some way, as one house only,  it's not as good, but it's still better than having no sittings at all. And the third thing - which  should never be seen as a replacement to the Parliament - is to have some sort of  committee in place so that we're at least working through the scrutiny that needs to occur. I  mean, to have the biggest expenditure that we've ever had, the biggest public health crisis  that that we've ever had, and to say that’s the moment there'd be no scrutiny? It's a  ridiculous proposition.

KARVELAS: Tony Burke, thanks for joining us.

BURKE: Great to talk to you.



ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ADAM GARTRELL 0427 008 525





