

$13.5 million to expand Intensive Care Unit at



Canberra Hospital



cmtedd.act.gov.au



/open_government/inform/act_government_media_releases/rachel-stephen-smith-mla-



media-releases/2020/$13.5-million-to-expand-intensive-care-unit-at-canberra-hospital



Released 08/01/2018



Senator for the ACT Zed Seselja and ACT Minister for Health Rachel



Stephen-Smith today announced an additional 8 beds for Canberra



Hospital's Intensive Care Unit.



Senator Seselja said the expansion of Canberra Hospital's Intensive Care Unit will boost



critical care capacity across the ACT.



"Canberra Hospital is the major tertiary hospital for the ACT and southern NSW,



providing high quality care to the sickest and most critical patients. This expansion will



ensure people from Canberra and surrounding areas have access to lifesaving care,



acute medical treatment and intensive care monitoring as the region's population



continues to grow."



"Last year the Federal Government committed $13.5 million for the much needed



expansion of Canberra Hospital's ICU as part of our $68 million Health Plan, delivering



support for patients in Canberra who need it. The expansion fills an urgent need to



address capacity shortfall and it is great to see the expansion plans unveiled today."



"I am proud the Federal Government has more than doubled funding for our hospitals



in the ACT, and will continue to deliver for the health of Canberrans."



Minister for Health Stephen-Smith said the additional ICU beds will increase critical



care capacity while the design and construction of the Canberra Hospital Expansion is



underway.



"This funding increases ICU beds at Canberra Hospital to 39, ensuring our health



system is well prepared and equipped to respond to the needs of the community.



"The expansion will connect to the existing ICU and includes improved amenities for



staff, patients and their families. Design will focus on providing patients and staff with a



contemporary, safe and comfortable environment," said Minister Stephen-Smith.



Funding for the ICU expansion has been provided through the Commonwealth



Community Health and Hospitals Program, additional projects included are:



$10 million for mental health initiatives, including a ten-bed low dependency



mental health unit at the Canberra Hospital.



$4.5 million to complete the build and fit-out of a new purpose-built facility at



Winnunga Nimmityjah Aboriginal Health and Community Services.



1/2



$1 million for a hospital discharge liaison pilot program.



"Across the ACT, we are investing in our health infrastructure, services and programs to



ensure Canberrans have access to the right healthcare, when and where they need it.



"This program of work will future-proof our health system and grow local jobs as our



city recovers from the impacts of COVID-19," said Minister Stephen-Smith.



Construction of the ICU expansion will begin later this year with completion scheduled



for the third quarter of 2021.



- Statement ends -



Section:



Rachel Stephen-Smith, MLA







| Media Releases



«ACT Government Media Releases







|



«Minister Media Releases



2/2

