MURRAY WATT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR NORTHERN AUSTRALIA

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DISASTER AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

LABOR SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND



BRITTANY LAUGA MP

STATE MEMBER FOR KEPPEL

ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR EDUCATION





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

ROCKHAMPTON

WEDNESDAY, 5 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Scott Morrison needs a jobs plan for Queensland; no “fast-tracked”

projects north of Brisbane; Virgin job and regional flight cuts.



BRITTANY LAUGA, STATE LABOR MP FOR KEPPEL: I'm here with Labor Senator for

Queensland Murray Watt to talk about a very important road - Yeppoon-Rockhampton

Road. This road is incredibly important to the people and economy of Central Queensland.

Over 11,000 vehicles per day traverse this road. It connects two very important centres in

Central Queensland between Yeppoon and Rocky, and trucks, tourists, visitors, local

people use this road every single day. Improving this road and upgrading it with the $80

million in joint funding that's on the table between the Federal and State Government is

incredibly important. I stood exactly at this spot in 2016 with then-Federal Labor leader Bill

Shorten to announce a Federal Labor commitment to this project. We committed $47

million at that point and then we ended up seeing Federal LNP match that commitment and

raise on it prior to the 2019 federal election. And I'm really pleased that the State

Government's been able to come to the party as well with now $80 million on the table to

upgrade this very important road. I'm joining Murray today in calling for the Federal

Government to bring forward their funding for this road. And Murray will talk a little bit

about that as well. But this road is critically important, we've currently gone out to

community consultation. That process is now underway where local people are able to log

on and make a comment or suggestion on the interactive map that's been set up by the

Department of Transport and Main Roads. And I'm certainly echoing the Department's

calls for people to log on and have a look at the road and make a submission with respect

to how they think that the $80 million could be best spent on upgrading this road. But it

would be best to get the jobs and the construction on this road happening sooner. And we

can do that if the Federal Government is prepared to fast-track this project and so we can

get that work underway sooner. So I'll hand over to Murray and then I'm sure we're happy

to take some questions.



MURRAY WATT, QUEENSLAND LABOR SENATOR: Well, it's a great pleasure to be

back here in Rocky for the second time in a couple of weeks, joining my good friend and

colleague, Brittany Lauga, who is an outstanding state representative for the electorate of

Keppel, working really hard on roads and many other projects here. The reason I'm here

today is to call on Scott Morrison to finally come up with some kind of jobs plan for

Queensland and for Central Queensland in particular. We've heard from Brittany that the

Palaszczuk Government has a very clear plan for economic recovery in this region, a very

clear plan about funding infrastructure projects, getting people back to work, creating new

jobs in new industries. But it's been complete silence from Scott Morrison and his local

LNP representatives about how Central Queensland is going to recover from the downturn

that we're experiencing from COVID-19. And it really is important that we start hearing

some ideas from them about what they're going to do to get jobs happening here in Central

Queensland. Now, one thing that they could be doing is bringing forward and fast-tracking

some of the infrastructure projects that they've already got on the books here for Central

Queensland, such as the Rocky-Yeppoon highway upgrade. That's a good project, the

money's there in the budget, but it's not going to be actually flowing from the Federal

Government for about another 18 months. And there's nothing stopping the Government

from fast-tracking that kind of project or other projects across Central Queensland so that

we can actually get jobs happening right now in Central Queensland. Now, just last week,

the Prime Minister, Scott Morrison, actually released a list of 15 projects around the

country that his Government was going to fast-track. And you know how many there were

in Central Queensland? Not one. And in fact, there was only one project in Queensland.

But not one project north of Brisbane. So, you know, I'll show you on a map what that looks

like across the whole of Australia. There's seven projects in New South Wales that are

going to be fast tracked by the Sydney-based Prime Minister. Only one in Queensland.

And that cuts out at Brisbane, with not one project being fast-tracked north of Brisbane.

Now, there's a whole lot of country there that has returned LNP members for this

Government. And I would have thought that those LNP members could get off their bums

and get the message straight to the Prime Minister that Central Queensland and North

Queensland is just as deserving of having projects fast-tracked as Sydney or Melbourne or

anywhere else down south. So it's important that we have that jobs plan from Scott

Morrison and particularly about fast-tracking infrastructure projects.



Just before taking questions, the only other thing I thought I should cover off is today's

announcement from Virgin. And this is devastating news for Virgin employees, that we

hear that there are going to be about 3000 jobs from Virgin cut. And we know that,

because Virgin is a Queensland-based company, it's inevitable that many of those jobs

being lost are going to be here in Queensland. Some in Brisbane, but some in Central

Queensland and some in North Queensland as well. And we also know that with Virgin

running a more streamlined operation, what that means is we're going to see fewer flights

in and out of regional areas like Central Queensland. That matters to the local tourism

industry, but it also matters to Central Queensland residents. Every time I'm in Central

Queensland, I meet people who need to fly to other places, whether it be Brisbane or

Sydney or somewhere else, to see family members, to have a holiday themselves or

sometimes to get medical treatment. And the reality is that with these job cuts and these

service cuts from Virgin, people are going to have fewer services and they're going to have

to pay higher fares. That's a tragedy for all of Central Queensland. And it's a tragedy that

could have been avoided. Scott Morrison had the opportunity to step in and help Virgin

avoid bankruptcy, avoid administration. In fact, the local senator, Matt Canavan, said that

his Government needed to step in and do something, but they didn't. And this is the

inevitable result of Scott Morrison turning his back on Virgin. Job cuts, service cuts for

regional Queensland. It's the last thing this region needs. We actually need a jobs plan

from Scott Morrison and all he's delivering is job cuts. Have to take any questions.



JOURNALIST: Just on the road, Michelle Landry says a lot about that it's on the

Queensland Government, that they're the ones who are holding this off at this point. What

do you have to say to her about that?



WATT: Brittany, I'm sure would like to say something about that as well. I mean, that's just

simply not true. Every time that Michelle Landry is challenged about her own Government's

failure to deliver to Central Queensland, she's got someone else to blame. Sometimes it's

the State Government. Sometimes it's the Council. Sometimes it's the Federal Opposition.

There's always someone else to blame. Michelle Landry's been the local member here -

this is her third term - surely by now she can take responsibility for actually getting her own

Government to follow through on its promises. They've actually made the commitment to

fund this upgrade. It's just that they don't want to do it for another 18 months. Well, I'm

sorry, Central Queensland can't wait 18 months. We need those jobs to be happening right

now. But as I say, Brittany might like to add to that.



LAUGA: Thanks for the question Leighton and yes, she does say a lot about Yeppoon-Rocky Road. But actually, the fact of the matter is the Federal Government has not

budgeted this money for another 18 months. We could start work sooner if that money was

brought forward and that's exactly what we're calling on today.



JOURNALIST: Don't you need to do the consultation period and everything like that? What

would you spend the money on sooner if all that is still going on?



LAUGA: Yeah look consultation is already underway, it finishes at the end of this month.

Bring the money forward and we could start work perhaps by the end of this year. But the

fact of the matter is that money is not budgeted by the Federal Government until the

following financial year. That's just too far away. We need those jobs in Central

Queensland now, particularly as we respond to this global pandemic. We are moving to the

final stages of the Rockhampton Northern Access Upgrade. We need to see more

construction jobs in roads and we can do that by starting work on this Yeppoon-Rocky

Road sooner. It's really great to see so many people making comments and submissions

with respect to this road already on the consultation platform. It's an online interactive map

where you can actually see the other comments that people have made. There are things

that we could do very quickly and easily if that money was brought forward to create those

jobs but get the work on this road underway sooner.



JOURNALIST: Can you give us an example of some of the things that the online

submissions are saying?



LAUGA: Yeah, well, it's no surprise that a lot of people are very passionate about the

Artillery Road intersection. We have seen some tragic accidents there in the past. There



have also been spots where other tragic accidents have occurred on this road. There are

people who are concerned about sightlines at particular intersections, signage, certainly

the duplication or four-laning is something that people are keen to see into the future. I

would, too. This is actually how this whole project started. Shortly after I was elected in

2015, I went to see Main Roads and I said, Yeppoon-Rocky Road is absolutely a priority.

They said at the time - the engineers - that there weren't enough vehicle movements on

this road per day. But I convinced them because of the important connection that this road

makes between our two largest centres in Central Queensland, that this road needed to be

upgraded sooner. That's how we got the money on the table by the Federal Government,

the state followed through. And now all that we're waiting for is the Federal Government's

budgeted money, which is too far into the future, in my opinion.



JOURNALIST: Senator Murray Watt's saying that obviously the money is there. Why 18

months? Why do we need to wait so long?



LAUGA: Well, I think that's a really good question for Michelle Landry and the LNP. We

need that money now. We need to recover from COVID-19 and we need this road

upgraded sooner rather than later.



Remainder of press conference about State Government issues.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: TALI ELEY 0448 078 456



