

BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRY SHADOW  MINISTER FOR SCIENCE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  MEMBER FOR GORTON





7 YEARS IN AND NO COMPREHENSIVE MANUFACTURING PLAN

We’re into the 7th year of this government, and yet the long term agenda for  Australian manufacturing is paper thin.

Reports today reveal more piecemeal rhetoric from the Industry Minister and no  comprehensive plan for industry policy or manufacturing.

The economic Budget update was a perfect opportunity to announce such a  belated plan, but nothing was forthcoming.

COVID-19 is a blinding reminder of the error that was goading car  manufacturers to leave our shores, a failed energy policy increasing the costs  of manufacturing, the withdrawal of private capital from research and  development, the depletion of critical skills, and the destruction of the viability of  smaller manufacturers further down the supply chain.

The virus has demonstrated just how vulnerable Australia is to global supply  chain shocks. The Liberals’ lack of a economic plan is leaving Australia, and  the manufacturing sector, dangerously exposed to turbulence in the global  economy.

While some of our manufacturers have adapted to produce much needed  Personal Protective Equipment and other essential suppliers during COVID-19,  Australia needs a more sophisticated manufacturing plan than just responding  to crises.

A number of business leaders and experts have raised concerns about  Australia’s research and development capacity, which is inextricably linked to a  recovery led by advanced manufacturing.

However, the only plan the Morrison Government currently has is to rip $1.8



billion from the Research and Development Tax Incentive (RDTI).

The Morrison Government speaks publicly against raising taxes to drive  economic recovery, but at the same time they want to increase the tax burden  on innovative firms by nearly $2 billion.

This Government simply likes to talk up manufacturing, while presiding over its  decline.

Australia has always been a nation that makes things, but this ability is  shrinking as the manufacturing sector has been contracting not growing.

As we look to the future and how we best emerge from the health crisis and  recession, the Morrison Government must do more to support the Australian  manufacturing sector. A strong local manufacturing industry will create jobs and  long term export and trading opportunities

FRIDAY, 31 JULY 2020

MEDIA CONTACT: ERIN SMITH 0458 950 010







