



THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP   MINISTER FOR POPULATION, CITIES AND URBAN  INFRASTRUCTURE

NICOLLE FLINT MP  MEMBER FOR BOOTHBY





THE HON COREY WINGARD MP   SOUTH AUSTRALIAN MINISTER FOR  INFRASTRUCTURE AND TRANSPORT

CAROLYN POWER MP   MEMBER FOR ELDER



MEDIA RELEASE

The Hon Alan Tudge MP, Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure   WANTIRNA SOUTH, VICTORIA



Wednesday 5 August 2020

WORKS ARE ‘ON TRACK’ FOR FLINDERS LINK PROJECT

The $141 million Flinders Link Project is starting to take shape as work begins this week  to lay close to three kilometres of new rail.

The Morrison and Marshall Governments are jointly funding the Flinders Link Project that  will see the existing line extended by 650m improving connectivity to health, innovation  and education precincts.

Approximately 1,000 new concrete sleepers will be placed between Alawoona Avenue,  Tonsley and the new Flinders Railway Station.

This railway line extension project involves the construction of an elevated single track  over Sturt Road, Laffers Triangle and Main South Road, the new Flinders and Tonsley  Railway Stations and an integrated shared pedestrian/cycle path adjacent the rail line.

Federal Minister for Cities, Urban Infrastructure and Population Alan Tudge said the  Flinders Link would connect Flinders University with the main transport network.

“It will open up and reshape this entire area of Adelaide, for students, for health workers,  for thousands of people,” Mr Tudge said.

“The Morrison Government has prioritised infrastructure construction as we come out of  the other side of COVID and we’re making sure that means jobs and money into the SA  economy.”

Minister for Infrastructure and Transport Corey Wingard said this is an exciting milestone  in the project.

“This project forms part of the Marshall Government’s record $12.9 billion investment in  infrastructure across the state,” Minister Wingard said.

“It’s creating 55 jobs per year during the life of the project and helping support our  economy during an extremely tough time.

“Once complete, this rail link will better connect residents in the southern suburbs with  important services including the Flinders Hospital and Flinders University.”

Member for Boothby Nicolle Flint said this project will greatly increase public transport  options for local residents.

“The extended train line will help local residents get to and from the city, and also help  people get to Flinders Medical Centre and Flinders University safely and easily without  the pressure of finding a car park,” Ms Flint said.

“The Flinders Link Rail line will also help the University unlock investment for their $1.5  billion Flinders Village redevelopment, as well as linking their main campus at Bedford  Park to the new Tonsley Innovation Precinct.”

Member for Elder Carolyn Power said this is incredible progress for the local community.

“Residents have shared with me how the Flinders Link Project will improve their lives by  helping them to get where they need to go, faster and safer,” Ms Power said.

“Public transport is fundamental in the day-to-day lives of so many, providing people  mobility and connecting them to employment, education, community resources, medical  care and recreational opportunities.”

Passenger services and the new stations are expected to be online by the end of the  year.

[ENDS]

Media Contact:  Minister Tudge - Michael Bennett 0434 782 923  Minister Wingard - Gemma Coombe 0415 175 716

