

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

TODAY SHOW

FRIDAY, 4 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Borders; National Cabinet; The Morrison Government doesn’t

have a plan for jobs



KARL STEFANOVIC, HOST: Time for pollies, with Home Affairs Minister Peter

Dutton in Brisbane and Deputy Opposition Leader Richard Marles, in

Melbourne. Good morning lads.



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR

PARTY: Morning Karl.



STEFANOVIC: Okay, first up, what I'm about to say isn’t going to be popular

with everyone, especially you Pete, but I am personally finding the pile on

Annastacia Palaszczuk right now a little hard to understand. Do we not

remember where we were six weeks ago in Victoria? Six weeks. And now

everyone is carrying on like we have got a vaccine. We don't. Do we need

a road map out of this? Yes. Do we need borders to open? Yes. Do we need

those with health issues given exemptions? Yes. Agricultural exemptions, tick,

tick, tick, but from what I can see Anna is doing what she was elected to do,

fiercely protect her state. And when you look at the terrible impact of COVID

in Victoria who can blame her? And today we see front page

headlines accusing her and the leaders of WA and Victoria of betraying

the nation. Wow! Peter, national betrayal? Surely jumping the shark.



PETER DUTTON, MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Karl, we are on the same

page here. I don't have any problem with borders being closed if that's

the recommendation of the health authorities, but in Queensland it's not. And

the trouble at the moment is that we have got a situation that is all political and

we are seeing a lot of people suffer. I think the mental health issues that-

[inaudible] - that the borders are open as soon as possible. But New South

Wales is dealing with community transmission but zero cases, if that's the test

for success, we are going broke. Businesses will close, those jobs won't be

there, so we have got to think about what's happening today, but what happens

over the next six months and the borders closed at the moment means

complete devastation for families in Queensland and there is no reason for it.



STEFANOVIC: So you don't think the AFL grand final is a good idea

for Queensland? I mean, this is one of the great sporting coups of the century.



DUTTON: I'm happy with the AFL grand final. That's a great thing. But

there shouldn't be an exception to the quarantine rules for executives coming in

from the AFL. They should be two weeks isolated like everybody else. If you

are a mum who wants to come up to see their daughters' baby born or you

are going to a funeral of a loved one, you can't get in to Queensland at the

moment. And if you are lucky enough to get in, under some exemption, you

need to do two weeks in quarantine. And the AFL executive hanging out in a

resort, which is great for them, but it just speaks of a double standard. And at

the moment we have got kids who are trying to go home over the school

holidays back to their farms that they have been at boarding schools, they

are prevented from doing that. I just can't understand the approach. It's only

because there is an election coming up in Queensland on 31 October and the

Premier's happy to be out there, bouncing the AFL ball in an awkward way, but

that's fine, and she wants to be popular but it's at the expense of a lot

of livelihoods and a lot of businesses in Queensland that at the moment should

be doing really well. And Cairns, North Queensland, is going to completely miss

this season.



STEFANOVIC: Surely at the moment, given what happened in Victoria just six

weeks ago, you can understand why she would be protective of

Queenslanders. I mean Richard, how would you describe what's happening to

Anna? Is allowing 400 AFL officials into the state while some can't cross

the border for medical reasons a good look or are they two separate issues?



MARLES: Firstly, I'm not going to criticise Annastacia Palaszczuk, I think she is

doing what you would expect the Queensland Premier to do. I'm not about to

pile on to the AFL either, I mean they have got their arrangements in place,

and obviously when you get to individual cases the rule of common sense

needs to apply. But I would make this point about the AFL; Queensland has

saved the AFL season. It's pretty miserable in Victoria right now. Footy is one

of the only things going around and so I'm incredibly grateful to Queensland for

the role they have played in allowing us to enjoy footy. But at the end of the

day, in all of this you've got to look to where is the Prime Minister? The fact that

we have a chaos around our internal borders in this country, there

is disagreement about it, there is no clear direction forward in respect of it, that

lies fairly and squarely at the feet of the Prime Minister. He lost control of

this months ago, is the truth of it, and he has been unable to bring people along

with him ever since. That's why we have got the situation that we have got now.



STEFANOVIC: Okay, we have National Cabinet today, Pete, a

simple question, what's the definition of a "hot spot"?



DUTTON: The Prime Minister is putting that definition out. Let's see what the

Premiers agree to. There is an application of common sense, as Richard says.

The definition has to be a sensible one. In Queensland yesterday it

was announced that the border with New South Wales, the restrictions would

be lifted there if there had been no case in New South Wales for 28 days. We

will never achieve that. As I say, if zero cases is what you are after, if

elimination is what you are after, we have seen New Zealand's economy go

back by 20 per cent, the same in the United Kingdom, the United States is 10

per cent. Ours has gone back 7 per cent. And, we need to help people get out

of this. You've got to make sure that we defeat the virus, we are doing that. We

are doing it in a sensible way in places like New South Wales where you

can contact trace quickly, but if we are going to close down businesses and

hibernate and conduct this State of Origin phoney war just for the purposes of

an election then that is going to be devastating to the country. That's what the

Prime Minister is trying to avoid.



STEFANOVIC: So he is going into Cabinet today with a definition of "hot spot"

which won't be agreed upon. So it will be just where it was two days ago, three

days ago, weeks ago. What is the definition of a "hot spot"?



DUTTON: I think Premier Andrews has already indicated, as Premier

Berejiklian has in New South Wales, that they are prepared, they see the sense

in opening borders. It seems to be the problem for WA and Queensland,

in particular, there is no justification at the moment for the border with New

South Wales to be shut. There are families from farms who can't deliver

produce across the border. And I just think there needs to be a greater level of

compassion here. As I say, if it's driven by the health advice, fair enough, but

that's not the case at the moment. These are decisions that are being made

- there is no way in the world that the Queensland Chief Medical Officer would

have suggested that it's okay for 400 AFL officials to come across the border,

not go into proper quarantine, given what's happening in Victoria. The Victorian

situation is a function of the hotel quarantine disaster. That's where the spread

has really caused Victoria difficulty. That hasn't happened in Queensland,

it hasn't happened in New South Wales, and therefore, that's the reason New

South Wales hasn't closed its economy down.



STEFANOVIC: Just quickly Pete, we are hearing this morning a Cabinet level

task force will offer tax breaks for foreign- based businesses to lure them

here. Is that true? Is that going to happen? Do we really need to be going down

that path?



DUTTON: I hope so, because we need to grow jobs. It's okay that we have got

support in place at the moment with JobKeeper and JobSeeker, that's fine,

and that's a good thing, but to get to the next stage we need to

have investment, we need to see construction, we need to make sure that

those jobs are created because families need to get back to a normal way of

life as quickly as possible. There is a devastation in a family, if you are a

small business, that had a good business before COVID and you are now

going to lose your house, all of those jobs go from that business and there will

be many other families that are impacted as well. We need the investment and

jobs.



MARLES: Nice to see a plan. It would be good to see a plan from the

Government. We have got a million people on unemployed queues, we are

expecting another 400,000 by the end of the year. Tax breaks alone, that's not



a substitute for a jobs plan. To hear a Cabinet Minister say that he hopes this

is what's going to happen, I hope we get something more definite than that.

Small business is facing the biggest crisis it has in Australia's history and we

hear nothing from this Government about what they are going to be doing

for them. We need to have a jobs plan from this mob right now. Rather than

government by whinging, which is what we are hearing about the way they talk

about the states, we actually need to have government by leadership. That's

where Scott Morrison is failing.



STEFANOVIC: Gentlemen thank you for your time. And happy Father's Day for

Sunday, I hope you have a wonderful day with your families.



MARLES: Looking forward to it.



DUTTON: Thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











