





SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Women

DR STUART MINCHIN  Pacific Community (SPC) Director-General

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE



Australia and SPC continuing partnership

Australia and the Pacific Community (SPC) have renewed their longstanding  partnership, reaffirming their commitment to supporting the sustainable development of  the Pacific.

Australia will provide A$42.5 million in core funding to the SPC over the next 3 years to  support the renewed 10-year strategic partnership (2014-2023) between Australia and  SPC.

SPC is the region’s leading scientific and technical development organisation. Australia  has been a member since the SPC’s establishment in Canberra in 1947.

SPC’s work ranges across public health, fisheries management, education,  geosciences, human rights and social development, gender equality, land resources,  climate change, and statistics. The organisation has been on the frontline of the Pacific  response to COVID-19.

Australia’s Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Women, Senator the Hon Marise  Payne, welcomed the renewed partnership and said Australia is proud to support the  organisation, whose work has never been more important than in the COVID-19 era,  including for women and girls.

“The COVID-19 pandemic has had a significant impact on women and girls across the  world, including in the Pacific. I look forward to working with SPC to ensure Pacific  women and girls contribute to our region’s recovery and help our people and economies  to emerge stronger.”

Dr Stuart Minchin, SPC Director-General, acknowledged the longstanding cooperation  between SPC and Australia and said the renewed partnership with Australia is evidence  of the long-term support Australia has provided to SPC.

“Together with Australia’s new funding commitment, it will allow SPC to continue to help  the Pacific recover and rebuild from the impacts of COVID-19 by tackling overarching  economic, environmental, and health development challenges,” he said.

Minister Payne signed the renewed partnership agreement in a virtual meeting with Dr  Minchin from SPC Headquarters in Noumea, accompanied by Alison Carrington,  Australia’s Consul-General to New Caledonia.



Media contacts:  Australia: David Wroe: +61 429 531 143, Melanie Ruiz: +61 427 888 392

SPC: Alexandre Brecher: +687 26 20 00

Authorised by Senator the Hon Marise Payne, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Women,  Australia, and Dr Stuart Minchin, Director-General, Pacific Community



