TRANSCRIPT

Saturday, 28 November 2020

Minister for Education Dan Tehan press conference

SUBJECTS: AFP arrests and child care fraud, Australian wine traded into  China, Hotel quarantine and Victoria, WA state border

Dan Tehan: Thanks everyone for joining us today. As you will have heard, the AFP has  launched a major investigation into family day care fraud. There is an alleged criminal  network that has been seeking to defraud the Commonwealth Government. Can I say to the  AFP, to Services Australia and the Federal Department of Education, congratulations on the  work that you’ve done against this alleged criminal network. The Government is absolutely  determined to make sure that it continues to crack down on any fraud that is occurring  against the Australian taxpayer. We have now seen savings of $3.1 billion made as a result  of activity against fraud of the child care system. We will continue to crack down on anyone  who seeks to defraud the taxpayer. We’ve put an additional 380 integrity officials in place  since 2018, and we will continue to do everything we can to protect the Australian taxpayer  against fraud against the child care system. I’m happy to take any questions.

Journalist: Minister, Kristy Mayr from Channel 7 in Melbourne. Was this mainly about the  money, this particular taskforce? Or were there ever any concerns about actual child welfare  as part of this?

Tehan: Well, this has been, this investigation was against fraud. But, as you would know, for  people who are pretending to run legitimate family day care businesses, and at the same  time seeking to defraud the Commonwealth, then there would be concerns around the early  childhood educators that are being used and the type of care that children are getting. So,  obviously, the number one target was the defrauding of the Commonwealth, but there will  always be concerns around what type of education and care is being provided to children  while these alleged criminal networks are seeking to defraud the Commonwealth.

Journalist: So, you mentioned this crack down will continue. How widespread is this? Are  there concerns that this is more widespread than, you know, what we know about now?

Tehan: Well, we’ve already seen $3.1 billion saved as a result of the crack down, and we will  continue to explore and investigate anything that we see is suspicious with these criminal  networks seeking to exploit the Australian taxpayer. Sadly, there will always be people who  want to exploit the Australian taxpayer. So, we will seek to always be investigating and  making sure that we’ve got the resources to ensure this isn’t occurring.

Journalist: Minister, Jade Macmillan from ABC. Could you provide any more information  about how they allegedly defrauded the COVID-19 stimulus payments?

Tehan: Look, that’s obviously part of the investigation. There are allegations which have  been made, there’s arrests that’s been made, and all that will be detailed as part of the  criminal prosecution. So, I don’t want to go into any of that detail. But, needless to say, there  has been extensive work been done, cooperation between the AFP, Services Australia and  the Department of Education - both the Commonwealth Department of Education but also

with assistance from the Department of Education in Victoria - and, all the charges,  obviously, will be laid out as part of the criminal prosecution.

Alright, have we got any further questions?

Journalist: Could I just ask on another issue. Has the Government failed to diversify export  markets for Australian wine, and argued by the Labor Party?

Tehan: What the Government is doing is seeking to address what seems to be a concerning  pattern of behaviour by the Chinese against Australia. Now, we’re seeking to have  conversations with the Chinese, we’re seeking to address this matter in the World Trade  Organisation, so that we can ensure we’re doing the right thing by our wine growers and  every other part of our trading system, which is being impacted at the moment by the  Chinese. Now, we want to work through this systematically. We understand the importance  of having a trading relationship with the Chinese that works in their mutual interest and in our  mutual interest. And, we will continue to prosecute the case, on behalf of our exporters, that  both sides behave within the rules that are set out, both within the World Trade Organisation  and through our Free Trade Agreement with China.

Journalist: Is China breaching those rules and those agreements?

Tehan: So, we are seeking, obviously, to work through these issues on a case-by-case basis  with the Chinese, and we’ve said on numerous occasions we want to sit down with them and  work these through. And, obviously, the latest, with regards to wine tariffs - once again, we  want to work this through with the Chinese. The Chinese have had a huge demand for  Australian wine due to its quality, and we want to make sure that we can continue to export  wine to China. So, that will part of ongoing dialogues with the Chinese as to why they’ve put  these tariffs in place.

Journalist: Minister just two questions - Kristy from 7 in Melbourne - just two unrelated  questions on other topics, if that’s okay. First of all, just on the hotel quarantine inquiry in  Victoria. As a fellow Victorian, how frustrating is it to watch this inquiry go on? It’s now  dragged on for months. I think the latest estimate says it’s cost taxpayers about $10 million,  and it’s looking like we may never know who’s responsible for the failures of the hotel  quarantine program. How frustrating is this for you to watch, and do we need a Royal  Commission to get some answers?

Tehan: Well, I think all Victorians want to know the truth. The commission was set up to find  the truth and, let’s wait and see what happens with its final findings. But, I think, all Victorians  deserve to know the truth. This had huge economic consequences for the Victorian state.   There were also deaths that occurred as a result of it. So, all Victorians deserve to know the  truth, and I hope that that’s what we will get when the final report is handed down by the  commission.

Journalist: If we don’t get it, do you think we do need a Royal Commission after that?

Tehan: Well, let’s wait and see what happens with the commission and its findings. Because,  I’m sure the commissioners themselves will want to be able to hand down a report which  clearly details the whole truth when it comes to what happened with quarantine in Victoria.

That’s what it’s set up to do, and I’m sure the commissioners will want to make sure that, as  part of handing down their report, they’ve got to the bottom of the matter.

Journalist: And, just another question if that’s okay, Minister, on the WA border. Obviously,  we’re now clear of the virus in Victoria. Should we be expecting a decision a little bit sooner  on WA reopening their border to Victoria?

Tehan: Well, ultimately, that will depend on the medical advice that the Western Australian  Government is getting. But, if that medical advice says that it’s safe for the border to reopen,  then one would hope that the border can reopen. These border closures can have serious  impacts on families, in particular. Often loved ones aren’t able to meet, often, where there  are people who are dying in families, loved ones can’t get to go and see their loved ones as  they’re dealing with the last months or weeks of their lives. Especially when we’re getting to  Christmas, families want to reunite. So, my hope is, if the medical advice is clear and it’s  safe for the border to open, that’s exactly what will happen.

Journalist: Thank you.

Tehan: Thanks everyone, thanks for joining us.



