

TONY BURKE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ARTS

MANAGER OF OPPOSITION BUSINESS

MEMBER FOR WATSON



LATEST BLOW FOR ARTS SECTOR



Today’s announcement of Australia Council Four-Year Funding results are

devastating for the arts sector, at a time when it is already suffering due to the

coronavirus crisis.



Only 95 small to medium organisations will receive funding for the years 2021-2024 - a 20 per cent drop compared to the previous round.



There are high-profile casualties - such as the Australian Theatre for Young

People in Sydney, and La Mama Theatre in Victoria - but also smaller

organisations that may not have name recognition but are vitally important to

their communities.



It is absurd the government has not delivered the Australia Council any

additional funding to deal with the effects of the coronavirus crisis on the arts

after years of cuts. The arts sector was one of the first to be affected in the

earliest rounds of crowd restrictions, and it may be one of the last sectors to

recover. This $50 billion-plus industry employs hundreds of thousands of

Australians, and it is hurting.





Labor acknowledges the Australia Council has done the best it can in a bad

situation, re-deploying funds toward the grant program, and delivering an extra

year of bridging funding for 49 organisations who were not successful in this

round to get them through the crisis.



But it is not enough. The arts need a specific, tailored package of support from

the government. Economy-wide measures, while helpful, will not assist the

whole sector and are insufficient to preserve the Australian arts sector as we

know it.



The arts sector was there when Australia needed it, helping to raise money for

bushfire relief. Australians are relying on music, books, and Australian

television and movies to help get them through this period of isolation and

crisis. But the government is not delivering help to the arts sector when it needs

it most.



We need the arts to be there when Australia emerges from this crisis - the

government must act now.



FRIDAY 3 APRIL 2020



MEDIA CONTACT: ADAM GARTRELL 0427 008 525



