

MURRAY WATT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR NORTHERN AUSTRALIA  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DISASTER AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT  LABOR SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS  TUESDAY, 18 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Hotel quarantine in Victoria; federal government’s aged care  responsibility; Liberal opposition to superannuation rises.

DANICA DE GIORGIO, HOST: Time now to bring in our political panel. Joining me live is  Liberal Senator Gerard Rennick and Labor Senator Murray Watt. Good morning to both of  you. Thank you for joining me.

MURRAY WATT, SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND: Morning, both of you.

GERARD RENNICK: Good morning, Danica.

DE GIORGIO: Let's get straight into it. I want to begin with Victoria's hotel quarantine  debacle. Yesterday, the inquiry confirmed that returned travellers account for more than  ninety nine percent of the state's COVID-19 cases. We'll start with you, Gerard Rennick.  The spotlight now surely has to be on the Andrews Government. Someone needs to claim  responsibility for this.

RENNICK: Yeah, that's right, Danica. Look, obviously the Victorian Labor Government was  responsible for the hotel quarantine. Look, mistakes were made. I accept that things were  difficult. I think everyone who tries to take the view that we're going to get this right the first  time just needs to keep a level head here. We haven't had a pandemic like this in a long  time. And so, look, you know, the best thing that I think that the Andrews Government can  do is to take responsibility and try and make improvements next time.

DE GIORGIO: The inquiry has already said that Ministers will be required to give evidence  at this. Murray Watt, I mean somebody really needs to stand up and take responsibility. Do  you think that's a fair assessment?

WATT: Well, I think I've seen Daniel Andrews stand up for about 40 odd days in a row and  take responsibility at every single press conference that he's done. Obviously, there have  been some problems there in terms of the hotel quarantine in Victoria. I don't think we  should prejudge things until the inquiry is complete. But I think one of the things that's been  most heartening about the Andrews Government’s response to this is Daniel Andrews'

willingness to take responsibility and I'd say it stands in great contrast to the Prime  Minister, who's always looking for someone else to blame.

DE GIORGIO: I want to move on to aged care. It's been revealed today that federal health  authorities have spent less than half the money set aside for a particular assistance  package. The package itself was forty three million dollars. Questions have to be asked  why all this money hasn't been spent? Given that it's certainly desperately needed.  Senator Rennick, what are your thoughts on these?

RENNICK: Danica, it takes time to get the money out to the relevant authorities. There  needs to be checks and balances in place to do that. Half the money has been spent, as  you pointed out, and I'm sure the rest of it will be spent in due course.

DE GIORGIO: And what are your thoughts on this Senator Watt? Because, you know,  we've just had the Royal Commission come out. There were pretty damning allegations.  It's certainly a sector that needs money and a spotlight needs to be shone on it.

WATT: Yeah, I don't know how many times we need to be having discussions like this  where gross failures in the aged care system are pointed out, an aged care system that is  the responsibility of the federal government. And yet we continue to find deficiencies in the  system. This has been going on for years. This government has been in power for seven  years and year after year, after year, we have reports about failures in the aged care  system. Most recently, it's in relation to COVID-19. These reports this morning are just the  latest example of the federal government failing to meet its responsibility in aged care. As  a member of the COVID Senate committee, we heard evidence recently that money that  was allocated to train aged care staff in how to apply PPE wasn't used either. So, you  know, we've had so many examples where the government likes to have a big  announcement, whether it be in aged care or anything else, but they fail on the follow  through. And tragically, in this case, what that means is putting people at risk. So the  government has simply got to do a better job in the aged care system. The Royal  Commission last week, we heard that they didn't have a plan to manage COVID-19,  despite the outbreaks that we've seen in other states and in other countries. And  unfortunately, people are paying the price for that right now.

DE GIORGIO: Well, I did hear, though, the Prime Minister come out and apologise last  week, particularly off the back of the Royal Commission's findings. Senator Rennick, would  it be fair to say that now more than ever, people are looking at aged care and wanting  better services in that field?

RENNICK: Oh, look, Danica of course they do, but can I just make a couple of rebuttals to  what Senator Watt just said? We've got one of the lowest mortality rates in the world. The  chief medical officer said last week that they did have a plan in place. It's very important to  note that Section 51 of the Constitution doesn't actually explicitly take sides with saying the  federal government is responsible for the aged care sector.

WATT: That's because we didn't have aged care in 1901 when the Constitution was  written.

RENNICK: Don't interrupt me, Murray! Don't interrupt, Murray. The aged care sector is run  by state governments, non-profitable institutions, charities and other for profit  organisations. It requires the cooperation of state governments. For example, when people

are sick, they get sent to hospitals. So you need the state government to co-opt with  making beds available there. I'm led to believe that the Victorian Government didn't do that  straight away. The Victorian government also brought in the quarantine rules where if one  person got COVID in an aged care centre, they would pull all the staff out. So obviously,  they are the ones making the decisions, on the ground decisions, in aged care centres.

So it's not that easy to just, you know - and when you first asked me about Dan Andrews, I  didn't say that, you know, we're going to get it - Dan Andrews was gonna get it perfect. So  for Murray Watt to sit there and to say that we've got to get aged care perfect, obviously,  we've got to try to improve it. No one's denying that. But this is not an easy sector to deal  with. And, you know, if you look at the overall numbers with respect, you know, we haven't  done a bad job comparative to other countries and we are focused on improving the aged  care sector.

WATT: Danica, the difference with aged care is that this is not a new problem that has  emerged. This is not something that has caught us by surprise that the aged care system  is in crisis. Just over the last three or four years, there've been about ten reports and  inquiries conducted which have highlighted massive problems in the aged care system.  There's been report after report, news report after report, and still the government hasn't  stepped up to the plate. I mean, this argument from Gerard that there's nothing in the  Constitution that says that the Commonwealth is responsible for aged care is nonsense. In  1901, when the Constitution was written, we probably didn't have an aged care system. I  mean, that's like saying that there's nothing in the Constitution about the NBN and  therefore the federal government's not responsible for the NBN either.

The reality is that for decades, the federal government has been responsible for the  regulation of aged care. Sure, it's provided by a combination of state and increasingly  private and not for profit operations. But the role of regulating aged care falls squarely at  the feet of the federal government. And it's a role that they have underperformed and failed  in year after year. It's got to be fixed. I don't know what it's gonna take for this government  to finally step up. We've got over hundred thousand people still on a waiting list for home  care packages and all sorts of problems with workforce, with nutrition. The federal  government's got to fix this.

DE GIORGIO: Oh, look, I mean, as we both, we've all said, you know, obviously clearly  mistakes were made. I want to move on, though. I know it's a very topical issue, but I do  want to move on because we are going to be running out of time soon. I want to talk about  the planned increase to superannuation contributions. That was a key election promise,  but this now could potentially be derailed. Yesterday, Scott Morrison said that the  pandemic has certainly changed everything. Senator Rennick from an employee thought  process here, I mean, how do you think that they would consider this?

RENNICK: Well, look, you know, people need money in their pockets right now. We  shouldn't sacrifice the standard of today's living for the future. We have a very good  pension scheme in this country that is provided for people up until this day. And it still  provides, might I add, for sixty eight percent of retirees who are on a pension or part  pension. Superannuation has actually done very little to reduce the number of people  relying on a pension. It saved about nine billion dollars in the pension, but it's come at a  cost of forty billion dollars in tax concessions for mainly wealthy retirees and over thirty five  billion in fees. Six hundred billion dollars are invested offshore. The number of people who  retire on a mortgage since superannuation was introduced has risen from forty per cent to



seventy per cent.

And might I add, the whole scheme is a Ponzi scheme because what's going to happen is  by around about 2030, people who have got a full lifetime savings in super will withdraw,  when they retire, will withdraw that forty years of super, thus requiring another forty people  to put in one year. So eventually you're going to have a cascading effect on  superannuation that is going to destroy the savings of future generations. So that is why  the generations that are putting their money into superannuation now, they're highly  unlikely to see it.

DE GIORGIO: ACOSS and the Grattan Institute have both said that the legislated super  rises could certainly restrict wages growth. So, Senator, what do you think that this is a fair  and reasonable move?

WATT: Well, no, I don't. Labor has always supported compulsory superannuation, unlike  the Liberal Party, and we have always supported increases to it, to make sure that workers  have a dignified retirement. The reality is that the Liberal Party has opposed every single  dollar that has gone into superannuation since it was created by a Labor government in  1993. We've had Liberal Senators like Gerard refer to, and call superannuation a cancer.  He's now calling it a Ponzi scheme. All that reveals is that they want to take apart the  superannuation system.

I mean, this argument that the government is making that there's gonna be some sort of a  trade-off between superannuation increases and wage rises. Well, that's the first time I've  heard anyone from the government care about wage rises for years. Under this  government, wages have been growing at the lowest rate they have in recorded Australian  history. And all of - they never did anything about it then. In fact, what they used to say was  that low wage growth was a “deliberate design feature” of this government's economic  policy. And now we're supposed to believe that all of a sudden they care about wage  growth. They've ignored it for years. All they really want to do is undermine the  superannuation system for ideological reasons. And the consequence of that is that  Australians will have a less dignified retirement and our pension costs for the taxpayer are  going to go through the roof in decades ahead. It's the wrong move at the wrong time.

DE GIORGIO: Gerard Rennick and Murray Watt, appreciate your analysis. Thank you for  joining me this morning.

WATT: Good to talk to you Danica.

RENNICK: Thanks.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TALI ELEY 0448 078 456





