

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW   ABC RN BREAKFAST WITH FRAN KELLY  THURSDAY, 10 DECEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Government’s proposed industrial relations changes; Being Leader of  the Opposition during the coronavirus pandemic; last sitting week of Parliament in  2020; economic recovery from COVID-19; Aussies stranded overseas; climate  change.

FRAN KELLY, HOST: Anthony Albanese, welcome back to Breakfast.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Good  morning, Fran.

KELLY: Quoting the Prime Minister, 'If the business doesn't exist, no one has a job'. That's  how he sums up the changes in their bill. A lot of workers who are very anxious about  keeping their jobs might see it the same way, don't you think?

ALBANESE: Well, that's an argument to drive down wages and conditions, Fran. The  Prime Minister says that they're open to dialogue now. They had months of dialogue  between employers and trade unions. They excluded Labor from that dialogue, that was a  decision that they made. But in none of those discussions did they raise this plan that would  cut workers take home pay. At no stage. And what they did was just spring it in the  legislation that they introduced yesterday. And if they're serious about taking that change  off the table, they should walk into Parliament this morning, remove that bill, just withdraw  it, and reintroduce a bill without those provisions in.

KELLY: Okay. It's no secret, though, that employers have been wanting changes to  enterprise agreements. If the Government says it's not a take it or leave it proposition, is  Labor open to compromise when it comes to making enterprise agreements more fit for  purpose?

ALBANESE: Well, our test is very simple, Fran. We want secure jobs with decent pay.  We'll examine any legislation that does that in a constructive way. That's the way that we've  acted all year. But what we won't do is vote for a pay cut for workers as their Christmas  present, who got us through this pandemic. All those supermarket workers, cleaners, truck  drivers, childcare workers, aged care staff, they are deserving of our respect. What they've  got from this Government is that at the very first opportunity, they've gone back to what's in

their DNA, which is attacking pay and conditions of working families.

KELLY: Okay. But what would be acceptable to the Opposition? We're trying to look at  what might happen here. Could it work if the language in the section was tightened up to  narrow the definition of the businesses allowed to bypass the Better Off Overall Test? Or do  you want that provision, which is described as modest by the Attorney General, do you  want that dumped altogether from the bill?

ALBANESE: Well, we'll examine any detail which is there. At the moment, we won't vote  for what's there. It's as simple as that. And that's not the only problem, of course. There's  other problems there, which is that if a casual is looking to be made permanent, and one of  the problems that's been identified by the pandemic is the insecure work, casuals were the  first people to be thrown out during the pandemic, the insecure work creates a problem for  them in terms of being able to have a mortgage, be able to have that security that a  constant income provides. And yet, under this legislation, there's no remedy for casuals to  be able to be made permanent because an employer has to agree there's no prospect for  arbitration. What the Government says is that they should just march down to the Federal  Court. People who are casual employees aren't in a position to take their employer to the  Federal Court in order to be made permanent.

KELLY: Are you over-egging this, though, because the Government's presented you with a  weapon, basically? You've labelled this bill nasty, but it was Labor, and the Government's  really pointing this out, it was Labor who amended the Fair Work Act back in 2009 to allow  employers to set aside the safeguard of the BOOT if they were facing hardships. Since then  60,000 EBAs have been approved, only 21 didn't comply with the test and only one resulted  in lower wages.

ALBANESE: Because there's a strict test in there, Fran. What we're doing is consistent  with what Labor always does, which is stand up for workers’ pay and conditions. What the  provisions in the bill that they introduced yesterday provide for is a very simple test, which  is, has a business been affected by the pandemic. Well guess what? Breaking news on  Radio National, Fran. Every business has been affected by the pandemic. Some of them  have been improved, it must be said, in terms of some of the retail outlets have done okay.  But every business has been impacted by the pandemic. And it's just quite outrageous for  the Government to establish a consultative process, which involved the ACTU, Sally  McManus and the union movement entered into that process in good faith, and they got hit  from behind with this with no notice whatsoever.

KELLY: Okay. So, you've said already this morning, 'We won't vote for what's there'. If this  provision stays, and you've already talked about the casuals, the concerns about the casual  provisions too, would Labor vote against this omnibus bill in its entirety? Would you vote it  down?

ALBANESE: If it stayed the way it is at the moment, yes, we would.

KELLY: This has been a tough year for you, for the opposition, probably for any opposition,  to be fair, in this global pandemic. But Labor has had trouble cutting through, questions are  being asked about your leadership. How much do you need and want this fight with the  Government?

ALBANESE: Fran, what we want is good outcomes. And that's what we've fought for all

year. I take great pride in the way that we've conducted ourselves. It was Labor who argued  for wage subsidies that became JobKeeper. It was Labor, along with the trade union  movement, that pointed out there was a problem with no paid pandemic leave. It was Labor  that has been constructive each and every day, not letting the perfect be the enemy of the  good. We've put forward constructive ideas. We've raised issues legitimately which are  there. And that stands in stark contrast to the Government, which when they were in  opposition as a Coalition during the Global Financial Crisis, voted against the economic  stimulus package and just voted no to everything.

KELLY: Where's all that got you though? I mean, yes, that is true, that is the way Labor's  behaved. Some Labor MPs are expressing disappointment privately in your leadership.  Next year could be an election year. What's your plan to turn things around and create the  space to take the fight up to the Government?

ALBANESE: Well, we're actually in a position, Fran, if you look at where we are.

KELLY: In the polls?

ALBANESE: We are three points higher, our primary vote, then we were at the last election  during a global pandemic which has given great advantage to every government in the  world unless it's been completely mishandled. So, I'm very confident that we will get credit  for the fact that we've being constructive. But what next year will be all about is the  economic recovery and whether we look after people who've got us through this pandemic.  The people who deserve the greatest credit for coming through, likely having Australia  better than most countries in the world, are the Australian people themselves. Those  people who have looked after each other. It has been state and territory governments, of  course, that have put in place very strong provisions, many of them under severe criticism  from the Federal Government, only Labor Government that they've been prepared to  criticise, of course. But we will continue to put forward our plan as I did in the Budget Reply  for cheaper childcare, for a future made in Australia, to recognise the weaknesses in our  economy that have been exposed by the coronavirus and have a practical plan to fix them.

KELLY: Anthony Albanese is the Federal Opposition Leader. This is the final sitting week  of the year of 2020. What a year it's been. Just two issues just to canvas quickly. In terms  of the recovery and the pandemic, 39,000 Australians are still stranded overseas, they  won't be home for Christmas, we can see that now. Labor's calling for a plan to get them all  home by February after which the focus should then be on flying in international students  and other workforces that might be needed. Given the log jam in quarantine hotels, how do  you propose that would happen? Where would you house tens of thousands of arrivals?  They're not all going to fit into Howard Springs.

ALBANESE: Fran, this is a great example of the gap that is there between what Scott  Morrison announces, which was that everyone would be home by Christmas, and what he  actually delivers, which in this case is 40,000 families around Australia who will have an  empty seat at their Christmas lunch table this year because of the Government's failure.  The fact is that a plan was identified to the Government by Jane Halton, who recommended  the Government taking charge of quarantine facilities, who recommended a practical plan  that, given the Federal Government does run quarantine under our federal system, she  recommended imposing exclusion zones around quarantine facilities, opening up further  quarantine centres like the RAAF centre at Learmonth. The fact is, that report to the  Government has been completely ignored. And of those who were already registered with



the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade when Scott Morrison made his home by  Christmas promise, there's 12,000 of those who are not home.

KELLY: Okay. And just one last issue for the year, and it remains a major issue, we started  this year off with bushfires and a lot of focus on climate change. On climate change, we still  don't know if the Prime Minister will get a speaking slot at the Global Leaders’ Summit on  Saturday. But new figures released in this country today project a 29 per cent cut to  Australian emissions by 2030, which is better than our Paris Commitment of a 26 to 28 per  cent drop. On that basis, do you think Scott Morrison should be given a slot? Because this  is happening without using credit carryover credits. The Government has drop that. Should  the PM be given a speaker's slot? What do you think?

ALBANESE: Well, there's been a recession, Fran. That's why emissions have gone down.  People weren't driving around in their cars and planes weren't flying. It's as simple as that.  And that had an impact. The fact is that the rest of the world regarded the idea that we  would be able to use Kyoto carryover credits for our 2030 targets that the Morrison  Government has set with contempt.

KELLY: And the Government has dropped it because it doesn't need them anymore.

ALBANESE: No. They dropped it because it was never going to be allowed, Fran. It was  just a farce. And the fact is that the last time Australia attended an international climate  change conference, they were sitting in a corner with Saudi Arabia and Brazil, as the  international pariahs, when they attempted to argue an absurd position. The fact is, if the  Prime Minister can't even get a speaking slot at a global conference, that says a lot about  the way that the world is regarding Australia's position. And the fact is that now that Joe  Biden has been elected as the President-Elect of the United States, Australia stands as one  of the very few places in the world that isn't prepared to commit to net zero emissions by  2050. And that's the big problem that this Government has. It has no credibility on the  international stage. It says that we need global action for climate change, and it's right. It is  right. But they are not a part of the solution, they're part of the problem.

KELLY: Thank you very much for joining us.

ALBANESE: Thanks very much, Fran.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053









