

MURRAY WATT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR NORTHERN AUSTRALIA  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DISASTER AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT  LABOR SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW   CANBERRA  MONDAY, 2 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Prime Minister’s bushfire funding failures; funding  rorts; coronavirus; Estimates

MURRAY WATT, SHADOW MINISTER FOR DISASTER AND EMERGENCY  MANAGEMENT: Well, firstly, I'd like to pass on my condolences to the family of the  Australian man who died of coronavirus over the weekend. This is obviously the first  Australian who has died from this virus. And I think all of us in this building express our  condolences to him and his loved ones. It's a reminder that this is a very serious disease  and we do need to listen to the warnings from our health authorities. And with any luck, this  can be brought under control sooner rather than later. I also just want to make it couple of  comments with Estimates starting today. A couple of things that we're going to be  focussing on Estimates are, of course, the huge number of rorts that we've seen from this  Government, whether it be in the sports funds, the infrastructure funds, in regional funds. I  was doing some preparation for Estimates over the weekend and you almost lose count of  the number of funds that have been rorted by this Government. So that's going to be  clearly be a focus throughout Estimates.

But also, one of the other things that we want to focus on is how the Government is going  with its bushfire recovery efforts, because concerningly, we continue to see reports that the  Government is drastically failing in its bushfire recovery efforts. Now, we know that the  Prime Minister grossly failed Australians when it came to planning for the bushfires. And it  seems that the Prime Minister is also failing Australians who suffered those bushfires when  it comes to supporting them through their recovery. Today, there's a report in one of the  newspapers that months after these bushfires that have occurred in New South Wales,  less than $2 million has been paid to small businesses who have suffered from the  bushfires. Now, having travelled to a number of the bushfire affected areas myself, I know  how much these small businesses and their workers are hurting and they desperately need  support from their government. And instead, what they are seeing is that Scott Morrison is  yet again turning his back on them, missing in action just like he was during the fires  themselves. Only four concessional loans have been approved to small businesses in New  South Wales since the bushfires have occurred. It is simply not good enough, and it goes  against the Prime Minister's promises - when he finally actually took action on the bushfires



- that support from the Government would be coming immediately. If, after months after  these bushfires, the best the Government can do is less than a couple of million dollars in  grants and only four loans being approved, then that is not the immediate support that the  Prime Minister promised. And we have seen the Prime Minister break his promise to  bushfire victims.

The other thing that's emerged in the last couple of days is that the Government's  promises to support the tourism industry in bushfire affected regions are also not being  delivered. It's another case of more marketing from the Prime Minister and no follow  through. What the Prime Minister promised was that his Government would spend $76  million on tourism promotion to encourage people to take holidays in bushfire affected  areas. And sneakily last week, what they did was plunder that funding to support tourism  promotion in areas that are hit by coronavirus. Now, coming from Queensland, I know very  well that there are real pressures on our tourism industry as a result of the coronavirus,  and there's no doubt they need our support, but that shouldn't be coming at the expense of  the businesses on the South Coast of New South Wales, in East Gippsland and even  indeed in my home state of Queensland, who are struggling to recover from the bushfires.

It's not good enough for the Prime Minister to come out with all sorts of spin and all sorts  of promises about what he's going to do to people affected by bushfires and then sneakily  take money away or refuse to pay up. It's about time he started providing Australians  who've suffered from these bushfires with the support that he promised to do.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TALI ELEY 0448 078 456









