



THE HON KEITH PITT MP

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia  Member for Hinkler

Media Release

31 March 2020

Resources Ministers united in response to COVID-19



The Australian Government is continuing to work with State and Territory Ministers and the  resources sector to ensure critical projects keep operating during the response to the COVID-19  pandemic.

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt said Australian Resources Ministers  met by teleconference again last night to discuss the shared goal of ensuring this vital sector keeps  operating.

“The Australian resources sector is a key part of the Australian economy,” Minister Pitt said.

“The commodities Australia mines keep the lights on here, they supply the essentials for major  businesses like smelters and refineries, and our exports will be critical in keeping international  economies going as they too deal with the COVID-19 pandemic.

“The resources sector has developed a set of health and safety protocols to protect workers and  local communities.  They include strict standards on transport and procedures on mine sites.

“State and Territory Ministers have committed to keep working together as each jurisdiction  updates its border rules,” Minister Pitt said.

Where possible jurisdictions will work together to maximise the ability of workers to move between  states and territories, noting that each state is regularly reviewing its requirements in accordance  with the advice from the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee and respective State and  Territory Chief Medical Officers.

“Ministers agreed that officials would undertake further work to ensure specialist personnel from  overseas and within Australia continue to be available to respond in the event of an emergency.

“The resources sector remains well positioned to lead Australia’s economic recovery, which was  confirmed in latest figures from Western Australia yesterday.

“They showed a 28 per cent increase in the state’s resources sales last year and importantly, the  number of people employed in the industry rose to 133,094.

“The Australian Government is also supporting workers and businesses with the historic  announcement of the $130 billion JobKeeper payment.”

As always the focus of the Australian Government will be the protection of people’s health, their  jobs and their livelihoods and positioning the Australian economy and our communities to bounce  back from the COVID-19 pandemic.





Media contact: Matt Dunstan 0411 535 072

