







THE HON TREVOR EVANS MP  ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR WASTE REDUCTION AND ENVIRONMENTAL  MANAGEMENT

MEDIA RELEASE



7 August 2020



Independent review of oil product stewardship

The fourth independent review of the Product Stewardship (Oil) Act 2000 was announced  today by the Assistant Minister for Waste Reduction and Environmental Management, Trevor  Evans, while visiting the Cleanaway Narangba Waste Oil Recycling Facility in Queensland.

Deloitte Access Economics has been engaged to conduct this important work, which  continues the Morrison Government’s continued program of action to boost recycling and  resource recovery.

Oil product stewardship ensures producers are taking responsibility for their waste products -  creating jobs, producing new valuable products and protecting the environment from  improper end of life management of waste oil.

Assistant Minister Evans said the Product Stewardship for Oil scheme was delivering strong  results ahead of the review.

“This scheme has been highly successful and we want to build on that success. It’s been  operating for twenty years and results in approximately 300 million litres of waste oil being  collected and recycled every year,” said Assistant Minister Evans.

“The independent review is a chance to make sure all the right parts are working together  smoothly.

“This is a scheme that supports 11 oil recycling facilities around Australia, employing 600  Australians and supporting thousands of contractors.”

The review will look at the financial and operational sustainability of the scheme, ensuring  the effectiveness of the scheme now and into the future.

“A single automotive oil change can produce four to five litres of oil and just one litre of oil  can contaminate one million litres of water,” said Assistant Minister Evans.





“This scheme makes a big difference to the environment and the health of Australians,  turning used oil from across the country into valuable new products.

“We must ensure we are recycling used oil from metropolitan and regional sites across  Australia to keep our country beautiful and protect the environment.”

Background

Under the Product Stewardship for Oil scheme, Australia’s oil recyclers collect and recycle used oil  from over 48,000 businesses around Australia that produce waste oil, such as mechanics, car  dealerships, factories, passenger transport, freight, service stations and heavy industry.

On 30 June 2020, the Australian Government announced an additional $7.8 million in temporary  funding to support oil recycling facilities affected by COVID-19.

ENDS  Media contact:   Assistant Minister Evans: Paul Cormack 0435 820 478

