

Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE GOVERNMENT IN THE SENATE  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA

MEDIA RELEASE

9 November 2020

ENSURING FASTER PAYMENT TIMES TO AUSTRALIAN SMALL  BUSINESSES

Thousands of large Australian businesses have been invited to register early for the Morrison  Government’s new Payment Times Reporting Scheme which requires large businesses with a  total annual income of over $100 million to publicly report their payment terms and practices  to their small business suppliers.

From 1 January 2021, large businesses must start reporting on how and when they pay their  small business suppliers with the first payment times reports to be provided from 1 July  2021.

Around 4,200 of Australia’s largest businesses including foreign companies that operate a  business in Australia are being invited to register their details.

The objective of the Scheme is to improve payment outcomes for Australia’s 3.5 million  small businesses by creating transparency around the payment terms and practices of large  businesses.

By providing access to information on large business payment performance, small businesses  will be able to make more informed choices about their potential customers. Greater  transparency will also incentivise large businesses to pay their small businesses on time.

Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business, Senator the Hon Michaelia  Cash said that longer payment times hurt small business cash flow.

“The Government is acting decisively and responsibly to support small businesses to  overcome the challenges posed by COVID-19. It is now even more important large  businesses pay their small business suppliers the money that they are owed promptly”  Minister Cash said.

“The Morrison Government has already got its house in order and is paying its bills faster.  Commonwealth agencies are paying invoices for contracts under $1 million within 20 days  and paying e-invoices within 5 days”

“Improving payment times for small businesses will help them to prosper, grow and employ  more Australians”, Minister Cash said.

After an initial 12 month transition period, civil penalties will apply to reporting businesses  that fail to report or give the Payment Times Reporting Regulator a false or misleading  report.



For more information on the scheme, visit industry.gov.au/ptrs



MEDIA CONTACTS  Guy Creighton - Guy.Creighton@dese.gov.au - 0438 815 302  Brittany Higgins - Brittany.higgins@dese.gov.au - 0449 171 294



