

THE HON ANDREW GEE MP  Minister for Decentralisation and Regional Education   Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Investment   Federal Member for Calare



STATEMENT

09 September 2020

INTERSTATE BOARDING SCHOOL STUDENTS DESERVE  ANSWERS

“Yesterday afternoon a document was circulated to a number of parties and media outlets  purporting to be an official exemption from the Queensland Chief Health Officer which grants  interstate boarding school students from NSW and the ACT approval to return home and  back to school again unimpeded these holidays,” Minister Gee said.

“Despite the fact that this document has been widely reported, there has been no public  confirmation from the Queensland Government that an exemption has in fact been granted.

“This morning, I called on the Queensland Government to address this issue. My Office has  also made contact with the Queensland Minister for Education’s Office and the Queensland  Department of Education to request more information. Unfortunately, we are getting radio  silence.

“The school holidays are fast approaching and boarding school students and their families  are hurting. They deserve certainty.

“I urge the Queensland Government to publicly confirm whether this exemption has been  granted, and to explain why there has been a delay in official advice.

“I simply do not understand why this is so difficult.

“The Queensland Government’s ongoing failure to publicly address these questions  continues to place boarding school students and their families in limbo.

“They are pawns in the new political game of COVID-19, whereby political self-interest and  parochialism overrides uniting families, giving them certainty and getting students home for  the holidays.

“It seems that if you’re a footy executive, heaven and earth will be moved to get you a sun  lounge and a cocktail by the pool, but if you’re a boarding school student trying to get home  for the holidays, you get a wall of silence.

“States and territories have a responsibility to their interstate boarding school students. They  need to step up and address these border restriction issues with compassionate and  common-sense solutions.

“We need to provide all interstate boarding school students with certainty and a safe route  home and back to school again these holidays.

“I’m hoping the Australian Health Principal Protection Committee can come up with a  nationally consistent, caring and compassionate approach to recommend to the states and  territories so that the turmoil over this issue doesn’t continue through to Christmas and the  next holidays.”

Media Contact: Gabi Phipps 0400 917 405, Gabrielle.Phipps@dfat.gov.au

