

CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



JASON CLARE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR REGIONAL SERVICES, LOCAL GOVERNMENT

AND TERRITORIES

MEMBER FOR BLAXLAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

SYDNEY

SATURDAY, 4 APRIL 2020



SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; support for health workers; parliamentary

oversight.



JASON CLARE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND

HOMELESSNESS: Thanks very much for coming along to Bankstown this

morning. I'm here with Chris Bowen, the Shadow Minister for Health, Khal

Asfour the Mayor of Canterbury-Bankstown and Gerard Hayes the Secretary of

the HSU here in New South Wales, as well as these wonderful people behind

me that are on the front line of this crisis helping to save lives here in

Bankstown. And people like them right across the country.



More and more Australians are being asked to stay at home. More and more

Australians are working from home and that's a good thing. The more people

that stay at home, the fewer people will die. But there's some people who can't

stay at home. They're the people that work in our hospitals, whether they're

doctors or nurses, or ambos, or cleaners, or kitchen hands. They're all on the

front line. Whether you wear a stethoscope to work, or you use a mop, you're

on the front line and you're helping to save lives. In the last few days, we've

heard some pretty awful stories about nurses and cleaners in some parts of

New South Wales being abused and spat on by people worried that they might

be spreading the disease as they're going in and out of work.



Now, you know, that's not on. The people behind me they should be being

saluted, not spat on. And one little way to express our gratitude and our thanks,

is to make it a little bit easier for hospital workers to get to work. More and more

people are going to work now by car. It's a safer way than public transport for a

lot of doctors and nurses and hospital workers. That's why Gerard Hayes and

the HSU have been running a campaign to get free parking in the car parks of

our hospitals for hospital workers. It's common sense. It's a great campaign.

The sooner state governments do it, the better. But another thing that we can

do is provide free parking on the street. For hospital workers that drive to work

and can't get into the car park. Make sure that if there's metered parking, it's

turned off. Or if there's time limited parking, that they're not booked and Khal

Asfour the Mayor of Canterbury-Bankstown has done just that. He'll explain

what he's doing. It's a fantastic initiative. And just a small way to say thank you

to the people that are on the front line here, helping to keep us safe, and

helping to save lives here in Bankstown. And people like them helping to save

lives right across Australia. I'll hand over to Chris Bowen, then Khal and then

Gerard.



CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks very much,

Jason. This crisis has a long way to go. While the published figures are

encouraging, there is no room for complacency when it comes to COVID-19.

We need to ensure we're detecting every case of community transmission and

we need to ensure we were staying with the very strict rules that are put in

place. And as we keep saying, if in doubt, do more. One thing we know is that

the health workers of Australia are our frontline. They deserve our applause.

But they deserve so much more. They deserve a practical support. health

workers across the country have contacted me and said, they are worried about

their families. And they wonder whether a nationally coordinated

accommodation scheme could be put in place to help them have somewhere to

stay if they're working 12 and 16 hour shifts, and they don't want to go home

and have to socially distance from their family at home because they've been

doing such good work. That's a good idea.



Also, as Jason said, we've been shocked to hear the stories of health workers

being abused on public transport, being accused of bringing the virus onto the

trains and buses. We're all in this together Australia. Let's stick most of all with

our health workers. But as more and more health workers are driving to work,

there are practical things that can be done, free parking is one of them.

Whether they go into hospital grounds, or councils following the lead of

Bankstown-Canterbury and others, providing free parking with a pass for

hospital workers, all good initiatives, these are sensible suggestions.



Now during the week, we made sensible suggestions about extending the

flexibility for nurses here in Australia on working holiday visas, to be able to

work in hospitals, not picking fruit, but work in hospitals. We're very pleased

that today, the Government has accepted that and made those changes as

announced that were recommended and suggested by Kristina Keneally and I

earlier in the week. There's also a range of changes that have been made for

working holiday visas across the country, which we welcome as well.



But these are practical initiatives. This has a long way to go. There's no room

for complacency and health workers deserve our applause. They deserve so

much more. They deserve practical measures as well.



CLARE: I'll ask Khal Asfour the Mayor of Canterbury-Bankstown to say a few

words.



KHAL ASFOUR, MAYOR OF CANTERBURY-BANKSTOWN: Thank you

Jason. After speaking to Jason recently and to Gerard and Chris, we knew that

we had to come up with a better way for our frontline hospital staff to be able to

get better access to work. Some are getting abused on public transport, not

something that we support. It's actually disgusting behaviour. What we are

trying to do here at Canterbury-Bankstown is help them by giving him a COVID-19 parking pass the ability to park on the street for free with timed parking, and

they will not get booked by our rangers. They just won't get booked and this will

be at our two major hospitals at Bankstown and at Canterbury. So we want to

make sure that our frontline workers have that relief. And even if it means I

don't have to get out of the hospital and move a car during the shift. That's a

good thing it gives one less thing to think about. So I really am happy that my

Council and my residents are supportive of this parking pass idea and I do

encourage all councils across the country to follow my lead, support this

wonderful initiative.



CLARE: Gerard Hayes, Secretary of the HSU, to say a few words.



GERARD HAYES, HEALTH SERVICES UNION: I'd like to take this

opportunity to thank Khal as the Mayor of Bankstown and Canterbury to who is

standing up for the health workers in this area, and ultimately in New South

Wales and ultimately in Australia. I call on other local governments to get on

board and follow Khal's lead here. To make life better for workers over the next

coming months, Winter is coming and with that, this fight will come. And this

fight is going to only be achieved by us working together. So when we can see

more people working in health, and we will see people from Qantas coming, we

will see people from hotels coming and we welcome that. But the fact of the

matter is these people have to be able to park you got to be able to get to and

from work, and if we can make it safe for people to do so. If we can make it

easier for people to do so. Our health will be so much better in the long term.



Today I'm calling on Dominic Perrottet, the Treasurer of New South Wales, to

look into the Treasury to open up the purses to let health workers do their job in

the best way possible. And Treasurer, you need to do this, you need to do this

now, to ensure that our people in New South Wales, our workers in health have

got the confidence to be able to come to work, do their job, and make people

well.



CLARE: Now one of those health workers who works here is Gail and Gail you

want to say a few words. We'll get you in here.



HEALTH WORKER: Hi, I'm Gail, I work at Bankstown. I'm in the food service

department and a lot of my colleagues are the cleaning department. We are

asking for you guys to stay at home. Stay safe, and leave us so we can come

to work and be safe and go home to our families also. So please just

understand that we need you to stay off the streets. Stay at home. Let us be

coming to work. Let us be safe. Thank you.



CLARE: Good on you. Thanks very much. I'm now happy to hand over to

questions. We've got a few questions on the phone.



JOURNALIST: The Government has announced it is going to allow people to

extend their visas to work in regional areas, pick fruit, that sort of thing which

you have welcomed. Should those jobs be going to Australians in preference to

people from overseas?



BOWEN: If I did hear your question correctly, this is the right balance that the

Government is going down today. Let's be clear. Australians are staying at

home on instructions. There is still fruit to be picked. There's still other jobs in

regional Australia to be done. And with the best will in the world not many

Australians are necessarily in a position to go and do that. Now of course, if

Australians want to go and pick fruit and do those other jobs, they deserve that

opportunity. Absolutely. But also, while we've got working holiday visa holders

here, it is very difficult for them to go home. With the necessary protections in

place we are comfortable with the changes the Government has made. And

also we support and welcome the fact that they adopted the changes we

suggested earlier this week in relation to international nurses here on working

holiday visas.



JOURNALIST: On the international students, and some of the adjustments that

have been made today, we have spoken to some international students who

say this isn't nearly enough, they contribute around $30 billion to the economy,

taxes and deserve a little bit more support. Does the Government need to do

more to support international students?



BOWEN: Yes, to be clear, while we welcome the steps that have been put in

place today, Kristina Keneally has been pursuing a range of matters on other

visa holders as well, not just working holiday visas, including international

students, international students are here. And they deserve the support of the

system. while they're here. They need to get that support and assistance.



Kristina has been pursuing a number of matters. Of course, Tanya Plibersek

has also been commenting on this matter as well. I've received feedback from

international students directly. The virus does not check your visa status before

it decides whether to infect you. And if you've got people who are here in

Australia and very, very difficult for them to go home. Then obviously every

consideration needs to be given to providing every support possible to them,

including international students. Kristina will be making further comments but

I'm sure that we will have the view that in relation to other visa holders other

than working holiday visas more could be done.



JOURNALIST: Do you trust the numbers coming out of China at the moment?



BOWEN: I think you could go through every country and say that they could be

doing more on testing. And indeed, in Australia's case, we've said while we

recognise the very good work that's being done on testing, we must be

ensuring we're testing everybody, with symptoms, and we must be ensuring we

are detecting all community transmission, and that is the big risk for Australia

going forward. I'm not going to get into any particular country. The Chief

Medical Officer said yesterday that all countries could be doing better with

testing. And I think that's probably a fair comment for him to make.



JOURNALIST: I guess the question is not specifically just about testing, but

about whether some countries, including China, are reporting what they are

testing accurately?



BOWEN: Well, look, I agree with what the Chief Medical Officer said yesterday,

I think we need to assess all countries and assume that there are more cases

that are being detected already. Putting a general statement which would apply

across the board.



JOURNALIST: Are you satisfied with Minister Cormann's, comments that he

will allow for more scrutiny of the Government spending as it goes through the

billions of dollars that are dolling out. Is that enough scrutiny?



BOWEN: Well, let me just tell you that question in two parts, it goes to scrutiny

of Government expenditure. And Minister Cormann's powers in his comments.

Firstly, on a positive note, there has been an arrangement agreed to between

the Government and the Opposition, that in terms of the Finance Minister's

advance of $40 billion, there will be consultation with the Shadow Minister of

Finance Katie Gallagher and that is appropriate. We welcome that. That was

our suggestion and the Government accepted it and it's a good thing. And that's

an appropriate check and balance.



More broadly, though, Parliament should be sitting. I mean, we're putting in

place measures to ensure the safe sitting of Parliament. We're putting in place

social distancing in Parliament, as we did in the last sitting, parliaments around

the world are providing scrutiny. When the nation is in crisis, you need

Parliament more, not less, you need parliament more, not less, and the nation

is in crisis. So the Parliament should be sitting for more than just one day to tick

the Government's legislation, which we'll be doing. But then we need to be

sitting on a much more regular basis.



And secondly, we continue to assess the options for parliamentary oversight

and transparency going forward if the Parliament is not going to sit, including

parliamentary committees or a committee to oversight and for the Government

to report to its actions. Any other questions? Jason will wrap up.



CLARE: Well, thanks again, Chris. Thanks, Gerard for the campaign that you

are running here on behalf of the wonderful people behind us who are at the

frontline in keeping Australians safe Can I also thank you Khal for the work

you've done, you are setting an example for the rest of the country about how

we can help our health workers to make life just a little bit easier and to say

thank you express, our gratitude in a in a small but important way. I know

there's other councils that are doing this as well, in Brisbane, Sydney,

Liverpool, down the road, and Perth.



And it's not an easy thing for councils to do. Lots of councils are struggling at

the moment financially, some have had to put workers off, they need a little bit

of help from the Federal Government or a little bit of help from the State

Government. Local government is the backbone of our local community. They

pick up the rubbish out the front, like keep our parks and gardens our soccer

fields or sports grounds available for us, even if we can't use them at the

moment. We don't want to see our soccer grounds turned into looking more like

national parks, and it's getting harder and harder for local government to

provide those services at the moment because a lot of the facilities they run

have had to be shut down so they don't have that revenue coming in. So they

need a helping hand. They need a little bit of help from the Government. A

good example of that is childcare.



Who do you think runs most of the childcare centres in New South Wales? It's

local government. Who do you think runs most of the childcare centres in

Victoria? It's local government. And the initiative that the Government

announced this week on child care whilst it is welcomed, has a missing part to

it. It relies on the funding through the Job Keeper program, and councils aren't

eligible for that, which means that there is a risk that a lot of the childcare

centres run by councils may not continue to be able to operate.



Now I've seen in the papers today that the Government's identified this and if

given any indication that they might be willing to fix this, they need to do it.

Because there's lots of childcare centres in Scott Morrison's electorate. Lots of



childcare centre in Dan Tehan’s electorate, lots of childcare centres all around

the country that are run by local councils. And they need the Government's help

here. Because if they don't, there's going to be a lot of parents who turn up

hoping to get their kids into that childcare centre and they won't be open and

available for help. So we urge the Government to have a look again at the

support they can provide to local government.



Thanks very much, everyone.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACTS:

LIZ FITCH (BOWEN) 0424 512 512

SCOTT DAVIES (CLARE) 0419 546 197



