





SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Deputy Leader of the Government in the  Senate Senator for South Australia



TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Interview on Channel 7, Sunrise, with David Koch.         Topics: Plans for the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge to visit Australia;   12/02/2020  06:44AM

David Koch: The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge are set to visit Australia for a bushfire recovery tour.  Discussions are underway between Kensington Palace and the Federal Government, with Scott Morrison  expected to formally write to the royals this week. During the trip, Kate and Wills will offer support to survivors  and thank firefighters, while also drawing attention to struggling regions. For more, I'm joined by Tourism and  royal Minister Simon Birmingham, live from Canberra. Minister, good to see you. How much effort has gone  into the discussions around this visit? How soon could it happen?

Simon Birmingham: Look, the Duke and Duchess have of course been very open in their sympathies for  Australia. They’ve been very keen to visit, we understand, when possible, and so discussions have been  ongoing. As you said, the PM’s due to write in coming days suggesting locations and dates. A lot of thought  has to go into those things to make sure they spend time with those who are affected by the bushfires but  also, we want to make sure that we project the best possible images of Australia back to the world. The Duke  and Duchess on pristine beaches, in recovering bushland, with great wildlife, demonstrating very much that  Australia is still a fantastic place to visit because that’s something we’ve really got to get the word out about  again.

David Koch: Yeah, gee, that is important, isn't it? That they’re just not in those scarred areas but also   showing that Australia is a great place to come back and visit because it has spooked a lot of overseas  tourists, hasn't it?

Simon Birmingham: It absolutely has. And we know that a royal visit can have an impact. When Harry and  Meghan were here, there was a 120 per cent lift in visitations to Tourism Australia website; there was about a  30 per cent lift in accommodation bookings in the spillover period. So that sort of huge free publicity that  comes from these royal tours delivers economic dividends and that’s really a part of what we’re focused on  here. Of course, the fire affected communities come first, but you do want to make sure that we help those  communities out by making the rest of the world know they’re still open for business, they’re still a great place  to visit.

David Koch: Yeah. And it’s important that you sort of point out those benefits because a lot of people will  inevitably ask - who’s going to pay for the trip? If we invite them, basically we pay, don’t we?

Simon Birmingham: There are costs that the host government has to pick up and those things will be  sorted out in negotiations. But exactly. There are real benefits to Australia's economy, to our communities.  And what does that mean? Well it means that tourism businesses, most of whom are small businesses, stay  open, they get more bookings. They come out of what has been a really tough period for them, between the  fires and coronavirus, so many Australian tourism businesses are struggling right now and we want to give  them the best possible lift in markets like the UK, Europe, the US, who we know will still be willing to travel   to Australia as long as they know they’re going to get a great experience Down Under.

David Koch:  Yep, smart. Alright, Simon, thanks for joining us. Appreciate it.

Simon Birmingham: Thanks Kochie.







Media Contacts  Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.











