

SENATOR PENNY WONG

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS  LABOR SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  ADELAIDE  FRIDAY, 20 MARCH 2020

Subject: Coronavirus

PENNY WONG, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY IN THE SENATE AND  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS: Thank you all for coming and for  observing the physical distancing arrangements that are now becoming par for the course.  Can I first start by thanking all of the front line staff in our health sector, our medical sector,  in our aged care sector who are working and dealing with, either face to face, the  consequences of these crises, or are working to ensure it doesn’t spread. We appreciate  the work that workers in the health sector are doing, we appreciate how stressful this is for  people and the country is extraordinarily appreciative of the efforts of our health  professionals who do such a great job.  Can I also acknowledge the work of the consular service in Foreign Affairs who are under  a lot of pressure and are stretched, and I’ll have something more to say about that. I know  though that they will be working as hard as they are able with the resources they are given  to do what’s right for Australians.

We have seen unprecedented travel bans placed on entry into Australia. We’ve seen  Qantas and Virgin indicating very clearly that they are going to finish international flights at  the end of this month. We’re also seeing commercial flights around the world being  cancelled and we are seeing lockdowns, bans of travel in a range of countries. At this time  I want to make this very clear: the Government needs a plan to help bring Australians  home. We need a plan to help bring Australians home. We need the Government to work  with Qantas, Virgin or any other providers to help people return. The Government needs to  speedily process visas for immediate family members of Australian citizens who are  rushing to return home.

The Government needs to resource our Foreign Affairs Department. There are  extraordinary demands on our consular system. Unprecedented demands. The  Government needs to resource the consular service so that it can provide the support to  Australians at what is an unprecedented time. As importantly we need timely information.  Comprehensive, timely information to Australians. I could go through chapter and verse  about the stories we are seeing. We know that there are Australians in countries where  they cannot leave. We know there are Australians struggling to get out of countries where  commercial flights are being cancelled every day. We know that there are Australians on

cruise ships who are being told they must dock in Italy who will have trouble getting home.  We know there are Australians on cruise ships who as yet have not been able to dock.

In these unprecedented circumstances, we urge the Government to come forward with a  plan to help bring Australians home and we give our assurance as the Opposition to work  with them to communicate that, to develop that in a bipartisan manner. Because we all  want to ensure we work together to keep Australians safe here, and we all want to ensure  we work together to bring Australians home.

I’m happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: What are you envisaging?

WONG: We saw Alan Joyce this morning on radio talking about the possibility of Qantas  being asked to provide additional flights for Australians. I know that this is a highly complex  issue. But there are some hot spots. There are hot spots that the Government can identify.  Certainly my office and other MPs and Senators have been contacted by people for  example from South America, in Peru, who are in need of assistance to get home. We’ve  been contacted by people who are in Morocco, as well as families of people who are on  cruise ships. So it is possible for the Government to identify known areas of need and to  work with Qantas or another provider to try to ensure we have the services in place to help  bring Australians home. Particularly given commercial options are not available. For a lot of  these people, I saw one woman reported as having had five flights cancelled, so she had  done what the Government asked, she had got on commercial flights and those flights had  been cancelled over the hours and days since.

JOURNALIST: The government is saying take a commercial flight home, is it time for us to  look at Government flights?

WONG: That’s what I’m saying: the Government should be working with Qantas to find  ways to bring Australians home. If that means supporting Qantas, Virgin or another  provider through subsidy or other arrangement to ensure we can deliver services to areas  where we know Australians otherwise won’t be able to get home, the Government should  be looking at that. And again I say that we offer bipartisan support to helping with that and  communicating that to the Australian people and to Australians abroad. Remember we  have over a million Australians overseas. Not all of them will want to come home, but there  are many who are trying to do what the Prime Minister asked, and they should be helped.

JOURNALIST: Do you envisage that Qantas might have to fly for longer than the airline  has initially indicated, at the end of the month, given how many Australians are out there?

WONG: Well this is a question that really the Government needs to address. We have just  over a week before Qantas has indicated it will discontinue its commercial international  services, suspend them, and what we should be doing is utilising this next week as best  we can. If there are arrangements that need to be put in place on an as needs basis  thereafter, I think the Government should be looking at that. I understand why the  Government is encouraging people to fly commercial. That is what Governments will often  say. But these are circumstances where those avenues are not open to so many  Australians, through no fault of their own, they haven’t taken risks, they haven’t done the  wrong thing. They’ve just been caught overseas or on a cruise ship at a time where the  commercial options for returning to Australia are drying up. That’s why we need a plan to  help bring them home.



JOURNALIST: Just to be clear Senator, you’re not saying that these flights should be free  or anything, people would pay their own way?

WONG: These are decisions have to make. In the Government I was a part of we didn’t  charge for previous circumstances where people have been coming home in a crisis in  Egypt. We didn’t charge for that, and the Government didn’t charge for Wuhan. What  Anthony Albanese has said, and he’s right, is that whatever charge there is ought not be  exorbitant and ought not be a barrier for travel for vulnerable Australians.

JOURNALIST: If you fly a million people home for free that could be a lot of money.

WONG: My point is if the Government has to make those decisions, and as I said, Ben, not  everybody is wanting to come home. I think what we should identify is what I’d describe as  hot spots, what I’d describe as areas of need where we know people are wanting to come  home but there isn’t a commercial alternative for them.

JOURNALIST: Donald Trump has been saying repeatedly, calling the virus the China  virus. What’s your response to that? The virus did originate in China, I guess. What’s your  feedback to Donald Trump?

WONG: There’s no race to any virus. Viruses don’t have an ethnicity and we’re all in this.  We’re all in this together and that’s the way Australians should, and are, approaching this.

JOURNALIST: What do you think of COAG’s decision to cancel NAPLAN?

WONG: I just saw that breaking earlier this morning. My view about that is governments  have to make the decisions that are responsible and appropriate given the circumstances  which we face and governments have done that. If that’s what’s required, just as we’ve  thought the travel bans and travel restrictions were required. These are times when  governments have to make a whole range of difficult decisions.

JOURNALIST: And what do you think should happen to people who are in Australia on  working visas that are about to expire?

WONG: This is an issue I know my colleagues Kristina Keneally and Chris Bowen have  been working on. There’s an issue which is a public health issue which is ensuring they  have the capacity to self-isolate if required and health services as required, and there’s  also the very practical issue of what happens when visas expire if they are also unable to  get home. Just as the Government needs to develop a plan for Australians who are  offshore seeking to come home, I think this is another cohort who are going to be affected  by the current situation that the Government needs to turn its mind to.

JOURNALIST: For those who are stuck on cruise ships, I’ve spoken to Minister Payne’s  office and they said it’s up to the cruise line to organise transport home for these people.  Do you think that that is a necessary response or should the Government be doing more to  help these people, most of them are heading towards Italy which is known as the epicentre  for this virus?

WONG: That’s right, I referenced that I think in one of my earlier remarks that one of the  cruise ships that has been in the media, at this stage is reported to be docking in Venice. It  is going to be very difficult for any commercial flights for the Australians - I think there are



some 250 Australians on that ship, very difficult for them to get out of Italy without some  assistance. So I would encourage the Government to work with the cruise line sector and  the operators of that particular vessel to ensure there are arrangements made. This is what  I mean, we are in unprecedented times and governments are having to deal with a lot of  unprecedented issues, and this is one of them. We haven’t had a situation before where  we’ve had cruise liners unable to dock, or docking where there are no flights for  repatriation and so I think Government should be helping to support arrangements or  enable arrangements for people to return home.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JOHN OLENICH 0447270785



