

BILL SHORTEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT SERVICES    SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE SCHEME   MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  TODAY SHOW  TUESDAY, 28 JULY 2020

SUBJECTS: Theo Makridis; aged care crisis; anti-maskers.

ALLISON LANGDON, HOST: I want to show you this morning this picture. This is Theo  Makridis. Just one human face of this unfolding tragedy. He was a resident of St Basil’s  Aged Care Home in Melbourne. His family spent five agonising days desperately searching  for information about him. They were told nothing, and only now have they discovered he  was already dead. It is utterly heartbreaking. And it's a national scandal. To discuss, I'm  joined by the Shadow Minister for Government Services Bill Shorten, and Gus Worland  from Triple M. Thank you so much for joining us this morning. Bill, you raised this case  because Theo was your neighbour. You know his family. It's just disgraceful, isn't it?

BILL SHORTEN, MEMEBR FOR MARIBYRNONG: It's incredibly heartbreaking. Theo  lived two doors down from us, for 10 years. Ninety two year old gentleman. He looked after  his adult son who had an impairment. Rita, the daughter, rang me on Saturday, just past.  And she said, I'm just out of out of luck. I cannot find what has happened to my father for  five days. I couldn't believe this. Five days. He went into St Basil's on July the 7th. It was  locked down on July the 8th. But for the five days between Tuesday of last week to  Saturday, no response at all. They couldn't tell him if he was alive or had passed away  where he was, hospital or in the aged care facility. Then Saturday afternoon, late  afternoon, Rita finally got a call. And it was the news that she didn't want to hear - that he'd  passed.

LANGDON: So they had no chance to say goodbye. Nothing.

SHORTEN: No chance to say goodbye. Nothing. And, do you know, I spoke to the family  last night and to the funeral director, they still can't even get the paperwork for the death  certificate so he can have his funeral with only ten people able to go next Monday. The  system is under-loved, understaffed, underfunded. And you shouldn't lose someone for five  days and then find out they've just passed away. It is wrong.

LANGDON: And you can hear the emotion in your voice there, Bill. I mean he was your  neighbour for 10 years.

SHORTEN: Lovely fellow. Would always say g’day. He lived at the corner of the  roundabout. We lived two doors down and he'd always say hello, he loved his family.  Anyway, he’s not the only person. And, you know, I think for Theo’s family, it's not just  about him. But now we've got in aged care, the problems and loss of life. At Menarock  facility in Essendon, which we spoke about a couple of weeks ago, they've had five  fatalities in my electorate. But this is aged care. It's not just the COVID-19. Aged care  hasn't been working properly. There's a lot of great people in the system, but something's  fundamentally wrong. And as I read somewhere, it's just understaffed, under-loved and  underfunded.

LANGDON: Gus, It's just not good enough is it, when, if we can't protect our most  vulnerable. What's the point?

GUS WORLAND, TRIPLE M: Absolutely right. And my heart goes out to you. Bill, I know  exactly the type of guy that Theo is just by that photograph and how you spoke about him.  And I'm sure that he is one of many. So, an absolute tragedy. Imagine that for five days,  not knowing where granddad is or not knowing where your dad is. I can't imagine what that  family have been through. Just another tragedy that, you've put it down to COVID of  course, but of course, the system is broken, isn't it? So we need to have that have that  fixed.

LANGDON: And this morning, the Australian Medical Association says they want a Royal  Commission into Victoria's handling of this crisis. Bill, are you on board?

SHORTEN: No, I think at this point, there is an enquiry into the hotel quarantine issues, but  there's already a Royal Commission into aged care. It's underway. My point is that for five  days, they couldn't find this man. And then they got the terrible news. They still can't get  the death certificate. Now, my point’s about aged care, COVID-19 exposed the sort of  underbelly of what's been going on in aged care anyway, I suspect. As a nation, we make  a decision. Do we think our older people are important or not? We make a decision, do we  just shrug our shoulders and kick the issue down the road? And say oh, too hard and  they're old and who cares? Or do we just say, wake up? Aged care matters. People matter.  To me, what happened to Theo, it's illustrative that the system doesn't respond to families  when we need it most.

LANGDON: Yep, we need the system to step up. We need people to step up. So when  you then see conspiracy theorists holding secret meetings, we saw another woman  confronting staff at Bunnings yesterday. Just take a quick look at this.

VIDEO PACKAGE: The man is on the phone now to the police. He's calling the police  despite the fact that I am actually here shopping, I’m a paying customer. Remember, this is  about your control. It's about your compliance. It's about silencing you.

LANGDON: Okay. Well, I would say to that woman that this morning we now have nearly  700 of our elderly with COVID-19 in 61 facilities. Bill, your message to that woman?

SHORTEN: My message to that woman is wake up to yourself. You know, don't be selfish.  COVID-19 is real. It's not a conspiracy. It's not a made up rumour. Why do people take  cameras into Bunnings to film themselves deliberately going looking for trouble? It's selfish.  The rest of us in Melbourne are wearing our masks. We're doing our social distancing.  People can't go to funerals. The Year 12 kids are doing it hard. Everyone's doing it hard.



And you just want your 15 minutes of whack job fame.

LANGDON: What is going on with them, Gus? I mean, what world, what planet do they  live on?

WORLAND: They’re attention seeking freaks. They really are. They should have the book  thrown at them. I'd love a cop to go in there and just say, sorry darl, and put her in the back  of the paddy wagon, let her rot in jail for a week or two to sort her head out. Bill’s  absolutely right. Attention seeking, who goes into Bunnings knowing exactly what she  wants to do, she wants to try to rile up staff who are out there trying to do a good job,  they’re at work, trying not to get this particular virus. It's just so selfish. And it really annoys  me, that part of Australia, people that think they can get away with this sort of stuff, and at  the moment, they are. And they are getting attention.

LANGDON: Oh, and this is the problem we then have with social media, isn't it, that  they've got this platform, they share their messages, they almost egg each other on, don't  they, Bill?

SHORTEN: Yeah, social media is such an unregulated area. It's the Wild West where  every idiot with a computer keyboard can, you know, be a hero. But when it comes to what  that lady is doing, it's selfish. I have people in the public commission towers, this is a great  stat which shows how much better people can be, the compliance rate with all forms of  testing is in the high 90 percents. So these people in the high rise, many of the migrants  locked, locked down by police, they cooperated fully. And yet you got these self-appointed  vigilantes of the no-nothing brigade just carrying on like they’re heroes.

LANGDON: Yeah. Well, strong words from both of you this morning. And thank you for  coming on. And, Bill, I mean, our thoughts and prayers are with Theo, Theo's family. So  many families going through a similar situation at the moment.

SHORTEN: Thank you.

LANGDON: It's tough. Thanks, guys.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM HOULIHAN 0438 366 400









