



The Hon Stuart Robert MP  Minister for the National Disability Insurance Scheme  Minister for Government Services

MEDIA RELEASE





Authorised by S. Robert MP, Canberra

Friday, 21 August 2020

NDIS update: Vic and NSW Providers to directly claim costs of PPE

The Minister for the NDIS, Stuart Robert, has announced temporary changes to allow NDIS providers  in Victoria and NSW to directly claim the costs of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) from the  NDIA.

With community transmission of coronavirus evident in both states, and in line with current health  advice, the changes will apply to providers who use PPE to deliver essential daily life services to  participants.

‘We’re making it simpler for NDIS providers to claim the costs of PPE to continue safely delivering  face-to-face services to participants,’ Minister Robert said.

‘This change will also give participants greater confidence that their NDIS plan funds will not be  impacted by the use of PPE, as providers can now directly bill these costs to the NDIA.’

The changes will see providers able to claim an allowance of $1.70 per hour of support delivered in the  Activities of Daily Life Support Category, to cover the cost of PPE.

Providers will be able to claim for costs they have incurred for delivering daily living supports from 29  July, in line with previous provisions made for providers to support PPE use.

Providers will also be able to continue claiming for PPE costs through the Price Guide, in agreement  with participants, announced as part of the previous provisions.

Victorian and NSW providers will be contacted over the coming days with further detail on the new  way of claiming for PPE, or can visit ndis.gov.au for more information.

In addition to new funding arrangements for providers sourcing PPE in Victoria and NSW, the  Morrison Government is also working to streamline arrangements for providers to access PPE through  the National Medical Stockpile where they are no longer able to access PPE through their usual means.

In advance of these new arrangements, the Government is providing another urgent dispatch of PPE  (surgical masks and face shields) from the National Medical Stockpile today for 48 Supported  Independent Living providers in Victoria that are working in high needs areas and may have had  challenges obtaining PPE.





Authorised by S. Robert MP, Canberra



Today’s announcement is in addition to existing NDIS participant-focused coronavirus response  measures, including proactive outreach to 7,000 high risk participants in Victoria and distribution of  more than 190,000 face masks to over 260 providers.

Further information on funding of PPE can be found at www.ndis.gov.au.

For information and advice regarding the appropriate use of PPE, visit the Department of Health  website at health.gov.au

[ENDS]

Media contact:  Minister Robert’s Office (02) 6277 7200



