



THE HON MICHAEL SUKKAR MP  Assistant Treasurer  Minister for Housing



THE HON BEN MORTON MP   Assistant Minister to the Prime Minister and Cabinet

THE HON JASON WOOD MP   Assistant Minister for Customs, Community Safety and Multicultural Affairs



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE  22 December 2020



Cutting red tape through new Deregulation Taskforce deep dives

The Australian Government today announced two new priority areas for its Deregulation  Taskforce. These will contribute to the Government’s JobMaker plan for economic recovery  by helping deliver fit-for-purpose regulations that secure vital safeguards while imposing the  least possible costs on business.

Reducing business costs arising from the administration of our excise and excise-equivalent  customs duty regime

The Assistant Treasurer, Michael Sukkar, said the Morrison Government will review  Australia’s excise and excise-equivalent customs duty regime to identify unnecessarily  cumbersome and duplicative processes.

Assistant Minister to the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Ben Morton, said feedback from  relevant industry participants has indicated these regimes impose unnecessary costs on  businesses, and time imposts on skilled officials from the Australian Taxation Office (ATO)  and Australian Border Force (ABF).

The comprehensive review aims to cut regulatory overheads for business, supporting new  investments in our fuel security and world-leading beverage manufacturing sector, while  enabling ATO and ABF officers to focus on higher-risk enforcement efforts.

Assistant Minister for Customs, Jason Wood, said it will also help facilitate the Morrison  Government’s Simplified Trade System reform agenda by looking to streamline a complex  regulatory area by identifying unnecessary pain points for importers and exporters.

This work will not examine the base or rates of taxation.  Rather it is focused on enhancing  the administrative efficiency of our excise and excise-equivalent customs duty regimes.



Reducing unnecessarily overlapping or duplicative cross-jurisdictional regulatory burdens

Ben Morton, Assistant Minister to the Prime Minister and Cabinet, also announced a new  Deregulation Taskforce focus on identifying and scoping reforms in relation to vertical,  cross-jurisdictional regulatory burdens.

Too often, Australian businesses have to deal with unnecessarily overlapping or duplicative  regulations, and/or duplicative regulatory compliance activities, overseen by Commonwealth,  state, territory and international regulatory bodies, which increase costs and impede business  investment, economic growth and job creation.

The COVID-19 crisis has shown what is possible when regulators are flexible and the states  and territories work in close partnership with the Commonwealth.

Without watering down safeguards, we need to continue streamlining regulatory processes.

Throughout early-2021, the Deregulation Taskforce will work with other Commonwealth  agencies to consult closely with businesses, as well as the states and territories, to identify  cases where we can reduce the burden from regulatory overlap.

Consistent with the Commonwealth’s focus on regulator performance and culture, the  Deregulation Taskforce will explore, not only overlapping ‘black letter’ regulations, but also  overlaps in compliance activities, for example, audits by multiple regulators.

The Deregulation Taskforce has already helped secure funding to build a 21st century digital  environmental approvals process, which will be rolled out in partnership with the Western  Australian Government over coming years.  It will provide proponents with a single point of  access to submit and track environmental approvals being undertaken by either the  Commonwealth and/or Western Australia.

In October the Government’s Budget Deregulation Package funded a single, streamlined  online process allowing new child care service providers to submit only one application for  assessment against both Australia Government and State/Territory requirements - reducing  red tape, improving fraud control and saving the sector an estimated $62 million a year.

The two new priority areas announced today are additional to the work the Deregulation  Taskforce is performing in relation to two other areas:

Occupational Mobility - implementing a uniform national scheme for the automatic mutual  recognition of occupational licences and improved information flows between jurisdictions to  improve overall outcomes for the community.

Modernising Business Communications - working with Treasury and across Commonwealth  departments and their regulators on reforms to Commonwealth laws including progressing  the removal of exemptions to the Electronic Transactions Act 1999, and working with states  and territories to progress priority reforms in business communication.

The work of the Deregulation Taskforce continues the Australian Government’s commitment  to reducing red tape, to make it easier for businesses to invest and create jobs. Further  information is available on the Deregulation Taskforce webpage  (https://www.pmc.gov.au/domestic-policy/deregulation-taskforce)



