

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

Media contact: Douglas Ferguson, 0455 448 985

Wednesday 1st April 2020



Radio National Breakfast with Fran Kelly



FRAN KELLY: The Federal Government is taking tentative steps to try and reopen some  global supply chains which have been frozen by the coronavirus pandemic. It's spending  $170 million on an export support package to help seafood, beef, and dairy producers  freight their goods into key Asian markets. At the same time community cohesion here at  home is starting to fray a bit with city dwellers being told pretty bluntly not to relocate to  regional towns to try and escape COVID-19.

Agriculture Minister David Littleproud is on the side of the country locals who he says are  already comparing grey nomad caravans to corona-infested cruise ships. Minister,  welcome back to RN Breakfast.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks for having me, Fran.

FRAN KELLY: Minister, I'm going to come back to these shipping and trade arrangements  in a minute. But first, this- there does seem to be a divide opening up between the cities  and the regions over the COVID-19 virus - city residents being told to stay away from our  coastal and country towns. What's the problem?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: We'll look as we see, and in fact we saw a surge of caravaners  from southern states and also from South East Queensland out into my own electorate in  the outback of Queensland to try and escape COVID-19. They've got to appreciate that  there are finite resources - health resources - in these small communities. And they're not  just putting themselves at risk they're actually putting these little communities at risk. And  it's not us being selfish here in the west, it's understanding that we don't expect to have  huge medical facilities, but the ones that are here are designed to support the small  communities that are here. And when you have significant influx of thousands of people it  puts everyone at risk when, particularly state officials have been very clear about this - you  need to stay home, you can't be selfish about this. Otherwise these caravans could turn  into the cruise ships of the outback and put a lot of Australians at risk and shut down these  little towns.

FRAN KELLY: When you say a surge of grey nomads into the southern states and South  West Queensland where you are, is it though- how do you know it's a surge to try to  escape the virus and not a surge in response to the please, post bushfires, for people to  come and spend their dollars in country towns?

Transcript



Transcript

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Look, obviously we are heading towards that season, but that  season normally doesn't start for a couple weeks after Easter. This has been going on for  some weeks and a lot of the mayors in these country towns - you don't have to be Agatha  Christie in one of these towns to know, and talk to some of these people as to why they're  there. But they were also cleaning out supermarkets on the way out which is putting  pressure on people from remote homesteads that come in 4-500 kilometres to get their  essentials and they find that their supermarkets are cleaned out. This is just about respect,  this is about doing the right thing. We do want you to come out but at the right time. This is  about all Australians respecting one another.

FRAN KELLY: Okay. You talked about panic out there which has led to some vigilantism.  You- yourself, just likened caravans to the COVID-infected cruise ships. Is there any  evidence yet the grey nomads are towing the virus into country Australia? And what do  you want them to do? A lot of these borders are closed now, do you want them to get out  of Queensland? Or- where do you want them to go now? They're there.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well the official position is quite clear: they need to stay home.  This is and invisible [indistinct].

FRAN KELLY: But if they're already there, what do you want them to do?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well they are already starting to turn around and go home, and  ministers were asking them to do that. Mayors have tried to be- to try to work with state  government. In fact I wrote to my own state government and ask them to work with mayors  in a constructive solution - whether that be to get people home or to quarantine them to a  point where community could have satisfaction. But now there is no- there is effectively no  holiday travel scenario in place for us at the moment. So we can't see who's got this virus  and who hasn't and that's the dangerous thing. See, you don't know who's transmitting this  from one part of Australia to the other. And if you're not there, as the health ministers have  said, for work reasons, for essential reasons, then you should stay at home. You should  respect your fellow Australians and do the right thing.

FRAN KELLY: And someone's pointing out on the text line is a lot of grey nomads that  don't have an actual home.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Totally. And that's where we need to work pragmatically with state  officials, and that's why I think the mayors out there were trying to get calm. And we were  trying those people that had the anxiety in those little towns to calm down and work with  state officials about what could be a solution for those people in particular. How do we look  after them in a practical way that gives comfort to the community, to Australia, to keep the  calm and to keep respect that we normally have.

FRAN KELLY: Is the calm breaking down? I mean, you talk about vigilantism, I've heard of  caravans' tyres being slashed Have you seen incidents?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Not- obviously I'm isolated in my own home as well, so obviously  I'm staying at home. But I'm getting these reports back from my remote mayors about  what's happening in their communities and they're obviously distressed, because that's not  who we are. But this is an anxious time, particularly when people are seeing livelihoods  lost and lives lost when they don't have the support facilities in terms of healthcare, that  they do get anxious - particularly when they've got elderly parents in these little towns. So

Transcript



Transcript

people- we're just trying to get calm, trying to get a solution, but everyone can play their  role by staying at home and doing what officials are saying.

FRAN KELLY: And that apparently now includes FIFO - fly in, fly out -workers and drive in,  drive out workers. There's a great deal of fear within mining communities about the  thousands of the FIFO workers. Queensland's shut its borders to all but a very small  number of essential FIFO workers from interstates. And there are reports that WA and  South Australia are considering a similar move. Can FIFO and drive in, drive out continue  when the rest of us are being told to self-isolate?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well this is where industry needs to be forward leaning. And I've  got to say, in agricultural, we are- and we're looking at this for transient workers to pick  fruit, and that's going to be an issue taking them into little communities. And so I reached  out to that ...

FRAN KELLY: I was going to say, it's a mixed bag, isn't it?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: It is.

FRAN KELLY: Because some farmers are urging the government to give their fruit picking  labour force - which aren't locals, of course - to extend visas to thousands of them so they  can keep picking the crops.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: And we need that for our food security. But we also need industry  to prove that they have the protocols in place to keep the community safe. In our meat  processing sectors they're doing that, they have a continuity plan. But for those that are  using transient labour we're going to have to work through a protocol that can give comfort  to the community. And NFF, Fiona Simson has been forward leading on this, we've had  conversations. And in fact the horticultural industry is already working on that.

And that's what the mining industry needs to do, is- they need to be able to show the  continuity plans of how they can keep these people in work and keep our nation moving,  but also give the comfort to those communities that house them, that there is practical  solutions in place to keep everybody safe. And it can be done, we're a smart nation.

FRAN KELLY: Is it a reality though, Minister, that the resource sector is going to have to  scale back a bit through this?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: I think that's too early to call. I think you've got to see that the  measures that are taking place - we're slowly flattening the line but we can't take that for  granted because of the work that's being done - the responsibility of every Australian. But  that's where industry also has to lead as well. And I think if the resource industry also  shows some forward leading measures around the FIFOs and drive in, drive out workers -  as is the agricultural sector - I think we can find solutions here that protects our  communities and protects our economy as best we can. But we've got to be predicated by  the best medical advice and that's what we'll predicate our decisions on moving forward.

FRAN KELLY: You're listening to our RN Breakfast. It's 17 minutes to nine. Our guest is  David Littleproud, he's the Deputy National Leader and Minister for Agriculture, Drought  and Emergency Management - himself self-isolating in his country home. To talk about the  trade deal, that was- that you're trying to get up - that money you've just announced. Long-haul flights have been grounded and that's crippled the export of the fresh produce,

Transcript



Transcript

particularly seafood. So this plan for special freight planes loaded up with seafood, red  meat and dairy. How would it work?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Look it'll be a subsidy, so it won't cover the total cost. But we've  seen an explosion in freight costs on- of air cargo because obviously, as you just  articulated, the passenger flights have reduced. So this is about trying to keep some  continuity. You've got to understand boats are still coming and going and those markets  will continue and it's important that we continue to export for our agricultural sector.

And Australians shouldn't get concerned the fact that we're trying to export in the middle of  COVID-19. We are a nation of 25 million people, we are still producing enough food for 75  million people. So our farmers still need to make money and they oversupply, so if we  don't export, they don't make a living and we can't produce [indistinct].

FRAN KELLY: Yeah. But how do they export given that many countries have closed their  borders? I mean we heard the Foreign Minister Marise Payne saying it's hard to get flights  in to get Australians out that are stuck in some of these

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well obviously flights are more difficult than actual- than ships but  this is cargo and not movement of passengers - so we're reducing the number of people  that are on these cargo flights. So we're working with our exporting partners to make sure  that they have a- still have an appetite for our food and fibre. So it's important that we're  able to articulate to them the safety of bringing cargo flights. As we clearly understood  there's a reduction in passenger flights so this reduces the risk and allows our cargo to get  there. It allows us to showcase Australian agriculture's not producing just the best food and  fibre in the world, but some of the most reliable.

FRAN KELLY: Sure. A couple of quick ones, Minister. Another problem in terms of  reduced passengers on airlines is the dire state of small airlines which have seen  passenger numbers plummet of course. As of today, Regional Express, Rex, is  suspending its Queensland services - they were the only routes Rex were still flying. You  want the Queensland Government to come up with solution, but why would Rex keep  flying if it can't fill any seats - it's not going anywhere?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Because the Queensland Government wants them to continue the  same number of scheduled flights when no one's using them - it's just not common sense.  Rex wants to reduce the number of scheduled flights to a point that reduces the costs, so  that they can actually continue to keep those essential flights going. We've announced a-  over $100 million package to support these airlines and work with Rex and work with the  State Government.

But it is absolutely insane for any state government to ask an airline to continue the same  number of flights when only 10 per cent of the normal passengers are using it. Why would  you, why would you put the Queensland taxpayer to that expense that they are also losing  money and force an airline basically to shut down? That just doesn't make sense.

Bureaucrats sometimes get caught up on clipboards and ticking boxes, rather than  practical common sense solutions. I've spoken to board members of Rex and they are  working through practical solutions and I hope and I think, from what I understand last  night, the State Government is now considering looking at those scheduled flights to keep  those essential services of medicine and bringing people back in out of those remote  areas to be able to get medical attention.

Transcript



Transcript



FRAN KELLY: Okay. Just finally, Minister, different states have different laws in place to  enforce the social distancing regimes. There's complaints emerging in New South Wales  that things have gone too far. You know, six-month jail sentences if people are outside  their home without a reasonable excuse. Police, we saw raiding public parks looking for  offenders. Some of your colleagues saying it's too heavy handed. Is this the spirit the  Prime Minister's been looking for or are these teething problems? How do you see this?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well look, we respect the sovereign right of each state. And I think  the Prime Minister has bought the first ministers together in the National Cabinet in trying  to ensure that we get continuity across the country. And it's how it's implemented at the  local level is where that sovereign right of states are able to implement it. Now, I even saw  comments by the police commissioner recently, as early as yesterday, saying that he'd  rather work with the community. And this is the balance that I think states need to find is  working with the community and those that want to flaunt the law, well we should throw the  book at them because this is putting people's lives at risk and livelihoods. You've already  seen the livelihoods of many Australians hurt. So this is the getting the balance right. We  respect the states, but I think the Prime Minister's been pretty clear about the intent of how  these measures, through the National Cabinet should be implemented.

FRAN KELLY: Davie Littleproud, thanks very much for joining us.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks for having me Fran.































