Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg







THE HON KEITH PITT MP

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia  Member for Hinkler



MEDIA RELEASE

25 August, 2020



Labor again turning its back on CQ jobs

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt says Queensland Labor Senator  Murray Watt has all but confirmed his party will again turn its back on Central Queensland mining  jobs by opposing a study into a new Collinsville power station.

Mr Pitt said on local ABC radio this morning Senator Watt said he couldn’t see why Labor would  support a feasibility study, which was a 2019 Coalition election commitment.

“Our commitment is about supporting and growing regional mining jobs in Queensland but Labor is  all about tearing any new opportunities down,” Mr Pitt said.

“Our coal is being exported to many countries around the world to generate affordable and reliable  electricity along with the job creation it brings and there’s no reason we shouldn’t at least  investigate providing the same opportunities here in regional Queensland.

“The Coalition Government supports all forms of power generation and Senator Watt and Labor  need to look beyond their blind ideology when it comes to coal, and backing regional jobs in the  resources sector.

“We’ve seen in recent weeks that Labor is tearing itself apart over its policies around the resources  industry as partly elder Joel Fitzgibbon fights a losing battle against Labor’s left faction to show some  common sense on coal mining,” Mr Pitt said.

“Queensland’s resources sector has done an outstanding job to maintain productivity while keep  workers and communities safe through the coronavirus pandemic.

“Coal continues to generate the royalties that prop up the Queensland Labor Government and  Senator Watt and his Labor mates should support the workers who keep the industry going.

“This will be a test for Annastacia Palaszczuk and her Queensland Labor team on whether they will  stand up to their federal colleagues and back mining workers.” Mr Pitt said.

“Unlike Labor, the LNP will not turn its back on the mining sector and the thousands of regional jobs  it’s supporting throughout regional Queensland.”

ENDS

Media contact: Minister Pitt - Matt Dunstan 0411 535 072

