Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



The Hon Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health

MEDIA RELEASE



9 September 2020

COVID-19 VACCINE DEVELOPMENT

Australia’s COVID-19 Vaccine and Treatment Strategy supports early access to, and delivery  of, safe and effective COVID-19 vaccines and treatments, as soon as they become available.

The Australian Government is pursuing a diversified COVID-19 vaccine strategy, ensuring  that Australia is well placed to access a successful vaccine.

To date our Government has announced advance purchasing agreements for the University of  Queensland and University of Oxford vaccines, and that Australia will participate in the  international COVAX facility.

The Australian Government is in discussions with a number of other promising vaccines and  will consider further investments in line with Australia’s COVID-19 Vaccine and Treatment  Strategy.

A COVID-19 vaccine will not be made available to Australians until it passes the strict safety  and efficacious regulatory assessments by the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA).

Phase III clinical trials in large groups of people are currently being undertaken around the  world to study the safety and efficacy of COVID-19 vaccines. This includes monitoring of  side effects.

TGA and the Department of Health are working closely with vaccine developers to monitor  the progress of the Phase 3 clinical trials.

Today, AstraZeneca have temporarily put on hold the Phase III study of the University of  Oxford COVID-19 vaccine following an unexplained illness in one trial participant in the  United Kingdom.

This is a voluntary and routine action that demonstrates the rigour and high standards of the  clinical trial process and that safety is the primary focus of the clinical trials being undertaken.

AstraZeneca are working to expedite the review of the single event to minimise any potential  impact on the trial timeline.

Phase III clinical trials of the University of Oxford COVID-19 vaccine are currently  underway in the United Kingdom, United States, Brazil and South Africa with up to 50,000  people participating globally.

The TGA rigorously assesses vaccines for safety, quality and effectiveness, before they can be  legally supplied in Australia.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.

The TGA is actively monitoring COVID-19 vaccine development, including safety  information, both in Australia and around the world.

-ENDS-



AstraZeneca statement 9 September, 2020

A spokesperson for AstraZeneca advised “As part of the ongoing randomised, controlled  global trials of the Oxford coronavirus vaccine, our standard review process was triggered  and we voluntarily paused vaccination to allow review of safety data by an independent  committee.

This is a routine action which has to happen whenever there is a potentially unexplained  illness in one of the trials, while it is investigated, ensuring we maintain the integrity of the  trials. In large trials illnesses will happen by chance but must be independently reviewed to  check this carefully.

We are working to expedite the review of the single event to minimise any potential impact on  the trial timeline. We are committed to the safety of our participants and the highest  standards of conduct in our trials”.

