

PETA MURPHY MP

MEMBER FOR DUNKLEY



LADIES, CHECK YOUR BREASTS



The number of women who have had breast cancer detected early has dropped

by 37% during the coronavirus pandemic.



This isn’t good news.



Experts are convinced that fewer women have been leaving home to get tested

and that some women may have been ignoring important symptoms because of

other stressors during this time. At a time where people are going through

financial and employment stress, juggling the needs of their children, families

and friends, and their lives have been upended by social restrictions, many

women are looking after everyone else other than themselves.



Data from the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare estimated the number

of new cases of breast cancer diagnosed in 2020 would be approximately

20,000.



The 37% drop in early detection could mean that up to 8,000 women have

breast cancer right now but do not know it. Early detection is an important part

of Australia’s excellent survival rate.



Federal Member for Dunkley Peta Murphy MP is using her own cancer



experience to call on Australian women to listen to their bodies and get tested.



“Ladies, check your breasts. It’s not only safe to visit your GP or the screening

clinic, it’s essential,” Ms Murphy said.



“As someone who has been diagnosed with breast cancer twice, I know how

important it is to get checked. Getting checked early saved my life."



“Women, its time to put your health first, COVID-19 is not an excuse to ignore

your body and not get tested. If you have any symptom of breast cancer the

message is simple - please get tested.”



Common symptoms of breast cancer can include:

Â·         a change in the size or shape of your breasts;

Â·         a change to the nipple such as crusting, redness;

Â·         a nipple discharge (liquid) that occurs without squeezing;

Â·         a new lump or lumpiness, especially if it’s only in one breast;

Â·         a change in the skin, such as puckering or dimpling (like orange peel);

Â·         your nipple becoming inverted (or pulled in); and

Â·         an unusual pain that does not go away.



Contact your local GP and book an appointment. For breast screening locations

and more information visit www.bcna.org.au.



FRIDAY, 31 JULY 2020



MEDIA CONTACT: DYLAN STEED 0400 615 862



Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.



