

Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE GOVERNMENT IN THE SENATE  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA

TRANSCRIPT

27 November 2020

Doorstop

E&OE

Subject/s:  The Australian Defence Force, Australians overseas, public smoking bans and  Santa Claus essential worker status.

ALLISON LANGDON: We are joined by Federal Minister for Employment Michaelia Cash  and radio host Dan Rennie, nice to talk to both of you. Michaelia I think to be honest, most  Australians, we don't even want to hear this. I mean, it cannot drag out can it, because our  armed forces need to rebuild, and they need to move on.

MINISTER CASH: In the first instance, the Australian military are one of the finest in the  world. I think everybody watching your program this morning would either know someone  who is serving or who has served. They serve with distinction and obviously we back them.  Of course, the report has raised some very significant allegations. The Government takes  them very seriously. The Australian Defence Force takes them very seriously. That is why the  Government itself established the office of the special investigator. Look in relation to the  majority of our troops, they service with distinction.

ALLISON LANGDON: Yeah, I mean, Dan, this is unfortunately going to be a very painful  process. It can't drag on. I really worry about the mental health of all of our veterans.

DAN RENNIE: Yeah. Look, I know too. And I've been speaking to a lot of former and  current defence force personnel. The other thing that comes back to me is a lot of the time is  that there's a cone of silence there and people don't want to speak out for fear of retribution.  I've spoken to a lot of people who've said there are some things that go on there that aren't  pleasant. We’ve seen the footage of the innocent man that was murdered on camera. It's not  the first time we've seen something like that, you know, I refer to the body cam of police  officers who have done the same thing in this country. I don't think body cams deter anyone  at all, but the, the fear of retribution is real. If you speak up against the Defence Force, they're  quick to defend them. It's really hard to defend the indefensible here. And let's hope that  justice is served for these innocent people who have lost their lives.

ALLISON LANGDON: Yeah. It's something else I want to talk to you both about this  morning too. We've been hearing from families this 37,000 Australians stranded overseas by  COVID-19 and many of facing the prospect of not getting home for Christmas. I mean, the  numbers keep going up, surprisingly Michaelia, how is that? How have we not come up with  a solution to this yet. The situation is dire for so many of these families. Why is it taking so



long?

MINISTER CASH: Well, since the Prime Minister spoke in September, I think at that time  there was around 26,000 Australians registered as wanting to come home. We have now  returned since that time almost 36,000. So, the Government is doing everything that it can to  get Australians home.

ALLISON LANGDON: But we still have 37,000 Australians trying to get home.

MINISTER CASH: Yes, and our ability to do that as you know, is constrained by the  numbers in quarantine, in the States and Territories. The Prime Minister works with the  National Cabinet constructively to increase those numbers and that is exactly what we will  continue do. In fact, I'm in the ACT. Yesterday, first international flight in six months,  touches down in Canberra, and 120 Australians are brought home from Singapore. Again, we  are doing everything we can to bring people home. We are working with the States and  Territories to have a look at those hotel quarantine numbers and continue to do what we can  to increase them.

ALLISON LANGDON: It is a tough one isn't it Dan. Here in Australia, we've done such a  great job on getting on top of COVID-19. We keep hearing the numbers coming out of  America, coming out of Europe and there's a part of us that doesn't want to expose ourselves  to what's happening over there, but these are Aussies and we need to look after them.

DAN RENNIE: Yeah, a hundred percent. Look, I was over in central America when the  pandemic hit. So, you know, the first thing I did was, was check all the relevant information  and get the hell out of there. Get back home and get into lockdown. I don't understand why  there's still people who want to get back here that can't, and perhaps the Government can  really step up and, and make sure this happens. And you said it's happening, but why is it  taking so long? That's what I want to know.

ALLISON LANGDON: Here's another issue too. That's going to affect every Australian  town and city, should smoking be banned in public places because Melbourne is considering  outlawing lighting up in public throughout the entire city. Dan, it's a war on smokers. Do you  support this?

DAN RENNIE: Ah, look, I think the Government needs to stop pretending they care about  people. Well, hear me out, hear me out. If, you know, if the Government was fed income,  that'd make tobacco illegal. The reason why they don't is because they make billions and  billions and billions of dollars from people smoking therefore into the healthcare system. It's  a terrible situation. If you were fair dinkum smoking would be illegal. It kills far more people  tobacco, than marijuana I should say. Many other progressive countries around the world  legalized marijuana. I don't actually understand why the Government do this. They're  victimizing people who are typically on the lower side of the socioeconomic level as it is,  people who smoke. So, look, step up Government. Don’t pretend that you, you actually care  about people. If you do, you know, put your foot down and make it illegal

ALLISON LANGDON: Fighting words, Michaelia your response?

MINISTER CASH: Oh, well it is a legal substance and people are allowed to smoke.



Pleasingly over the last two decades smoking rates in Australia have dropped substantially.  I'm not a smoker. We have very strict laws in Australia in terms of your ability to smoke in  public places. This is a decision for the Greater City of Melbourne. I'd leave it to them, but it  is a legal substance.

ALLISON LANGDON: But what do you think about this though? I'm asking your opinion  on it.

MINISTER CASH: I just said, I'm not a smoker. So, I personally don't appreciate people  smoking near me, but we already do have very strict laws in Australia in relation to your  ability to smoke in public places. This is a discussion that obviously the city of Melbourne  wants to have with its constituents, and they should.

DAN RENNIE: Should smoking be illegal?

MINISTER CASH: Well, it is a legal substance and that is the position of not the  Government.

ALLISON LANGDON: That’s not the question Dan's asking though.

MINISTER CASH: It is a legal substance and people are able to smoke. Pleasingly, as I  said, over the last two decades, smoking rates in Australia have dropped substantially. As  people become more and more aware of the harmful effects of cigarettes. I'm not a smoker  myself. I personally don't like smoking. I personally don't like being around people who don't  smoke, but I do acknowledge it is a legal substance. People are entitled to smoke, but we do  have very strict laws in Australia, in relation to your ability to smoke in public.

ALLISON LANGDON: Have you never been a smoker?

MINISTER CASH: I may have dabbled when I was a backpacker, but no, I don't like  smoking. It's just not something I do.

ALLISON LANGDON: Well, there is a national scandal brewing here people that we do  need to talk about before we go, how one man will avoid undergoing 14 days of quarantine  when he arrives from overseas - Father Christmas. That’s who we're talking about. He's been  given a special exemption by New South Wales so he can deliver presents to all the kids. Dan  this is an outrage, one rule for us and another for Santa.

DAN RENNIE: Look I’m sure he’s got all the relevant PPE and he's done his COVID test.  Hopefully he's got his mask on, look, go hard Santa.

ALLISON LANGDON: We need it more than ever this year. Don't we even Michaelia?

MINISTER CASH: It has been a tough year for everybody, and I wholeheartedly endorse  those comments, go hard Santa. What a nice, light way to end the program today, as well as  we do head into those four weeks before Christmas. You know, I think WA did it for the  Easter bunny. Look, I think it's fantastic and I wholeheartedly endorsed the exemption that's  being provided.





ALLISON LANGDON: Michaelia, have you been naughty or nice?

MINISTER CASH: That is for others to decide.

ALLISON LANGDON: Such a politician. All right, guys. Thanks for joining us this  morning. Have a nice weekend.

[ENDS]



