

JIM CHALMERS MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR RANKIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RADIO NATIONAL BREAKFAST  FRIDAY, 13 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; Economic impact of Coronavirus; Stimulus package;  Labor’s response to the Global Financial Crisis.

HAMISH MACDONALD, HOST: Jim Chalmers is the Shadow Treasurer. He joins me now  from Brisbane. Good morning to you.

JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: Good morning, Hamish.

MACDONALD: Is the Australian Government taking the seriousness of the health scenario  here seriously enough?

CHALMERS: We've said we think that some of the steps that the Government has been  taking are good steps but perhaps not good enough or fast enough. There is a lot of  anxiety in the community. There's a real hunger for more information to be provided. I think  that's reflected in your interview earlier today.

MACDONALD: But specifically, should major public events be held in Australia in the  midst of this?

CHALMERS: We need to take the advice of the medical experts and the medical  practitioners. That's been our approach all along. That's what's guided some of the travel  bans and the issues around the Biosecurity Act, for example. It's right and proper that we  continue to ask these difficult questions of the experts and we act accordingly based on the  advice that we are provided.

MACDONALD: But I mean, Bill Bowtell is an expert. He guided part of Australia's  response to the AIDS crisis in the 1980s. He's saying that we are not taking this seriously  enough and that it would be irresponsible to hold major events like the Melbourne Grand  Prix. He says that we shouldn't be going to the football on the weekend or attending mass  gatherings. I mean, if we're saying we're listening to the experts, why is the advice of  someone like him being ignored?

CHALMERS: I think we should follow his advice when it comes to providing more

information. We should obviously consider his advice on things like being part of big  crowds. The advice so far has been that if you're crook, stay away from the football. That  advice will obviously evolve as the situation evolves. It's one of the things that will be  discussed with the Premiers at the Council of Australian Governments’ meeting today. Our  approach all along has been to listen to all the experts, but principally the Chief Medical  Officer and his colleagues in the states. They've been providing advice. We've been  providing bipartisan support for decisions taken on the basis of that advice.

MACDONALD: Would you be going to a major public event this weekend? I mean, are you  planning to go to any sporting events? What are you doing?

CHALMERS: My Broncos are away tonight. They're in Townsville at the new stadium up  there. It's not an option for me to go to the Broncos this weekend, but I would still consider  going unless the advice from the Chief Medical Officer changes. I feel well, I'm not  sick. One of the bits of advice is if you're sick, stay away from crowds but people will make  their own decisions. If the advice changes from the Chief Medical Officer in this pretty  rapidly evolving situation then people's behaviour should change then too.

MACDONALD: The issue of modelling and forecasting was raised by Bill Bowtell. It exists.  The Federal Government has projections. New South Wales has indicated what it expects,  up to 1.5 million people in that state alone could contract the Coronavirus. Is it, in your  view, important that the Federal Government be upfront and honest with the Australian  public about what the projections show?

CHALMERS: It’s always better to be as transparent as possible. That needs to be  consistent with making sure that people treat that information calmly and they respond in  the right ways. But typically more information is better than less information -

MACDONALD: So does it concern you that that is not being released at a national level?

CHALMERS: I'm not aware of the information that they're not releasing. Our team in the  Federal Opposition gets briefings all the time, principally via Chris Bowen and Anthony  Albanese, the rest of us from time to time. They'll make decisions about the information  that is best released. But I think as a general rule, the more information and transparency,  the better.

MACDONALD: So have you been shown modelling about projections over the coming  months for the spread of Coronavirus within Australia?

CHALMERS: Not the way that you describe it, but we have avenues and opportunities to  ask the Chief Medical Officer about the impacts on our communities. As you'd expect and  imagine you can't go down the street in our local electorates without people asking for  advice or asking about our expectations for the spread of the disease. A lot of people are  going to get this virus. That's going to put enormous pressure on our health system and  our economy. The more information that can be provided to people to make good  decisions in that context, the better.

MACDONALD: Okay. The stimulus package is in many respects in line with what Labor  did in 2008 during the Global Financial Crisis. It includes investment incentives, wage  subsidies to business, $750 cash payments to lower income households, particularly to  pensioners. Is there anything about this that you don't support?



CHALMERS:  No Hamish we’re being supportive of the package that was announced  yesterday. We're being responsible and constructive. Our priority is getting this support out  the door as soon as possible so that it can be circulating in the economy. You're right that  there are some striking similarities to what Labor did successfully during the Global  Financial Crisis. There has been a need for some time to get that cash support out the  door, but also to support employers and support apprentices. There are aspects of this  package that we would do differently. For example, we don't think that they've done  enough to encourage casual workers who don't have access to sick leave to stay home if  they're crook. We would probably do something more substantial there. Immediately after  the package was announced, Anthony Albanese and I stood up and said that we will be  supportive, constructive and responsible because every Australian has a stake in the  Government getting this right. We don't want to see large scale job losses or business  failures. We want to support the economy and communities and that's why we need this to  work.

MACDONALD: Just on the incentives for casuals to stay at home or self-isolate if there's  any question about their wellness. We spoke to Cassandra Goldie earlier this morning from  ACOSS. She indicated that there are actually imminent changes to the Sickness  Allowance from Centrelink underway anyway. She says it's actually unclear how people  could apply for that. She said that the exemption process is due to change shortly and they  want the Government to delay any changes to the Sickness Allowance. Do you have a  view on that? Are you calling on the Government to delay it?

CHALMERS: That's something that I've been discussing with my colleague Linda Burney  who has coverage of these issues. Some other colleagues have expressed an interest  here. What we want to do is make sure that any changes to the Sickness Allowance don't  act as a further deterrent from people staying home if they're unwell. Our concern is that  people won't be incentivised to sign up for social security and get into the system. We're  worried that getting $40 a day, which is what the payment is, may be much less than  people are earning so that's another disincentive. We need to look at the main objective  here. The main objective here is to keep people home if they're unwell. If they do the right  thing by their co-workers, we want to do the right thing by them. We don't want them to  have to choose between doing the right thing by their colleagues versus being able to feed  themselves and live. We think what's being proposed here is not perfect. We support the  broader package but there might better be ways to do this aspect of it.

MACDONALD: The point is being made repeatedly now that this crisis is very different to  the Global Financial Crisis. Whilst there are some similarities being drawn between the  stimulus package then and now, the actual broader economic scenario is quite different.  We're not facing a liquidity crisis globally like we did in that moment. Do you therefore think  that whatever the way out will be is actually ultimately quite different?

CHALMERS: There are obviously key differences. The one we were just talking about is  one of them. During the GFC there wasn't an issue about making sure casual workers  stayed home if they were sick. That's one of the most important differences. The  similarities are that this is a big economic challenge and it warrants a substantial response  from the Government. Australians should be very proud of what they achieved together  during the GFC under Labor to see off recession and to save hundreds of thousands of  jobs. It remains to be seen whether what the Government announced yesterday will be  similarly successful. We hope it is and that's why we will support it and try to expedite it



through the Parliament.

MACDONALD: Jim Chalmers, thank you very much.

CHALMERS: Thank you, Hamish.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949







