

CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

SYDNEY

FRIDAY, 13 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Coronavirus.



CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH:  Well thanks for coming

this morning. Obviously this is a rapidly evolving situation facing Australia and

indeed the world. This is a health crisis which has moved and will continue to

move very quickly. The issue I want to address primarily this morning though is

that of major events; sporting events, concerts and big public events. In this

environment events like this have a very big health risk and implication. The

Labor Party believes it's incumbent on the organisers of these events to seek

urgent medical advice about proceeding or cancelling or postponing or making

the event spectator free.



In this environment tough decisions are necessary. I understand that the

decision to postpone or cancel events will be a tough decision for many

organisers, but a tough decision now can avoid tougher decisions for the

country in weeks and months to come. It's appropriate that organizers put

public health first over any consideration of profit or any disappointment for

people who are looking forward to the events. Ultimately, to begin with at least,

it will be a matter for the organisers of each event to make a judgment call.



We also believe it will be appropriate for the Australian Health Protection

Principals Committee to give urgent advice to Governments and to people, to

the public generally about the risk of proceeding with any major events and we

would urge the Committee which is made up of representatives of State and

Federal Health bureaucracies, the Chief Medical Officers to undertake that

urgently.



So to summarize; events in an environment of a rapidly emerging virus contain

significant risk. It's up to each individual if an event proceeds to make their own

judgment about whether to attend or not but it's also incumbent on organisers

of events to very seriously consider postponing or cancelling those events or

letting them proceed in a different environment which is spectator free. Each

event is different, no two events are exactly the same but the public health, the

public interest must come first for everyone at all times.



We're also again renewing our call this morning for the Federal Government to

ensure that the public information, the advertising campaign is rolled out as

soon as possible. There is no excuse for delay. The public needs the best

information and the public health information should be provided by the

Government urgently. It can be done. Also we renew our concern that the fever

clinics, the respiratory clinics will take too long to roll out. I understand the

complexity. I don't say it can be done overnight but it can and must be done

more quickly than over the next six weeks and we also call for the telehealth

rebate to be extended to more Australians so that people can access

telehealth, that is talking to their doctor on the telephone or Skype and have

bulk billing and that needs to be implemented immediately and it needs to apply

to more people as well. We've provided bi-partisan support to the Government



for every action they've taken but we also call for more action.



JOURNALIST: If we are cancelling events at that size should we be looking at

schools closing down until Easter?



BOWEN: Well, that's a matter in the first instance for State Governments,

certainly in relation to public schools. School cancellations would be a big

decision. They should be taken on public health advice. Obviously, the

argument for cancelling schools is that they can be an opportunity to spread the

virus but I know that the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee will

be considering such a matter and again the more information that can be given

to the public as soon as possible about what decisions might be taken and

when so the families can plan for any eventuality-- as a father of two school

children I understand the complexities that that will provide for families, that

information should be provided to people ASAP.



Thanks very much.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512





