JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN



CATHERINE KING MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT AND REGIONAL

DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR BALLARAT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP

CANBERRA

MONDAY, 5 OCTOBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Federal budget; Infrastructure; Jobs crisis; Tax cuts.



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: This is an incredibly important budget.

It's framed in the teeth of the deepest, most damaging recession we've seen in

Australia for almost 100 years. We confront a full-blown jobs crisis in this country

with almost a million Australians unemployed and the Treasurer has said that he

expects it to get worse before it gets better. At risk here is a lost generation of

Australian workers sacrificed to the first recession in this country in three decades.



The test for this budget is what it means for unemployment. If unemployment is too

high for too long, then this budget and this Government would have failed its

central task. What we need to see in this budget is new jobs created, people

supported, and investments in the future so that we have something to show for

these mountains and mountains of new debt. We can't allow the only legacies of

this recession to be a lost generation and more than a trillion dollars in debt racked

up by this Government. That's what is at stake here as the Government gets set to

announce its budget here tomorrow night.



This can't be another budget which over promises and under delivers. It can't be

another budget which leaves people out and leaves them behind. It can't be

another budget which fails to address, let alone acknowledge, some of the big

challenges of the future. It can't be another budget which indulges the

Government's ideological obsessions at the expense of ordinary working people.

This is the Government's opportunity to prevent unemployment being unacceptably

high for unacceptably long. If they fail to do that in the budget then the Government

itself will have failed.



Tomorrow night the Government will try and pull a big swifty on the Australian

people. They will try and pretend that all of this debt in the budget is the

consequence of COVID-19 alone. It cannot explain seven years of economic

mismanagement by seven months of COVID-19. The Australian people shouldn't

fall for Josh Frydenberg and Scott Morrison's spin which says that all of the

problems in the economy and all of the problems in the budget have suddenly

appeared in 2020. Seven months of COVID-19 don't explain those seven years of

economic mismanagement.



We have always acknowledged that coronavirus is having a devastating impact on

our economy and on the budget. It's time for the Government to acknowledge the

decisions taken by Scott Morrison and Josh Frydenberg have made the

unemployment queues longer than they need to be and made this recession

deeper than it needs to be by providing support too late and too narrowly and

withdrawing JobKeeper too soon and too bluntly has made a bad situation even

worse.



When it comes to over promising and under delivering, this is a Government which

makes big announcements, pats themselves on the back, and gets the big

headlines without the follow through which is necessary to properly create jobs,

support people, and invest in the future. On that note, I'll ask Catherine King to say

a few things about infrastructure, then happy to take your questions.



CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE,

TRANSPORT AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Thanks Jim. As Jim said we've

seen lots from this Government in terms of getting a headline but very little when it

comes to delivery. Today's infrastructure announcement that's due to be formally

announced in the budget tomorrow is another one of those. We know over the

course of the last six budgets that the Government has underspent $6.8 billion on

infrastructure projects that it promised, but has failed to deliver. Last year alone,

they spent $1.7 billion less than they had promised because they had failed to

deliver. If you take things like the Urban Congestion Fund which was in fact

something announced in the 2018 budget, they promised $200 million for New

South Wales but they've spent $4 million. They've spent nothing in the Northern

Territory, nothing in South Australia, and nothing in the ACT. This is a Government

that is big on the headline, but very very poor on delivery. We can't afford a

Government who is not on the ball when it comes to actually getting this money out

the door, investing the time that it takes to get these projects moving, and to

actually get this money circulating through the economy. Too many people are

relying on this Government to deliver, to deliver for their jobs, to deliver for

employment, and to deliver for the economy, but their record so far in every single

budget is a big announcement on infrastructure, big headlines on infrastructure,

but the delivery is actually missing every time.



JOURNALIST: This announcement today on infrastructure, the $7.5 billion, is that

enough? Do you think they should be spending more than that?



KING: It's hard to see whether it's new money. I saw the Deputy Prime Minister

this morning unable to answer whether it's new money. The problem is that the

Government makes the announcement but isn't spending the time and the effort on

actually delivering. It's not interested in the projects actually getting there on the

ground. It's interested in the headline. It's not interested in the jobs that come from

them.



JOURNALIST: You say it's unacceptable for unemployment to be too high for too

long. What is your definition of too long? When would you like to see it back to pre-COVID levels?



CHALMERS: It's for the Government to explain how the policies that they

announce tomorrow night will do the job of getting that unemployment rate down

somewhere near where it was. The Reserve Bank thinks that full employment is

something around four and a half per cent. The point that we're making is that if

the Government is going to be borrowing hundreds of billions of dollars to add to

the record debt that they had already racked up before COVID-19, we need to get

bang for buck for those borrowed dollars, and we measure that effectiveness by

what it means for jobs. The Treasurer has said that when unemployment gets

below six per cent that he can put the cue in the rack or flick the switch back to

austerity. We don't think that's good enough. He has conceded himself that the

unemployment rate doesn't even properly capture all of the underemployment and

insecurity which defined the labour market for much of the last seven years. There

is almost a million unemployed Australians as it is. The Treasurer says that will get

worse before it gets better. We don't want high unemployment for too long, and

that mountain of debt to be the only legacy of this budget tomorrow night.



JOURNALIST: Jim, will Labor support -



CHALMERS: We'll just go to Jen and then back to you.



JOURNALIST: There's speculation that the income tax cuts will be lumped

together in one bill, both stage two and three. Will you support it?



CHALMERS: We haven't seen what the Government is proposing. Clearly it's

difficult to come to a position on Monday on something that we won't see until

Tuesday. We've made our views on tax cuts well known for some time now. For

some months we've said that we've got an open mind to tax cuts for workers on

low- and middle-incomes. We have raised concerns with stage three of the income

tax cuts. Stage three is the least responsible, least affordable, least fair, and least

likely to be effective because higher income earners aren't as likely to spend in the

economy as workers of more modest means. We've made that clear for some

time. It's up to the Government how they present that -



JOURNALIST: Sure, but will you oppose the legislation?



CHALMERS: It's up to the Government how they present that legislation to the

parliament. We haven't seen how they intend to do that. We'll come to a position

after we see that.



JOURNALIST: Jim, will Labor support raising the debt ceiling to above a trillion

dollars?



CHALMERS: We don't have a say in the debt ceiling like we used to. But clearly,

one of the big takeouts of this budget is the Government will have new record debt,

more than a trillion dollars. Remember this is the party that said debt a tiny fraction

of that was a debt and deficit disaster. Now they say that debt higher than a trillion

dollars is manageable. It's for them to explain that inconsistency. It's for them to

explain that hypocrisy. We've said that every single dollar here is borrowed money.

We need to get maximum bang for the buck. We measure that by what it means

for supporting jobs, supporting communities and investing in the future.



JOURNALIST: The Treasurer says the budget assumptions are predicated on

there being a vaccine sometime this year or next year. Obviously, everyone wants

to see a vaccine for COVID but is that too rosy a prediction?



CHALMERS: Let's have a look at what the budget forecasts say. We don't have

access to them yet, not for another day and a half or so. We'll go through all of

those.



JOURNALIST: Is it irresponsible though to make that sort of prediction?



CHALMERS: I'll make that judgment once I see what the forecasts are, but I will

say this; the last time that the budget was updated, it was based on the

assumption that the international borders would all be opened on 1 January, it was

based on the assumption that Melbourne wouldn't be locked down, it was based

on a whole lot of rosy assumptions which fed the Prime Minister's absurd

assumption that the economy would come roaring back to life in the last weekend

of September. We always said that that was a ridiculous assumption which was

being used to feed the Prime Minister's insistence that welcome support in the

economy and JobKeeper and JobSeeker be pulled out at that date. The

Government doesn't have a good record of anticipating what's going on in the

economy. I think part of the reason for that is because they have no affinity and no

empathy for real people in real communities.



JOURNALIST: Should there be maybe a different set of predictions, and maybe

one where there is a vaccine, and one where there isn't a vaccine?



CHALMERS: Let's see what the forecasts say.



JOURNALIST: The WA Government is saying that they are reporting a surplus of

$1.7 billion. Do you think that is a good look or in your view does that indicate that

there needs to be more investment in jobs in that local economy?



CHALMERS: The Western Australian Government is investing in the local

economy and that's appropriate. They've got some tremendous advantages, as

you know, in Western Australia. I think that Ben Wyatt and Mark McGowan have

done an extraordinary job and continue to do an extraordinary job out west. My job

is not to second-guess the decisions made by state governments. My issue is

whether the Federal Government gets its budget right. We measure whether they

get it right or wrong by what it means for jobs.



I just might go over here mate - I've had a couple over here that I have missed.



JOURNALIST: Would you support an increase to the low income tax offset for

poorer Australians?



CHALMERS: The priority in tax relief should be Australians who need it most and

Australians who are more likely to spend it in our shops and small businesses

around the economy. That's been our view, forever, and it continues to be our view

now. Let's see what the Government comes forward with.



JOURNALIST: What kind of increase would you like to see though, if you're

supportive of that increase?



CHALMERS: I'm not prepared to put a number on it without seeing all of the other

budget numbers and seeing what all of the trade-offs are. One of the points that

we've made about tax relief is that when it is directed at people on middle incomes

and lower incomes they're more likely to spend it than people on higher incomes.

That's Economics 101. Every dollar here is borrowed money. There are

opportunity costs of doing one thing or another. We want to make sure that it's the

most effective it can be in the economy.



JOURNALIST: Just on infrastructure, Infrastructure Australia has previously

released lists of recommended projects. I know here at least in the ACT there's

infrastructure spending [INAUDIBLE] deemed necessary. Do you believe that we

need to be pursuing the projects on that list to get the best bang for buck?



KING: This is a Government that's completely sidelined Infrastructure Australia.

Let's be frank, they're not interested in independent advice about where their best

projects are. They're interested in putting infrastructure investments in seats they

hold. They've done that with the Urban Congestion Fund. It looks like, when you

look at the projects certainly in my home state of Victoria today, there weren't

many Labor seats and projects in Labor seats that were announced today. Let's be

honest this Government has been absolutely up to its neck in using public funding

for pork barrelling. Infrastructure is probably a prime example of that, and I don't

think we're going to see the Government suddenly changing its tune anytime soon.



JOURNALIST: Just further on infrastructure, do you think that doing a big spend

on infrastructure is actually going to give the best bang for the buck given the

people who have lost jobs in this environment?



KING: I think you've got to do a number of things. The first is, of course it is really

important for the economy in the longer-term to be investing in those large-scale

projects, those visionary projects, that are really going to boost productivity across

the country. We've heard Anthony Albanese talk about high speed rail and faster

rail. They are long term projects that do take some time, but there are also projects

that are equally very important in local communities, whether it be small-scale road

projects or social infrastructure that has been so important in being able to keep

people active, whether it's been in our parks where people have been able to

exercise, whether it's been on bike trails and small-scale projects. Certainly for

building and construction, it is critically important, but of course there are other

parts of the economy that that money then flows to whether it is our hospitality

workers and retail workers when people in those industries start to spend money.

That's why it's so important and so disappointing that the Government fails every

time to deliver on the promises that it makes. That is money that should be flowing

through those economies today, and it should be flowing through every economy.

Why is one region able to benefit from infrastructure or regional funding, and

another not? It's not as though one region has been affected by coronavirus and

another not. That's the problem with what the Government does with infrastructure;

it over promises, under delivers, and then it favours its own seats.



JOURNALIST: Considering Michael McCormack couldn't say that he had

confidence that the issues identified in that ANAO report on

the Leppington Triangle had been fixed to his satisfaction just yet, what confidence

can the Australian people have that this record infrastructure spend will be spent

properly?



KING: That's a very good question. $30 million for a $3 million piece of land that

the Government now somehow says was a bargain, and was somehow just maybe

a poor process issue. We'll be investigating this further. Frankly it is absolutely

scandalous. This is an acquisition at 10 times the value. It makes it pretty hard to

have confidence in the Government's spending on infrastructure and its investment

in infrastructure when it does something so blatant as wasting taxpayer money in

that way.



JOURNALIST: The Department won't say whether any details of the independent

report it's apparently compiling right now will be released, or if it will be released

publicly. Would you like for that report to be release publicly?



KING: Absolutely. I think for people to have confidence in the Government's

infrastructure spending program, it needs to be absolutely transparent about not

only what happened and how it happened, but why did it happen and why it

occurred. Until the Government fronts up to the parliament and to the media and

tells them that, this project will continue to smell to high heaven.



CHALMERS: We'll just go Brett and then Jen, and then we're going to have to call

it a day.



JOURNALIST: Just if the tax cuts are presented to the parliament in one month

which is widely expected, is Labor prepared to block tax cuts for 70 per cent of

workers in order to stop tax cuts for 6 per cent of workers?



CHALMERS: I don't think there's much use in anticipating a hypothetical about

what the Government might do. There's lots of speculation. We've all seen it in the

papers. We've all read the smoke signals that have gone up. Let's see what the

Government does tomorrow.



JOURNALIST: But if it does?



CHALMERS: I will talk to my colleagues. We'll come to a view on what we do in

the parliament. We've made our priorities and our principles really clear. We'll see

what the Government does. We'll respond to it then.



We'll just go to Jen, and one more then we're done.



JOURNALIST: The Government's described this budget as the most important

since the end of the Second World War. Do you agree with that? And in a few

words, what do you need to see tomorrow?



CHALMERS: This is obviously an extraordinarily important budget. We want to

make sure that people aren't left out and left behind. We want to make sure that

there's investment in jobs, supporting communities, and investment in the future.

We want to see a budget which is not about headlines, not about over promising

and under delivering, not about dodgy deals, pork barrelling or paying too much for

land from Liberal Party donors as Catherine said. The budget needs to be about

jobs, people, and the future. If the Government doesn't prevent unemployment

being too high for too long, then it will have failed.



Last question.



JOURNALIST: Given the global pandemic, are you worried that Labor isn't getting

much traction during this budget process?



CHALMERS: I'm worried that Australians don't have enough jobs and

opportunities. The politics will take care of themselves. Our role here is to do what

we can, to agree where we can and disagree where we must, to put up robust

alternatives where that's necessary, to point out where the Government is not

acting with sufficient urgency, and when the Government is announcing projects as

Catherine said and not getting the money out the door, there's a role for the

Opposition there. It's not business as usual in the economy so it can't be business

as usual in politics. We've tried to be supportive where we can be, but we've also

been critical where the Government's got it wrong. They've got it wrong with

JobKeeper for example, they've got it wrong with these big announcements which

aren't followed through on, and that means the unemployment queues are longer

than they need to be, and this recession which is already horrific for too many

Australians is worse than it needs to be as well.



Thanks very much.



ENDS





MEDIA CONTACTS:

MEGAN LANE (CHALMERS) 0424 437 949

NICK BEAVER (KING) 0419 709 266

