

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE   MEMBER FOR CORIO

MURRAY WATT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR NORTHERN AUSTRALIA  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DISASTER AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT  LABOR SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  GOLD COAST  MONDAY, 9 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus impact on tourism sector, Gold Coast tourism  industry suffering, impact on casual workers, need for stimulus, ADF  personnel in isolation

MURRAY WATT, QUEENSLAND SENATOR: We've taken the opportunity  today to meet with a number of representatives from local Gold Coast hotel  organisations and hotel operators to just get a better understanding of what the  impact of coronavirus is on the local tourism industry. We've heard some very  worrying stories about the impact the coronavirus is already having on the local  tourism industry here on the Gold Coast and across Queensland more broadly.  For some time now, there has been a very direct impact of coronavirus on the  hotel industry and the tourism industry in Cairns. But it's already becoming  clear that that is starting to impact on the Gold Coast and other parts of  Queensland as well. So what we're here today to do is to understand what is  exactly happening and also to underline the need for the federal government to  really step up to the plate. We've seen the Queensland Government take action  with some extra funding to promote tourism, especially to domestic travellers.  And yet we're still waiting for the Federal Government to do anything about this.  Now, about three weeks ago, the federal Minister, Stuart Robert, who's a Gold  Coast-based Member of Parliament, said that he was hatching a plan about  what the Federal Government was going to be doing to help the local tourism  industry. And here we are three weeks later, and it seems that he's still sitting  on this plan, waiting for it to hatch. Meanwhile, we're seeing the local tourism  industry really impacted. It's not just hotel owners, it's also the little operators -

the surf schools, the fishing charters, the cafes that rely on tourists - who are  really starting to feel the pinch. And of course, before long, we need to worry  about what the impact might be on the casual workers who form so much of the  employment base here on the Gold Coast. So it's critical that the Federal  Government finally start taking some action to support the local tourism  industry, to get moving, to recognise that this is a serious problem that isn't  going to go away. And it's simply not good enough for the Federal Government  to be saying that they might try to redirect funding that had already been  announced to support the tourism industry after the recent bushfires. That's  what we're hearing from a local perspective. But I'll let Richard add to that and  cover off the national issues.

RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER: Well, thank you, Murray. It is  really wonderful, actually, to be here on the Gold Coast today. And it's great to  be here with Senator Murray Watt, who does such a fantastic job  representing  Federal Labor here on the Gold Coast. What we've heard today  in terms of the experiences of hotels in the tourism sector on the Gold Coast is  pretty confronting. We've seen hotels experience drop offs in occupancy rates  going right down to single digits almost overnight. And that's obviously having  an enormous impact on the hotels as a result of the coronavirus. And a big  hotel chains, they can obviously wear that, big operators can. But when you  think about small and medium businesses, cafes, schools, fishing charters, all  of those companies which make the tourism experience so important here on  the Gold Coast or in a place like Cairns where those companies are doing it  tough, it really goes to the heart of the tourism sector. And it's those that we  really need to be thinking about how we get through what's happening with  tourism in the coronavirus. The other point is the casual employment, which is  significant within the economy. But it's significant within the tourism sector.  We've heard stories of very difficult conversations that are already happening  with hotel owners and their casual workforce. That is going to have a big impact  on those people that will obviously flow through to the economy more generally.  And so it's really important that the Government has a response in relation to  how this is going to impact the casual workers of this country. For a long time  now, we've been saying that the government needs to act in relation to the  economy. Last year, before coronavirus or before the bushfires, we were calling  on the government to bring forward stage two of tax cuts. We were calling on  the government to bring forward infrastructure projects so that we could get the  economy going. We were calling on the government, have a plan for wage  stagnation, which is the standout feature, or has been the standout feature of  the economy up until this summer. It's very important that the Government acts  in relation to the economy, which was already going very slow before either of  the bushfires or corona. The Government's now revealing that it will be coming  forward with its stimulus package. It needs to do that, obviously, and it needs to  do that quickly. We'll be constructive in our approach to whatever the

government puts up in relation to the stimulus package. But it's very important  that it is sufficient. It needs to understand fully what is going on within our  economy now in sectors like the tourism sector that we've heard about today.  And it's simply not good enough to come up with a response to tourism, which  seeks to, in a sense, raid the response which has already been put forward in  relation to bushfires. The coronavirus is something which needs to be dealt with  on its own terms. The economic impact in relation to the tourism sector needs  to be dealt with on its own terms and the government therefore must have a  package which deals with the impact the corona is having on the tourism sector  on its own terms.

JOURNALIST: Before you came here today, obviously you were aware of what  was going on in Cairns but how across were you of the impacts here on the  Gold Coast?

MARLES: Well, it's one thing to hear stats and figures, it's another to actually  be present in a place and to hear the very difficult stories that the people have  to tell about the way this is impacting the tourism sector on the Gold Coast right  now. The kind of conversations that have been had with casual workforces  when there is no work because there are people who are not here, and  particularly in a place like Cairns and the Gold Coast, that's very significant. So  this is real. It's not just statistics. It's actually happening to real people and it's  going to be playing out for some time to come. And that's really the other point.  This is it is not just something that's present for the next week or two. The  Government needs to bear in mind that whatever response it comes up with  has to contemplate quite some time that it needs to keep the tourism sector  going in order to get past the impact that the coronavirus will have.

JOURNALIST: And until we get a response from the Federal Government, how  badly can you see this going?

MARLES: I think this is obviously going to have a very significant impact on the  tourism sector in Australia and here on the Gold Coast. But come back to the  fact that we went into this summer with the impact that the bushfires have had  and the impact of the coronavirus has had with an economy that was already  weak. And as big as the impact will be a rise of the coronavirus, it points to the  negligence, really, on the part of the Government last year in failing to act in  stimulating the economy when it was already flat-lining. And so the fact that  stage two of the tax cuts brought were not forward, as we argued, the fact that  we've not seen infrastructure projects brought forward, as examples, speaks to  the inaction of the Government, which is now being put into stark relief, given  the very significant impact that the coronavirus will have.

JOURNALIST: And I guess we are still only starting to realise, and will continue

to realise, just how big the impacts of coronavirus will be. Why do you think the  Government has taken so long to do something?

MARLES: Well, the Government needs to act and it's a very good question. I  think that this is a very significant event and it is very important that the  government comes forward with a package, gives a sense of reassurance to  industries like the tourism sector, that it has a plan for it going forward and that  it comes to this with a package which is sufficient. Now, as I said, we will go  about dealing with this in a very constructive way. We want to obviously support  the Government in terms of how it handles it. But it is very critical that whatever  they bring forward is sufficient to the task and this is going to be an issue which  has a very big impact on the tourism sector here on the Gold Coast, in  Queensland and in Australia.

JOURNALIST: Do you have an idea, in an ideal world, of what that package  would look like?

MARLES: That's a matter for the Government and obviously they are best  placed with the information they have to put forward that package. But you  cannot have the meetings we've had today, see the impact that the coronavirus  having on the economy here on the Gold Coast right now, without being  completely aware of the need for the package to be significant in the way in  which it helps an industry like the tourism industry through this event. It is  critically important that what they bring forth is sufficient. It is obviously not good  enough that what it does is simply raid a fund that it has put together for  another purpose in relation to the bushfire response. This has to be dealt with  on its own terms.

JOURNALIST: Have you been briefed about the two defence personnel who  are in isolation?

MARLES: I've not been briefed that we will be seeking a briefing from Defence  though in relation to.

JOURNALIST: OK, so it's with Defence at this stage?

MARLES: You're referring to the personnel in the ADF? I've not received a  briefing yet, but we will be seeking a briefing from Defence in relation to them.

JOURNALIST: How big a demonstration of just the far reaches of coronavirus  so far - does this demonstrate the fact that it is now within the ADF?

MARLES: Well, the ADF is a big organisation, and has tens of thousands of  people in it. So it's not surprising that ultimately there would be an impact there.



As I say, we will be seeking a briefing from the government in relation to that.

JOURNALIST: In the next day or so?

MARLES: Well, we'll be seeking that briefing straight away.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACTS:   KATE HANNS (MARLES) 0423 974 363  TALI ELEY (WATT) 0448 078 456









