

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT

INTERVIEW WITH MICHAEL BAILEY, 4RO  WEDNESDAY 14 OCTOBER 2020

EO&E…

MICHAEL BAILEY: We’ve got the Prime Minister of this great land of ours on air, Scott Morrison. Good  morning to you, Scomo, how are you?

PRIME MINISTER: I'm very well, Michael. It's great to be up here with Michelle Landry, too.

BAILEY: Yes. I tell you what, she's doing a terrific job. Gee, isn't there some money being pumped into the  Singaporean Army outpost? It's just amazing, isn't it?

PRIME MINISTER: Well she's been a key advocate in this area, making sure this is getting to the local  businesses and local contractors as well. But we've got, we're we're we're really getting underway here. I  mean we've got too many of the contracts now moving and getting people in place. We've got 30  companies that have been engaged in central Queensland for the delivery of the design phase, and that's  in the order of some $55 million dollars. But then there's all the many other things that I was with the  runners of Beef Week last night, and had a good chat to them. And they’re thrilled about the money we're  putting in for Beef Week, which I know is just, you know, a tremendous event up here. It's not just known,  can I tell you in central Queensland, we know about Beef Week, a lot further south than that, too. And  we’re pleased to be supporting that. But you know, there’s Rookwood Weir, there’s the Urannah dam. It  just goes on. Michelle has just been an absolute factory for churning out the support for central  Queensland.

BAILEY: Oh, yes. She never she never leaves any stone unturned, that's for sure. When it comes to our  favourite Capricornia. Look you flew into town for a reason, Prime Minister, what was that?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, this is to communicate with people in central Queensland about how the Budget  is going to deliver, for you know, bringing Australia out this COVID-19 recession. There are so many  different measures. Whether it was, you know, the mining services business yesterday, we’re meeting  with other businesses, the instant expensing, the work for- the job hirer credit, JobMaker job hirer credit,  the bringing forward of the tax cuts, which is really important - 2.3 million Queenslanders are getting  those tax cuts, which we made law last Friday, 2 million of them on low to middle incomes. But then the  Budget specifically, I mean, we've got the Rocky stadium, which Michelle announced. Of course, there  were plenty of advocates for that stadium. And there's no doubt about that. I mean, we welcome all the

advocacy we had and there were many champions of that project. But I can tell you, the government  doesn't get to make that decision and put that in unless they're in the government. They are the  government. And the reason that's the case is because of the people of Capricornia, that put Michelle  Landry into Parliament once again.

BAILEY: Yeah look that’s what it’s all about. So those tax cuts, only, you know, not only just for you and I,  but also the businesses. When do they actually take effect from?

PRIME MINISTER: Oh well the business ones take effect immediately.

BAILEY: Immediately.

PRIME MINISTER: Yep.

BAILEY: So people should actually go see their tax agents straight away and say, hey, hey, hey, there's  money in the can?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah, there's two parts of it. There's for businesses, there's the immediate expensing  of all their capital expenditure. So there used to be a thing, well there still is, the instant asset write off,  that was capped at $150,000. And I remember being up here some years ago, over at Coxons Radiators,  and they were one of the businesses that were benefiting from that broader plan that we had in place.  Now we've just taken the cap off completely. So big engineering and heavy machinery equipment that  mining companies and others are going to be spending on. And that's going to draw a lot of support out  of local contractors, I mean people like Coxons actually, locally. And many others are going to benefit from  that. We're trying to just encourage businesses to bring forward their investment decisions. I mean,  particularly in central Queensland and areas of the mining industry, they are being able to push through  this crisis. And this will mean they'll be able to bring forward expenditure and get on with it. And that  means lots of jobs, lots of apprentices, lots of trainees, and enabling central Queensland to push forward  through coronavirus.

BAILEY: When do you think JobKeeper will actually start to go down to the fact that people who don't  want to work will actually have to start going back to work because there are so many vacancies in our  region and they can't fill them because of JobKeeper. They're earning too much money. I find that bizarre.  I would rather work for a living than than just take money from the taxpayers. But anyway, that's just my  thoughts.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I think that view would be shared broadly, and that's already started to happen.  I mean, JobKeeper already changed at the end of last month, so did JobSeeker. It was, it fell, JobSeeker  fell by $300 dollars a fortnight. People can still earn that $300 dollars and not have their payments  affected. So, you know, we did sort of both there, keeping the supports in, but also giving people the  incentive to work. So we're looking to see how that plays out over the next couple of months. JobKeeper  has already been reduced back to $1,200 and for, $750 for those working less than 20 hours a week. So  we've already started the transition out of it Michael, we’ve transitioned to not just, you know, we've  been keeping people in jobs, some 3 million people supported by that. Now we're getting, we're working  to get people into jobs, which is what the hiring credit, the JobMaker hiring credit is about. And we've  seen 760,000 jobs come back into the economy since the pit of the recession. The COVID recession.  And  that's a great outcome. But we need to get more people back into work.

BAILEY: And of course, tourism is bleeding no matter where you go across this great country of ours. You  know that very well. The borders, you have no control. But do you see them lifting soon so we can get  some normality back into our tourism game, I must say, the locals have been supporting, you know, the  tourist operators all over Queensland. You know, they're going gangbusters, but we need the cream on  top to survive.

PRIME MINISTER: There's no doubt about that. And that, you know, New South Wales residents being  able to holiday in Queensland would obviously be good for the tourism industry, New Zealanders who will  start holidaying in New South Wales from the end of this week

BAILEY: Yes.

PRIME MINISTER: ...because they don't have to quarantine into New South Wales. If that was available in  Queensland, and then that could, that could happen immediately, too. But look as a government and as  a Prime Minister I've left that decision for the premier. The borders have played a role, particularly when  they were brought in, post July when the Victorian wave hit. I mean, prior to that, the Premier and I were  actually working to open the borders. She was committed to opening them in July. There was a, everyone  was on the same page there. The opposition here, the premier, myself. We were all looking to open those  borders in July. But everything changed after that. And so the borders came in. They played a role. But  our only position on the borders has been, it's got to be based on the health advice and be transparent  about that. And there just can't be double standards. But they they do come at a cost. You can't ignore  that. I mean, protecting health does come at a cost. And the cost has been very severe for the tourism  industry. And they should only be there as long as they absolutely have to. It's always been my view, and  that's a judgement for the government. And they've got to weigh that all up and get that right and apply  it without having a double standard.

BAILEY: Yeah I know that Mary Caroll, Capricorn Tourism, you know, she's begging for the borders to  open, but she always says it's up to the health authorities, I suppose. Roll on October 31, Halloween.  Maybe something will change after that. What do you reckon, Prime Minister?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, look, I know certainly if Deb Frecklington becomes Premier. I know she wants to  manage both the health and the economic issues in this crisis. And you’ve just got to look south of the  border. I mean, since the pit of the COVID recession, you know, the bottom point, we've seen 70 per cent  of the jobs of New South Wales come back, in Queensland it's been 44 percent, in South Australia, it's  been 70 per cent as well. So, you know, they're doing things differently in those two states and they're  getting different outcomes and they're managing the coronavirus extremely well. And the Queensland  health system can manage it. I mean, we've done the review all around the country and Queensland, you  know, has a good contact tracing system. So no criticisms of that. And so you’ve got to balance up the  health with the economic. That's the judgement, and the premier will make it and has been making it and  our government has just been working to try and get as much of the economy moving as possible.

BAILEY: Now, a personal question for you, Prime Minister, because you've been working 24/7, 7 days a  week. Are you okay?

PRIME MINISTER: I'm fine. That's very kind of you to ask. Always better when I get to get out of, you know,  I’ve been locked in Canberra for a long period of time this year. But it's what is what it's great to do,  Michael, is to get out of Canberra. Nothing wrong with Canberra. But to get up here and to see how our  Budget is working on the ground. I mean, I met some young apprentices yesterday. And, you know,

people, some have moved to the area, some grew up here in Rocky they’re getting jobs in the mining  services industry, they’re getting trades, diesel mechanics, things like this. And it’s women, it's young girls  coming out of school. It's middle aged, sort of older age of apprentices. And we've got an older apprentices  scheme which gives about a $4,000 subsidy. We've got a, we've got a up to $10,000 dollar wage subsidy  for people aged over 50 who've been unemployed for more than six months. And just to see all these  programmes being used by local businesses, it really is reassuring. And to hear the stories about JobKeeper  that I've heard throughout Queensland these last few days, people who would have lost their job and they  kept it, the businesses are now stronger. Those businesses are now off JobKeeper and they're pushing  ahead. It's great to see it working on the ground.

BAILEY: I don't care how much money the government is spending. I reckon you're doing, and this is just  me personally, I might add, I think you and your government are doing a terrific job making sure this  country stays afloat. And I don't care how much money gets spent. I think you're doing the right thing.  And I can see the road to recovery taking shape as the weeks roll on. And surely you must get that vibe as  well?

PRIME MINISTER: You know, I do. And then this, I mean people talk about assumptions in a Budget. The  only assumption I make in the Budget, really at the end of the day, is the Australian people.

BAILEY: Yes.

PRIME MINISTER: I mean our Budget is an investment in them. It's not the government solving the  problems, it’s the government stepping up to help Australians at a time of great need so they can get back  up on their feet and start running again. That's the assumption I make that Australians will do that, that  they’ll, when they have a go, they'll get out there. We'll give them one, they’ll get out there and have that  go. And that's what I'm seeing up here in central Queensland. Certainly what I saw down south, too. I see  it all around the country, I was in South Australia the other day. Same thing. People know it's tough and  they know that, you know, you can't, you can't prevent everything that happens in a terrible pandemic  like this. But they know we're putting everything we can at this to ensure Australians get back on their  feet. But we're counting on them to take it forward. You don't bake spending, this spending for the next  decade or more. You just get people back up on their feet and know that Australians will push on.

BAILEY: And I think Australians are really appreciating that. Look, I know you got to fly, so to speak. Where  are you off to next after you leave Rockhampton?

PRIME MINISTER: We will go a bit further north before the end of the week. We've got National Cabinet  on later in the week, so I'll have to return to Sydney for that at the end of the week. But no, it's been great  to move through the area and it's particularly good to be here with Michelle Landry. She really is an  amazing local member. You say I don’t rest, I tell you she never rests for central Queensland and  Rockhampton. She is just a dynamo. And. And there is just so much whether, you know, the ring road  that’s coming, and Rookwood weird and all of these things, the stadium. I mean, that's Michelle. She's  amazing.

BAILEY: It certainly is. And Scott Morrison, of course, the Prime Minister of Australia. You're more than  welcome to return to Rockhampton as many times as you like, please. Because we like the big  announcements. We like the money that always follows. And next time, make sure you pop into 220 Quay  Street, we will have a cup of tea together. Okay?

PRIME MINISTER: Sure, good on you. Thanks Michael.

BAILEY: Okay, thanks very much there’s Scomo, the Prime Minister of Australia.

[END]

Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

