MATT THISTLETHWAITE MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR THE REPUBLIC

MEMBER FOR KINGSFORD SMITH





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

WEDNESDAY, 26 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Australia’s aged care sector crisis; Morrison Government failures;

Richard Colbeck must resign.



MATT THISTLETHWAITE, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL

SERVICES: Good morning. The Australians in our aged care facilities at the moment are

the people that built our great nation. Some of them were around during the Great

Depression, many of them defended our nation during World War II, a lot of them were

post-war migrants that came to Australian with nothing more than the clothes on their back

and a suitcase, working on things like the Snowy Mountain scheme, building the

infrastructure and the quality of life that we all enjoy today.



But under the Morrison Government, the people living in our aged care facilities have

become the forgotten Australians, they’ve become the victims of a Government more

interested in cutting the taxes of large corporations than in improving the quality of care in

our aged care facilities. Victims of a Minister that had forgot how many of them passed

away or weren’t getting the necessary care of had infections in the facility. Victims of a

Government without a plan and that didn’t understand the intense contagious nature of the

Covid-19 whilst it was running rampant through aged care facilities, Government

Departments were arguing who was responsible for their care.



These great Australians deserve more than an apology, they deserve a plan from this

Government to fix the problems in aged care and to ensure the quality of care improves, a

plan to ensure that workers in these facilities are properly remunerated so that they don’t

need to work an extra job to get by, a plan to ensure the Minister is responsible for

decisions in aged care and ensuring that the buck stops with the Commonwealth

Government. The Prime Minister needs to man-up, take responsibility for what’s happened

in aged care and develop a plan to improve care for those great Australians that have

helped built this nation. Happy to take any questions.



JOURNALIST: A lot of work has been done quickly in the aged care sector, though a bit

late, what work is left to do to give you, Labor, the confidence that this sector is managing

the outbreak quite well? What more is still to be done?



THISTLETHWAITE: There’s a few things the Government can do. They’ve got to improve

the quality of care in our facilities, that means ensuring that we have the best trained and

most capable people working in these facilities. The Liberal Party in NSW removed a

requirement for nurses to be in nursing homes throughout the State. We could ensure that

the people who work in these facilities are better remunerated and have access to the best

quality training and skills to ensure they are the best qualified people working in this

system that don’t need to have a second job. And of course we can have independent

oversight and verification of quality and standards as recommended by the Royal

Commission. There’s three things the Government can do almost immediately to fix the

quality of care in our aged care facilities.



JOURNALIST: Richard Colbeck’s had his responsibilities moved out of his portfolio into

Greg Hunt’s portfolio, what are your thoughts on that?



THISTLETHWAITE: The Aged Care Minister has no responsibility for aged care anymore,

all the Minister is doing is taking home his salary but not looking after aged care. It says

everything about the crisis in this Government regarding aged care that the Minister for

Aged Care has had the responsibility for the sector taken away from him. The people in the

aged care facilities deserve better from this Government.



JOURNALIST: Should he resign?



THISTLETHWAITE: The Minister should have resigned a long time ago when he couldn’t

name how many people had passed away in the facilities, these are the basics of getting

across the portfolio and knowing your job and of course we saw that the Minister didn’t



understand that and now he’s had the responsibilities given to the Health Minister. That’s

not good enough. Thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: BEN LEESON 0404 648 275



