

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



2020 AIPS HEALTH BUDGET REPLY



SYDNEY

FRIDAY, 16 OCTOBER 2020

*** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY ***

Acknowledgments

I acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, the Gadigal people of  the Eora Nation, and pay my respects to their elders past, present and emerging.

I’m going to speak today about what the Budget included, but also what it left out.

There was no more serious omission than the health of First Nations peoples.

It is less than three months since we ‘reset’ the Closing the Gap framework.

But re-setting the targets achieves nothing without real accompanying action.

The Budget contained no serious measures on the three health targets - on First Nations  life expectancy, birthweights or suicide.

As a nation, we can and we must do better.

Thanks to the Australian Institute of Policy and Science for hosting today’s Health Budget  Reply, and to our sponsors Johnson and Johnson and Medicines Australia.

After a year spent on Zoom, it’s good to be with many of you in person again. And hello to  those watching online, particularly from Victoria.

Whether you’re here or online, I want to thank you for your efforts throughout 2020.

By global standards, and with tragic exceptions as in aged care, Australia has responded  well to COVID-19. I give all governments, federal and state, due credit for that.



The bulk of the credit for what we have achieved, though, belongs to all Australians, and  particularly to the health sector.

You’ve been under enormous pressure since February, and you’ve stepped up every time.  Thank you for what you have done, and what you continue to do, to keep us safe.



2020 Budget



The Budget included a number of necessary health measures, and I want to begin by  welcoming them.

Most obviously, the Government confirmed ongoing support for telehealth consultations,  COVID testing, GP respiratory clinics, public and private hospitals, and other elements of  the COVID-19 health response.

We welcome their almost inevitable extension into next year, and note that they may well  need to be extended further.

In relation to telehealth in particular, there will need to be a conversation as to how to make  telehealth a permanent feature of our system.

We also welcome the Government’s recognition of the mental health impacts of the  pandemic.

Since May, we’ve been arguing that those impacts don’t stop at the Murray River, and that  Medicare mental health consultations need to be doubled nationally.

We were glad to see that happen in this Budget.

And there were other welcome measures.

I particularly want to welcome long-overdue support for Australia’s thalidomide survivors.

Until the Senate inquiry that reported 18 months ago, we as a nation had not focussed on  the ongoing needs of these survivors.

I’ve enjoyed getting to know them and advocating on their behalf over the last 18 months,  and will continue to listen to them on the adequacy of the proposed package.

But I recognise, as they have, that this measure is a big step forward - and I thank the  Government for it.



Gaps

In general, though, I think the health budget was more notable for what it omitted than what  it contained - and so do the experts.  .



The Australian Medical Association said the Budget “left most other challenges in health  care for another day”.

The Public Health Association said it was “a huge disappointment, bordering on  disastrous”.

Professor Ian Hickie said that mental health reform had “once again been left in the waiting  room”.

And so on.

Now, I’m the first to acknowledge that the Minister and his Department have had a lot on  their plate this year.

But many of us  have participated in the “Don’t Wait Mate” campaign.

It’s an important message: that we as individuals shouldn’t ignore other health risks during  COVID-19.

And the same is true for us as a country. We simply can’t ignore the health challenges that  were with us before the pandemic, and will be with us afterwards.

Kicking necessary reform perennially into the long grass is no way to handle the health  system.

If we do, Australians will continue to suffer needlessly.

Now, the window for the next federal election opens next August - less than 10 months  from now.

And so today, I want to give you a sense not only of my criticisms of the Government, but  of my own priorities as the alternative Health Minister.

In my mind, there were three broad omissions in the health budget - and they’re the three  things that would provide a framework for my approach as Health Minister.

First, a recognition of the social determinants of health, and of the benefits of prevention.

Second, an acknowledgment of record costs and waits for care, and an effort to restore the  universality of Medicare.

And third, the resolve to tackle big challenges and pursue necessary reforms.

Or to put it more simply: equity, access and reform.

Let me take those three in turn.



Equity

When we talk of health, the conversation moves quickly to health care.

But any serious effort to improve Australians’ health must begin outside the health care  system.

I wrote about this in my 2013 book ‘Hearts and Minds’. (If you haven’t read it, you can get it  at very competitive prices on the remainder desk at all good - and some not so good -  bookstores.)

In particular, I wrote about the epidemic of diabetes that was then sweeping my Western  Sydney electorate - and is now overwhelming it.

I wrote about its correlation with income, with socioeconomic background, with educational  attainment.

And I posed the question: “whether we, as a nation, will continue to tolerate a situation in  which less well-off people … live sicker and shorter lives than the wealthy”?

Unfortunately, in this Budget, and under this Government, the answer appears to be yes.

Because we have taken no serious action on the social determinants of health - what  Michael Marmot calls the causes of the causes.

Those forces have their strongest and most tragic impact on First Nations peoples.

As the National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation put it in response to  this Budget:

“When you have, on average, 17 people in a small house, how do you expect children to  get a good night’s sleep, do their homework, be fed and healthy?”

The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare says more than half of the First Nations  health gap is due to the social determinants and health risk factors like smoking.

And the same is true more broadly.

The Institute also tells us that one in two Australians have a chronic disease - but that 38  per cent of that burden is totally avoidable.

Yet the Government is just now developing a National Preventive Health Strategy.

That change of heart is welcome. But to be of any use, the Strategy must seriously  confront the broader forces that are threatening our health.

Earlier this week, I gave the 2020 Earle Page Politics Lecture at the University of New  England.



Australia already has among the most casualised workforces in the OECD.

We are facing a pandemic of insecurity in the workplace.  That impacts on the health of  individual workers and the health of our society.

And this trend is set to worsen during the first recession in three decades.



I’m very concerned that as people return to the workforce after we come out of recession,  they will be returning to insecure jobs, forced into the gig economy, with all the negative  implications for their mental and physical health which are now well understood.

To address challenges like these, we need to move much closer to a ‘health in all policies’  approach, where we recognise the health impacts of forces beyond the health portfolio.

Or to take another example: as no less than 30 health groups have highlighted, the draft  Preventive Health Strategy fails to even mention climate change.

Despite the World Health Organisation calling climate change the defining health issue of  the 21st Century.

.



That’s why I’ve announced that as Health Minister, I’d designate the health impacts of  climate change as a National Health Priority Area.

And more broadly, these drivers of health are part of Labor’s commitment to an Australian  Centre for Disease Control.

Anthony and I have made that commitment essentially for two reasons.

First, as of January, Australia was badly unprepared for a pandemic. We had less than one  mask per person in our National Stockpile, and hadn’t run a preparedness drill since 2008.

We need to be better prepared for next time (and we all in this room know that there will be  a next time, and it may not be a long time away) and we see an Australian CDC as a key  element in that.

But second, as in other countries, we want the Australian CDC to treat other health threats  with the same urgency as COVID-19.

We want it to focus on non-communicable as well as communicable diseases, and the  forces that make some Australians more vulnerable to both.

I see this as a significant commitment, and an important addition to the architecture of the  health system.

Experts have called for an Australian CDC for more than three decades - but this is the  first time a Government or alternative Government has committed to one.  I’m very glad we  have done so.



Access

Now of course, even if we get all those things right, even if we start to make real progress  on prevention and the social determinants of health, Australians will always need health  care.

And that brings me to my second broad point, on access.



One of the striking lessons of COVID-19 is that Australians still expect universal access to  health care. It is part of the fabric of who we are.

In February and March, we looked around the world and saw health systems  overwhelmed, and clinicians making impossible decisions.

The Australian community rejected that sort of rationing here, rightly demanding testing  and treatment for everyone who needed it.

And governments listened. Notwithstanding some delays and failures, they dramatically  expanded the capacity of our health care system to cope with COVID.

We took measures to bend the curve like lockdowns and quarantine, but we also took  action to expand capacity like the laudable expansion in intensive care beds across the  country from 2,000 to 7,000.

At its heart, that’s the promise of Medicare: universal access to care based on clinical  need, not capacity to pay.

But outside of COVID, it’s a promise we all too often break.

I no longer refer to Medicare as ‘universal’ - right now, it isn’t.

Because the costs of care have never been higher, and waits for care have never been  longer.

It may sound like a slogan, but it’s true.

And those barriers of cost and time cause millions of Australians to miss out.

Let me give you a couple of examples.

For COVID, we not only introduced Medicare telehealth rebates, but also doubled  incentives to allow GPs to bulk bill.

But outside that context, the average GP out-of-pocket fee is now $39.

1 in 5 Australians have less than $1,000 in their savings.

Many people don’t even have $100 in their accounts.

And it can be a choice of heading to the GP for a niggly cough, or dinner for the kids.

So it’s understandable then, that even before the recession, that cost forced almost  600,000 Australians a year to delay or avoid seeing their GP.



And that’s not to mention the services that are largely excluded from Medicare - like dental  care, which two million Australians a year can’t afford.

Or take hospitals.



We may have more than tripled the capacity of our intensive care units for COVID 19.

But in our public hospitals, one in three emergency patients are not seen on time, and  elective surgery waits are at record highs.



The bad news is that costs and waits like these have been exacerbated by Government  policy, most particularly the Medicare freeze and the cut in the Commonwealth’s share of  hospital funding.

But the good news is that they can also be improved by Government policy - by a  concerted effort to restore the universality of Medicare.

We’ll have more to say about that before the next election.

But it’s fair to say that the health system has always been - and will always be - better off  under Labor.



Reform

That’s not just a matter of investment. Which brings me to my third point.

It’s also a matter of reform - of a willingness to tackle the big challenges head on.

As of last Estimates, there were 55 action plans in some stage of development or  implementation in the Health portfolio. Fifty-five.

So, lots of activity.

But what of delivery? What of the big, complex, sometimes contentious discussions we  need to have to improve our health system?

If First Nations health was the worst omission from this Budget, mental health was a close  second.

One in two Australians experience mental ill-health. One in four don’t access services. It  costs our economy up to $180 billion a year.

That demands comprehensive reform, across portfolios and across levels of government.

The Government ordered the Productivity Commission inquiry into mental health more  than two years ago, and the report has been with them for almost four months.

Yet it hasn’t even been released.

And we’re told not to expect a response until the 2021 Budget next May .

Similarly, the Children’s Mental Health and Wellbeing Strategy - the Government’s  promised response to the fact that half of all serious mental health issues begin before the  age of 14 - has also been delayed by months and months.





We have no time to waste on mental health reform, and this Budget was a massive missed  opportunity.

And under this third point of reform, I of course have not forgotten about medicines.

I welcome the announcement that the Government and Medicines Australia are working  towards an extension of the Strategic Agreement.

But at this stage, the Government has only agreed to do what it already does - to list new  medicines within the average fiscal envelope of recent years.

It’s good those listings won’t have to be offset. But nor will $481 billion in deficit spending  on other programs.

And as Anna Lavelle has said, “the devil is in the detail. The mechanics are a bit opaque  and we have to look at how that’s going to work”.

So I wish Medicines Australia luck in its negotiations over the coming months. You’ll have  my attention and my support.

But the more fundamental issue in the Government’s approach to medicines is the lack of  reform.

The review of the National Medicines Policy is way behind schedule - it hasn’t started, yet  alone reported or been implemented.

And so we still have 20th Century systems for registering and subsidising medicines -  systems that simply don’t match the 21st Century of personalised medicine.

That’s not just my view. It’s also been expressed by the likes of Andrew Wilson.

The same is true of the MBS. It’s essentially a system of episodic rebates for acute  illnesses and injuries.

But, that’s no longer the world we live in.



For decades now, governments and the sector have been talking about new funding  models to encourage coordinated care that prevents and addresses chronic disease.

The time for talk is over. The time for meaningful reform of primary care, to better cater for  the widespread chronic disease in the community, is here.

I could go on. Private health insurance coverage is at record lows, and calling minor  changes in the budget “a second wave of reform” doesn’t make them so.

Conclusion

I don’t say these things as a starry-eyed optimist.



I’ve been an MP long enough - and a Cabinet Minister long enough - to understand the  challenges of reform.

But we as a country - and frankly, we as a Party - established Medicare. Universal  superannuation. The NDIS.

They were all hard.  They were all worth it.

And in recent months, we’ve been reminded again what governments can do with focus  and resolve.

Because our response to the pandemic shows what is possible when governments actually  apply force of will to seemingly intractable problems.

What if we resolved to apply the same force of will and singularity of purpose to some of  the other problems in health which have been regarded as intractable?

Martin Luther King talked of the fierce of urgency of now. We have all been living the fierce  urgency of now this year.

When this approach is applied, when ideology is set aside, when prime ministers and  premiers of good will work together to fix an urgent problem, a lot can be achieved.

We should no longer accept challenges being left in the too hard basket.

We cannot rest on the past achievements of Medicare, now almost forty years old, or the  comparatively low death rate in Australia from COVID-19 and say there is not much to do  in the Australian health system.

There is a lot to do.  A lot to reform.  A lot to improve.

And I look forward to working with all you to do so.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ELIZA MITCHELL 0413 410 931





