

17 October 2020

Iron ball of bureaucracy leaves Australia the begging bowl of Asia   AS Australia’s biggest anti-free trade advocate, Bob Katter, Federal Member for Kennedy has weighed in on  the escalating trade tensions with China, slamming successive government free trade policies and warning  that unless Australia breaks the “iron ball of bureaucracy around our ankles we will continue to be a begging  bowl of Asia” with cattle, cotton, barley, wine, fruit and vegetables and coal.

Mr Katter said it was unsurprising that China was showing no signs of cutting down Australia’s trade deals  with the top earning commodities.

“If you take away China as a customer, you’ve lost 30 per cent of the nation’s income, and the criminals that  allowed this to happen in the Parliaments of Australia by running around with their free trade, black-dogging  the all-powerful Chinese, should be shot.

“For years they were running around saying that free trade would make Australia become the “food bowl of  Asia” but we are now the begging bowl of Asia, just look at our fruit and vegetables where Australia is now a  net importer.

“The country is now reaping the whirlwind that feeds the greedy snivelling sycophantic slave masters, the  snake like Sydney city suits living in their pleasure domes.”

Mr Katter said the only response to Beijing’s power plays was to focus on developing Australia’s self-sufficiency particularly on essential products used every day which are currently produced in China, like  plastic.

“Self-sufficiency in a post-Covid world should be the catch cry and I cannot see one single item undertaking  by desperate Dan the dictator, or “do what I say” Palaszczuk, the NSW Premier seems to be too busy on  extra-curricular activities and while I’d like to very much to think that Josh Frydenberg would be on board,  I’m afraid Josh’s background inhibits him from building this nation.

“The problem with letting business build Australia as the Treasurer believes is that businesses are carrying  more bureaucracy leg iron than my burdened convict forebears ever had to carry and it is  the banks, sorry  the “mortgage lenders”, that have led us to this.

“The long term benefit for Australia is to produce in our country sophisticated industrial goods and the  industrial by-products of agriculture such as ethanol which opens the way to plastics manufacturing. Fancy  importing all your plastic products (your Coca Cola bottles etcetera) from overseas when we could be doing  it here.

“Countries like China just print the money to build a development or project; state-of-the-art economies of  scale and it is not cheap labour anymore given their wages are over 50 per cent of that of Americas.



“We have the iron ball of bureaucracy around our ankles and we have banks that want to know the value of  our house when we want to build a Bradfield Scheme. And the mortgage lender banks are only interested in  how much they can sell a half built dam or factory for. They look to the mortgage value rather than the  project.

“Australians must throw out their current political and monetary regime and replace it with an aggressive  build and own our nation attitude which is the driver in America, China, Europe and Brazil.

“Instead, we are still floundering around in the fairy floss of free marketism which is an explanation and  admission that we know absolutely nothing about anything and we don’t have to do anything because it will  all be done for us.”

ENDS



