JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  LOGAN   THURSDAY, 15 OCTOBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Labour force; Quarantine.

JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: 30,000 Australians lost their job last month and 18,000  Australians gave up looking. The Government still expects 160,000 Australians will join the  unemployment queue between now and the end of the year. We now have almost a million  Australians unemployed and it's expected to get worse before it gets better.

Unemployment will be too high for too long in this country because the Government is failing on jobs.  We can't have a situation where the Government has a trillion dollars of debt and a hundred billion  dollars in new commitments but is still not doing enough to protect and create jobs in this  country. The Government's failure on jobs during this Morrison Recession means fewer people are  able to put food on the table, fewer people are able to put shoes on their kids and provide for their  loved ones.

It beggars belief that the Government is cutting JobKeeper while unemployment is still rising. It  beggars belief that the Government can rack up a trillion dollars in debt and still not have a  comprehensive plan for jobs. The Government still expects 160,000 Australians to become  unemployed between now and the end of the year, they still expect unemployment to get worse  before it gets better, they still expect unemployment to be higher at the end of four years than it was  last year, and yet still we have no comprehensive plan for all of these Australians who are losing  their jobs.

JOURNALIST: You've criticised them for a lack of ambition with their 6 per cent target. What should  they be aiming to do?

CHALMERS: The Government thinks that they can put the cue in the rack once unemployment gets  to 6 per cent which is higher even than it was during the Global Financial Crisis. What the Reserve  Bank Governor has said today is that we should be more ambitious on jobs. Labor has said  continuously that we need to chart the course back to full employment because unless we do that  we won't get anything better than the stagnant wages that we've seen for too long in this country.  Labor thinks there should be support in the economy so that we can get closer to full employment so  that we can boost wages. There was nothing in the Government's budget and nothing in what they  have said since which gives Australians the confidence that we will make enough inroads into  unemployment which is still rising at the same time that they're cutting JobKeeper, racking up a  trillion dollars in debt and not doing enough to keep unemployment at acceptable levels.

Today the Government leaked their talking points. Jobs are not even in the top six priorities in the

Government's talking points. When we look at those talking points which were released today,  Australians and their jobs barely get a look in. If jobs aren't in the top six priorities for the  Government, no wonder we've got high and rising unemployment which will get worse before it gets  better. We need to see better from the Morrison Government.

JOURNALIST: Mr Morrison's colleagues in Queensland have set a 5 per cent target. Is that  something you would encourage? Do you think we should be aiming that high, or that low?

CHALMERS: There are judgements about full employment which are closer to 5 per cent than 6 per  cent. The Government seems to think that if they got to 6 per cent then they can put their feet up  while tens of thousands of extra Australians are unemployed compared to pre-COVID. We need to  be more ambitious in this country about how we can make the economy better after COVID-19 than  it was before. The Government doesn't have any vision for the future, they don't have a proper plan  for jobs, and that's why we've got high and rising unemployment.

JOURNALIST: They were attacked for that 5 per cent as being irresponsible for setting that target.  Do you agree with that?

CHALMERS: I'll leave the state election fight to the people involved in the state election. We think at  a national level that the Morrison Government should be more ambitious than they are. They need a  plan to tackle unemployment. Unemployment is high and rising in this Morrison Recession because  the Prime Minister doesn't have a plan. Despite a trillion dollars of debt and one hundred billion  dollars in new commitments, they still expect it to get worse before it gets better and that means a lot  of hardship for a lot of Australians.

JOURNALIST: The drag on the nation's employment is Victoria, isn't it? If not for them, the country  would be faring okay?

CHALMERS: Obviously there's a lot of concern with the Victorian economy, but we shouldn't  pretend that there's not weakness elsewhere in the country. I was in Cairns the week before last,  one of the areas probably hardest-hit by COVID-19, the shutdown of the international border, and  the cuts to JobKeeper. We shouldn't pretend as the Treasurer wants to do, that all of our challenges  in the economy are limited to Victoria. He is desperate to play politics. He is desperate to pick fights  with Premier Andrews. If only we had a Treasurer who understood that weakness in the economy  and weakness in the jobs market is not just a problem in Victoria.

JOURNALIST: Howard Springs will be taking more Aussies returning home. Cairns was given the  chance to take Aussies, but they said no. Your thoughts on that?

CHALMERS: Obviously we need to be looking for ways to process Australians returning from  overseas more effectively. We need a plan for that, but we haven't seen it. Clearly we need to be  thinking innovatively about how we ensure that people can continue to come to Australia. There is a  system which already exists for communities and particularly for specific hotels in communities to  opt-in to taking people in quarantine. That is largely a matter for businesses and for the local  communities. We need to ensure the when that opportunity is presented that the community actually  supports it. I also think there's a role for the National Cabinet here. Scott Morrison and Josh  Frydenberg are desperate to pick fights with Labor premiers. It would be much better if they spent  that time trying to find ways to ensure that returning Australians and others can quarantine more  effectively so that we can get that plan in place, get people quarantining and keep our people safe.

Unfortunately, National Cabinet has become something the Prime Minister trumpets when things are  going well, but where there are problems that are left unsolved like this one, he seems to want to  pretend that it's all state Labor premiers' faults. That's not good enough.

JOURNALIST: Annastacia said no to Cairns?

CHALMERS: There's a place for state-based decision making here as I said, and a place for  community decision-making and individual hotels and facilities as well. The point I'm making is that  Scott Morrison and Josh Frydenberg shouldn't spend all of their time bagging state Labor premiers  about these arrangements. If the so-called National Cabinet is any good and if there's an opportunity  to do things more effectively, then he needs to show leadership and have that discussion at National  Cabinet. We don't have a role in it as the Federal Opposition but if he thinks things can be done  better then he should negotiate that in the usual way through National Cabinet.

Thanks very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949

