

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES  MEMBER FOR HUNTER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2CC  WEDNESDAY, 19 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: China investigating Australian wine; lack of diplomacy towards China;  Hunter coal industry hit by COVID-induced fall in demand; Labor Party supports the  coal industry.

STEPHEN CENATIEMPO, HOST: ... usually is the voice of common sense is Joel  Fitzgibbon, the Member for Hunter and the Shadow Minister of Agricultural and Resources  - good morning, Joel.

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: G'day Stephen. I was thinking during that  editorial: wow, why don't you tell Canberra what you're really think.

CENATIEMPO: Well, I mean, you know, you look at these border closures, and I know  you've got to play politics to a certain extent, but seriously, I mean, South Australia,  Western Australia, Queensland, Northern Territory, we're talking about shoring up state  elections here, not about any real need to disintegrate the Federation, as I call it.

FITZGIBBON:  Well, politicians obviously have two concerns. One is a genuine one for the  health of the community and their response to the pandemic, and the other is, of course,  their backsides. And when things go wrong, they get blamed and become a little risk  averse, I suppose.

CENATIEMPO: Speaking of protecting backsides, I don't think anybody in Australia is  really to blame for this, but China is investigating Australia's wine exports, accusing us of  flooding the Chinese market with cheap wine. Do we produce enough to flood China?

FITZGIBBON: No, of course we don't. And most of our wine into China is now premium -  $1.2 billion worth of it every year. It's about 37 per cent of our wine exports. And this is  really bad news for us, and I beg to differ, I think there is someone to blame. I think it's  Scott Morrison. I think his language and attitude towards China has been outrageous.  Malcolm Turnbull wasn't any better, indeed probably worse in many senses. And, you  know, it's a big gorilla. It's our major trading partner, our largest export market, and it's  angry and it's going to punish us.

CENATIEMPO: But surely we can't, you know - one of my criticisms, and I put China  Aside for a moment because China is a big gorilla, as you say - but we always seem to

kowtow to other nations and put their cultural interests and their sensibilities first and never  our own. We always go to cap in hand to everybody. Surely we've got to stand up for  ourselves at some stage?

FITZGIBBON: Absolutely, we should never go in cap in hand and we should always  aggressively defend our national interest. But what we should not do is unnecessarily  offend the Chinese. And that's what Scott Morrison has been doing; that's what Malcolm  Turnbull was doing. Scott Morrison going out ahead of the rest of the world on an inquiry  into COVID-19 when there was always going to be an inquiry into COVID-19. Scott  Morrison suggested that they should be UN style weapons inspectors into Wuhan when  that is just not possible - short of armed force. And it was unnecessary for him to say it.  And of course, he's offended them. Now, Marise Payne and Linda Reynolds, the Defence  Minister, going to Washington very recently just to show how much it's on the side of the  United States in its fight with China. It's alright for the United States; it's not being damaged  economically by the fight because it's got a cozy little trade agreement with the Chinese,  but it is hurting us. And we've got to be smarter about the way we deal with the  relationship.

CENATIEMPO: So how do you handle these things? I mean, you know, surely being on  the front foot as far as the inquiry is taking leadership rather than saber rattling? I mean,  how should it have been handled? What should have been done?

FITZGIBBON: You made the point that some of our politicians aren't what they used to be,  and there was a thing called statecraft or diplomacy where you smartly balance these  things. You might be thinking one thing but there are different ways to skin a cat and within  your language, you are strategic. But Scott Morrison, Malcolm Turnbull haven't been  strategic. They just attacked China on many occasion, pilloried people here in Australia  who had the audacity to associate with Chinese, for example, and of course, China's  responding in kind.

CENATIEMPO: Ok, let's talk about the coal industry for a moment. Something that affects  your electorate, probably more than most. We are talking some very real job losses on the  horizon there.

FITZGIBBON: Very scary for us, Stephen. Those who are rallied constantly against the  coal mining industry here are about to get a bit of a taste, I fear, of what it would be like in  the Hunter Valley without the coal mining industry. It's about 75,000 jobs directly and  indirectly. It's the backbone of our economy. It's the engine that drives, indeed, the New  South Wales economy, and this is quite frightening for us. And, of course, China, again, is  a major customer taking a hell of a lot of our thermal coal. And it's another area where I'm  concerned China could take retaliation, but this current downturn is all about the pandemic.  The countries to which we sell our coal are winding right back in response to COVID and,  therefore, demand less of our call and, you know, coal companies can't just keep  stockpiling it forever. So sadly, they're starting to, you know, curtail production and,  therefore, stand down the workforce. And, you know, if those economies in Asia don't pick  up soon, that will continue to happen.

CENATIEMPO: So you're going to have discussions with various ministers about this  when you come back to Canberra next week, but isn't it people on your own side that you  need to talk about? I mean, I saw Graham Richardson on Sky News last night suggest that  it's just madness if Anthony Albanese and others in the Labor Party don't come out in open  support of the coal industry. Are you having much luck convincing the anti-coal brigade on



your side?

FITZGIBBON: The Labor Party has always supported the coal mining industry, and is one  of the bases on which it was formed. It will continue to support the coal mining industry, I'll  have no doubt. And we have to be absolutely balanced in our approach to industry and, of  course, our approach to climate change. We have to get that balance right. We have to  take meaningful action on climate change, but we've got to be careful that we don't so in a  way away there adversely affects Australian industry. That sounds complex, but it's not  that hard really.

CENATIEMPO: Yeah, I think you're right. That's one thing we will agree on. Joel, good to  talk to you, we'll catch up next week.

FITZGIBBON: A pleasure, Stephen.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641









