Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg







THE HON KEITH PITT MP

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia  Member for Hinkler

Senator HOLLIE HUGHES  Senator for NSW

Senator PERIN DAVEY  Senator for NSW

MEDIA RELEASE

July 28 2020





Labor ‘luminary’ powerless to stop party’s march to green fundamentalism

Attempts by long-serving Labor MP Joel Fitzgibbon to call out the spread of radical green-left  ideology within his party are welcome, but set to fall on deaf ears as Labor continues to thumb  its nose at workers in the critically important resources sector.

Leaked emails from the Opposition spokesman on Resources and Agriculture to the Labor  Environment Action Network (LEAN) revealed the extent of the influence Labor’s green  faction.

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt said “LEAN” is an unfortunate  symptom of Labor’s growing green ideology.

“As someone who has served his party for a quarter of a century in Parliament, it is sad to see  someone of Mr Fitzgibbon’s standing having such little impact on Labor’s policy direction  when it comes to mining and energy jobs,” Mr Pitt said.

“Joel Fitzgibbon’s admission that Labor is overstating the job and economic benefits of  renewable energy projects is welcome but will have no impact on the dominant anti-mining  and resources faction in Labor.

“Queensland Labor premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has completely ignored his calls to make a  decision on the New Acland mine in Queensland and his federal leader Anthony Albanese  refused to back the project and save jobs when he was in Brisbane recently,” Mr Pitt said.

New South Wales Liberal Senator Hollie Hughes said Labor’s growing anti-mining stance  threatens jobs.

Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg



“Joel Fitzgibbon seems to be a member of a party more focussed on appealing to the Green  Left than creating jobs, Labor is no longer representative of the heart and soul of the Hunter,  supporting our fabulous mining industry.”

“It’s devastating for the region that their Federal representatives are more focussed  internally, bickering over Climate Change, posturing for their own jobs when Mr Fitzgibbon  and his mates make their move against Albanese.”

“Mining regions like the Hunter are making an enormous economic contribution to the  nation’s economy through the coronavirus pandemic and Labor should be showing support  for the industry, not trying to shut it down,” Senator Hughes said.

“Only the Coalition has the policies to back the thousands of local resources industry workers  and support the industry’s long term future.”

Nationals Senator for New South Wales Perin Davey said there’s no-one of influence in Labor  left to stand up for regional Australia.

“When a voice like Joel Fitzgibbon’s is ignored by his own party as Labor is swallowed up by  the ideological left, it’s regional areas and jobs that are most at risk,” Senator Davey said.

“Labor won’t be able to get away with saying one thing to people in the cities and another to  those in regional areas.

“The people of regional Australia deserve to know where Labor stands on jobs in the mining  and energy sectors. Only the Liberals and Nationals Government is consistent in its support  for thousands of workers throughout the NSW Hunter.”



ENDS

Media contact: Minister Pitt Matt Dunstan 0411 535 072     Senator Hughes - Jen Havilah 0421 829 913

Senator Davey - Alex Riddell 0400 766 925























