

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER

MARK DREYFUS  SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL  SHADOW MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM  MEMBER FOR ISAACS





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW   MELBOURNE  MONDAY, 14 DECEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Manufacturing in Australia; Labor’s ‘A Future Made in Australia’; floods.

MARK DREYFUS, SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL & MEMBER FOR ISAACS: It's a  pleasure to welcome Anthony Albanese, the Leader of the Opposition, to my electorate.  And just wondering whether you can hear me? It's pretty noisy here in this Volgren factory.  It's excellent to see Anthony here. Anthony was here in Melbourne straightaway when the  lockdown finished. And he's here again now that we've had two weeks of Parliament, back  in the manufacturing part of Australia here in the great electorate of Isaacs. Anthony spoke  in his Budget Reply about the need to provide jobs for today, to train workers for the future,  to restore and build our recovery out of manufacturing. It's fantastic to see Anthony here  again in Melbourne, showing his commitment to that vision for Australia. Over to you,  Anthony. Thank you.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Thanks very  much, Mark. And it's good to be here with you in Dandenong and also, Julian Hill, the  Member for Bruce. Both of you are important parts of the Labor team. And it's great to be  here at a manufacturing plant right here in the heartland of Melbourne in Dandenong. The  fact is that Australians can make things. The fact is, Australians do make things. What we  need is a Government that supports manufacturing here, particularly high-value  manufacturing. Right here at this Volgren factory, what we see is high-skilled jobs, almost  200 Australians being employed here, but as well, dozens of other companies relying upon  this business through the supply chain. And that's the benefit of manufacturing is that what  we're seeing here as well, today, we saw the first delivery where they're building the first  electric bus for Perth as part of a contract they have with Western Australia, an important  innovation. The fact is that we need to become more self-reliant. And when we talk about  the economic recovery, what we need to do is not just to build back to what was there, but  to build back better. To build back more resilient. To build back so that we can be more  self-reliant. And that means delivering on manufacturing. And I'm very pleased to be here.  This was one of the important components of A Future Made in Australia. Support for  manufacturing. Support for upgrading our energy grid for the 21st century. Support for  public housing. Support for making sure our defence industries have procurement from  Australia. Support for apprentices. Today, we've met apprentices here at Volgren here in



Dandenong. And there'll be more apprentices coming on next year. So, I do want to thank  very much Volgren for having us here today.

I also want to, though, say that our thoughts are with those people in southeast  Queensland and the Northern Rivers region of New South Wales who are experiencing yet  another extreme weather event with the dangers of floods, with real concern about safety  for people there. I want to repeat the message that the emergency services personnel are  sending out, which is to not risk your life by going through floodwaters in a vehicle. Make  sure that you listen to the authorities’ recommendations over today and coming days  because this will be a difficult period for northern New South Wales and for southeast  Queensland.

THIAGO DEIRO, CEO OF VOLGREN AUSTRALIA: Well, good morning, everyone. It's  been a pleasure to have you guys here. Especially Anthony, Mark and Julian. Volgren built  its first bus out of Dandenong over 40 years ago. And since then it has expanded its  operations to three other states and abroad through exports to seven different countries.  Against all odds, we've been managing to keep our business alive, fighting for local jobs  and local manufacturing. The main reason for that is because we know that what  Australians are capable of are the fields of heavy and advanced manufacturing. But we  know it hasn't been an easy task. Unfair competition from imported buses and regulations  that were supposed to protect local jobs and promote local content but are not enforced or  audited and raising the red flag and made us rethink our business model. These things  have changed since the beginning of the year. COVID has put Australians out of work and  got people thinking, perhaps more than ever before, about where their products are made.  Volgren currently employs 320 people across our manufacturing operations in Dandenong,  Victoria, in New South Wales, Western Australia and Queensland. We have shared our  future expansion plans with the Victorian Government. And we want to create a hub for  development of new technologies for zero emission buses, electrics, hybrids and hydrogen  here in Dandenong. But to make it happen we need a clear plan and policies that give us  all, employees, employers and business owners, fair treatment and promotes fair  competition. This is the recipe for more opportunity and more jobs for all Australians. Thank  you very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053









