BILL SHORTEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT SERVICES

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE

SCHEME

MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

TODAY

TUESDAY, 22 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Victoria’s improving Coronavirus figures; Australian borders; Federal

budget.



ALLISON LANGDON, HOST: Well, finally, some positive news about Melbourne’s battle

with Coronavirus. Just eleven new cases yesterday, but testing was down to 7,000. From

Lockdown Central, I'm joined by Shadow Minister for Government Services Bill Shorten.

And in Sydney, Triple M's Gus Worland. And nice to talk to you both.



BILL SHORTEN, MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG: Hi.



LANGDON: Bill, hopes have been raised that you'll come out of lockdown even quicker

now. You think there's any chance your Premier will consider it?



SHORTEN: Well, first things first, we are getting the numbers down. A month and a half

ago, that was 730. Now it's down to eleven. I think the mood, while some people are keen

for us to have this done with as quickly as possible, I think the general mood in Melbourne

is lifting. I mean, it's day 83 of lockdowns for yours truly. But I think we can see the end in

sight, and I'm not sure people want to rush it if we're this close and we're doing this well.



LANGDON: But Gus, don't you feel like we're all in this journey with Melburnians together?

I mean, I think we all rejoice and we all go yay when we see those numbers coming down.

And hopefully I mean, hopefully, fingers crossed today, it might be single digits.



GUS WORLAND, TRIPLE M: Exactly right. You know, it was Team Australia wasn't it, at

the start of the year, when we first started chatting in March. And now we've been really

feeling it for our Victorian mates. And yeah, if we can get down even less, I mean, at some

stage Bill, you just got to say ‘we're doing it’, aren’t we - because there's all the other

damage that's going on around, actually keeping it all shut down. So I feel for you, mate.

And I feel for my family and friends there in Melbourne, but at some stage we’ve just got to

bite the bullet.



LANGDON: Yes, and when -



SHORTEN: Thanks.



LANGDON, Sorry, go Bill.



SHORTEN: I think that will happen. Let's just see how the numbers go. But anyway, it's

good it's great work by Victorians and our health system.



LANGDON: Yeah. We're all cheering for you. But I mean, you look at, with this lockdown,

you've got businesses crippled. You've got some of the toughest lockdown conditions in

the world, yet Bill, this morning we're hearing a majority of Victorians actually support

Daniel Andrews handling of the crisis. Did that surprise you?



SHORTEN: Well, I was pleased to see it. I think the view when I speak to a lot of small

businesses is they're desperate to get going again. But I think a lot of people just recognise

that, we're in this and we've just got to finish it. We've come this far. So I think it reflects on

Daniel Andrews, but I think it just reflects on Victorians. We want to get this done. We've

come this far. The number of infections has dropped. Let's just finish the job.



LANGDON: Come on. There's been a there's been a lot of anger around it. It must have

surprised you a little.



SHORTEN: Well, I was pleased to see that so many people were willing to stick with it. But

I'd also say, as you know, we have the federal budget coming up. Now we can have

economic recovery not just in Victoria, but for Australia. And I'm keen to see some good

measures which help deal with the long queues of unemployed everywhere, including

Victoria.



LANGDON: What is more important to you, Bill, with the upcoming budget? Is it extending

JobKeeper? Is it spending more? Is it tax cuts?



SHORTEN: Well, I suppose it's some of all. I think the government's made a mistake to

penalise pensioners and not increase their pension, which they do every six months,

slightly. The increases aren't much, but they make a difference to a pensioner. I also think

that we've got to start looking at childcare, more funding for childcare. I mean, a lot of the

spending promises, tax cuts and infrastructure are going to favour the blokes, and that's

fine. But I think women are missing out in the federal government's economic recovery.

And I suspect that a better funded childcare would go an awful long way towards helping a

lot of people, including the kids.



LANGDON: Yeah. Would you be on board with that, Gus?



WORLAND: Oh, look, absolutely. I think we've got to share the love. And I know a lot of

people are struggling at the moment when it comes to the childcare situation. So, yeah, we

need to make sure it's spread right across the board.



LANGDON: Now Gus, let's talk about Sydney, because The Daily Telegraph this morning

is calling it a summer bummer. It's the five point plan to keep us COVID-safe during the hot

months. So we've got strict social distancing, new flag warnings at beaches and

restrictions at pubs and restaurants. I mean, it's going to be a summer like no other, isn't

it?



WORLAND: Oh, look, exactly. But this year has been exactly the same. And you can look

at everything, Ally and Bill, you know, negatively or positively, and why don't we just say

how lucky we are that we can get anything going on and we just got to suck it and see for

the time being. So let's not be negative about it. Let's just say, you know what? We can still

go to the beach. We can still go and have a swim, have a sunbake, do whatever you want,

buy an ice cream. So I mean sure, we might not be able to do it on top of each other, but

that's not the worst thing in the world.  Let's just enjoy what we've got.



LANGDON: All right. Bill, do you enjoy an ice cream on top of each other? [laughs]



SHORTEN: Oh, I love you Sydney people, there's nothing you won't get up to. I mean, at

the moment, we can't go more than five kilometres from our house. So, the idea that

you've got to distance by towel, to Victorians, isn't the world's hardest obligation at the

moment. What are holidays? We're keen to have one. Anywhere.



LANGDON: Yeah, well, that's it. You know what, though? It's looking very promising for

Christmas, isn't it? But we do then have to ask the question, what's going to happen with

the borders because the border wars won't go away. And this morning, we've got a group

of leading health experts, they've joined the Prime Minister and they've joined leaders in

property, retail and hospitality, saying there's no legitimate health reason to keep the

borders closed. Bill, the issue here is borders are political, do you think it's likely that the

Premiers, Annastacia Palaszczuk, Mark McGowan, will listen or budge?



SHORTEN: Well, early on in this pandemic, the Prime Minister handed over the borders to

the Premiers. So you sort of can't have it each way. You can't say you make the hard

decisions and then I might come in later and contradict you.



LANGDON: But hang on, the Prime Minister never had control of the borders.



SHORTEN: Well, he'd be the first Prime Minister since Federation who’s created six

countries in one. So, I do think, it's been a bit convenient, as he's famously said about the

bushfires, he doesn't hold the hose. So you know, I'll take with a grain of salt him bagging

the Labor Premiers. He doesn't seem to do the same to the Liberal Premiers. People are

sick of the politics. We all want the borders taken off. But let's do it when it's safe to do so.

There should be common sense, and I think I and 99 percent of people just want to see

common sense, balanced with safety. And I think we're heading in the right direction.



LANGDON: Gus, is it time to reopen Australia?



WORLAND: Look, I think we've always said on this show that, you know, let's listen to the

health experts. If they say to do something, then we should do it. If they are saying now

that there's no health reason to have the borders shut, then let's open them up again.

We've always said the health experts are the ones that know what they're talking about.

Let's leave politics out of it. So to me, that means open them up.



LANGDON: All right, Gus, you heard it here first. I think actually you've said that a few

times, to be honest. Now, I want to finish on this. Do you like the idea of jellyfish and

chips? Because researchers at University of Queensland say that's what we may have to

get used to as traditional fish stocks run out. So other options, Bill. Urchin and chips, eel

and chips, even Patagonian toothfish and chips. Any sound appealing?



SHORTEN: Well, that sounds tasty. I like to have jelly at the end of my meal. I don't want

to see my fish plate wobbling. [laughs]



WORLAND: I think anything with chips and a glass of white wine, I'll shove it right down

my gullet. No dramas at all.



LANGDON: Okay. That is a challenge that you will now see on the Today Show. Gus

Worland eating jellyfish and chips.  I don't think that's poisonous, is it?



WORLAND: And the wine as well!



LANGDON: Doesn't even matter.



WORLAND: Gotta be the wine as well. It's a combo.



LANGDON: Oh, good. I’ll provide the wine if you agree to eat jellyfish on air. Bill, what are

you going to agree to eat on air for us?



SHORTEN: Sure, I’ll each jellyfish - all for The Today Show, you're going well. So if we've

got to eat jellyfish, we’ve got to eat jellyfish



LANGDON: You guys are mad. You're going to regret that.



SHORTEN: Yeah, I’m sure I am too.



LANGDON: Cause I'm gonna hold you to it. While I’m at it, Karl, are you in?





KARL STEFANOVIC, HOST: No way.



LANGDON: That’s the first time!



SHORTEN: Harden up, Karl.



LANGDON: Gentlemen, always good to chat to you. Look after yourself.



WORLAND: Have a good day.



SHORTEN: Have a good morning.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM HOULIHAN 0438 366 400



