

JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RADIO NATIONAL BREAKFAST

WEDNESDAY, 2 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: National accounts; Border closures; JobKeeper.



FRAN KELLY, HOST: Jim Chalmers, welcome back to Breakfast.



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: Thanks very much, Fran,



KELLY: Before we get to JobKeeper, we know the National Accounts today will be a

shocker, but the consensus amongst economists is that the slump could have been a lot

worse. Do you agree, and do you give the Government some credit for that?



CHALMERS: It’s going to be a dark day today. I think we'll learn for sure what a lot of

Australians and their families already understand, which is that we are in the midst of a

deep and devastating recession and that has consequences for millions of Australians. It

won't come as a shock that that is what those numbers will show. The shocking and

surprising thing is that we've known for some time that we're in a recession and that we're

in the depths of a jobs crisis, but the Morrison Government still doesn't have a jobs plan to

respond to that. You say that it might not be as bad as some economists feared some

months ago. That will be cold comfort for the million Australians who are already

unemployed, a new record, and for the 400,000 Australians the Government expects will

join the unemployment queues between now and Christmas.



KELLY: But isn't it reasonable for the Government to say - and get some praise perhaps -

that its policies and income support, for instance JobKeeper which we're going to be

talking about in a while, have meant that the downturn here is nowhere near as bad as it is

elsewhere? For instance, the UK economy declined 20 per cent, the US suffered close to a

10 per cent fall in economic growth. Even the RBA said yesterday that as difficult as things

have been here the decline has not being as severe as earlier expected?



CHALMERS: All of those comparisons are absolutely meaningless if you've lost your job.



KELLY: Why?



CHALMERS: If you've lost your job, if you're wondering if your small business can cling on,

or if you can't access JobKeeper because you're a casual worker, or work in aviation, at a

university or in the arts and entertainment sector then the comparison between here and

whether or not it's better than Donald Trump's America is completely and absolutely

meaningless. It goes to a bigger issue here, which that while these will be the worst

numbers we've seen, the worst quarterly GDP since these records were first kept, we need

to be able to go beyond the numbers and understand what it means for real people in real

communities. That's why those comparisons are meaningless. If you've lost your job in

Brisbane, Melbourne, Sydney, Perth or any of our regions, the idea that things are a bit

better than in America or in the United Kingdom doesn't matter a lot to you.



KELLY: Alright, let's talk about the real people in Melbourne. The pace of the recovery and

the decline in the jobless rate will be largely influenced by what happens now in Victoria,

which of course is in the hands of the Victorian Labor Government. Pressure is mounting

on the Premier Dan Andrews to come up with a roadmap out of the state's lockdown and

he will deliver that on Sunday. You're calling on the Morrison Government to have a jobs

plan. Has it taken too long for Dan Andrews to offer Melburnians and Melbourne

businesses a plan on the way out of this?



CHALMERS: It's important that he does provide that information to businesses, workers

and communities in Victoria. He said that he will do that on Sunday and that's appropriate.

Our issue here in the federal parliament is to make sure that the Morrison Government

does a better job managing the economy out of this recession than they did managing it

into the recession. That's going to be our focus. Scott Morrison and Josh Frydenberg are

guilty of always wanting to focus on Dan Andrews. They always want to focus on the Labor

Party, state governments or other issues as a distraction from their failures on the

economy which are costing jobs and their failures in aged care which are costing lives. We

need to not fall for that. Our job here is to get the federal settings right. I don't think that any

objective observer of what the Government has done here in managing this recession

would say that they've got everything right. They've got some things right but not

everything right. Josh Frydenberg keeps talking about the $314 billion that he's injected in

the economy. We asked him how much of that has actually been injected into the economy

by the Federal Government and he could only get to $85 billion. He's come up short there

and that's one of the reasons why this recession is deeper than it needs to be and it's one

of the reasons why unemployment is still rising even after the period covered by the

numbers we'll receive today.



KELLY: Yes, but it's all very well for you to call on the Federal Government to manage the

economy but it makes it more difficult when states are locked down. We've seen the

impacts. We've seen the numbers from Treasury of the impact of the Victorian lockdown.

The Prime Minister is urging the states and territories to open their borders for the sake of

the economy. The Queensland Premier says that certainly won't be happening in

September and she doesn't know when it will happen. You're a Queenslander, do you

support the Premier and her strong stance in keeping the border closed or do you think

that the states and territories should open up to give everyone the best chance of

managing this economy?



CHALMERS: I do support Premier Palaszczuk. I think she's been right, she’s been

resolute, she’s been careful and cautious. If she'd opened up the borders and lifted the

restrictions when the Liberal Party and the National Party were calling on her to do so, that

could have had catastrophic implications for lives and jobs in my home state of

Queensland. But nobody, Fran, is contesting that some of these necessary restrictions

have consequences for the economy. Absolutely nobody is contesting that and nobody

wants these lockdowns and these restrictions to be in place even one day longer than is

necessary. I spend a lot of time with the business community, and their peak

organisations, and I understand that they would like to see the economy open up as soon

as it's responsible to do so. But they also understand that the absolute worst thing we

could have for local economies, the business community, for communities more broadly,

and for the nation would be to have another outbreak which would absolutely devastate the

economy and would cruel the recovery before it even gathers pace.



KELLY: You've been critical of the Government for cutting JobKeeper and JobSeeker

payments right now, but Labor waved through the Government's six month extension to

the program in the Senate yesterday which will do just that. JobKeeper recipients will lose

$300 a fortnight in a month's time; JobSeeker recipients will see their coronavirus

supplement cut in half. Why did you vote for these cuts if you say they're going to be bad

for people and bad for the economy?



CHALMERS: It's not right Fran to say that we voted for the reductions in JobKeeper and

JobSeeker.



KELLY: You voted to pass the legislation.



CHALMERS: No, Fran. I need to correct you on that. It's very important that your listeners

understand that all the legislation did was to extend JobKeeper beyond the September

snapback that the Prime Minister wanted to see. We campaigned for those payments to be

available for longer. We said that unemployment is rising; it makes no sense for there to be

that hard snapback at the end of September. The legislation does not set the rates or the

eligibility for the JobKeeper payment. We did not vote to reduce those payments. The rate

of those payments is entirely the responsibility of the Treasurer. It is entirely up to him to

set the rate and the eligibility for those payments. What we said all along is that they need

to be tailored to economic circumstances., The economy and especially the labour market

has got worse, not better, since he announced those changes. He should be reconsidering

those reductions. It's still before him to do that. We want him to do the right thing. The

Reserve Bank has said that we need to do more in the economy to support jobs, in their

announcement yesterday, but the Government seems to think we should be doing less. It

makes no sense when unemployment is rising for the Government to be withdrawing

support from the economy without a comprehensive plan for jobs to replace it.



KELLY: Jim Chalmers, thanks very much for joining us.



CHALMERS: Thank you, Fran.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.















