





JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RADIO BRISBANE

MONDAY, 27 JULY 2020



SUBJECTS: Facemasks; Regional Queensland listening tour; State

borders.



KELLY HIGGINS-DEVINE, HOST: Jim Chalmers is the ALP Shadow Treasury

spokesperson, good afternoon.



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: G'day Kelly, how are you doing?



HIGGINS-DEVINE: Really well. I think all of us have been watching over the

weekend the video with various people, mostly from Melbourne at the moment,

refusing to wear masks and having constitutional debates with people at

Bunnings which is a strange place to have them but there you go. What's your

reaction to people who are refusing to wear masks?



CHALMERS: It's really disappointing. In a crisis of this magnitude with all of the

threats posed by this virus I think the very least we can do is follow the health

advice and in Victoria that means wearing a mask and so people should be

doing that. The other thing I noticed from that video and I have watched it a

couple of times is the remarkable patience of the Bunnings workers. I think right

around Australia people are accustomed to being helped out by Bunnings

workers on the weekend in stores but just to see the professionalism of those

staff was really heartening and they don't deserve to get a serve like that.



HIGGINS-DEVINE: Yeah and we saw them sort of on the frontline of those

videos but you just know that that kind of, I don't know what you call it, I'm

going to say idiocy is happening in a whole lot of other places as well. We don't

have to worry about that in Queensland at the moment but I mean things turn

on a dime as we've seen in in Melbourne. Do you think it'd be any different here

in Queensland?



CHALMERS: When you're talking about so many people being asked to do the

right thing overwhelmingly people do that but they're always will be a couple of

as you described them idiots who will do the wrong thing. That's disappointing

but we should also recognise that our Victorian friends who are going through

an incredibly difficult time, are in the vast and overwhelming majority, doing the

right thing and that's absolutely crucial to get on top of this outbreak.



HIGGINS-DEVINE: Absolutely. Now, Jim Chalmers I do believe that you'll be

traveling around Queensland in the next few days. Where are you going?



CHALMERS: I'm talking to you from cattle country around Roma, we just

toured the sale yards here to speak with people in the beef game about the

outlook for their industry, but we'll also be speaking to some trainees in the

mining industry around Emerald and Biloela, and then the tourism industry

around Bundy and Hervey Bay. The reason we're doing this, we're driving

something like 1800 kilometres, Senator Chisholm and I, is because we

recognise that the economy during this recession will recover at different

speeds in different parts of the country and we need to recognise that the

economy isn't just what happens in the boardrooms of Sydney and Melbourne

it's what happens in regional Australia, including regional Queensland so we're

going to talk to as many people as we can from those industries to get a sense

of the outlook for them and whether there's anything that government can do to

help.



HIGGINS-DEVINE: What have you learned so far?



CHALMERS: The thing we've learned from the cattle territory, the beef

farmers, is a lot of them are still recovering from the drought. Even though this

year is expected to be a bit better than last year there's a lot of restocking of

herds. So that means that sales still won't be way up there where people want

them to be. But there's something about people in regional Queensland  they

are incredibly resilient people, very forward looking, they’re not down in the

dumps, they want to see their industry grow and that's common right across the

country. People recognise that times are tough but some of our industries really

are the hope of our side when it comes to growing out of this recession.



HIGGINS-DEVINE: ABC Radio Brisbane, Kelly Higgins-Devine sitting in for

Steve Austin for the rest of this week, Jim Chalmers is the ALP Shadow

Treasury spokesperson, and a regular guest on Drive. Jim Chalmers I have

been reading today an article about the difficulty in finding workers in regional

areas. Of course these jobs were normally done by backpackers who just aren't

here at the moment, what are your ideas on this?



CHALMERS: It's very different in different parts of the country but in aggregate

we've still got something like 13 people on unemployment benefits for every job

vacancy in Australia so overall job opportunities aren't exactly thick on the

ground, but there are opportunities out there concentrated in some areas.

Some people will be able to move to access those opportunities but many won't

and so what we need to make sure is that we've got the arrangements in place

that people can move for work, that's a bit harder with the borders closed and

all the difficulties that we talked about at the start of this interview but not

impossible. We want to see those opportunities filled, because the borders are

closed internationally so the opportunity to bring in workers from overseas is

limited. We want Australians to be able to fill job vacancies that means they

need to be trained for them. They need to know where the opportunities are

and the need to be able to go an access them.



HIGGINS-DEVINE: That's requiring government at many levels to be very

flexible and to be very quick, which is something that governments can find

tricky at times are they going to be able to move quickly enough to be able to

do those things you just mentioned?



CHALMERS: Well it depends how far they're coming from, we've got issues

with some state borders, we've got the Victorian challenges at the moment and

to a lesser extent, but still concerning, in New South Wales as well, so mobility

is not as easy as it is in normal times. We just need to be sure that within states

that people know where the opportunities are so they can grab those

opportunities when they present themselves because as I said jobs aren’t

exactly thick on the ground at the moment. We need to do what we can to hook

people up.



HIGGINS-DEVINE: Jim Chalmers is ALP Shadow Treasury spokesperson, this

is ABC Radio Brisbane. Jim let's talk about household debt as opposed to

government debt, how do you see this rising as an issue, household debt was

already pretty big in Australia, but given what we've talked about, jobs being a

bit of a problem at the moment as well people trying to pay off mortgages

during the COVID lockdowns and now having to pay it all back. Have we got

some big problems coming up in the future?



CHALMERS: Unfortunately I think we do. One thing that's not well recognised

is that household debt was actually at record highs, even before the

Coronavirus and government debt was also at record highs, even before the

Coronavirus so the economic challenges associated with the outbreak has

made those challenges with debt at the household level and at the government

level worse. In both cases what we need to be able to do is make sure that we

can service them. For households for families and workers that means making

sure that they've got a job. That's our highest priority at all levels is to do what

we can to make sure there's a national jobs plan so that people have got the

opportunities. Banks have delayed some repayments and been accommodative

in some areas which is a very good thing but it means that at some point that all

needs to be repaid and caught up with. That's going to be a massive challenge

and I think one of the things that Reserve Bank's worried about is that when

people have to service all this debt, after the crisis, it means that they won't

have as much to spend in our shops and small businesses and that might

mean that the recovery is a bit slower than we'd like.



HIGGINS-DEVINE: In your area of Logan we've been talking about aged care

facilities and just what the preparations are like in Queensland, in case there is

an outbreak, as we keep saying we're all right at the moment but you never

know. Are you confident, they'll be ready if the virus does have a Queensland

outbreak?



CHALMERS: I know that they're doing the work to try and be ready to try and

be prepared. My colleague Julie Collins who is our aged care spokesperson

has made some points today and a lack of preparedness on a national level



when it comes to things like protective equipment. So we need to make sure

that we're doing absolutely everything that is necessary to prepare for that

eventuality, hope for the best but prepare for the worst. It's easy to imagine

outbreaks in different pockets of the country like, aged care homes which are

particularly susceptible given the workforce and given the age of the tenants, so

we need maximum care there and that means maximum preparation.



HIGGINS-DEVINE: Jim Chalmers good to talk with you and enjoy the rest of

your trip around Queensland.



CHALMERS: Thanks so much Kelly, all the best.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949





