JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

HOBART

MONDAY, 27 JULY 2020



SUBJECT: Morrison Government’s aged care inaction.



JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS: What we’re seeing

today in Australia is concerning reports about how prepared the Federal Government was

for another outbreak in aged care in Australia. We should have learnt from the outbreaks in

aged care in New South Wales. But clearly, we haven’t learnt the lessons of those

outbreaks in New South Wales. To hear that over 1,300 aged care facilities requested

personal protective equipment from the national stockpile should have made somebody in

the Federal Government say clearly these people are not prepared, clearly as a

government we need to make sure people are prepared for outbreaks in aged care in

Australia. We’ve heard repeatedly from the Federal Government, from the Prime Minister,

that we are going to have to live with this virus. That we are going to see outbreaks across

the country. So why were we not better prepared for an outbreak in the aged care sector in

Australia when this happened in Victoria?



I am very concerned and my sympathies go to the families, friends and loved ones for

those who have been impacted and those who have lost loved ones in what we are seeing

in Victoria today. It is devastating. I can only imagine how devastating it must be to be a

family member who has a loved one in one of these facilities and not being told what is

happening and not knowing that their loved one is getting the best possible care. The

government needs to do more. The government should do more and the government

should have done more prior to this outbreak. It is not ok for the government to say we are

doing everything we can. The government should have done more before the outbreak

occurred in Victoria.



JOURNALIST: What specifically should the government have done before the Victorian

outbreak?



COLLINS: Well, if you are getting a request from 1,300 providers for personal protective

equipment why don’t you do a proper audit to find out how much these facilities have, how

much they are going to need if there is an outbreak? If we had an outbreak here in

Tasmania tomorrow do we know that the aged care facilities have enough personal

protective equipment? We don’t know. We should know but we don’t know.



JOURNALIST: Do we know that aged care facilities don’t have enough personal protective

equipment?



COLLINS: Good question. That is my point. The government should know how much

personal protective equipment aged care facilities have around this country. Are we

prepared for an outbreak in facilities elsewhere? We don’t know the answer to that. I hope

that we actually get to the point where we do know the answer to that. I am very concerned

about the heartbreaking reports from family and friends of loved ones over the weekend

about what has happened in some of these facilities. We obviously welcome the aged care

response centre in Victoria. But why does it take so long for the government to respond.

It’s like you are responding after the event and not learning lessons and responding

beforehand and being prepared.



JOURNALIST:  Beside an audit of PPE in aged care homes what else should the

government do now?



COLLINS: What I’d like to see is the reports that the government has commissioned into

what happened at Dorothy Henderson Lodge and Newmarch House. We know that the

Royal Commission into Aged Care is looking at what happened in some of these facilities.

We need to have learnt lessons. We need to find out what went wrong in these facilities

and we need to have learnt the lessons and be implementing them in Victoria.



JOURNALIST:  Have you heard of any Tasmanians who have relatives in aged care

homes in Victoria at the moment?



COLLINS: I haven’t been contacted by any of those relatives. No not at this point in time.

But I can only imagine how devastating it must be for some of those family members. The

government has said we have to live with this virus. They said there were going to be

outbreaks. Why was the government not better prepared for outbreaks in aged care is my

question to the government?



JOURNALIST: This crisis is still obviously happening in aged care homes at the moment.

I’m sure that there will be some within government that would say by coming out today and

I guess doing a doorstop on this that you are trying to gain political points from this. What

would you say to that criticism?



COLLINS: I have been raising these issues privately with the government for a long time.

I’ve been saying that aged care was in crisis prior to COVID-19. I have been saying for a

very long time that the aged care system is in crisis. What I hope to do by coming out

today is to get the government to move faster, to learn lessons faster, to do more faster, to

make sure that these families and that these people in residential facilities in Victoria and

elsewhere in the country are getting the best possible care.



JOURNALIST:  Do you think Daniel Andrews is to blame for any of the issues we’ve seen

in the aged care homes in Victoria?



COLLINS: I think what we are seeing in aged care is that the system was in crisis prior to

COVID-19. Sadly we are seeing the elevation of some of those issues that have been

happening in aged care. We have the Royal Commission’s interim report saying what is

happening in our aged care sector is ‘neglect’. We need to respond better. The

government should have been ready prior to this outbreak in Victoria.



JOURNALIST: How similar are the challenges that people in aged care homes in Victoria

face compared to the ones in Tasmania?



COLLINS: I think the challenges are the same. The challenges are around staffing. The

challenges, particularly in Victoria at the moment of course, is that so many staff members

who have been deemed close contacts and so many of them will be in isolation or

quarantine that trying to staff these facilities is becoming very difficult and that’s why we



welcome the aged care response centre and the government’s announcement there. And

the government is trying to move more staff into facilities into Victoria but the point that I’m

making is that the personal protective equipment we knew 1,300 of them requested PPE

from the national stockpile. Why did that not trigger somebody to say we need to find out is

there enough protective equipment in these facilities?



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119



