

ALICIA PAYNE MP  MEMBER FOR CANBERRA



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2CC STEPHEN CENATIEMPO BREAKFAST SHOW  TUESDAY, 25 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Political panel with Zed Seselja; Parliament sitting during COVID-19;  remote Parliament; the future of JobSeeker and JobKeeper; borders; Parliament as  a workplace for parents.

STEPHEN CENATIEMPO, HOST: This morning we are launching a new regular segment  on the program. We are going to have one from each party go head to head in the Federal  Parliament. Alicia Payne is the Labor Member for Canberra and joins us now. Alicia,  welcome to the program.

ALICIA PAYNE, MEMBER FOR CANBERRA: Good morning, Stephen.

CENATIEMPO: And Zed Seselja is the ACT Liberal Senator and Assistant Minister for  Finance, Charities and Electoral Matters. Gee, that's a mouthful. Welcome back, Zed.

SENATOR ZED SESELJA: Thank you, Stephen. Good morning, Alicia.

PAYNE: Good morning, Zed.

CENATIEMPO: Ah, Parliament is back. It's been a while since you guys have been in the  House. Extra coronavirus measures in place. How hard has it been?

PAYNE: Well, it's been it's been great to be back. But it is quite different to you know, a  normal Parliamentary sitting. There's a lot of restrictions around meetings. We're not  having any. I mean most of our meetings we're still having via teleconference from our  offices. So obviously a reduced number of people. Lots of restrictions. We're all wearing  masks around the building and you know, special seating arrangements in the chamber.  But in particular, it was really exciting yesterday to see some of our colleagues dialling in  remotely by video and asking questions and giving speeches in that way. So that's a very  new thing.

CENATIEMPO: Zed. Is it true that most of the parties have brought their staff back, well  not all of their staff, but some staff back to Canberra but the Liberal Party Chief Whip has  said, no, do it by yourselves?

SESELJA: Well, we we've certainly been advised to only have absolutely essential staff.  So, minimal staff where possible where they're travelling, it's obviously slightly different for  those of us who are here based in Canberra, but it's a very different feel. I wouldn't say it's  the most buzzing sort of building. I mean ordinarily Parliament House buzzes during a  sitting week and there's thousands of people and obviously that's not possible right now.  So we're all getting used to a much quieter Parliament, but the important work of  democracy goes on and I'll give a special shout out to my sister who made me a  spectacular looking mask that I donned for the first time in Parliament House yesterday,  which was a bit odd, given we're not wearing them around Canberra, but the Parliament  presents particular risks. So, we've all got to do our bit.

CENATIEMPO: Some people that say Parliamentarians should wear banded masks all  year round, Zed. But...

SESELJA: I gotta say, I gotta say, Stephen. It's very difficult for, if you've got FaceID on  your mobile phone to unlock it. So, I'm getting used to all that it doesn't recognise me in my  mask. So, it's all very different.

CENATIEMPO: Alicia, the future of JobKeeper and JobSeeker are high on the agenda in  Parliament this week. Look, I know that there are people on your side that are calling for  the current rates to stay. But surely you got to admit that it's unsustainable to maintain  JobKeeper and JobSeeker for much longer?

PAYNE: Well, I think that we can see that the economy is clearly not yet back to normal.  And there's a lot of concern in the community about when JobKeeper begins to be reduced  and withdrawn in September, particularly, you know, here in Canberra people that I talk to,  because the Government's expecting that 400,000 Australians are going to lose their jobs  between now and Christmas. So, I just can't see that that's the time to begin winding back  that assistance just yet because many people who would otherwise be unemployed are  currently not unemployed because of JobKeeper. So, I think we need to keep it going until,  you know, we're out of the woods really.

CENATIEMPO: But aren't we just, aren't we just sweeping up the problem under the under  the carpet and making the figures look better if we do that?

PAYNE: No, because I mean, if we look at what's happening in Victoria, at the moment. I  mean, that's a huge part of our national economy that's in full lockdown, even here in  Canberra we've still got restrictions on, you know, on for example how many people,  restaurants and cafes can have and a lot of businesses are still not back to where they  were. So, this is enabling, you know, sort of people to keep their jobs and keep those  businesses going until the economy does pick up, which is going to take time. I mean, it's  it's not going to be this year, certainly not gonna be by the end of September.

CENATIEMPO: Zed, one thing that I think the Opposition has got right here is the level of  what NewStart was prior to switching over to JobKeeker, and the doubling of that rate. The  Government's looking at scaling that back slightly. But why was the government so  reluctant to actually say what they are going to do in the long term with the rate of  NewStart or JobSeeker or whatever it happens to be called from one week to the next?

SESELJA: Well, obviously, that's gonna be a matter for Government and for the Minister of  Social Services to make those judgments. We've obviously brought in emergency levels of  NewStart, as it was, or JobSeeker at about, with that extra $550. And, as you rightly say,  that's being scaled down over time. But on the point of whether it's JobSeeker, or whether  it's JobKeeper. I mean this, this has been an extraordinary emergency level of assistance  that the Australian Government has put in. And you know, it's right that we've done that  through this unprecedented pandemic. But there is no doubt though, that it can't go on  forever. The cost of the supports are extraordinary. I know so many in the community here  in Canberra, and right around the country have valued that support. But I think there's also  an acknowledgement that we need to help businesses to start to get back on their feet, to  start to become profitable again over time, and the Government can't forever continue this  level of support. And so that's why I think in a pretty responsible way, we're scaling it down  over time. But now the onus is on all of us, that includes state and territory leaders, to work  together to actually look at ways of opening up the economy. We have seen signs in really  every state and territory other than Victoria in recent times, of jobs coming back, we want  to see that continue. But as sensible and cautious decisions are made, we will give  businesses and other individuals the opportunity to make a living themselves rather than  continue to rely on government assistance.

CENATIEMPO: Alicia, I'm not gonna let the Liberal Party off the hook here but I am gonna  squarely point the finger at Labor for a moment. Annastacia Palaszczuk, Daniel Andrews  and McGowan in WA, these guys, these State Premiers are being absolutely recalcitrant.  Is it time for Anthony Albanese to step up and say, guys, pull your heads in, this is one  country?



PAYNE: Well, what I'd reject the premise of that, I mean, they're making their decisions  based on medical advice.

CENATIEMPO: No, they're not, no, oh, hang on Alicia. No, they're not. No, they're not. I  think...

PAYNE: Well, you know, if we look at what happened in Victoria, I think we'd all agree  that's, that's, that's been very scary to see that number of cases and deaths escalate like  that. And I think that going into lockdown is what they needed to do.

CENATIEMPO: Yeah, but I'm talking about extending the state of emergency for another  12 months.

PAYNE: Well, we're clearly not out of the woods yet. And I think most people would agree  that the most important concern at the moment has got to be health. It's got to be keeping  people safe, keeping people alive. And then absolutely our economy needs to continue.  But as we've seen, you know, in the previous lockdown that things do continue and  hopefully in Victoria soon, it won't be like this for 12 months but it's about keeping that  State of Emergency where premiers can deliver the assistance they need to keep that  going.

CENATIEMPO: Zed, it's fair what Alicia is saying, that Victoria is a slightly different case,  but certainly the Prime Minister is going to start waving the stick around a bit with  Queensland and WA and, and, and his own counterparts in South Australia and Tasmania,  to a lesser extent New South Wales and say, Come on, guys. Let's, let's, if we're all in this  together, let's be fair dinkum about it?

SESELJA: Yeah, look and when it comes to medical advice, couple of points. One, it'd be  very difficult to argue that medical advice would dictate that Canberrans could not fly to  Queensland when we have zero cases, and we're somehow declared a hot spot by the  Queensland Government, I mean, that is a political decision. That is not a medical decision  when you have zero cases. So clearly politics is being played there. And likewise, with  whether, whether it's, you know, South Australia, Tasmania, or WA. I think that they need  to start thinking about something other than, you know, just shutting down borders forever.  And I would be hopeful, and I'd certainly call upon them to be to be opening them up to  places like the ACT. Of course. I mean, people in Canberra, we don't have cases here at  the moment, thank God. But in terms of the broader point Alicia made on Victoria, I mean,  it must be said that Victoria had the strongest lockdown, the toughest lockdown, and they  didn't work. They didn't work because of other government failures. So, lockdowns  themselves are not the complete answer, and can be a very blunt instrument as we've  seen in Victoria, where they clearly didn't work because they didn't get the quarantined  right.

CENATIEMPO: Alicia, on to lighter things, you're expecting your second child and about to  go off on maternity leave. Zed, you're a father of five. What's Parliament like for parents  and particularly in this COVID environment? I'll start with you, Alicia.

PAYNE: Yes. So, this is my last week of Parliament sitting before I have my baby in the  next couple of weeks. So, you know, it has been, I mean, Parliament is not a job that's  designed for parents, but then many jobs, most jobs aren't. And I think we're all across the  board things are getting better at balancing parenting and work. I think Zed would agree,  you know, being based in Canberra helps a lot. We don't have the travel that our  colleagues have, which would be very difficult with, with children at times. But I think this  virtual participation that was seen in response to COVID-19 just starting yesterday has  been a really great thing that has enabled people you know, when they need to, to be able  to dial into Parliament and participate in that way. And that's a great thing. But certainly,  yes, things are on the improve. And it's been great to see other people with small kids  making it work. And I think that's really important because we need to have a diversity of  representation in the Parliament. And if we make it impossible for parents, both mothers  and fathers to participate, that's a big section of the community that are cut out of the  Parliament.





CENATIEMPO: Zed, as an expectant mother, I'm going to let Alicia have the last say.  Alicia, on behalf of the team here at 2CC, congratulations, and thanks for joining us. And  Zed, we'll catch up with you again next week.

SESELJA: Thanks very much and good luck with the birth, Alicia.

PAYNE: Oh, thanks Zed. Thank you, Stephen.

CENATIEMPO: Thanks, guys.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TASMAN VAUGHAN 0435 933 313







