

MICHELLE ROWLAND MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS  MEMBER FOR GREENWAY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS BREAKFAST  TUESDAY, 3 NOVEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Resignation of the Australia Post CEO: draft National  Integrity Commission legislation.

DAVID SPEERS, HOST: Australia Post is searching for a new Chief Executive  after the resignation of Christine Holgate yesterday.

LISA MILLAR, HOST: She was forced to stand aside following criticism of  expensive watches given to senior executives. Shadow Communications  Minister Michelle Rowland has called for a clean-up of the Board at Australia  Post and she joins us now from Sydney. Good morning and welcome  to Breakfast.

MICHELLE ROWLAND, SHADOW MINISTER FOR  COMMUNICATIONS: Good morning.

MILLAR: Do you agree she should have gone? Was this the right decision for  her to make, to resign now?

ROWLAND: Lisa, I’ll reserve that judgement because an investigation is  underway, and we have Senate Estimates questioning again for Australia Post  next week. It has been a very strange ten days or so since these revelations  first came to light. We’ve had -

MILLAR: But you’d have a view on the watches, whether it passes the pub  test? Even Christine Holgate suggests that it didn’t.

ROWLAND: I certainly do, and I said this at the time, that this did not pass the  muster for any responsible spending, particularly since Australia is in a  recession. But I also think it has been an incredible couple of days in which

we’ve had initially the Prime Minister looking like he had effectively sacked her  on the floor of the Parliament and then lawyers being called in only a few days  ago, different identities in the media both for and against the CEO, and then  yesterday this offer of resignation.

MILLAR: At the core though isn’t this a question of how they treat money,  whether they treat it as taxpayer money?

ROWLAND: It certainly is. It’s about that, it’s about governance, it’s about  whether the Board is capable of proper executive oversight and to date the  evidence is that it is not. It is a swamp of Liberal Party mates and hacks. But it  also needs to go to the other key issue and that is about service delivery. I  mean, this is a Government and this is an Executive - a Board - that signed off  on a proposal at the height of COVID, using it as cover to try and cut one in four  postie jobs, to double delivery timeframes and cut services. That’s what Labor  has spoken out against.

MILLAR: But you’re not saying that Labor has never appointed political  appointees to Boards?

ROWLAND: That’s not the issue here. The issue here is whether or not this  particular Board, at this particular time, in a government business enterprise,  which is supposed to be delivering a very important job particularly during the  pandemic, is capable of performing its functions. Clearly there are serious  questions to answer here.

MILLAR: Is there a different way to appoint Board members?

ROWLAND: There are different ways for different entities, but I think you need  to examine the merits of those. I don’t think that this is a question purely  confined to this instance. I mean, the ABC for example, there is a process for  Board appointments, as with the SBS and other government business  enterprises. But the proof is in the performance Lisa. You need to look at  whether this Board has done its job, whether the Chair has done its job. The  Board and the Chair didn’t appear during the last round of Estimates, and they’ll  be called next week.

MILLAR: Do you think there needs to be a wider review into how these  organisations are spending money?

ROWLAND: Possibly, but I think we need to stick to the core issue here. This is  about a government business enterprise, which at the height of COVID, should  be seeking to expand services, not seeking to cut jobs. This is about a Prime  Minister who shows outrage, a Communications Minister who says he is



“shocked” by these revelations, but neither of them apply the same standards,  in this case, that they should apply to their own portfolios or their own  Government.

MILLAR: Can I ask you about the Integrity Commission. Mark Dreyfus has  already indicated that he is not happy with this proposal, but wouldn’t you be  better off getting something in and operating that if you got into government you  could change or beef up as required?

ROWLAND: I understand what you’re asking: should we have something half  good and then make it better later on? I think the point of a proper Integrity  Commission is that it should be set up properly from the get-go, so people  know its boundaries, something that is arrived at after proper consultation and  something people would have confidence in. I don’t know whether it would  serve the confidence of the Australian people to have a Commission that is set  up as half good with a promise to make it better later on.

MILLAR: Alright, Michelle Rowland, we’ll leave it there. Thank you for your  time.

ROWLAND: Pleasure.

MEDIA CONTACT: ADAM BOIDIN 0406 009 019





