

HON LINDA BURNEY MP  MEMBER FOR BARTON

SENATOR JENNY MCALLISTER  SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES

CHRIS MINNS MP  MEMBER FOR KOGARAH





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  SYDNEY  SATURDAY, 8 FEBRUARY 2020

SUBJECTS: Support for Chinese-Australian community; coronavirus.

CHRIS MINNS: Well thank you. We are in the heart of Hurstville, in the middle  of the most vibrant Chinese Australian community anywhere in Australia,  talking to our local community. We have Senator Jenny McAllister from New  South Wales; the Member for Barton Linda Burney; and wonderful community  representatives Ben, Jenny, Jason and everybody’s here to support our  wonderful Chinese community. And the message really from the heart of  Hurstville is that it is open for business. Restaurants are serving some of the  best food you will have. Not just in Australia. But anywhere in the world. And  many of them are full. So, a lot of people that live, work, reside, study -  whatever - in this part of Sydney, are getting out of their houses, even on wet  rainy days like today, and partaking in some of the best food you will ever have.  So, it’s a reminder I think to our local community. Don’t forget, come out.  Patronise your local restaurants. Eat some of this food. Talk to your local  community. Convince your neighbours to come out. Tell your family. Tell your  friends. Tell grandma, grandpa: today is the day that we’re going to leave the  house and have a wonderful meal in Hurstville in this wonderful part of Sydney.  And with that I think I’ll throw it over to Jenny.

SENATOR JENNY MCALLISTER: Thanks Chris. Look, it’s wonderful to be  here in Hurstville with good friends and terrific community leaders. We have  had a terrific meal talking with one another about some of the challenges that  are facing Chinese Australians and the Chinese Australian community at the  moment. With the coronavirus, it is actually a difficult time, and it’s a really



important day for us to be here and show some solidarity. There are a lot of  Chinese Australians - for a range of reasons - feeling a little uncertain. And it’s  incredibly important that as a community, we pull together and to give this  community our support. I will say that in talking to some of the leaders here,  we’ve heard some pretty disturbing stories about people behaving in racist  ways. This is a disease which does not discriminate, and we ought not  discriminate either. This is a time to stand very firm, as a proud multicultural  nation, supporting Chinese Australians, at a time when we are all dealing with  something quite challenging globally. And it’s been terrific to be here with good  friends and to hear their very wise perspectives on how we can best support  this community.

LINDA BURNEY: I want to really acknowledge the Chinese community for  welcoming us here today - for telling us what the effects of the coronavirus is  having not only on business but also on children in schools. And the most  important thing - the most important message - is look at official channels;  read official information. Do not believe some of the sensational stories that we  are seeing on social media. We are here for the Chinese community. And thank  them very much for having us here today.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DARYL TAN (BURNEY) 0422 028 222







