The Hon Darren Chester MP Minister for V



eterans’ Affairs

Minister for Defence Personnel

ADF RESERVE EMPLOYERS RECOGNISED

EMPLOYERS across Australia who support our Australian Defence Force (ADF) Reservists were today acknowledged at the annual Defence Employer Support Awards.

Minister for Defence Personnel Darren Chester said the awards showcased employers that actively supported their Reservists to undertake their defence training and service.

“We have more than 25,000 active Reservists who contribute vital skills and capability to the defence of our nation, but who are also supported by their civilian employers,” Mr Chester said.

“This support has been incredibly important this year with the first ever compulsory call-out of our Reserves during the bushfires, as well as the ongoing support they have provided states and territories during the coronavirus pandemic.

“The Defence Employer Support Awards recognise those employers that go above and beyond for their staff who are Reservists and is just one way we can acknowledge and thank them for their contribution.”

The winners of the 2020 National Employer Support Awards are: Large private sector organisation — FDC Construction and Fitouts Medium private sector organisation — Agfa HealthCare Small private sector organisation — Project Everest Ventures Public sector organisation — Flinders Island District High School  Not-for-profit organisation — Central Queensland University.

Mr Chester said the contribution of employers by supporting their Reservist employees had helped the ADF respond quickly and effectively in a time of crisis.

“Not only did my electorate of Gippsland benefit greatly from the support provided by our Reservists, but communities like Kangaroo Island in South Australia had around 700 Reservists in total deploying to the island during Operation Bushfire Assist,” Mr Chester said.

The Australian Government recognises and values the contribution made by ADF Reservists and their employers to Defence capability and to the communities all around the nation.

“Our Reservists are a highly skilled, dynamic and disciplined workforce, whose service to our country during the unprecedented circumstances of 2020 was made possible by the support of their employers,” Mr Chester said.

Date received: 11 November 2020

“I commend both the award-winning organisations and all the nominees for their continued support of our ADF Reservists and their communities across Australia.”

Defence provides direct support to ADF Reservists and their civilian employers through the Employer Support Payment Scheme and a range of engagement programs and activities.

Watch the Defence Employer Support Awards winner announcements at www.defencereservessupport.gov.au and https://youtu.be/6OvgED71si4

MEDIA CONTACTS:  Rachel Tharratt: 0419 034 302 Defence Media: (02) 6127 1999

Office of the Hon Darren Chester, Canberra ACT.

