JOSH BURNS MP

MEMBER FOR MACNAMARA





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS FIRST EDITION WITH PETER STEFANOVIC  WEDNESDAY, 26 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Victorian COVID cases; State of Emergency extension.

PETER STEFANOVIC, HOST: Well, let's go live to Victoria now. And joining us is Victorian Labor  MP Josh Burns. Josh, good to see you, thanks so much for joining us. I just want to get your view on  that breaking news we've got at the bottom of the screen there. It's the latest update from Victorian  health, we've got 24 deaths, that's the second highest that Victoria has had yet sadly, and 149 new  COVID cases, which I guess if you want to take a positive it's that things seem to be following a  trend of at least being below 200 which is something but what's what's your reaction to those  numbers this morning, Josh?

JOSH BURN, MEMBER FOR MACNAMARA: Well, good morning Pete, it's it's pretty difficult times  down here in Victoria and to see 24 deaths overnight is you know, it's heartbreaking. And this this  whole pandemic is a bit heartbreaking to be honest mate. It's taking lives and it's taking them really  quickly and we need to, it just reminds us why we need to re double down our efforts because if we  were to let this thing run as it wants to and we were to let this virus run as it wants to then it wouldn't  be 24 deaths, it would be hundreds of deaths. Like what we've seen overseas and 149 cases isn't as  low as we'd like it and it's certainly better that the downward trend in the seven day trend is heading  in the right direction. But we want it to keep coming lower, keep getting lower, reduce the amount of  transmission and to keep trying to eliminate this virus.

STEFANOVIC: A lot of talk a lot of debate around Premier Daniel Andrews' move, Josh, to extend  his emergency powers the State of Emergency powers for another 12 months. There's a lot of I  guess there's a couple of big speed bumps ahead of that looks like it might not happen. What was  your view of that, first of all?

BURNS: Well Pete, I think that, you know, going on from your previous question that we're not out of  this pandemic yet. And we need to be able to implement the directions of our public health  authorities and our health experts, and that's something that we've been saying consistently  throughout the entire pandemic is that we need to be listening to the experts and we need to be  listening to our doctors right now. I think that there's a few things to sum up here, first of all, is that  we need the ability to implement the directions of our Chief Health Officer in Victoria. We need the  ability to, for example, implement the masks requirement, to implement social distancing restaurants,  to implement potential restrictions on gatherings. And that's all done through the Public Health Act  and through the State of Emergency insurance policy that the Premier has outlined. The timing of it,  I'm a bit agnostic be honest mate. I think that that there is absolutely acceptance from all sides of  politics that there needs to be an extension. For how long, well that's a matter for the Victorian  Government and the Victorian Parliament to come to some agreement, but I would say that we need  to, you know, cooler heads need to prevail because doctors and nurses overnight have come out in

Victoria and said that, you know, I don't care how long for but this thing needs to be extended  because we're not out of the woods, yet.

STEFANOVIC: Perhaps how it was done frightened too many people, Josh, would you concede that  perhaps he shouldn't have gone for 12 months, maybe said six months, we'll look at six months or at  least go month by month and allow some consultation before just saying it out loud? And then, you  know, perhaps frightening a lot of people who thought their liberties were being taken away. And  then you heard from the Prime Minister about half an hour ago, but he said that various offices were  bombarded with concerns from people suggesting that their freedoms were being unnecessarily  taken away.

BURNS: Well, the first thing I'll take you up on is that the Prime Minister's job here is to lead the  country not to fear the country and not to scare the country. And and you know, these are really  important legislative instruments that we've been using throughout the entire pandemic. These are  instruments that, unless I'm much mistaken, are currently existing in all of the states and territories,  for an unlimited period of time, I think WA might be the only state that's comparable to Victoria,  where it has a limit on the extension of the State of Emergency powers. And ironically because  Daniel Andrews introduced it when he was Health Minister. So I think that I think that, you know, we  need to deal with this in a calm and sober way. And I've heard reports of the Premier's house being  shared on social media and people wanting to protest outside his home and quite frankly, that is  absolutely abhorrent and unacceptable and for people to be whipping others into a frenzy and and  spreading fear that leads to, potentially people confronting and, putting public images of the  Premier's private residence with his kids and his wife on social media. I mean, I think that we all  need to be really careful about our language here. These are extraordinary powers, but these are  extraordinary times. And I think that, you know, they hopefully won't be used one day longer than we  need to. As the Premier said yesterday, they're an insurance policy to potentially implement the  directions of our health authorities, which, ultimately at a time of a pandemic is the most important  thing.

STEFANOVIC: So just to be clear, I mean, this this is something that you support, the extension of  these emergency powers, but 12 months maybe a bit too long?

BURNS: Well, it gives me no joy to say Pete, but I think that this pandemic will probably be with us  for another 12 months. So you know, whether whether that's done in in bits and whether the  Victorian Parliament decides that, then there needs to be shorter implementing, shorter intervals of  extension, well, that's a matter for the Victorian Government and the Victorian Parliament to come to  some agreement. And I'm sure they'll get to a place where everyone's relatively comfortable. But I  think that this pandemic is going to be with us for a while and we need to be able to listen to the  directions of our Chief Health Officer and of our health experts the entire time. And as we've seen,  24 deaths in Victoria is just tragic, and we need to be doing everything we can to save as many lives  as possible.

STEFANOVIC: Alright, Victorian Labor MP Josh Burns, always good to talk. Thanks so much for  your time this morning. Appreciate it. We'll talk to you again soon.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DEAN SHERR 0423 394 949

