











SENATOR THE HON LINDA REYNOLDS CSC  Minister for Defence  Senator for Western Australia



MEDIA RELEASE

A SAFER AND STRONGER AUSTRALIA - BUDGET 2020-21

6 October 2020

The Morrison Government remains committed to keeping Australians safe, while  protecting the nation’s interests as part of Australia’s COVID-19 Economic Recovery  Plan, in a rapidly changing global environment.

The 2020-21 Budget sees sustained strong investment in Australia’s national  security, with a focus on regional security, building defence capability and creating  jobs, boosting Australia’s cyber resilience and supporting Australia’s sovereign  defence industry.

The Budget delivers the Morrison Government’s commitment to grow the Defence  budget to two per cent of GDP in the 2020-21 financial year and will deliver a stable  funding path into the future.

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE AND 2020 FORCE STRUCTURE PLAN

The 2020 Defence Strategic Update and 2020 Force Structure Plan is a 10 year  funding model with a 20 year outlook and continues to provide Defence and defence  industry with the planning certainty required to support the ongoing development and  delivery of critical Defence capability and Australian jobs.

This 10 year model provides Defence, including the Australian Signals Directorate,  with funding of $575 billion over the decade to 2029-30.  The Morrison Government’s Budget commitments position Defence to implement the  2020 Force Structure Plan and address our increasing strategic competition, now  and into the future.

BOOSTING AUSTRALIA’S DEFENCE CAPABILITY

The Morrison Government will invest $270 billion over the next 10 years to upgrade  the capability and potency of the Australian Defence Force.



This includes investing in more lethal and long-range capabilities to hold adversary  forces and infrastructure at risk, further from Australia, including longer-range strike  weapons, offensive cyber capabilities and area denial capabilities.

We will also invest in capabilities to give Australia better awareness of our region  and to support regional engagement, while also increasing our air and sea lift  capability to ensure we can rapidly respond to events across our region.

More broadly, through this investment we are ensuring Defence and Australia has  more durable supply chains, while further strengthening Australia’s sovereign  defence industry to create more high-tech Australian jobs and enhance the ADF’s  self-reliance.

Our investment in Defence will also expand ADF support to civil authorities in  response to national crises and natural disasters with deployable health care and  engineering capabilities.

This $270 billion investment provides unprecedented opportunities for Australian  industry and the creation of more Australian jobs.

The Morrison Government is strengthening the Australian Industry Capability (AIC)  Program to help maximise opportunities for Australian business in these projects.

Investment in critical infrastructure, facilities, wharves and ports will continue with  around $30 billion being invested over the decade.

Local industry involvement in the delivery of these projects will be maximised  through the Morrison Government’s Local Industry Capability Plan initiative. This  ensures that local suppliers, contractors and tradies have the opportunity to secure  more of this work, creating more jobs for local communities.

CYBER SECURITY SUPPORT

Malicious cyber activity against Australia is increasing in frequency, scale and  sophistication.

This Government is making the nation’s largest ever investment in cyber security  through our $1.7 billion 2020 Cyber Security Strategy, which includes $1.4 billion  over the next decade to enhance the cyber security capabilities and assistance  provided to Australians through the Australian Signals Directorate and the Australian  Cyber Security Centre.

This significant investment, known as the Cyber Enhanced Situational Awareness  and Response (CESAR) package, will mean that we can identify more cyber threats,  disrupt more foreign cybercriminals, build more partnerships with industry and  government and protect more Australians.

The CESAR package has been designed to boost protection and cyber resilience for  all Australians, from individuals and small businesses through to the providers of  critical services.





It includes a $470 million investment to expand our cyber security workforce, with the  creation of over 500 new Australian jobs within ASD.

The package will put our nation on the front foot in combatting cyber threats and our  investment in a cyber security workforce will help ensure we have the people we  need to meet future cyber challenges.

SUPPORTING AUSTRALIA’S ECONOMIC RECOVERY AND BACKING  DEFENCE INDUSTRY

Australia’s defence industry has demonstrated remarkable versatility throughout the  COVID-19 pandemic, and will continue to keep Defence capabilities and our  Australian economy moving.

Supporting Australia’s defence industry is crucial to our economic recovery and the  creation of more jobs.

We have implemented a $1 billion investment package aimed at boosting Australia’s  defence industry and supporting thousands of jobs across the country.

This includes increased funding of over $110 million for Defence innovation, industry  grants, skilling and micro credentialing, and cyber training for Defence industry.

The Morrison Government recently launched the Skilling Australia’s Defence  Industry (SADI) Grants program, which will deliver $39 million over the next three  years to support a skilled workforce in the defence industry sector.

In addition to these grant initiatives, the Government is announcing a further  $4 million to establish the Joint Strike Fighter Industry Support Program, delivering  more opportunities for Australian industry participation. This builds on the success of  the New Air Combat Capability Industry Support Program, which has delivered 46  grants to 25 Australian companies, worth $21.7 million.

Already we have fast-tracked a range of capability, infrastructure, skilling and  workforce initiatives over the next two years, including a $300 million national estates  works program focusing on regional areas, and $190 million on infrastructure  projects in the Northern Territory.

Around 4,000 Australian jobs will be supported over the 2020-21 and 2021-22  financial years through the delivery of this economic package. This reaffirms our  commitment to further strengthening the defence industrial base to ensure that it is  robust, resilient and internationally competitive.

The measures will continue to support and grow the 70,000-strong workforce in  defence industry, supply chains, and down-stream suppliers who are benefiting from  our investment in defence.







ADF SUPPORTING AUSTRALIANS

The Government remains committed to supporting Australians in need which is why  we are strengthening the ADF’s ability to respond to natural disasters, domestic  emergencies, and support to the near region.

Since February, Defence has provided comprehensive support worth $80.7 million to  states and territories as part of Operation COVID-19 ASSIST with more than 3,200  personnel providing support across the country.

To continue to provide support, the Government will streamline the process for  calling out Reservists to boost the ADF’s capacity to respond quickly when needed.

This measure builds on the Government’s commitment to increase the number of  reserve days for existing ADF Reserve members, and recruiting an additional 500  Reservists to provide more employment opportunities for Australians impacted by  the COVID-19 pandemic.

DELIVERING SUPPORT TO THE SOUTHWEST PACIFIC

The Morrison Government will invest a further $124.3 million over 10 years to  support the Pacific Step-Up through increased investment in security infrastructure in  the Pacific.

This investment includes a joint Australia-Solomon Islands project to construct a  border and patrol boat outpost in Solomon Islands’ western provinces, announced by  Prime Minister Morrison and Prime Minister Sogavare in October 2019.

Australia’s support for a border and patrol boat outpost will enhance infrastructure  and security cooperation between our countries, and support Solomon Islands’  border security.

The outpost will be used by the Royal Solomon Islands Police Force and other  Solomon Islands agencies to conduct remote patrolling and security operations.

The design will feature environmentally sustainable elements and will be appropriate  to regional conditions, and will include a wharf capable of replenishing Guardian-Class patrol boats, accommodation buildings, and storage facilities.

Under the Pacific Step-Up, Australia is working with regional partners to strengthen  economic resilience, deepen personal connections and enhance security  cooperation.

Our infrastructure projects in the Pacific contribute to the Australian and regional  economies. These projects are providing significant economic stimulus and  employment opportunities.

Defence Portfolio Budget Statements (PBS) 2020-21 are available on the Defence  website.



Media Contacts  Ben Martin (Minister Reynolds’ office): +61 447 219 902  Nicky Hamer (Minister Reynolds’ office): +61 437 989 927  Defence Media (02) 6127 1999, media@defence.gov.au





Authorised by Senator the Hon Linda Reynolds CSC, Minister for Defence, Australia.

