T h e  H o n . D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s

T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T

Sunday 29th November 2020

Minister Littleproud iv Sky News

KIERAN GILBERT: Let's go live to Queensland, not far from Groom where that byelection was. And  we're joined now by the Deputy Nationals Leader and Minister for Agriculture, Emergency  Management and Drought David Littleproud joins us [indistinct]… today. Let's start with China,  Minister, first of all, because things are getting- going from bad to worse. So we did note a shift in  tone from the Federal Government, though. Simon Birmingham saying that the fact that there've  been various actions, the cumulative effect gives rise to the perception these actions are being  undertaken in response to some other factors. Has the Government basically decided to call this  for what it is in terms of being coercion here?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, look, we took it on face value, the actions in which China implemented  against barley, timber, and now- but now wine, but subsequent they’ve made statements,  assertions, and grievances around some of the actions, sovereign actions, of our country. Now,  that obviously leads to the perception, quite rightly, that the actions that they’re taking against  our commodities is more around their grievances around our sovereignty and our sovereign  actions than it is around anything to do with trade. So it's important now for Chinese officials to  quite clearly articulate and demonstrate that that is not the case. We are a rules-based trading  nation, and we expect those that we trade with do the same - not only through individual trade  agreements but also just through the WTO. So it's important that China is very clear on this.  Australia has been open and transparent, and we expect the Chinese to do exactly the same, but  the evidence and the actions that are mounting tend to indicate it's more a grievance around our  sovereign actions rather than trading actions.

KIERAN GILBERT: Given we just signed the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, this  RCEP, as it's called - China signed it as well - what good is it if it doesn't help protect us and our  wine exporters from action like this?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, it sets in place a processes, as does our trade agreement. And that's  the thing is we’re not going to throw our toys out of the cot and not be a leading nation in terms  of protocols for trade because if you move away from that then it becomes disorderly and  anything goes. There’s set procedures that will now follow, and we respect that, but we expect  those nations to act fairly, and if they don't we'll go to the umpire, we'll work with industry around  making sure we get that right and the timing of that, whether it be on wine or barley. We'll  continue to work with those industries around what that’ll look like, but you just can't have- be  part of a rules-based system and then say you're not going to adhere to those rules, and that's  what we're saying is we’ll now take a next step under these procedures and these rules. We

Transcript

T R A N S C R I P T

respect that. We’re a good trading nation, a fair-trading nation, and we'll continue to be  predicating our actions on the rules-based basis of trade.

KIERAN GILBERT: Given the wine tariffs and concerns over coal imports, 80 ships off the coast  apparently, in hindsight, could the Government have handled this better? Specifically, with that  initial call for an inquiry into COVID, would it have been better for the Government to basically get  all its ducks lined up first to get some other nations on board first so that we weren't standing out  on our own on that issue?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I don't think we're standing on our own. The fact that Australia  decided to lead the world and do the responsible thing - we’re a good global citizen. The world's  got a lot smaller, and we have to understand that our lives are intertwined because of that, and  therefore we have a responsibility to one another. There wasn't any malice in our request to look  at this. It was a sensible request. I would have thought that after a pandemic where so many lives  have been touched that that is the responsible thing governments would do, and the fact that  Australia decided to lead the world again on this matter I think doesn't really go to the facts  around this at all. That's the responsible thing any government should do, and the fact Australia  led, I think we should be proud of that. We'll continue to work and make sure that we have our  door open and our phone always on to those in China that may have grievances or  misunderstandings about any of our actions. That's the best way to resolve it is dialogue, an  enriched dialogue, rather than closing it off, and that's what Australia will continue to do. We have  led the world in trying to understand and learn better from this pandemic, and we'll continue to  try and make sure that those nations that might have misunderstandings around that that we  explain that to them.

KIERAN GILBERT: Isn't it all a bit predictable though? The Government- as the Trade Minister-  Finance Minister himself said, it's a cumulative impact. Has the Government been a bit clunky in its  diplomatic efforts, particularly in relation to China? Have the chest-beating elements of the debate  carried too much sway within the Government?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I don't think from ministers that there’s been any chest-beating. I think  our language has been very considered. It's been around understanding, and in fact it's been the  Australian Minister- Trade Minister and myself that have both reached out to try and start  dialogue around this. And that's the only way to resolve any misunderstandings or grievances is to  have dialogue. But someone's got to lead that, and that's what we've done. We've said from the  start that if there are issues, the best way in which to deal with them is to have dialogue, and  that's what we'll continue to do. But we won't compromise on our sovereignty or our values - we  never will. And whether it be to China or any other country, Australia is its own sovereign nation,  and as we respect other nations and their sovereignty, we’ll make our own decisions here in  Australia around our sovereignty, but we want to be able to trade. I think trade is one way, is a  most significant way, in which there is global security because I think there is vested interest from  both sides if we’re able to trade in a rules-based way.

KIERAN GILBERT: We obviously feel for the wine exporters at the moment, and- but if this starts  getting towards threats to iron ore exports, that's when the nation will really start getting nervous,  won't we?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, obviously we’ve already started in terms of making sure that whether  it be iron ore, coal, wine, barley, that we can send our commodity into other markets, and we’ll

Transcript

T R A N S C R I P T

continue to do that. There are 14 free trade agreements. In fact, trade before we came into  government was only covered by about 26 per cent for free trade agreements. Now it's over 70  per cent of our trade is covered by free trade agreements. We're looking to get that to around 90  per cent. So we’re giving exporters the opportunity to spread their risks. That's a simple business  principle we say to any exporter - they shouldn’t have market concentration…

KIERAN GILBERT: You can’t replace China, though, as a customer, can you?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, those are the challenges that we’ll work through, and make sure that  we work with the industry, and we look to diversify markets as quickly as we can. And that's why  we've already done a lot of the legwork and continue to do that around making sure there's  opportunity to send boats left and right if there are challenges with one particular market.

KIERAN GILBERT: A few other issues now. A challenge for the fruit juice industry - our viewers  might not have noticed this story, but it's a big one for fruit growers and producers. Basically, the  health star rating for 100 per cent, no added sugar juices is being reduced. How big an impact is  that going to have on the industry?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, this is just pure insanity. I mean, the states and the Commonwealth  and New Zealand Government all come together under the FSANZ, and that's the Food Standards  across Australia and New Zealand, and we've created this health star rating system. What they’re  effectively saying is that they will give diet cola a 3.5 health star rating, while 100 per cent  vegetable and fruit juice will get somewhere between two and 2.5 health stars. It has no  nutritional value, diet Cola, but I can tell you 100 per cent vegetable and fruit juice does. This is  just states and state ministers, in particular, not having the courage to stand up to bureaucrats  and using their own common sense and saying that just doesn't work. In fact, New South Wales  and South Australia, I have to say, supported me in asking for a four star health rating for 100 per  cent vegetable and fruit juice, but the other states turned their back. Queensland, Victoria,  Northern Territory, Western Australia, they all turned their back on farmers. $67 million alone just  to the citrus industry that this will do, but what it also does, Kieran, is undermines the health star  rating system. Because common sense of Australians out there, when they go to the supermarket,  and they look at 100 per cent fruit juice against a diet cola, and they see higher stars for diet cola  versus 100 per cent fruit or vegetable juice, they're just going to say that those health star ratings  mean absolutely nothing. So what the state ministers have effectively done is undermined their  own system. But sadly, this is going to cost primary producers, particularly when we're just coming  out of a drought, and we're not out of it in some parts, but for some of these this is the first  bumper harvest we’ve had in some time.

KIERAN GILBERT: Citrus Australia is warning the producers will simply stop using the system, some  of them that have lost faith in it.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well- and that goes to my point is that what these actions of these State  Ministers are being led by the nose by their bureaucrats because they don’t have the courage to  stand up to them and say get out. They’re effectively allowing them to lead an industry into  turmoil again and undermine the exact system that they’re trying to promote and preserve. This  health star rating system could be used sensibly, but when you get politicians that don’t have the  courage to stand up to their bureaucrats, then it undermines the whole system. And I don’t blame  Citrus Australia, because they’re the ones at the forefront of this that are going to hurt the most.

Transcript

T R A N S C R I P T

KIERAN GILBERT: The- let’s look at another issue that we heard overnight. HomeBuilder - Andrew  mentioned it earlier in the program - it’s going to be extended. Is it likely that that support  initiative will be in place right throughout next year?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, we’ve obviously just extended it. We’ll- all our measures have been  targeted and temporary. Obviously, this is costing the Australian taxpayer around $900 million,  but it’s having a significant impact on getting us out of this COVID recession. We’ve seen a 20 per  cent increase in dwelling approvals since we started this program. There’s been 27,000 dwellings  that’ve been approved under this, and there’s another 15,000 we anticipate under this. So this has  been a significant program around getting us out of this COVID recession, getting tradies moving,  and it’s where they procure their materials, from the local hardware store, so it flows through.  And then what happens is the homeowner has capital and has equity that they can also go and  invest in other things within the economy. So this has been a real success story. We’ll continue to  monitor not only this program but others as we move through the next year. But we’ve got to  make people understand that all our measures have been temporary and targeted, and our  economy is starting to respond because of it. And I think we’re probably standing better than any  other nation in the world because of the levers we’ve pulled. We didn’t waste our money on Pink  Batts in school halls. We actually have put money and programs into what will grow the economy,  not just in building infrastructure but operating, and that’s creating jobs here and into the future.  And that’s- really, the levers that we’ve pulled as a government through this COVID recession, we  haven’t flitted it away on ideological infrastructure that have no benefit into the future.

KIERAN GILBERT: Would you like to see that program broadened to encompass social housing?  That way you can have the economic benefit, but you’re also undertaking Projects that otherwise  won't be built. So that's a real stimulus. Plus you've got the social benefit of improving the social  housing stock.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, Kieran, that's the state government's responsibility. They build social  housing. In fact, I've got to congratulate the Victorian government. They've put $5 billion out with  respect to that. The other states are doing three-fifths of bugger all, and it's time that they did  their bit. And in fact, even the RBA Governor made it very clear that while the Australian  Government has spent around 16 per cent of GDP, the states have only been spending around 2.5  per cent of GSP. So they haven't really been doing any of the heavy lifting at all, and Victoria has  finally said that they’re going to do something, and I've got to congratulate them. And it's now up  to the other states to follow them. $5 billion worth of social housing’s important, and that’s the  responsibility of the states. We've got to get back to our own knitting. Each state and Federal  Government shouldn't be overhanging into other jurisdictions’ responsibilities. This is where the  states need to move away from this business model of blame Canberra and ask more money.  They've simply got to live up to their responsibility. Victoria is, and now it's time for the rest of the  states to do their bit as well.

KIERAN GILBERT: You’re the Minister for Emergency Management. Last summer was an absolute  shocker. As we are broadcasting this morning, many Australians are feeling the heatwave that  we’re copping at the moment in large parts of the country. How's this year shaping up in terms of  the fire threat and with La Nina, that system in place? So I guess the other risk, the flip side is the  floods and cyclones that we're likely to see.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah. Kieran, look, we’ve planned meticulously for the bushfire season again  this year, and I've got to say it's the fire commissioners from around the country that do that.

Transcript

T R A N S C R I P T

Emergency Management Australia simply coordinates that on a national level. And we've some of  the best fire commissioners in the world. The threat isn't as high as last year, but there is still  threat particularly in western New South Wales, west of the divide, there’s an updated response  that I saw only on Friday around this. There’s parts of Queensland that we're still worried about,  and particularly in Western Australia. And then there’s also, even around Canberra, the real threat  of grass fires. And because of some of the early spring rain we’ve had, it's created some fuel loads  that we need to watch and monitor. But as you've just articulated, we’ve got to be prepared to  pivot and pivot quickly into a La Nina, and so that means that we’re likely to see more cyclones,  harsher cyclones, and in fact that’ll lead obviously to flooding. So we need to make sure that we  can pivot from bushfire into cyclone and flooding events, particularly in Northern Australia, and  that's all with the overlay of COVID-19. And so what we've done back in August was we sat down  and we made sure that we had a COVID plan on top of- that overlayed our bushfire and La Nina  plans, so that we can move emergency service personnel from one state to the other and keep  them safe and the people that they're going to save safe. So we all have a responsibility. We've all  got to prepare. It's not just state and Federal governments that have to. Homeowners can too, and  if- they need to have a plan to get out, and if one of those emergency service personnel tell them  to get out, do it. Don’t wait. These people are putting their lives on the line for you.

KIERAN GILBERT: And finally, your neighbour in the seat of Groom, the Groom by-election, the win  to Garth Hamilton, a thumping win, no surprise there.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, look, you never take anything for granted these days, but look, we’re  very happy to get Garth in after the retirement of John McVeigh. Garth’s an engineer. He’s built  roads, rail, dams, even mining - you know, that dirty word that the Labor Party won’t talk about.  So, you know, he’s- he comes with experience, practical experience, and that’s what we want to  bring to the parliament, diversity, and I think the people of Groom got it right, thank God,  yesterday.

KIERAN GILBERT: David Littleproud, Deputy Nationals Leader, Minister for Agriculture. Talk to you  soon. Thanks.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks, mate.

Media contact  0455 448 985

