

THE HON JOSH FRYDENBERG MP  Treasurer

THE HON ANGUS TAYLOR MP  Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction

THE HON KEITH PITT MP  Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia

MEDIA RELEASE

Monday, 17 August 2020



RELEASE OF LATEST REPORT OF ACCC GAS INQUIRY

Australia’s gas supply outlook will remain steady through next year despite the ongoing  impact of COVID-19 according to the latest Australian Competition and Consumer  Commission (ACCC) Gas Inquiry interim report.

The report also confirms that gas prices have continued to fall, which is expected to  provide some relief to local gas users.

The majority of offers by producers for supply in 2020 and into 2021 fell to between $8- $10/GJ. There is also evidence of further price falls since February, with prices being  offered in Queensland falling below $7/GJ.

The COVID-19 pandemic has had little impact overall on East Coast gas production or  consumption so far in 2020, compared to the same period last year.

Sufficient supply has also been confirmed to meet forecast domestic and export  demand in 2021.

This is enhanced by LNG producers being well placed to alleviate any potential supply  pressures. It is expected 84 petajoules (PJ) of excess gas in 2021 could be directed to  the domestic market.

Despite this good news, the Government is taking the ACCC’s concerns seriously in  regards to the widening divergence between domestic price offers and the LNG netback  price.

There are also reports that some LNG spot cargoes have been sold at well below the  prices being offered to the domestic market.

Treasurer Josh Frydenberg said The Morrison Government welcomes the latest report  from the ACCC into the east coast gas market.

“The impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic are being felt across the economy which is  why it is important that the Government and the ACCC continue to monitor  developments in Australia’s gas markets to ensure Australia’s consumers and  businesses benefit from competition.”

Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction Angus Taylor said the Government  expects gas producers to reflect internationally competitive export prices for Australian  gas users.

“Australian gas must be working to benefit all Australians. It is essential that local gas  users see the price reductions locally that are available on the LNG export market. We  expect these price reductions to be passed on fairly,” Minister Taylor said.

“We support the ACCC issuing a compulsory request to seek more supplier pricing data  so that we can better understand this pricing difference.”

Beyond 2021, however, the supply outlook is expected to tighten, with the ongoing  impact of COVID-19 casting uncertainty over the longer-term outlook.

“Australia’s competitive advantage has always been based on cheap energy,  particularly for the manufacturing sector” Minister Taylor said.

“Gas will be central to our ongoing economic recovery. A robust and competitive gas  industry will allow both gas producers and users to thrive, with lower prices benefiting all  Australians.”

The ACCC also recommends that the Government’s landmark Heads of Agreement  with Queensland LNG producers be extended to beyond 2020 to improve supply  certainty. The ACCC recommends that the Government work with industry to include a  reference the netback price in the Agreement to make commitments that support  domestic gas users.

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt said despite the ongoing  impact of COVID-19, the gas market had continued to perform comparatively well.

“The COVID-19 pandemic is impacting all sectors of our economy, but our gas industry  continues to show resilience under pressure,” Minister Pitt said.

“There will be challenges in the future, particularly regarding uncertainty over our mid- to  long-term supply outlook, contributed to by bans on gas exploration.

“The Government will continue to call on states and territories to remove blanket bans  and moratoria on conventional and unconventional gas exploration.”

In 2017, the Government entered into a Heads of Agreement with east coast LNG  exporters, which has been successful in committing big LNG producers to make more  gas available to domestic users.

ENDS

Treasurer:       Annabel Clunies-Ross,  0428 295 517  Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction:     Liam O’Neil,  0428 113 617  Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia:    Matt Dunstan,  0411 535  072



