TRANSCRIPT

Thursday, 13 August 2020

Minister for Education Dan Tehan interview with Sandy Aloisi, ABC NewsRadio

SUBJECTS: Job-ready Graduates package draft legislation and HELP debts,  Universities and COVID-19, Schools and COVID-19

Sandy Aloisi: The Federal Education Minister is Dan Tehan and he joins us now. Minister,  good morning.

Dan Tehan: Morning, Sandy. How are you?

Aloisi: Very well, thank you. Why is this necessary?

Tehan: Because, what we don’t want to see is students taking on a study load they can’t  complete, leaving them without a qualification and a large debt.

Aloisi: How many students are actually failing half their subjects? Do you have some sort of  figure?

Tehan: Well, research has shown that nearly six per cent of university students fail every  subject in their first year. What this is designed to do is to make sure that universities and  students understand that they need to work together to make sure that the student is  suitable for the course that they’re undertaking, and, then, to make sure that throughout their  course, that they get the guidance, support and help that they need to complete their  studies.

Aloisi: I’m just thinking, Minister, about the cuts universities have had to make during this  pandemic, and staff numbers, of course, being well down. How will they ensure that this new  legislation, put forward by the Federal Government, will actually be enacted the way you  want it to be?

Tehan: Well, we’re obviously working with the sector. We’re putting in place reforms which  puts the focus back on making sure that we’re looking after our domestic students, and we’re  preparing our domestic students for the challenges that they’re going to face as we come out  of this COVID-19 pandemic. And, I think, that the way our universities go about educating  young Australians, they’re up to the challenge to making sure that we’re getting students  enrolled in the right courses, and that they can complete those courses.

Aloisi: So, how will they do that, Minister? What exactly will universities need to do to make  sure students are academically suitable, and, also, engaged with the course they propose to  do?

Tehan: So ,when a student, for instance, say, is struggling, and might fail a couple of units,  they can talk to that student, talk to them about whether the choice they’ve made about the  degree that they want to undertake is the right one for them. They could suggest to them  that, maybe, there is another more suitable degree that they might want to look at, if they’re  struggling with the one they’re undertaking. This is just a common-sense approach that we  want both universities and students to take to make sure that we’ve got students in the right

degrees, and that universities are working with students to help them complete those  degrees.

Aloisi: And, you’ve had some pushback from the Nationals MP Andrew Gee. He’s the  Minister for Regional Education. He believes that regional students will be worse off under  this legislation. What’s your response to that?

Tehan: Well, obviously, Andrew has put forward some suggestions that he thinks will  improve the legislation. I’ve spoken with every Vice-Chancellor across the nation the last two  months. They’ve also put forward suggestions to me as to what they think would improve the  legislation. We’ve, obviously, sent the draft legislation out for consultation. I look forward to  receiving more feedback on the legislation. These are major reforms. We want to get them  right. We’ll continue to consult as we take this legislation through the parliament.

Aloisi: And, more broadly, Minister, with the pandemic upon us and universities, as I  mentioned earlier, cutting their staff, how do you see the university sector emerging from this  pandemic?

Tehan: I want to see the university sector emerging from this pandemic educating young  Australians for the jobs that we need, giving them the skills that they need to be contributors  to our community more broadly. I think they’ve got an absolutely vital role to play as we  come out of this pandemic, and I continue to work with them to make sure that they’re going  to be fit for purpose to undertake that role.

Aloisi: And, how will they be fit for purpose? I think what I meant by my question was, given  they’ve had such an upheaval, how will they emerge from the pandemic able to provide the  tertiary education we want for our kids?

Tehan: Well, they’re very well-placed to do so. We’ve got, I think, some of the best  universities in the world. They are, they’re renowned. That’s why we have international  students from across the globe wanting to come here and study. So, I think, what we’ve got  to do is make sure that we continue to support them, work with them, and they will be very  well-placed to help us come out of this COVID-19 pandemic.

Aloisi: And, finally, Minister, can I just ask you about the cluster, the COVID cluster in,  particularly in one school in New South Wales, in Sydney. How concerned are you about  that? And, how concerned are you that perhaps other schools might actually throw this sort  of cluster up, too?

Tehan: Well, we continue to take the advice of the medical expert panel - that’s the medical  experts from all states and territories and the Chief Medical Officer of the Commonwealth  Government - on what we should be doing to make sure that our schools are safe. They  continue to provide advice to the Government that schools are safe. But, we’ve got to put in  place proper protocols to keep teachers safe, and, also, to make sure that the engagement  outside of school is done according with the restrictions or rules that are being put in place  by various states or territories. So …

Aloisi: … So, at this stage, you’re happy with the protocols in place for school students, at  the moment?

Tehan: Absolutely, and we continue to ask our medical experts to continue to provide us with  updated advice. But, their clear advice is, that with the right protocols in place, schools  remain safe to be open.

Aloisi: Alright, Minister, I thank you for your time this morning.

Tehan: Been a pleasure, Sandy. Thank you.

Aloisi: That’s the Federal Education Minister Dan Tehan.

