

The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina



OP-ED



PRESERVING - AND BULDING - THE TOP END VOICE

By Michael McCormack, The NT News - 27 August 2020

Supporting local communities is the Australian way. Our communities need to stay connected, with  each other and with our governments.

Spending time in the Northern Territory recently alongside Lia Finocchiaro's Country Liberals’ team, I  heard growing bipartisan concern over the possible loss of a Northern Territory seat in the Federal  House of Representatives.

Correctly undertaking a redistribution assessment as required by law, the Australian Electoral  Commission recently proposed NT representation be halved - from two to just one seat.

The ramifications are enormous.

Already, the Northern Territory seat of Lingiari represents Australians spread across 1,348,000  square kilometres. A single NT seat would represent 247,280 people living across 1,421,000 square  kilometres.

If the Australian Capital Territory - had kept its two seats, it would have an average 220,100 people  per electorate - compared to the NT population of 247,280.

So Northern Territorians have every right to ask how the ACT now has three seats - an average  147,000 people each - while the NT representation is being cut to a single seat.

I’m privileged to represent the regional NSW seat of Riverina: a little shy of 50,000 square  kilometres; a good four-hour drive, 373km end-to-end, Peak Hill to Yerong Creek. It’s among the  largest of the 47 seats across NSW - 47 seats across a land mass a touch more than half that of the  NT.

Also in NSW, the electorate of Grayndler covers 32 square kilometres. Unlike the NT, it’s best never  to take an aircraft to move around that Sydney electorate.

At the recent Territory election, Senator Sam McMahon travelled 1,460km from Darwin to a remote  pre-polling station - for a booth that saw 3 votes registered on the day. 3 votes. That’s dedication.  That’s democracy. That’s the NT!



While acknowledging a concerning recent easing of population in the NT, there are real concerns  over how to effectively represent all Territorians spread across a single seat. I know these concerns  are shared across the political spectrum.

What must be done is to grow the NT population to ensure the AEC does not have to grapple with  whether or not the Territory should have one seat or two - or perhaps even more! Our Government  has targeted policies to grow the economy, grow jobs and therefore grow regional populations such  as the NT.

The NT has immense potential to contribute to Australia’s economic growth - indeed, to our  economic recovery post-COVID.

Industries from tourism to cattle, horticulture, fishing, bauxite, copper, gold and uranium head a  long list of contributions to our national economic wealth - including our export effort - and they  deserve a clear national focus and understanding.

Australians pride ourselves in our robust system of democracy.

A single NT seat would in fact cover not just the NT - but also the far-flung Indian Ocean Territories  of Christmas Island and the Cocos Islands.

Some action is already under way. The Minister for Finance has asked the Joint Standing Committee  on Electoral Matters (JSCEM) to inquire and report on a Private Senator’s Bill. The committee  received more than 50 submissions.

For my own part, I agree such a large area as the Northern Territory, with residents spread  everywhere, needs and deserves more than one Reps’ MP to ensure democracy is well served - best  served.

MICHAEL McCORMACK IS DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND FEDERAL LEADER OF THE NATIONALS

