







The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology  Federal Member for McPherson

MEDIA RELEASE

AUSTRALIA AND INDIA PARTNER ON COVID-19 RESEARCH

10 December 2020

Australian and Indian researchers will work together to advance COVID-19  screening and study the future health effects of the virus, after a nearly $4 million  investment by the Morrison Government.

The Australia-India Strategic Research Fund (AISRF) has funded six new projects,  including one to develop COVID-19 diagnostic technologies and another study of the  longer-term effects on the hearts and lungs of patients who have recovered.

Other projects will develop risk management systems to protect farmers from  disasters associated with climate change and demonstrate how food-drying  technology using renewable energy can reduce pollution in the food-processing  sector.

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said she was pleased  that work in these important areas would be able to continue after the COVID-19  pandemic had caused significant delays this year.

“This latest funding will enable Australian and Indian researchers to contribute to the  global response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including in crucial screening and  diagnostic testing,” Minister Andrews said.

“As a result of our shared commitment to finding answers through science and  technology, India and Australia have tackled a number of shared challenges since  the AISRF was established in 2006, with important progress made in areas including  agriculture, energy and health.

“The Australian Government remains committed to our strong, strategic relationship  with India, which provides numerous economic benefits for both countries.”

The Australian recipients are the University of South Australia, the University of  Southern Queensland, the University of Technology Sydney, the Metro North





Hospital and Health Service in Brisbane, the University of Adelaide, and the  University of Western Australia.

In June 2020, the Australian Government announced it would commit a further $15  million to extend the AISRF for another four years to 2024, bringing Australia’s total  funding for AISRF grants to nearly $100 million over 18 years. This funding will begin  to roll out from the next grant round in 2021.

The AISRF is Australia’s largest fund dedicated to bilateral science collaboration. It  helps build links between Australia and India’s top universities, research institutions  and the end users of scientific innovation.

For more information on successful projects, visit business.gov.au/aisrf.



Media Contact: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846 / Jen Jennings 0435 121 347

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

