

SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  MINISTER FOR FINANCE  MINISTER FOR TRADE, TOURISM AND INVESTMENT  LEADER OF THE GOVERNMENT IN THE SENATE



THE HON ANGUS TAYLOR MP  MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND EMISSIONS REDUCTION

MEDIA RELEASE

Friday, 27 November 2020



SUPPORTING GRID INFRASTRUCTURE TO DELIVER BENEFITS OF SNOWY 2.0

The Morrison Government is delivering key infrastructure that will ensure the reliable  and secure energy generated by Snowy 2.0 is available across the National Electricity  Market (NEM), powering thousands of households and businesses for decades to come.

The Government will invest $125 million through the Clean Energy Finance Corporation  to help finance the development of grid infrastructure critical to the delivery of Snowy  2.0.

TransGrid Services will use the CEFC finance to build and operate a new 330kV switching  station and associated transmission lines as part of its agreement with Snowy Hydro  Limited to provide connection services for 30 years.

Energy and Emissions Reduction Minister Angus Taylor said the project will ensure the  benefits of Snowy 2.0 are felt across the entire NEM.

“Snowy 2.0 is Australia’s largest renewable energy project and will deliver reliable and  secure energy to thousands of Australian households and businesses,” Minister Taylor  said.

“It’s all part of our strong action to stabilise the grid and get the energy generation  balance right to deliver affordable, 24/7 reliable power.



“This is a yet another initiative by our Government to bring power prices down and keep  the lights on for Australians.

“Importantly, as we recover from the COVID-19 recession, Snowy 2.0 will stimulate the  economy and create jobs.”

Finance Minister Simon Birmingham said the CEFC was established to facilitate  increased investment into the clean energy sector and has delivered significant projects.

“Infrastructure projects like Snowy 2.0 will play a key role in Australia’s economic  recovery by creating jobs and boosting economic activity,” Minister Birmingham said.

“More than 500 people and 100 local businesses have already been engaged on this  project and we expect 5,000 direct and indirect jobs to be created over the life of the  project, with the potential for many more jobs to be created locally and in the broader  region through supply chains and support services.”

CEFC CEO Ian Learmonth said: “Investment in new storage, transmission and related  infrastructure is essential to support the security and reliability of the grid during  Australia’s clean energy transition. Our ability to offer investment certainty in  challenging market conditions is evidence of the critical role the CEFC can play in  supporting grid related developments. We are delighted to be working with TransGrid  Services in investing in this exciting project.”

Today’s announcement marks the first major grid infrastructure investment by the CEFC,  which is in line with the Government’s actions to secure the grid and put downward  pressure on prices.

The Grid Reliability Fund, once established, will be administered by the CEFC and will  support investment in new energy generation, storage and transmission infrastructure  such as this.

Snowy 2.0 is a key part of the Morrison Government’s plan to make renewables more  reliable, reduce volatility, bring down power prices for Australian families and  businesses, and provide other services critical to the security and stability of the NEM.

Snowy 2.0 will provide an additional 2,000 megawatts of fast-start, dispatchable energy  and provide 350,000 megawatt hours of large-scale storage, enough to power the  equivalent of 500,000 homes for over a week during peak demand.



Snowy Hydro Limited expects first power from Snowy 2.0 in 2025.

ENDS

Minister Birmingham’s office:                   Benn Ayre, 0428 342 325  Minister Taylor’s office:                               Liam O’Neil,  0428 113 617





