

GRAHAM PERRETT MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING  MEMBER FOR MORETON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS ON THE HOUR  FRIDAY, 20 NOVEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: South Australian Lockdown; Defence Force Inquiry Report.

DANICA DE GIORGIO, HOST: Joining me now live is Nationals MP David Gillespie and  Labor MP Graham Perrett. Hello to both of you. Thank you for joining me. I want to discuss  the war crimes report with you shortly. But let's start with that breaking news out of South  Australia. The lockdown now set to end early, not six days anymore, but in fact ending at  midnight Saturday. Graham, we'll start with you here. We know now that there was a lie, a  contact, a close contact of a person lied to contact tracers. The South Australian  Government is now blaming this person for locking down the state. Is it fair to blame this  individual for the decisions made by the government?

GRAHAM PERRETT, MEMBER FOR MORETON: Look, the government would have  relied on the advice of the Chief Medical Officer. And that was very clear from the process.  If someone lies, it is the weak link in all of these things. We had a similar situation on the  south side of Brisbane, where people didn't tell the truth immediately. That makes the  tracers job so much harder in terms of locking down and finding anyone that might be  involved. So the South Australian Government has relied on the advice of their Chief  Medical Officer, that's the appropriate thing to do. I'm not sure that there is a great benefit  in putting someone in the cross hairs media wise. I saw that on the south side of Brisbane  as well. But making sure that the advice of the health professionals is followed is first and  foremost in any decision of politicians hopefully.

DE GIORGIO: Well, David, I'll throw to you on this one because the South Australian  Government, the Police Commissioner, they clearly said in that press conference that they  were plunged into the six day lockdown because of this one lie. But is it fair to blame this  individual for their own decisions?

DAVID GILLESPIE, MEMBER FOR LYNE: Well, it's the facts and how they're interpreted.  If it was a casual customer that came through a pizza parlour and went out infected, that  has much greater ramifications because there's hundreds or potentially thousands of  customers. Whereas if the fellow or the lady was a close workmate with a known infected  case, well that has different ramifications. And from what I'm informed, it was put out that  this person was a casual customer, he came to a pizza bar and got it, ergo the authorities  think we might have hundreds of people who've picked it up by going through a hotbed of

Coronavirus, as opposed to close up, close working with a workmate who's infected,  different sort of formula. So that's why they appear to have changed their advice and going  back to a more, you know, level playing field and treating it as a close personal contact.

DE GIORGIO: Okay, and now we've got changes. This was meant to be a six day  lockdown. It's now ending tomorrow. Graham, was it a knee jerk reaction from the very  beginning? And I say that because we've now got border closures across the entire  country. We now have South Australia coming out of lockdown early. Has it just been  based on a wing and a prayer?

PERRETT: Well, Danica, I think this will be the new world that we live in where we do  overreact.

DE GIORGIO: Yeah, but do we close down every time? Do we close down every time  Graham?

PERRETT: Well, we need to take the medical advice. I keep coming back to that. And if  the advice is that there's a possibility for a wave and we've seen that in Europe what  happens with the second wave, we've seen in the United States, we've seen in  France,  Israel, this can easily get out of control if the government doesn't respond very  quickly. So I'll take my cue from Peter Malinauskas, the opposition leader in South  Australia someone that does know, he's on the ground, so to speak. And he said we'll  support the government in everything they do. So I'd take my lead from Peter. That was  the right approach to listen to the health advice and respond. And then we can change, but  better to have acted quickly and caught it, rather than saying, oh, gee, that got away from  us, didn't it? And we've seen what happens when you have a lockdown. Hardcore  lockdown like in Victoria.

GILLESPIE: That's exactly what I was trying to explain. The implication or the inference  they made was that there were potentially thousands of other community people; second,  third and fourth and fifth generation contacts that had the virus courtesy of a potential retail  outlet. But it now appears that it was maybe a one or two person connection rather than  hundreds and potentially thousands. So calm heads should prevail, you do need to  manage clusters. New South Wales, Tasmania managed shutting down a cluster. That's  what we're left now. So we don't need the huge statewide lockdown and close borders  because it's a different set of data that you're dealing with.

DE GIORGIO: David isn't New South Wales, though, an example of how you can shut  down a cluster without entirely going into a lockdown?

GILLESPIE: Yes, you take the words right out of my mouth Danica, you know...

DE GIORGIO: It brings me back to the point why do we shut down each time? Why are we  shutting down every time?

GILLESPIE: Well, the Victorian shut down there was widespread confirmed community  outbreak and they had to go to the extreme to shut it down, admittedly it went for a lot  longer than most people thought. But the end result is that it is under control in Victoria.  Everything is 2020 vision in hindsight. Sure, if they knew it was just another worker in a  pizza parlour that was infected, I don't think they would have recommended a shutdown.  So they have adjusted their management according to the facts. We can't shut down states

all the time, there will be outbreaks, they have to be managed. It has to be managed in a  sensible, reasonable, rational way. But we do rely on people telling the truth. So we've got  the right facts in front of us.

DE GIORGIO: All right, well be interesting to see how the South Australian public responds  to this. I want to move on now. We do have a lot to speak about, particularly, of course,  that report that was handed down yesterday into alleged Australian soldiers allegedly  committing war crimes in Afghanistan. Graham, firstly, to you on this, how important is it  that justice is served?

PERRETT: Look, it's important for so many reasons. Now, I should say I haven't read the  entire report. But even just going through it, it was chilling. And I can understand why Linda  Reynolds, the Defence Minister, and very well respected soldier, was sickened by it. It's  important for a lot of reasons Danica in terms of our standing in our community, in the  world, to be able to talk to other nations about if they have problems with human rights and  the like. We must be able to look those nations in the eye and we can only do that if we  have a clean sheet, if we have moral standing. And as Major General Brereton said, we  are all diminished by this report. Everyone that puts on a uniform, every Australian in a way  has been affected by the deeds of a few. I should stress that; a few. The majority of  serving ADF and people that previously put on a uniform, do the right thing, serve their  nation with honour, and it's only a few that have put a smear on the good name of  Australians.

DE GIORGIO: Yeah, absolutely. It certainly does make for a hard read. David, you know, I  guess really what happens next? And will there be international ramifications for Australia  over this?

GILLESPIE: Look, I don't think so if we do our due legal process, and I might say there are  allegations that have to be gone through a legal process now. They are very, very  disturbing and the people who have been named will get a fair judicial process. But I don't  want to pile on like some commentators and casting a stain over all the fine upstanding  service men and women who answered the call, put their lives on the line, and thousands  of them served in Afghanistan. I think it's an overreaction to possibly cancel 3000 service  medals for men and women who have done nothing wrong. You can't cast aspersions on  all those fine upstanding people. Look, I've never fought in a battle. But you see how  asymmetric and how conflicted the space was in Afghanistan. And these people, we asked  them as a nation to go in time and time and time again. And obviously, something's gone  wrong with the behaviour, it has to be answered. It has to be dealt with. But I don't want to  sweep up everyone and tar them with the same brush. We should allow servicemen and  women who received medals and recognition to keep their medals and deal with the  problem amongst those who are facing charges.

DE GIORGIO: David Gillespie and Graham Perrett, we have...

PERRETT: Definitely David but the decision of the Chief of the Air Force, Chief of the ADF,  Angus Campbell, about unit citations wasn't about individual people. It was about unit  citations. And I think Linda Reynolds as Defence Minister backed him 100% and I would  hope that every member of the Parliament, whatever the party would support the Defence  Minister and the Chief of the ADF in terms of making that decision.

DE GIORGIO: David, do you have a final comment on that?





GILLESPIE: Well look what I've read they were proposing 3000 medals were going to be  struck off with...

DE GIORGIO: And a squadron disbanded, essentially. Is that what you're saying? David?

GILLESPIE: Yeah.

DE GIORGIO: Yeah. Which was one of the findings of the report.

GILLESPIE: Deal with the legal process. We need to deal with what the judges said we  need to deal with. Let that process go through and we’ll react in an appropriate manner  once all the allegations are tested legally.

DE GIORGIO: Okay. Unfortunately, we do have to leave it there, Graham Perrett and  David Gillespie, thank you for joining me this afternoon.

GILLESPIE: Thanks.

PERRETT: Thanks very much, Danica.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MICHELLE HOWE 0413 606 446







