

STEPHEN JONES MP  SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES  MEMBER FOR WHITLAM





LABOR ASKS AUDITOR-GENERAL TO ASSESS PLAGUED EARLY  RELEASE SUPER SCHEME

Labor has asked the Auditor-General to investigate the Morrison Government’s troubled  robo-release early access scheme.

The scheme was set up in March to provide a last line of support to people hit by the  coronavirus.

But repeated scandals have shown that the Government has bungled the scheme from top  to bottom.

In May, the scheme was frozen when the AFP uncovered evidence that sophisticated  criminal were using the scheme to steal super from unsuspecting Australians.

The ABC’s 7:30 program told the story of Daniel Bunten, who had $9,000 stolen from him  through the Government’s scheme.

Hundreds of other Australians may have also faced the same issues. It is not clear how  many have been hit by super thieves - because the threat was not detected by the ATO,  but by an employee at a super fund.

In June, the ATO announced it would commence investigations into individuals who had  accessed the scheme on incorrect grounds.

Poor communication and misleading promotion of the scheme - including by Government  senators - may mean that some have accessed the scheme incorrectly.

This could leave well-intentioned individuals struggling with the costs of the coronavirus  pandemic facing fines of up to $12,600.

And in July, senior public servants conceded that the early release scheme may result in  Australians losing access to JobSeeker and other income support.

And now the Government has secretly extended the scheme through for three months with  no parliamentary review.

The Government had a choice at the start of this pandemic. It could have provided support



Australians needed - paid pandemic leave, wage support, and economic stimulus.

Instead, it chose to ask them to raid their retirement savings through a poorly-implemented  robo-release scheme.

This scheme has now also failed to meet the legislated purpose set by Parliament in  March.

The Auditor-General should take a close look and see how many more failures have  slipped under the radar.

THURSDAY, 6 AUGUST 2020

MEDIA CONTACT: AMY SMITH 0459 846 926









