Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Cyber Safety and the Arts, Sydney.

THE HON PAUL FLETCHER MP  Minister for Communications, Cyber Safety and the Arts

MEDIA RELEASE

18 September 2020

$5 million support for AAP Newswire

The Morrison Government will provide $5 million to the Australian Associated Press Limited  Newswire (AAP) under the Public Interest News Gathering (PING) program.

M



inister for Communications, Cyber Safety and the Arts, the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, said AAP is  critical to media diversity and has consistently demonstrated its commitment to accurate, fact-based  and independent journalism over its 85 year history, including a strong contribution to regional news.

“T



he COVID-19 pandemic has triggered unprecedented challenges for Australia’s regional media  sector, with severe declines in advertising revenue threatening the sustainability of many news  outlets,” Minister Fletcher said.

“T



he AAP Newswire provides services to more than 250 regional news mastheads across Australia,  covering public interest content on national, state and regional news. This allows regional mastheads  to concentrate on local news stories important for their communities.

“



Importantly, AAP also provides regional stories for national distribution so that regional issues and  voices are heard across the country.

“P



ublic interest journalism is important now, more than ever. This $5 million in funding will allow  AAP to continue delivering its important news service for communities Australia-wide.

“



It will also provide the Newswire more opportunities to secure additional private investment to  support its long-term sustainability.”

T



he PING Program is designed to support media organisations to maintain or increase their  production and distribution of public interest journalism in regional communities during the COVID-19 pandemic.

O



n 29 June 2020, Minister Fletcher announced that 107 regional broadcasters and publishers would  receive funding under the $50 million PING Program. Almost all grant agreements have been  executed and 93 successful grantees have received their first payment under the program.

T



he additional $5 million for AAP increases the Government’s investment in PING to $55 million.

T



he Government will prepare guidelines and enter into a funding agreement with AAP in accordance  with the Commonwealth Grants Rules and Guidelines 2017. Consistent with all PING grantees,  details of the agreement will be published on GrantConnect within 21 days of the agreement being  executed.

Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Cyber Safety and the Arts, Sydney.

M  ore information on relief for Australian media during COVID-19 is available on the Department of  Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Communications website.

Med  ia contact:  Imre Salusinszky | 0432 535 737 | imre.salusinszky@communications.gov.au

Rebecca Papillo | 0439 892 771 | Rebecca.Papillo@communications.gov.au

