





The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

The Hon. Peter Gutwein MP  Premier of Tasmania



Senator the Hon. Marise Payne  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women





JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

Saturday 7 November 2020

TASMANIA TO HELP MORE AUSTRALIANS RETURN HOME

The Australian and Tasmanian Governments have agreed to provide an additional 450 spaces in  quarantine facilities in Hobart hotels to help more Australians return home from abroad.

The Tasmanian Government has indicated it would increase its quarantine capacity spaces if it can  confirm additional hotel contracts, which will then make it possible for the Department of Foreign  Affairs and Trade, in partnership with Qantas, to arrange facilitated commercial flights to help  Australians return home.

Prime Minister Scott Morrison said the additional capacity was on top of the 6,315 weekly quarantine  spaces currently agreed to by states and territories.

“We’re working every option to help as many Australians return home as quickly as possible,” the Prime  Minister said.

“We thank Premier Gutwein and his government for their willingness to help us tackle the challenges  our friends and family are facing overseas amidst the pandemic.”

The Commonwealth is continuing to work with state and territory authorities to further increase the  quarantine capacity they can offer, as well as further facilitated flights.

Tasmanian Premier Peter Gutwein said Tasmania was pleased to support the national effort to help  Australians in need.

“Tasmania will never turn its back on its fellow Australians, and as I have said for some time, we stand  ready to play our role to help bring Australians home,” the Premier said.

“This is being achieved in a COVID-safe way for returning Australians and Tasmanians, with all inbound  passengers required to be tested prior to travel, and will need to return a negative COVID-19 test on or  after day 10 of their quarantine period before entering our community.

“This deal also means supporting our hotel industry which has seen a significant downturn in bookings  this year.”

Minister for Foreign Affairs Marise Payne said DFAT officials would work with Qantas to ensure the most  vulnerable Australians registered are given priority access to these flights.

“Our focus is on helping Australians who want and need to return,” Minister Payne said.

“More than 411,000 Australians have returned since 13 March and around 30,600 have been assisted by  the Australian Government including on 66 directly facilitated flights.”

The Government continues to assist vulnerable Australians overseas through consular assistance and  through the Hardship Program. Financial assistance is available to help cover the costs of flights where  other sources of finance have been exhausted.

More than 7,000 Australians of the 26,200 registered with DFAT on 18 September have returned since,  including around a quarter who were considered vulnerable.

We continue to encourage Australians trying to return to Australia from overseas to register with DFAT  through the nearest embassy or high commission or via Smartraveller.

The Government is underwriting the cost of the flights, and airfares will be available at commercial rates  to passengers, with loans through DFAT available to those who need assistance.

More details on the flights will be available on smartraveller.gov.au and qantas.com.

[ENDS]

Media Contacts:   Prime Minister’s Press office, (02) 6277 7744  Premier’s office: Chris Medhurst, 0410 600 400  Minister Payne’s office: David Wroe, 0429 531 143  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney



