JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN





OPENING REMARKS TO THE ACTU SUPER TRUSTEES FORUM



ONLINE



TUESDAY, 1 DECEMBER 2020



Thanks Scott [Connolly] for the chance to join you again and to speak to so many trustees and

to the broader movement about some of those challenges that you rightly identified in your

introduction. I want to acknowledge the First Nations' people of this country. I am coming to

you today from Ngunnawal and Ngambri land. I pay my respects to elders past, present and

emerging.



It's a good time to have this discussion. It's a big week for the economy. We'll get the National

Accounts tomorrow, and what almost every economist expects them to show is a bounce back

in terms of the quarterly economic growth number. That's welcome but entirely unsurprising

when you consider the extremely low base that was created by the June National Accounts,

which showed the biggest contraction that we've seen. It's worth remembering that when the

Treasurer and the Prime Minister get into all their usual self-congratulation and self-regard,

that even a good number tomorrow won't make up all of the lost ground from the recession,

and won't undo all of the longer-term damage done particularly in the labour market.



It's also worth reminding ourselves from the outset that what really matters here is not one

quarterly GDP number or another but how real people and real workers are faring in the real

economy, in real communities. When you take that view of it, a view that the Government is

more or less incapable of taking, then you appreciate that there will be some difficulty in the

economy for some time. We want to see it recover quickly and bounce back, but a true

measure of whether it has recovered quickly enough, or bounced back sufficiently, will be

whether or not people are able to provide for their loved ones in secure jobs with decent wages

and decent living standards.



I know that that's something that the ACTU and the broader movement understand, but

unfortunately I don't think it's something that the Government necessarily grasps. How do we

know this? Because as we've gone through what has been a horrific year broadly, but in the

economy as well, the Government's really had two choices: to try and work out how we can

make the economy stronger, more inclusive, and more sustainable after COVID than it was

before COVID; or to use what's going on now as an excuse to indulge some of their ideological

obsessions that they've had for years which have been a recipe for an economy which was

vulnerable coming into COVID and will be vulnerable coming out of COVID if they continue

down this path.



I don't need to remind all of you about their ideological obsessions with industrial relations and

winding back consumer protections in the financial system, but also with a special relevance

for us today, on superannuation. They're always looking for opportunities to diminish super.

They're always looking for opportunities to thieve retirement incomes from working people;

they always have and they always will because they don't believe in super. They are envious

of what Labor and unions and Paul Keating and the Australian people were able to create

together when it comes to compulsory super and they are always looking for a way to

undermine it. Every time they undermine it, it means less money for working people to retire

on. That's why collectively we're so passionate about it.



They're hoping that the COVID pandemic has turned Australians' heads and distracted them

sufficiently for the Government to do three things. There are other things in super that Stephen

Jones will cover off no doubt later in the week but for the purposes of starting the discussion

today in this forum, I think they're hoping that COVID has distracted people from at least three

things. Firstly, they set up this Retirement Income Review as a stalking horse for more cuts to

superannuation, particularly the Superannuation Guarantee’s legislated increases. Secondly,

they used it as an excuse to undermine retirement balances by playing around with early

access which has been devastating for so many workers when you consider the impact there.

And three, more recently, they've used it as an excuse to try and undermine your capacity to

stand up for your members by arguing against outcomes which are diabolical in terms of

retirement incomes for working people.



If you think about the Retirement Income Review a bit more specifically, it was inconvenient for

them in a couple of instances. The Retirement Income Review backed in compulsion, said it

was crucial, and said working people wouldn't be able to save sufficiently for their retirement

without compulsory super. It quantified some of the impact of early access. They think that

people taking out two lots of $10,000 might cost a young worker $70,000 in retirement. I know

some of your own numbers, and some of the ISA numbers think it's more like 100,000.

Regardless, that's a hell of a lot of money for a lot of working people in retirement. It shows

what kind of damage is being done by early access.



Unfortunately, the report gave the Government exactly what they were after when it came to

the Superannuation Guarantee and the legislated increase to 12 per cent because it repeated

what I think is rubbish about the superannuation-wages trade-off, which doesn't stand up to

scrutiny. I won't give you an avalanche of numbers today in this discussion, but think about

these facts: in the six years before this Government froze the Super Guarantee in 2014 wages

grew at more than 3 per cent, about 3.3 per cent, but in the six years since they froze the

Super Guarantee last in 2014, wages growth has been barely above 2 per cent - which you all

know is historically low. This Government has the worst wages outcomes on record. We know

from Mathias Cormann's burst of honesty that low wages growth is a "deliberate design

feature" of this Government's approach to the economy.



So when they say, if we freeze the Super Guarantee we'll see all this stronger wages growth,

we know that's rubbish. It didn't happen last time when they claimed it would, and it won't

happen this time. We know that there's a hole in their argument. They also expect people to

believe that the very same businesses who they say can't afford a Superannuation Guarantee

increase can afford to pay the equivalent amount in wages and that obviously doesn't square.

They also won't be able to claim at budget time in May next year simultaneously that the

economy is galloping again because they are economic geniuses, but that it's also hurting too

much for businesses to be able to afford half a percentage point in the Superannuation

Guarantee. You cannot mount both of those arguments at once.



I think we've got some pretty strong arguments in this big fight that's coming up. I feel like

we're well-placed. The facts are on our side and we've got the capacity to prosecute that

argument really well. It's going to be an enormous fight, but we're well armed for it. If and when

we win it, we can focus on what really matters: the positive role that super can play in

kickstarting and then turbocharging this recovery.





We've got an amazing opportunity here that not every country has. We've got these trillions of

dollars in workers' capital available to invest in good outcomes for the country and for

individual Australian workers and their retirement. It would be strange in the extreme if we

didn't take full advantage of that and focus on super's role in boosting jobs and wages in the

economy by boosting investment in the areas that desperately need it, whether it's transport

infrastructure, energy infrastructure, property, especially housing, and obviously health care. A

lot of funds are getting into that which is terrific not just the provision of services, but also

medical research and innovation. Clearly, the care economy is crying out for investment not

just from the private sector or from superannuation but from government as well.



That's why Anthony Albanese's budget reply was so important. We said that we should be

investing in childcare so that we can get more Australians, particularly women, participating in

work when those opportunities present themselves. We need to modernise our energy network

to get energy costs down which would be good for jobs and investment. We need to get that

social housing built and maintained. We need to make sure that we're getting more

apprenticeships and jobs out of all these hundreds of billions of dollars that the Government is

spending on defence procurement, rail procurement, and other infrastructure.



That seems to me to be a much better chance of growing the economy the right way after

COVID than it was before. It requires us to win some of these other arguments that have been

picked by the Government for ideological reasons, not economic reasons, which will be

detrimental to the economy in the long run. We need to win those arguments and refocus our

efforts on what we can do to make the economy stronger, more inclusive and more sustainable

so that more of the people that we represent can get a bigger slice of the action in the recovery

and beyond.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949



