

JIM CHALMERS MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR RANKIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS BREAKFAST  TUESDAY, 31 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Economic response to Coronavirus; Wage subsidies;  National debt; Assistance for Virgin; Labor’s constructive approach.

LISA MILLAR, ABC NEWS BREAKFAST: Good morning, Jim Chalmers.

JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: Good morning, Lisa.

MILLAR: And the bird sounds in the background as well. Just what we need on  breakfast television. Is Labor going to support -

CHALMERS: Live from my backyard Lisa with all the crows.

MILLAR: Yes. Is Labor going to support this?

CHALMERS: I would think so, Lisa. We have described this as a step in the right  direction. We welcome the Government's change of heart. It was only last week  they were saying this is a bad idea when we were saying it's a good idea. If  they've had a change of heart that's a good thing. No doubt there'll be issues to  be ironed out and we'll play our usual responsible, constructive and supportive  role, working through all of the details, making sure that this big program which  does have the capacity to do a lot of good in our community works as it should.

MILLAR: Do you want to make changes to it? I mean, we're talking about  something that's already half the nation's normal wage bill. It is quite  extraordinary.

CHALMERS: It's a massive amount of money, Lisa. Inevitably there will be issues  that arise as we work our way through the detail. I had a conversation with the  Treasurer about it last night after dinner. We'll have briefings from the Treasury  at some point, as will my colleagues, and we'll work our way through it. Some

of the issues identified already are that people who have been a casual in a  workplace for less than 12 months will miss out. There are issues about  reattaching people who might have already been dismissed by their employer.  There are all kinds of issues, but we'll work through that. What we've shown  throughout this process, Lisa, is that when we engage constructively, we  identify the gaps, the flaws and where there's a lack of urgency, and we work  our way through and try to fix it. That's the approach we'll take here.

MILLAR: I think what stunned people yesterday as well was when we were  talking about six million people, six million jobs. Do you think that this will  enable us not to see those double figure unemployment numbers that had  already been predicted, up to 13 per cent perhaps?

CHALMERS: It remains to be seen unfortunately. It will definitely do some good in  preventing some of those layoffs but how many layoffs it will prevent we don't  really know yet. This is an extraordinary economic challenge which flows from a  diabolical health crisis. It seems to get more serious by the day. We don't yet  know where unemployment will peak. Certainly, a lot of people have lost their  jobs already. One of the criticisms that we have made is that the Government  delaying bringing in something like this, while they criticized it because it came  from us and from the unions, has made life difficult for more people. We want to  get it in place as soon as possible. The payments don't flow until May. We want  to work through those details too. It is a good step and it's a step in the right  direction. We welcome it. We support the Government's change of heart. If  there are ways to make it better between now and when the Parliament sits,  then we'll try and do that.

MILLAR: What do you think about Virgin looking for a $1.4 billion loan rescue?

CHALMERS: No doubt the airlines, not just Virgin, are in a world of pain right  now. They've got some serious difficulties which flow from the various travel  bans and the serious slowdown in interstate travel as well. We're sympathetic  to their general calls for some more assistance. The first package obviously  wasn't enough. There was a subsequent package announced by the Deputy  Prime Minister. My colleague Catherine King has been in constant contact with  the airlines and with the Government to see what better deal we can get here.  What form that takes is something for the Government to determine. But again,  we want to see the airlines survive this difficult period. We'll play a constructive  role in suggesting where they could get more support from the Government.

MILLAR: Wherever we end up, with how many billions spent here, to try and  save the economy, someone's going to have to pay for it down the end. How is  that going to work out? How long is Australia going to be in debt?

CHALMERS: On the indications that we have now, Lisa, I think we're headed for

a generation of debt unfortunately. The thing that people probably don't  perfectly appreciate is that debt had already more than doubled over the last six  or seven years. So we already had an issue with it in our Budget. Now clearly  that's going to skyrocket. But the most pressing priority is that we support  workers, businesses, communities, families and pensioners through this difficult  period. That will come with a big price tag, already something like $213 or $214  billion in direct stimulus. That's appropriate. We've been very supportive of that.  One of the consequences of this is that we will be saddled as a nation with a  generation of debt. It might be something like a trillion dollars by the time the  Government's finished.

MILLAR: So, your own young children will be well into their adulthood before we  can say that was the end of that period of time?

CHALMERS: It remains to be seen, Lisa, but we're already heading up towards  $800 billion worth of gross debt. It's conceivable that that heads north from  here, particularly with an extra $130 billion spent yesterday. The Government  will tally it all up in their Budget. The point that I'm making is that Australians do  need to be ready for a long period where the Federal Budget is in debt and it  will take a long time to pay that off. Our highest priority is to support people  through here. You mentioned the children of this country. It's very important  that we support their parents and their grandparents through this difficult time,  and that we try and prevent an even deeper, more horrific downturn in the  economy. That's what we're in the kart for. That's why we've been so  supportive of what the Government's been putting forward.

MILLAR: Anyone privately aggrieved within the Labor Party that you are offering  this kind of support in comparison to what happened during the GFC? I know  Josh Frydenberg last night was asked on 7.30 whether perhaps he now had  some sympathy for the big decisions that had faced the Labor Government  then.

CHALMERS: We're certainly being far more responsible during this period than  the Liberals and Nationals were during the GFC. I think that's self-evident. It's  not the most important issue right now but I think in time people will realise that  more than a decade of the Liberals and Nationals rubbish about what  Australians achieved together under Rudd and Swan during the Global  Financial Crisis was just that, it was rubbish all along. That's what we're  discovering now. We should have had enough of the wrong-headed criticism of  what Australia achieved then. Australia achieved a remarkable thing then,  avoiding recession when so many other countries that we compare ourselves to  did not. That was a remarkably successful period for Australia. What we want to  see now, having passed the test 10, 11 or 12 years ago, we want Australia to  pass the test under this Government now.



MILLAR: Jim Chalmers, thank you.

CHALMERS: Thank you, Lisa.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MEGAN LANE 0424 437 949





