

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY  DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  TUESDAY, 18 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: Senate Covid Committee hearings into the Ruby Princess today.

JOURNALIST: Big day today with Border Force appearing before the COVID committee.  What are you hoping to find from Michael Outram and his officers?

KRISTINA KENEALLY, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE AND SHADOW  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: What Commissioner Walker's report lays bare is that,  well, let's call a spade a shovel. The Prime Minister flat out lied on the 15th of March when  he said arriving cruise ships would be under the direct command of Australian Border  Force. What Commissioner Walker's report lays bare is that, in fact, Australian Border  Force had no power or authority to stop the one boat that mattered. Here we have an  agency, the Australian Border Force, tasked to manage the borders, in the middle of a  global pandemic, the Prime Minister puts them in charge but gives them no power, no  authority, to stop the one boat that mattered. We're going to be talking to Australian Border  Force today about their roles and responsibilities on board that ship, the actions that they  took and the things they were unable to do to stop the Ruby Princess from disembarking  her passengers and spreading coronavirus across Australia.

Now I want to be clear - Commissioner Walker's report rightly lays blame on New South  Wales Health and Premier Gladys Berejiklian has rightly apologised. But Commissioner  Walker's report also makes clear that Federal Agriculture officials failed to do Human  Health Inspection reports, failed to do Traveller with Illness Checklists; did not do the  things they were required to do by the National Protocol in managing coronavirus aboard  cruise ships. Now you have to ask if Federal Agriculture officials had done their job  onboard the Ruby princess that morning, would we have had coronavirus in the first wave  spread so significantly across Australia? The other thing we need to get to the bottom of is  who actually gave permission for people to leave the Ruby Princess? We know that  passengers started disembarking between 6.30am and 7am. We don't know who actually  gave that permission. Commissioner Walker was unable to get to the bottom of that  because Scott Morrison stopped Federal officials from Agriculture and Border Force from  appearing before the Special Commission of Inquiry. Now, we don't know who gave that  permission; we'll have the two agencies in front of us today. This is an opportunity for them  to explain to the Australian people, to the Australian Parliament, their roles and



responsibilities for the Ruby Princess, the things that they failed to do, and the things that  they did and where the responsibility lies at a Federal level for our borders. I mean, come  on, this is a Federal Government that has prided itself in its ability to stop the boats. They  failed to stop the one vote that mattered and today, Agriculture and Australian Border  Force can explain how that mistake occurred.

JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister, NSW Health, Gladys Berejiklian see this is an open  and shut case; you obviously don't. What would you like to see done?

KENEALLY: We need to clean up the spaghetti bowl of arrangements, the mess of human  biosecurity management at our borders. The Australian Government should be securing  our borders but the Ruby Princess shows is that a boat can arrive, riddled with  coronavirus, passengers can just get off and scatter across the country. Commissioner  Walker was scathing about the fact that people were able to get off a cruise ship in a global  pandemic and scatter across Australia without quarantine arrangements, without proper  testing. Australians should be able to trust their government with their health; indeed with  their very lives. What we know is that the Ruby Princess arrived; proper border control  wasn't in place. Border control and quarantine are the responsibility of the Commonwealth  Government. They need to explain their mistakes. They didn't do it in front of  Commissioner Walker; they need to do it in the Parliament today.

JOURNALIST: Just one final one - so you'd like to see an overhaul of Australia's border  measures. What does that look like under Labor Government?

KENEALLY: First of all, let's get out on the table what has actually happened here. We  know that Agriculture made significant mistakes. They didn't do the things they were  required to do at our borders. One has to ask what is Agriculture even doing in relation to  border security? We have an agency called the Australian Border Force. Now for some  reason, this Government in 2015 decided not to give Australian Border Force responsibility  for human biosecurity at our borders. You've got to ask what is going on when you have  Health, Agriculture and Border Force and state government agencies all involved with the  management of our borders? We need a simpler, more streamlined process; that's what  Commissioner Walker recommends, that's what we would support the Government in  implementing. Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110









