RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2SM MARCUS PAUL IN THE MORNING

WEDNESDAY, 9 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Anthony Albanese’s vision statement on the regions.



MARCUS PAUL, HOST: Coffs Harbour Federal Labor will deliver their seventh vision

statement which will be importantly focusing on regional Australia, we're in Sydney

obviously, but this program also going out to regional New South Wales. Anthony

Albanese and also the Deputy Leader of the Opposition Richard Marles will be addressing

the nation in which they will hopefully outline a plan that will ensure that Australia comes

out of COVID 19 and let's hope fingers crossed a little unlike what's been going on in aged

care. There's been no real recognition of the work Labor have done in their suggestions on

that but I hope they'll take some of this on board. It's a very good speech I've read it, all the

information that Albo is going to present today but I'm very happy to say that Richard

Marles is on the program. Thank you for your time Richard.



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Good

morning Marcus. How are you?



PAUL: Yeah I’m really, well just, you'll be there electronically, you're stuck in Victoria aren’t

you?



MARLES: I am, well I'm stuck in regional Australia, I live in Geelong-



PAUL: Yes of course, yeah-



MARLES: And yes sadly with what's going on in Victoria at the moment, the way in which

we make our presence felt around the country is via video link these days-



PAUL: Yeah that’s alright that still works.



MARLES: It’s a brave new world but we're getting used to it.



PAUL: No it works. And of course a big announcement today by your party. The seventh

vision statement and I mentioned importantly there will be discussions on, you know,

regional Australia creating jobs in areas that let's face it have been decimated by the

current pandemic, Richard.



MARLES: I mean that's right, but I think what's happened with COVID-19 is it has opened

our eyes to a whole lot of opportunities that exist for regional Australia which I think and

Anthony thinks, when we look into the recovery from COVID and what will be a period

where I think there'll be probably the biggest reimagining of Australia in our lifetime. I think,

there is a real opportunity for us to see a much bigger future for regional Australia and

what we're talking about before is an example of it. So many more people now are working

remotely they're not having to commute in and out of the capitals they're able to do, well

they're being forced to do their work from home but that in turn opens the prospect that in

fact a whole lot of work that we used to associate with only being able to be done in CBDs

can actually be done from regional Australia and people can do that work whilst enjoying

all the benefits of living in regional Australia which are considerable.  And so I think that

this is a critical moment or juncture really in Australia's history to try and come up with a

vision for how coming out of COVID we can have a much grander view of the role that

regional Australia can play in the nation.



PAUL: Well I mean we've had 30 odd years, three decades of continuous economic

growth and sadly that's, well not all been wiped out, but look we are facing some

challenging times we are officially as we know now in a recession. So the suggestion from

Labor is that the regions can help in a big way.



MARLES: Definitely, and I think you know if you take a bigger view you know that since

Federation we've built some fantastic cities in this country. But in fact we've become much

more urbanised country; a high proportion of our population live in those cities. And I think

that if Australia's going to reach its full potential  this century needs to be about the

development of regional Australia and the coronavirus has put into sharp focus the

opportunities that can come from that but also the need really from the point of view of the

country that we do actually invest in our regions if we're going to reach our full potential as

a nation. So I said earlier there is the opportunity to be working more remotely from home

which opens up a whole lot of opportunities in regional Australia. But one of the

preconditions to making this work and it's a point that Anthony is going to make in his

speech today is that some of the critical pieces of infrastructure which enable regional

Australia need to be built upon and invested in. Things like roads and rail and links to city

but also things like regional universities.



PAUL: Yes



MARLES:  I mean regional universities are at the heart of great regional cities. You look at

Newcastle Uni, Wollongong Uni, James Cook Uni in Townsville. You know behind great

regional cities in this country now you will find really significant regional universities and

right now they're being cut back. Right now, we're seeing significant job losses in those

universities, they are being underfunded dramatically so you know investing in in those

universities, which if you look around the world, you know regions are built on you know

lots of university towns. We need to be thinking about that here as well. So being mindful

of what are the building blocks for regional Australia and making sure that we're properly

investing in them is critical if we're going to realise this future.



PAUL: And when you look at, you mentioned the stats. I mean a million already

unemployed a further one and a half a million Australians are underemployed, if you like

and we unfortunately expect at least another 400,000 to join them on dole queues by

Christmas with the scaling back of JobKeeper and JobSeeker. But this stat really struck

me. There are currently 28 people living in regional areas relying on unemployment

payments for every vacancy.



MARLES: Yeah and that stat is astounding. I mean, there's two sides to it; it speaks to the

pain that's being experienced in regional Australia right now in terms of the level of

unemployment. But what it also speaks to, if we're looking optimistically is the opportunity

for businesses in regional Australia because there is a huge human resource that is there

ready and willing to work-



PAUL: Yes.



MARLES: But it does require businesses to be thinking outside of the box a bit and to see

regional Australia as an opportunity for them. But that's only going to happen if

governments are properly investing in that infrastructure which enables business to be

done from regional Australia. So roads, rail but then the you mention universities-



PAUL: Yes



MARLES: But then something like you know the NBN. I mean, the NBN is fundamental to

enabling-



PAUL: It's got to work first, Richard.



MARLES: It has got to work. And you know, it hasn't been working.



PAUL: Not everywhere, no.



MARLES: But NBN, when it was first was rolled out under the Rudd and Gillard

Governments, it was first conceived in that time, was really seen as one of the great keys

that unlock the potential of regional Australia because it would enable people to do a whole

lot of businesses from regional Australia which previously couldn't be done. Well that

vision, that hope really has not been fulfilled. And again Anthony speaks about that in his

speech today, that that is a central piece of the infrastructure to allowing business to

flourish in regional Australia.



PAUL: All right well, it's a good place to be doing it today, launching the seventh vision

statement. Importantly as we say focusing on regional Australia in particular. It will happen

in Coffs Harbour. Anthony will be there. You'll be dialling in via some sort of wonder of

technology- if the NBN works!



MARLES: Hopefully.



PAUL: All right mate. Thank you so much for your time, we'll catch up soon.





MARLES: Thanks Marcus.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363



