

THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  MINISTER FOR TRADE, TOURISM AMD INVESTMENT

THE HON SUSSAN LEY MP  MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT



MEDIA RELEASE

Friday 13 March 2020

FREE ENTRY TO COMMONWEALTH NATIONAL PARKS  The Australian Government has announced that visitors will be able to access iconic Commonwealth  national parks for free, with entry fees waived for Uluru-Kata Tjuta, Kakadu and Booderee National Parks  from 16 March to 31 December 2020.

These parks are some of Australia’s national treasures where visitors can experience spectacular wildlife  and vast landscapes ranging from white sand beaches, to wetlands and the red centre.

Federal Tourism Minister Simon Birmingham said this initial initiative under the Government’s $1 billion  Coronavirus Regional and Community Fund, was aimed at supporting local tourism operators and getting  more tourists into these regions.

“Tourism is the lifeblood of the communities in and surrounding these national parks, and it’s absolutely  critical that we help to get people back visiting these areas that rely on tourism,” Minister Birmingham  said.

“This is just the start of targeted initiatives that we will be backing under this Regional and Community  Fund to drive visitation into our tourism regions and support tourism businesses that have been hit the  hardest as a result of the coronavirus.”

Minister for the Environment Sussan Ley said the decision sent an important message of support to  businesses and to tourists.

“The Morrison government is helping small businesses in challenging times but this is also a reminder for  people to do the same by planning a winter escape to some of these amazing places.”

Tourism is a key driver of regional economies and these national parks are anchor destinations for their  regions.

Combined, they welcome more than 820,000 visitors annually and support the visitor economy in  surrounding towns and communities through flow-on benefits of visitation to the accommodation,  hospitality and tourism sectors.

Under the lease arrangements for these national parks which are jointly managed by the Director of  National Parks with their Traditional Owners, a percentage of revenue generated from the sale of park  entry fees is returned to traditional owners. The Australian Government will continue to pay the lease  payments to the park’s Traditional Owners.

This announcement is further to the Australian Government’s broader range of tourism stimulus  measures, including the Holiday Here this Year campaign, which encourages Australians to holiday  domestically.

We are encouraging Australians to make the most of this opportunity to have free entry into some our  nation’s most spectacular national parks and to start planning their next holiday.

For more information on these national parks visit www.parksaustralia.gov.au

Minister Birmingham’s office:                    Benn Ayre  0428 342 325  Minister Ley’s office:                                        John Brady 0427 867 638



