

THE HON SUSSAN LEY MP  MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT

THE HON WARREN ENTSCH MP  SPECIAL ENVOY FOR THE GREAT BARRIER REEF  MEDIA RELEASE  Wednesday, 16 December 2020

BOOST FOR GREAT BARRIER REEF TOURISM OPERATORS

With the hope of domestic tourism returning to the Great Barrier Reef, tourism operators, businesses,  and individuals with a permit to operate in Reef’s Marine Park will get further relief from the extension  of Commonwealth Government fee waivers.

Regulations have been amended to deliver the $6 million relief measure to operators, with the waiving  of the Environmental Management Charge, normally associated with most commercial activities on the  Reef until 30 June 2021.

Environment Minister Sussan Ley said the six-month extension, initially announced in the October  Federal Budget, was among a range of measures for a reef economy that has been severely impacted by  the COVID-19 pandemic.

“We are helping to reduce the costs of visiting the Reef at a time when we hope to see some signs of  recovery for Reef tourism,” Minister Ley said.

“Through the COVID Relief fund, we have also invested $8.2 million in the Reef economy, including $3.2  million to engage tourism operators in reef monitoring and conservation work, and $5 million for  Townsville’s Reef HQ.

“The marine tourism industry is a key partner in Reef protection and management, playing an important  role in the protection of the world’s largest Reef ecosystem.

“They have been hit hard by COVID’s impacts and while we are hopefully seeing some signs of recovery  there will be a long road ahead.  Special Envoy for the Great Barrier Reef Warren Entsch said that the Morrison Government was  committed to supporting the Reef and the Reef economy.

“This is a time for Australians to take the time to visit the Reef, it is an amazing natural wonder and, as  travel restrictions ease, it is an opportunity to experience its beauty and support local businesses,” the  Special Envoy said.

“We are delivering on a budget commitment that will provide relief for the industry at a time when it is  very much needed.

“Prior to COVID-19, the Great Barrier Reef region contributed $6.4 billion to the Australian economy and  supported an estimated 64,000 jobs and we can all play a part in helping it to recover and grow.”

The environmental management charge is associated with most commercial facilities and activities,  including tourism operations, non-tourist charter operations, operating under a permit issued by the  Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority.

For most tourism operations, Marine Park visitors participating in a tourist activity are liable to pay the  charge to the permit holder, who then remits the charge to the Authority.

This extended waiver will cost the Australian Government $6 million over the 2020-21 and 2021-22  financial years, and is one of several measures in place for the Reef tourism industry.

Application and assessment fees for permits to operate in the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park are also  currently waived until the end of June 2021, providing additional support for businesses.

ENDS

Environment Minister’s office:   John Brady 0427 867 638  Ben Flores 0448 463 094  Special Envoy’s office:  Adam Davies 0417 010 702

