



The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT HOUSE, ACT  THURSDAY 13 FEBRUARY 2020



EO&E…

PRIME MINISTER: Thank you. I’m joined of course, by the Minister for Health and the Chief Medical Officer  Dr Brendan Murphy, I thank you again, Brendan and all the senior medical officers, chief medical officers,  of our states and territories, who have also met today and are providing very important advice to the  government in relation to the coronavirus.

The advice that we received this afternoon at the National Security Committee from that panel of the  chief medical officers is that Australia's arrangements to protect Australians from coronavirus here in  Australia are working, they're effective, they're doing the job. And it's important that we ensure that that  continues to be the case. And that's why this afternoon we've agreed to accept the recommendations  that have been provided to us to maintain the ban and the entry restriction on foreign nationals who have  recently been in mainland China for a further week to protect Australians from the risk of coronavirus. So  this is something we will continue to review on a weekly basis and consider all the medical evidence that  has come forth. There's an enormous amount of work that is taking place between Australia and many  other nations who are working together to ensure we have the best information available to us to make  the best possible decisions.

This decision was made following the receipt of the expert medical advice and we did not take this decision  lightly. We are very mindful also of the disruption and economic impacts of these arrangements. But I  note Australia is one of 58 countries that has introduced some form of travel restrictions. And I just want  to assure all Australians that we are doing everything we can to keep Australians safe at this time and to  ensure that we are mitigating everything that is possible to address any of the threats. I'm going to ask  the Chief Medical Officer and the Minister for Health to go through some other matters, but I want to  make a couple of other points.

I'm very grateful for the constructive approach that the Chinese authorities have been participating with  Australia. I'm very appreciative of the role of their embassy here also in Canberra and I’d like to thank also  the Chinese Australian community for the way they've been engaging, and respecting the quarantine  arrangements and the self isolation. The Chinese Australian community has been absolutely fantastic. And  I think it's very important that all Australians reach out and support them at this time in particular, as we

go into the weekend, I’d encourage you to go and support businesses. Particularly those Chinese  Australian businesses, and to provide that support because they really have been doing a tremendous job  under what have been very stressful and trying circumstances for that community. They are such an  integral part of Australian life and it's important at this difficult time, particularly for the Chinese Australian  community, that all Australians are putting their arms around them and supporting them in every way  they can. I also want to ensure that we keep our thoughts also on the people in China as well. This is a  very devastating impact in China and particularly in Hubei province and in Wuhan where the impacts are  very significant. Australia and China, we are bound by ties of family and commerce, and education and so  many things. And this disruption happened at a very important time of the year in China around Lunar  New Year. But we know the Chinese people are incredibly resilient, and we know they'll bounce back and  we will bounce back together in our relationship with China as we get through this very difficult time and  we make decisions consultatively and together and listening to each other and doing what we can to help  each other as we manage our way through what has been a difficult period. But the key thing is, is that  the decisions the government has taken, the way we’ve gone about that, how we’ve gathered the advice,  made decisions, is keeping Australian safe when it comes to coronavirus.

And I particularly thank the Minister for Health, as well as the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Minister  for Home Affairs, the arrangements both up in Howard Springs in the Northern Territory as well as on  Christmas Island, have been working very effectively. I thank particularly the Chief Minister of the  Northern Territory, who I just spoke to a few moments ago, to advise him of this decision as I’ve also  sought to make contact with all the other Premiers and Chief Ministers, those arrangements are working  very well and I leave it to the Minister for Health and the Chief Medical Officer to take you through a few  more of those details.

THE HON. GREG HUNT MP, MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks very much Prime Minister and to Dr Murphy,  as the Prime Minister says our approach to the coronavirus is keeping Australians safe. Two sets of figures  underline this, firstly and sadly, overnight, we have seen some very significant growth in the figures,  particularly out of Hubei Province. Now over 60,000 people are confirmed as having coronavirus. The vast  majority are in Hubei and very sadly, the number of those who have passed away has increased to 1,357.  Against that background, in Australia, we remain at a figure of only 15 people who have been confirmed  with coronavirus. Now we have 5 that have formally cleared the virus and I understand there’s a number  of others are increasingly [inaudible]. So that means that the measures that we have taken are protecting  Australians. But the advice from the Chief Medical Officer and the chief health and medical officers around  the country was to continue those measures for the time being. So we accept that advice. I will also note  that the latest advice that I have out of Christmas Island and Howard Springs is that there are no confirmed  cases in either of those facilities. In Howard Springs, where there is ongoing testing, a further four cases  have been tested and cleared. And this remains good news and it says that the advice of the medical  officers is keeping Australians safe and the decisions that we’re taking are assisting in that. Brendan?

DR. BRENDAN MURPHY, CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER: Thanks Prime Minister and Minister. So as the Prime  Minister and Minister have said, we've recommended the continuation of the travel ban for an additional  week at this time. As Minister Hunt said, there's been significant growth in Hubei, in other provinces of  China there has been slower growth and perhaps not at the same rate that we saw earlier, but still growth.  That is of concern because there are still evidence of community transmission in other provinces and  that's the reason we would like to maintain the travel ban at the moment. Other countries in Asia have  had some growth in cases, particularly Thailand, Japan, noting the particular case of the cruise ship in  Japan, which is of course, [inaudible] there. But we believe that those larger numbers in some countries  are also well controlled at this time. Our major focus is on what is happening in China. As we've said on

many occasions, Hubei Province is well locked down despite the very significant growth in cases there.  But our concern is to make sure that in those other provinces of China, the Chinese are getting on top of  the outbreaks, which are much smaller, and hopefully they will be able to contain them and at that time  hopefully we'll be able to review the travel bans. As the Minister and Prime Minister have also said,  perhaps the best news is that we’ve had no further cases in Australia, all of the 15 cases that are here,  have had some association with the Hubei Province or from someone who's come from that province. We  haven't had anyone who's come from China, since the travel ban was introduced, develop the disease.  And so we still have, obviously, our citizens and permanent residents coming here and they have behaved  impeccably with self-isolation and I congratulate them on that. So I think we’ll leave it there thank you.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given there’s sort of uncertainty about how long these bans may continue,  have you discussed at a sort of leadership or Cabinet level or NSC level, the possibility of some sort of  financial assistance that directly affected sectors like the universities, is that something that you can give  [inaudible]?

PRIME MINISTER: We’re working very closely together with the university sector and also the secondary  school sector. Because there was a small number of those who were affected by this. And the Education  Minister has been in pretty much constant contact. On the universities issue it is still some four to six  weeks before we’ll reach a period of time where that can really start to impact on the year and they’ve  put in place a number of measures, online learning and these types of things that can address that now.  But as I’m sure, as Dr. Murphy will tell you, that the challenge in managing this is you don't know what  you don't know, and at the moment there is a lot that is still unknown about this virus, we have seen its  transmission outside of Hubei, as Dr Murphy said, not accelerate as greatly as it was. And that's welcome.  And that the level of severity outside of Hubei is certainly different to what you've seen inside of Hubei.  And we have not had any cases in Australia that have come from mainland China. Now since the start of  the travel ban there’d be in excess of 25,000 people who would have arrived over that period of time,  Australian nationals and so on who are returning. And that is welcome news. So we we are taking a  cautious approach, but a very mindful approach, mindful that these bans do have an impact on a number  of sectors. And in some sectors like tourism it's a double blow because of the impact because of the  bushfires. And as we know, that bushfires didn’t only impact the directly affected areas by those bushfires  and the tourism sector. They did affect the country more broadly. So we're very mindful of that. This is  why we are on a weekly rotation on the review of this. And we are looking at all options that are available  to us to mitigate the impact where possible.

JOURNALIST:  Prime Minister how long can the Australian economy really sustain this travel ban. Given  that Chinese tourists alone, you've just referenced the tourism industry, bring in, there’s about 120,000  that come every month and spend, they’re the highest spending tourists that come to Australia. So how  long is it realistic that this lasts and will you get on the phone to President Xi Jinping to express you know,  Australia’s regret for this crisis occurring in China right now?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, two points. The first one is, our first responsibility, my first responsibility is the  health and wellbeing of the Australian people, particularly here and where Australians have found  themselves isolated, vulnerable and impacted we have undertaken measures that would assist them.  Now, I don't just mean the assisted departures of what were effectively 3 flights with Australians also on  the Air New Zealand flight, but also support for those currently on cruise ships and the additional  assistance we're putting in, we’re looking to get a medical officer up to there. But also we have a mental  health hotline, and providing what support we can through consular support to those Australians who  find themselves in this situation. But let’s make no mistake, my job is to protect the health of Australians

right now. That is the government's top priority. And we are very mindful of the economic impacts of this.  But the threat that could otherwise present to the health of Australians is of a level that has led us to take  these decisions on the best expert medical advice. So we will constantly continue to monitor this very,  very closely. And as I said to Phil, mitigate the impact on the economy where we can with sensible  measures that don't put the health of Australians at risk. We've just been in contact with the Chinese  embassy just now to convey this latest decision, and as I said in my opening comments, we're seeking to  support China in any and every way we can as they deal with this crisis. This is a terrible crisis for them to  manage. And I know that with so many Australians who have Chinese heritage, they will be concerned  about family members back in China. And so our message, the only message I have for China is one of  empathy, and one of support.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you said you’re considering sensible measures to mitigate the impact. Could  that include financial assistance to the university, tourism, or hospitality sectors?

PRIME MINISTER: No, they’re not measures currently before us and nor are they measures that are  currently being sought. But we are approaching this the same way we have the entire time. And you deal  with the information that's in front of you. You deal with it in a very measured way. And you take the  steps that you believe are necessary based on the best advice and you keep consulting, you keep listening,  you keep understanding what the impacts are on the ground and you take your best measures to be able  to address those.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister are you considering expanding this travel ban beyond China, the Philippines  we understand has now banned people coming from Taiwan and Hong Kong. Would Australia look at a  similar measure? Given that’s [inaudible]?

PRIME MINISTER: We haven’t made that decision.

JOURNALIST: Professor Murphy, can I ask you, the Diamond Princess, each morning we wake and it seems  to be more people being carted off that ship with coronavirus, from a microbiological point of view, is  there a possibility that thing is acting now as an incubator that people may be better off that ship than on  it?



DR. MURPHY: So it's a good question, I think at the moment it, ships are known as incredible places where  infectious diseases can be transmitted. At the moment the period of time the quarantine has been in  place is still consistent with everyone having been infected before the quarantine was put in place. But if  further cases continue to come you'd have to wonder about the quarantining. So we're sending a public  health expert hopefully in the next few days to go there to look at the issues and to provide advice to us  in terms of the Australians there.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister on another matter?

PRIME MINISTER: I just, I just want to make sure that while we  have the Chief Medical Officer here you  address any questions you’d like to him.

JOURNALIST: Just to follow up on my question sorry Prime Minister, you said haven't made a decision  about extending the travel ban to other countries. Are you considering that though, is that actively under  consideration?

PRIME MINISTER: Well there's no recommendation, of course, to that.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what was the reaction of the Chinese embassy with regards to the news  that the ban was being extended, they expressed some unhappiness last week with regards to that?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I wasn't on that call personally, that that has been done through the Department  of Foreign Affairs and Trade so, but my understanding is that they would understand these decisions. And  again, that's why I stress my appreciation for the way that China and Australia are working together on  this. China is dealing with countries all around the world. I can only imagine that task, that while they’re  dealing with what is a very real and serious domestic crisis of their own. So we simply want to support as  as best we can, but I'm sure they understand that the Australian Government, like all others, will be taking  decisions in their best interests and their top priority is the health and well-being of their own citizens.

JOURNALIST: Indonesia still hasn't confirmed any cases, and there was a man who passed through Bali  and was diagnosed with the virus back in China. Indonesia insists that he didn't contract it while in the  country. Are you satisfied with the way that that's being handled?

DR. MURPHY: So the Indonesians are conducting tests, and they're expanding the testing at the moment.  My reading of that person who went through Bali was it's consistent with that infection being being picked  up in China. So that, obviously we're watching the situation in Indonesia, but they are doing a lot of a lot  of testing and they're expanding it at the moment.

PRIME MINISTER: We’ve got a lot of cooperation between Indonesia and Australia on these issues. It was  it was one of the many issues that I discussed with the President earlier this week. OK. I’m going to let,  give Brendan a leave pass, I’m sure the other matter you wish to ask me about are not ones he can assist  you with.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the issue, are you concerned about the development recently that  Anthony Albanese was being called to be a witness in the criminal prosecution case against, several former  New South Wales Labor powerbrokers?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, all I can really given the nature of this matter, and that is before the courts, is that  it's obviously a very serious matter that Mr Albanese has been called before, to appear as a witness on  this case. And witnesses will go before this court process and they'll have to answer questions about what,  what information they have about these very serious cases that have been considered, involving these  matters.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can I just go back to Lanai’s question about the impact on the tourism sector,  the Australian Tourism Council wrote to you earlier this week seeking some financial support, are you  open to considering that request?

PRIME MINISTER: Well it's early on in terms of understanding of the longer term impact. Our first  response is really to put the energy in behind the campaigns that we're running, particularly domestically.  And that is the first line of defence in terms of addressing the demand deficit that will come from the fall  in the number of visitors that will be coming from China. So that's the first line of response. And given  we'd already moved in that area in relation to the bushfires, we can add additional effort to that. And so  the Tourism Minister is pursuing that with Tourism Australia and working closely with the states and the  territories. There have been a number of issues that have been raised also by colleagues, this week as

over the course of the parliamentary sitting weeks, particularly those members like Warren Entsch up  there in northern Queensland and others who are seeing the impact in their own communities. And it's  not just the tourism industry up there, is the seafood industry as well. There’ll be those impacts in other  parts of the country. So when I say that we're looking at ways to mitigate the impacts of these on the  ground, well, we're open to all the options that are there to do that effectively and to do that responsibly  and that there is nothing more I can do that at this point.

JOURNALIST: But no direct financial support to the states?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I just said there's nothing further for me to add to that at this point.

JOURNALIST:  Does the Government have modelling on the economic impacts, including on those specific  industries like tourism and education if this crisis continues in the weeks and months ahead?

PRIME MINISTER: The Treasury has been doing a lot of work. Obviously, with the Treasurer and the  Treasurer has written to all the state and territory Treasurers about that work, I think to the Premier’s  directly about that work that’s being done. I think we have to understand that it's still very early in this  virus and a lot of the impacts are still unknown and so while you would have any number of scenarios that  could potentially play out, it's important at this stage, I think, not to get ahead of ourselves, to be taking  the steps that we need to take, firstly to deal with the health and wellbeing of Australians, and then look  at what the broader economic impacts are and the things we can do to mitigate some of those things,  sensibly, and consistent with the health advice. But beyond that, looking to, on the other side, how you  can rebuild.

Now, as I think I told you in this room on, one of the previous press conferences, I think we had an 11 per  cent fall in the national visitor arrivals during the previous SARS and MERS cases, and that was followed  up in one quarter with a 16 per cent increase afterwards. And so it is different in that there is the ability  for this to ramp up on the other side. And over the course of a year, then you can have potentially some  spreading out of those impacts. But I don't for a second discount or underestimate what the real pain and  impact of that is right now, and in Australia, this is why I say particularly to our Chinese Australian  community, this weekend, get out and about there. And there's a domestic economic response that all  Australians can make in where they go and what they do, and I want to encourage them in doing that.  And I think that’ll be a good thing.

JOURNALIST: As you did allude to Prime Minister, the Treasurer has asked his department to put together  modelling on the economic impact of coronavirus, have you seen that yet? Has that been put before you  in NSC or Cabinet? Has that been presented, has it been finalised?

PRIME MINISTER: Not in the final stage.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Audit office has just given evidence to the audit committee suggesting  that because the grant, the sports grant process took so long, that 43 per cent of the projects that received  funding were ineligible. You've defended the administration of the program by saying that all projects that  received funding were eligible.

PRIME MINISTER: I was quoting the Auditor-General.

JOURNALIST: So the Audit Office has just said that that is, that 43 per cent of projects were in fact  ineligible.

PRIME MINISTER: I haven't seen evidence, I haven't seen that statement. So I will review that. Thank you  very much.

[END]

Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

Press Office of the Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Prime Minister, Canberra



