

CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

INTERVIEW

ONLINE

TUESDAY, 29 DECEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: JobKeeper and JobSeeker cuts.



JOURNALIST: JobSeeker. We've seen cuts since March and we’ve had the cut in

September and now in a few days yet another cut. Is this coming too soon, Chris?



CHRIS BOWEN MP, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: It's certainly coming

too soon. Job Seeker and JobKeeper have been lifelines but the government is

ripping it away too early. This crisis, this economic crisis won't be over until the

health crisis is over and while we're doing okay, we have a long way to go.



JOURNALIST: The Minister just held a press conference and she wouldn't say

that this was a cut to the supplement or a cut to the rate. So in your view is $250

down to $150 a fortnight a cut.



BOWEN: A cut is a cut and this is a cut. The Government should just have the

guts to acknowledge that and to be honest with people about it. Everybody accepts

that these payments will eventually have to be reduced but this is too soon, it's too

much, and it's a body blow to those people who are still doing it tough. In my own

community, where the unemployment rate is still way too high and right across

Australia in the suburbs and the regions.



JOURNALIST: Yes. So we are looking at data today about suburbs that will likely

suffer the most and this must concern you given that the data we're seeing has

come out of your electorate.



BOWEN: Absolutely. Everybody in my community knows how tough it is. They

know people who've lost their job. They've got family members who've lost their

job. It's just common sense for people in my community that these cuts come too

hard and too fast.



JOURNALIST: Now, we've already discussed the fact that these cuts will be in

place until the end of March. We don't know what's going to happen beyond that

yet. The Federal Government has said in the past that it's waiting to see how the

economic recovery goes. When would you like to hear from the Federal

Government about what will happen with this Coronavirus supplement?



BOWEN: Well the Federal Government's own figures, their own projections, are

that unemployment is going to go up and up next year. So they need to urgently

tell the Australian people what their plan is. They currently don't have a plan. They

can't leave it to the last minute. Business needs certainty, individuals need

certainty, the country needs certainty and they're not getting it from Scott Morrison.



JOURNALIST: Throughout this pandemic when this support was announced,

Labor and social services advocates have come out saying that this is a chance to

raise the base rate of JobSeeker so no one goes back to that $40 a day Newstart

allowance. Given that is it time for Labor to actually suggest what that rate should

be?



BOWEN: Look, I think everybody in Australia knows the rate is too low. The

Business Council knows it, ACOSS knows it, everybody knows it except for the

Government. Now, the Government can fix this today. They're the ones in office.

They're the ones who have the levers at their disposal, the Labor Party can

suggest we can call on, we can make all sorts of suggestions to them but they're

the only ones who can do it. Now obviously, we hope they do it well before the next

election. If they don't, then we'll tmake our position clear, and people will have a

chance to vote on that at the next election.



JOURNALIST: But wouldn't putting a figure out there help sort of push the

Government into that direction instead of having them sort of stagnant on this

issue?



BOWEN: Well as I said, only the Government can set the NewStart rate or

JobSeeker rate, we can't do that from opposition. We'd love to be able to do it but

we're in opposition so we can't. So it's really incumbent on the government of the

day to ensure that it doesn't return to the pre-existing, pre Coronavirus rate, which

everybody except Scott Morrison knows is too low.



JOURNALIST: Anything else you'd like to add today, Chris?



BOWEN: No that sounds pretty comprehensive to me.



JOURNALIST: Okay, wonderful thanks again for your time.



BOWEN: No problem.



ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: ELIZA MITCHELL 0413 410 931



