





TRANSCRIPT

Senator James Paterson

Liberal Senator for Victoria

Tuesday 11 February 2020

Doorstop

Subjects: Coronavirus, cyber hacking, Nationals



JOURNALIST: Do you think the Chinese government is being open and honest enough about the  state of the Coronavirus within its own country?



Senator James Paterson: I've been listening very carefully to our chief medical officer, Brendan  Murphy, on that question. And he says that now we can have more confidence that the Chinese are  being open and transparent about the challenges they're facing with the Coronavirus. Particularly,  since they made the decision to invite the World Health Organization in and their experts in to  assess it. But I think there certainly are worrying stories emerging from the early days of the  coronavirus where perhaps the Chinese government's response was not ideal.



JOURNALIST: Almost 100,000 foreign students aren't going to go back in time for Australia's  university semester to start,  that's going to have a big effect on the economy isn't it?



Paterson: Undoubtedly, it will have an effect on the economy. And we don't know yet what the true  extent of that effect is going to be. Only time will tell. We don't know how long those students are  going to be delayed from returning to Australia. We don't know how much that's going to affect  providers. So, time will tell but yes, I acknowledge it's going to have an impact.



JOURNALIST: An impact on the budget as well?







Paterson: Undoubtedly, the cumulative effect of the drought, the fires and the coronavirus will all  have an effect to probably depress revenue lower than it otherwise would have been, and probably  increase outgoings more than otherwise would have been.



JOURNALIST: Senator, overnight we saw U.S. officials indict four members of the Chinese PLA over  hacking concerns to do with Equifax. Concerning, given the fact that we now see U.S. authorities  indicting members of the People's Liberation Army?



Paterson: Cyber intrusions and hacking are at record highs. And we know that many of the people  that are perpetrating are state sponsored and there are a couple of countries in the world that are  particularly notorious for having above average significant interventions in Western democracies.  And that is of great concern. What we can do as an individual sovereign country is to boost our  defences as much as possible. So we are as resilient as possible to those attacks.



JOURNALIST: What do you think of the Nats this week?



Paterson: I guess they can account for themselves. They can speak for themselves. I'm a Liberal. It's  not my job to dictate to the National Party how they behave or comment on how they behave.



JOURNALIST: Bit of a distraction when the Indonesian president was here, wasn't it?



Paterson: It's certainly been of great interest to the people in this building, including your good  selves. And I understand the interest in that. But really, that's for the National party to account for.  Thanks, guys.



ENDS



