



THE HON ANDREW GEE MP  Minister for Decentralisation and Regional Education   Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Investment   Federal Member for Calare



MEDIA RELEASE

29 July 2020

CORPORATE COMPANIES SET THEIR SIGHTS ON REGIONAL  AUSTRALIA



Influential leaders from the private sector met virtually this week for the second Regional Australia  Council 2031 (RAC2031) meeting, aimed at supporting the development, investment and  prosperity of regional Australia.

Minister for Decentralisation and Regional Education, Andrew Gee welcomed the establishment of  the RAC2031 initiative, which he said would contribute to and compliment the Government’s  commitment to create jobs and boost investment in country Australia.

“I was delighted to address the RAC2031 last week, especially given the group’s strong focus on  regionalisation and regional jobs,” Minister Gee said.

“Getting more folks to move to the country has been a priority for the Coalition Government since  2013.

”We’ve been actively encouraging government agencies to relocate parts of their operations to  country Australia. However there remains significant room to build upon and broaden our  decentralisation agenda, particularly when it comes to attracting corporate organisations, sole  traders and professionals to the regions.

“It is critical that Government continues to work closely with industry to ensure we are removing  some of the impediments that prevent individuals and businesses from relocating to the regions.   Especially now, as people across Australia are realising that working from home is possible and  are considering a ‘tree change’.

“The RAC2031 will play an important role in developing and promoting the regional Australia  brand, and in establishing strategies and resources that will help corporate organisations and  employees easily make the move and call regional Australia home.”

The RAC2031 will also support the important work of the Regional Australia Institute (RAI), an  independent think tank focused on better outcomes for regional Australia.

RAI Chief Executive Officer, Liz Ritchie said the megacity outlook in Australia was far from fixed.

“Australians have alternatives and people want choice about where they can build their future,” Ms  Ritchie said.

“COVID-19 has changed the way we all live and work. It has fast-tracked the acceptance of  working from home or even another location. People can now live where they love, not where they  work.

“Our corporate members are already reporting a 20% increase in workforce productivity since  COVID-19 began earlier this year - because of changes to workplace flexibility.

“We know there is a great opportunity here and we look forward to working with Minister Gee and  his Government to develop our National Awareness Campaign to promote working, living and  investing in regional Australia,” Ms Ritchie said.

Minister Gee said “The best thing we can do for country Australia is create the right conditions and  policy framework for private companies to make the move and invest in our regions - and I look  forward to working with the RAC2031 and RAI to proactively attract businesses to country  Australia.”

Media Contact: Gabi Phipps 0400 917 405, Gabrielle.Phipps@dfat.gov.au









