

THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP  MINISTER FOR POPULATION, CITIES AND URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE  ACTING MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP, MIGRANT SERVICES AND  MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS



TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT HOUSE, ACT





18 October 2020

Subjects: New Zealand arrivals; Victoria lockdown; border closures, federal ICAC.

ALAN TUDGE: (Because) Today we understand that the Victorian Government was present at  the APAHC meeting on Monday where the issues in relation to New Zealanders arriving in New  Zealand and on-travelling to another destination were discussed, and Professor Sutton was the  representative at that meeting. It was further discussed the next day at a subsequent meeting,  this precise issue. And again the Victorian Government was represented at that meeting and  again the representative was the Chief Health Officer, Professor Sutton. We further understand  from The Age newspaper today that the Premier’s own department had in fact given  authorisation to individuals who had arrived from New Zealand to Sydney to then travel on to  Victoria. So the Victorian Government was present when it was discussed, they were made  aware that this was going to occur, they raised no objections in the meetings and furthermore,  expressly authorised individuals who were arriving into Sydney from New Zealand to be able to  on-travel into Victoria. Now, I would ask the Premier today to reveal those emails and any other  correspondence which shows, clearly and demonstrably, that they authorised the people to  come into Victoria. And that would completely clear this up, but we know from the minutes of  the meetings of the expert medical panels on Monday and Tuesday, the Victorian Government  was present, were aware, and raised no objections to Kiwis and Australians who had arrived into  Sydney, travelling into Victoria.

I’d furthermore say that it’s not surprising that they would give such authorisation because the  risks are so low, given that the 14-day rolling average of coronavirus cases in New Zealand is  precisely zero. That is, there’s no community transmission in New Zealand. There hasn’t been  for the past 14 days, at all. So the risks of carrying the virus are very low, and that’s indeed why  people arriving from New Zealand were not required to quarantine. And it’s indeed why they  are being treated like any other Australian or visa holder in New South Wales once they had  arrived, which means that they can travel to other destinations if those jurisdictions and those  other destinations allow them to do so. And this is another further point. At all times, the  decisions in relations to the borders, the internal borders, are up to state governments. So for  example, we know that the Western Australian Government has a very hard border for anybody  going into Western Australia at the moment. That’s their decision, we might not necessarily

agree with it, but it’s their decision. Equally, the New South Wales Government, presently, does  not allow Victorians to travel into New South Wales unless you have a certificate. I experienced  that myself on Friday night. I drove up from Melbourne, through New South Wales into the ACT,  I was stopped at the checkpoint by New South Wales Police officers, supported by the  Australian Defence Force, to check that I had a certificate to be able to enter into New South  Wales. When I return back to Victoria in a couple of months, they will not be any such  checkpoint from the Victorian Police, because there is no restrictions on New South Wales  people going into Victoria, because the Victorian Government has not put such restrictions in  place. So it’s always the case that it’s up to state authorities to determine their own border  arrangements, and of course, though, as I’ve pointed out, the risks of a person travelling into  Sydney from New Zealand, carrying the virus is incredibly low, because community transmission  has been precisely zero.

I will just finish with this point. The fact that people can’t recall being at meetings, people can’t  recall emails being sent, people can’t recall making decisions, it’s just deja vu in relation to the  Victorian Government. That just seems to be a pattern now of not being able to recall what’s  going on, not being able to recall being at meetings, not being able to recall making decisions,  not being able to recall sending emails to authorise such activities, and I’ll just finally say that  today, Premier Andrews, I hope lives up to his side of the bargain for Victorians, because  Victorians have surely lived up to their side. And Victorians have done the right thing, case  numbers are now down incredibly low, lower than- the rolling 3-day averages below two, is my  understanding, and it means we should be opening up today, and be much more like Sydney,  and as a Melburnian that is almost hard for me to say, to be like Sydney, but that’s what we  should be doing today.

QUESTION: You mentioned two meetings where you say Professor Sutton was in  attendance. Will you release the minutes of those meetings so we can be sure that what you’re  saying is right…

ALAN TUDGE: [Interrupts] Yeah, that’s not a- sorry, David.

QUESTION: ...and the other thing is: did the meetings discuss the number of people who  would come to New Zealand and then forward-travel into Victoria? Was it that detailed about  actually who would come through from New Zealand via Sydney and into Victoria in terms of  the actual numbers?

ALAN TUDGE: It’s not my decision to release those minutes. That would have to be a decision  of that committee. But I am told by the Chief Medical Officer of Australia that the matter was  expressly discussed at the meeting on Monday and expressly discussed at the meeting on  Tuesday, and in both cases, the Victorian Government was represented at those meetings and  raised no objections, and in both cases the Victorian Government was represented by their  Chief Health Officer.

QUESTION: Why did Professor Sutton say he wasn’t there?

ALAN TUDGE: You’d have to ask him that question. Because I am informed by our Chief  Medical Officer that he was present, and the minutes clearly show that he was present for both  meetings. And the minutes themselves show that this was expressly discussed, the fact that

there would be people from New Zealand arriving into Sydney and then potentially travelling on  to other destinations.

QUESTION: Do you believe the Australian public really want the borders open?

ALAN TUDGE: The international borders or the state borders? I think that some people do, and  some people are quite happy for there to be restrictions. I mean, we have restrictions on the  borders at the moment and for obvious reasons. Closing the borders back in March was one of  the most important things that we did in terms of getting control of the coronavirus, if not the  most important thing that we did. And we’ve gradually been reopening those borders in a very  safe manner, and of course the decision was made that we could have a bubble arrangement  with New Zealand because New Zealand’s infection rate was effectively zero. In fact, as I  mentioned previously, their rolling 14-day average right now is precisely zero. It’s not one, it’s  not 0.1, it is zero.

QUESTION: [Inaudible question]

ALAN TUDGE: Well, again, this would be completely up to the Victorian Government. The  Western Australian government, for example, has arrangements in place such that you cannot  just jump on a flight in Sydney and just arrive into Perth. They organise that with the airlines,  they make those arrangements. And to go into Perth you have to ensure that you’ve got a  certificate, permission from the Western Australian Government. At all times entering into a  state’s jurisdiction is up to the state governments, to put those arrangements in place. I gave  you a very clear example of, I had to get a certificate to go from Victoria into New South Wales.  When I return from New South Wales into Victoria I will not need any such certificate because  the Victorian Government has not placed any restrictions on anybody internally moving from  other destinations into Victoria.

QUESTION: So why didn’t the Australian Border Force tell the Victorians that there would be  17 people coming through via Sydney into Victoria and will the Australian Border Force tell the  Victorian Government of any future New Zealanders arriving in Victoria in the same way?

ALAN TUDGE: Well, this was, again, David, these arrangements were expressly discussed  among the Chief Medical Officers of the nation, amongst the Federal Chief Medical Officer or his  representative and amongst each of the state Chief Medical Officers or Chief Health Officers, as  they are sometimes referred to as.

QUESTION: Sure, but it’s pretty clear that the Victorians want to know. So will Australian  Border Force give them that information? If there was a plane arriving today, can Australian  Border Force, given it’s the authority here, check who are then going on to Victoria and give the  manifest to the Victorian Government or to Victorian authorities in some way?

ALAN TUDGE: I mean, the Victorian Government, if they wanted to put in place arrangements,  they would work with the airlines and put in place those arrangements, just like any jurisdiction  has put in place arrangements with the airlines, so that you have to show that you’ve got a  certificate before you jump on a plane to go into Western Australia.

QUESTION: Have the 17 people that have gone into Victoria, have they been tracked down?

ALAN TUDGE: You’d have to ask the Victorian Government that question.

QUESTION: Well, have they been provided with the manifest from the airline?

ALAN TUDGE: Again, you would have to ask them that question. The Victorian Government  yesterday morning just after eight o’clock requested the passenger cards, and we secured those  passenger cards and delivered those to the Victorian Government within four hours. I presume  they have undertaken the tracing activity from that point onwards. Again, I would just point out  that the risks of those 17 people having the virus is very, very small, because there is zero  community transmission in New Zealand. (Inaudible) There’s more community transmission in  Victoria than there is in New Zealand. There’s more community transmission in Sydney than  there is in New Zealand. And so the risks of a Sydneysider ordinarily crossing the border is higher  than it is for a Kiwi who travels from New Zealand into Sydney and immediately onto Melbourne

QUESTION: The Victorian premier has flagged closing the border altogether. Would you be  concerned if that happened?

ALAN TUDGE: Well, you know the Federal Government’s view in relation to internal borders.

QUESTION: If these people were found is there anything that can be done if the Victorian  Government tracks them down?

ALAN TUDGE: What are you proposing?

QUESTION: I’m just wondering if they can [indistinct] kick them out of the state?

ALAN TUDGE: Again you’d actually have to ask the Victorian Government that question in  terms of what their powers are.

QUESTION: If yesterday the feds used the passenger card information to tell the Victorian  Government about the 17, I take it you could establish there were 17, will it do the same thing  with every future flight from New Zealand?

ALAN TUDGE: I’m sure if the Victorian Government requested that from the Australian Border  Force that we’d happily provide that.

QUESTION: On the issue of internal borders you raised your concerns about the different  ways the states are treating this. Do you conceded that had National Cabinet been able to arrive  at a standard definition of hot spots and some of those other key issues, we would not be where  we are now? And should that now be a priority to get to the point where we all agree, given that  a vaccine is at least six to twelve months away?

ALAN TUDGE: From my understanding there has been discussions about reaching a national  definition of a hot spot and it was not agreed by all jurisdictions. But again, from my  understanding and the Health Minister will have further details on this, the number of cases  now in Victoria is actually below their own hot spot definition.

QUESTION: Minister, can I just take you to a separate issue. Because members of the  Rwandan community have told the ABC they’re being targeted by the regime there to become  foreign agents. How concerning is it that there are some diasporas who are being subject to  foreign interference?

ALAN TUDGE: I’ve expressed my concern in relation to this point previously, that it is real, that  there are some foreign countries who seek to have influence over their diaspora. We do take

this incredibly seriously and it’s one of the reasons why we have increased the resources we put  towards countering foreign interference. People when they come to Australia and they become  Australian citizens, they typically do so because they share our values, they enjoy the freedoms  and the prosperity which Australia has. They make a commitment to Australia and we respect  the commitment that they make and we welcome them with open arms into our community  and country. And we take the issue of foreign interference by any country, on any matter,  incredibly seriously. Last few questions.

QUESTION: Just in relation to that matter, in your acting role in Immigration, do you have  any information about a Melbourne man who had his Australian passport seized after travelling  to Rwanda early last year?

ALAN TUDGE: It wouldn’t be appropriate for me to comment on that.

QUESTION: There’s likely to be some easing of social restrictions in Victoria today but not  much relief for small businesses. How is that going to be received?

ALAN TUDGE: I hope that, as I said previously, that the Premier looks to New South Wales  because the case numbers are effectively the same in New South Wales as they are in Victoria,  and yet in New South Wales, basically it’s open, it’s relatively free, people go about their  business. The effective unemployment rate in New South Wales is almost half that of Victoria. In  Victoria the mental health anguish which the lockdown has caused is extraordinary. The calls to  Beyondblue in Victoria are 77 per cent higher than any other jurisdiction on a per capita basis.  Every single Federal MP has had correspondence and calls into their offices of people in tears  when they call up. Everybody understands, elderly people who are in complete isolation and  haven’t seen their grandkids for months, haven’t seen their own children for months. This is  what is occurring in Victoria. Thankfully the virus numbers are down but we need to reopen for  the sake of people’s mental health and for the sake of people’s social well-being, for general  freedom principles but also for economic reasons so that people can get back to work. That is  what we want to see. Let Melbourne be like Sydney. Last question, mate.

QUESTION: Two years ago the Prime Minister promised a federal ICAC. Where is it? And  given what we’ve seen in the past week, multiple scandals at a federal level,  isn’t one needed  now more than ever?

ALAN TUDGE: We’ve got a commitment towards introducing a federal ICAC and that is being  worked on, as you know, by the Attorney-General, and so you can put further questions to him.

[ENDS]

