









THE HON DAN TEHAN MP  Minister for Education

THE HON GREG HUNT MP  Minister for Health

THE HON JAMES MERLINO MP  Victorian Minister for Education  Deputy Premier of Victoria

PROFESSOR BRENDAN MURPHY  Australian Chief Medical Officer



MEDIA RELEASE

22 February 2019

Facilitating Chinese-based students to attend Year 11 and 12

Senior high school students who remain in China due to Australian travel restrictions have  been offered a strict pathway to resume their studies in recognition of the importance of the  final two years of school.

Year 11 and Year 12 students who are completing their senior secondary schooling can  apply for an exemption to the 1 Feb 2020 COVID19 travel restrictions applied to foreign  nationals who have been in mainland China.

The decision was taken based on the best medical advice available and with the safety of  Australians as the number one priority.

The Australian Health Protection Principal Committee (AHPPC), which includes State,  Territory, and Federal Chief Medical Officers, has recommended a strict framework to allow  small numbers of additional people to enter Australia from China.

This follows the unanimous recommendation of the AHPPC for such a proposal given “the  apparent slowing in case numbers in other provinces of mainland China, suggestive of better  containment”

This framework will be adopted to allow entry for these student and includes strict  requirements that students only be permitted entry to Australia if they follow the same strict  isolation conditions that apply to Australian citizens and permanent residents who return  from China.

All Australian governments understand the importance of education and we are all working  to minimise the impact of COVID-19 on students.

In recognition of their strict school attendance requirements under state and territory  regulations, which if not met would prevent them from completing their senior secondary







qualifications, the Australian Border Force (ABF) Commissioner may grant an exemption on  a case-by-case basis, which was also a requirement of the medical experts on the AHPPC.

There are about 400 Year 12 students and 360 Year 11 students already enrolled in  Australian schools who cannot enter the country due to travel restrictions. Some of these  students may need an accompanying parent or adult sibling where welfare arrangements  have not been made by the schools.

The inclusion of these students on a case-by-case basis does not apply to anyone from  Hubei province.  It is only for other regions and is in line with the medical advice that these  areas pose a minimal risk due to the much lower number of reported cases’.

Students arriving in Australia will be subject to the same enhanced border measures that  apply for Australian citizens and permanent residents returning from China and will be  provided with information on the self isolation requirements they will be subject to and how to  seek medical attention if they experience symptoms whilst in self isolation.

Should they wish to, state and territory governments will be able to seek exemptions to  COVID-19 travel restrictions for year 11 and 12 school students who meet the below criteria:

a. The Australian Department of Education, Skills and Employment, in conjunction with  states and territories, confirms the students are enrolled in year 11 or 12.

b. Each state and territory health agency provides assurance the student’s (and  guardian’s if necessary) quarantine arrangements meet all health requirements within  their jurisdiction.

c. Neither student nor guardian is unwell, and have not demonstrated any sign of illness  for more than 14 days.

d. Neither student nor guardian has visited Hubei province, China, since the outbreak of  COVID-19.

e. The Australian Border Force and the Department of Home Affairs confirm the student  (and their guardian if necessary) have valid and existing visas in place and security  checks have been completed.

f. The Australian Border Force considers each individual meets the criteria for  exemption and advises the Australian Departments of Education, Skills and  Employment and Health. A weekly report consolidating the number of people to  whom the Australian Border Force has granted and refused an exemption by state  and territory will be provided to the Australian Departments of Education, Skills and  Employment and Health.

g. The Australian Department of Education, Skills and Employment, will inform their  state and territory counterparts of the outcome of the application for exemption.

h. State and territory education agencies will inform schools who will then inform  students of exemptions or otherwise, as well as state and territory health authorities.

i. The Australian Border Force will provide uplift authority for exempt travellers.

j. The Australian Department of Agriculture will conduct health/biosecurity screening of  all students and guardians at the border.

k. Students and guardians complete 14 day self-quarantine in line with state or territory  requirements (at the point of entry into Australia).

l. State and territory health authorities monitor local quarantine requirements (at the  point of entry).

m. If students or guardians breach quarantine arrangements, their visa may be subject  to cancellation.













ENDS



Media contact:  Tehan: Byron Vale 02 6277 7350 | minister.tehan.media@dese.gov.au  Merlino: Matthew Dixon 0438 190 148 | matthew.dixon@minstaff.vic.gov.au

