

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

TODAY SHOW

FRIDAY, 27 MARCH 2020



SUBJECT: Coronavirus.



ALISON LANGDON, HOST: The death of a man in Western Australia has taken the

national coronavirus death toll to 13. And, it follows an additional three deaths

in Melbourne and one in Queensland yesterday alone.



KARL STEFANOVIC, HOST: It's prompted calls from Victoria's Chief Medical Officer for

urgent and tougher lockdown measures. Something we have been talking about here on

the show for a while. Joining us now is Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment Simon

Birmingham, and Deputy Opposition Leader Richard Marles. Good morning guys, nice

to see you this morning.



RICHARD MARLES, Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party: Good morning.



SIMON BIRMINGHAM: Good morning Karl.



STEFANOVIC: Simon, to you first of all; the Government has asked us, pleaded with us,

made laws surrounding our movements, most of us have complied and done the right

thing. Then we have a situation like yesterday at the international airport in Sydney where

all those rules are broken and thrown out the window. What an embarrassment.



BIRMINGHAM: Well Karl, this is a reminder of how tough the job is at every single level to

make sure that we are applying these principles of social distancing. What we

saw yesterday, was at Sydney Airport, a change in terms of the practices, more stringent

testing on people as they arrived, but that then requires a change in other practices that

flows through. It falls upon every single one of us, at state level, at the federal level, and

right across the community to keep working to get this right, to maintain that one and a half

to two metres distance from one another so that we can slow the spread of this virus.



LANGDON: I think the problem with what we then saw yesterday, we do have Scott

Morrison who is doing - it's a very tough job, and I think he is doing a good job. He comes

out and tells us all that, you know, reminds us about social distancing, do this, do this, and

I think the majority of people are doing the right thing. Then we saw what happened at the

airport yesterday, it's been a debacle with our cruise ships, and now at our borders.

Richard, I mean, how would you control scenes like that?



MARLES: I think we need to have really clear messaging and really clear policies. Firstly,

we absolutely need to understand that our border is an asset and it needed to be used

from day one. It will continue to be an important asset going forward. There has to be a

plan from the Government. And what we are seeing is a kind of step-by-step, almost death

by 1,000 cuts here. We actually need to know what is the plan to make sure that we are

doing everything we can to see the stopping of the transmission of this disease. We saw

an announcement in relation to hairdressing as an example, that changes literally 24 hours

later. There has to be one clear, consistent message, based on the idea of doing

everything we possibly can do right now.



STEFANOVIC: I don't mind - I mean I think you are right in terms of the messaging, but

there are things like with hairdressing, there are 67,000 hairdressers around the country

and they’re on rubbish money anyway, that 67,000 could easily be on the dole queue. I get

the changes there and it's being fluid. But what I don't get is yesterday's scenes at

the airport. That was a complete and utter breakdown. That was an international

embarrassment, what happened at our borders.



BIRMINGHAM: It's inappropriate, it shows though the pressure -



STEFANOVIC: It's not inappropriate. It's grossly negligent.



BIRMINGHAM: When you change one practice, which was that they applied additional

medical testing at the airport, then you've got to make sure the message flows through to

change all the other practices to ensure you don't have those types of problems. The

message is one that everybody needs to adhere to; to keep that distance from one

another.



STEFANOVIC: So this morning when people arrive from overseas, that won't happen?



MARLES: I trust that, firstly, Border Force have got the message, but also the health

authorities have got the message, but most importantly, that those arriving on those planes

back into Australia have got the message as well. They are now of course, overwhelmingly

Australians because we have effectively shut off the borders in terms of new arrivals from

anywhere around the world and this is purely about Australians returning home. They need

to hear the message loud and clear, keep your distance from one another. And

all Australians do. The plan is very clear; that is to slow the spread of this virus so we save

lives. We are doing it in the context of also trying to, as much as we can, save people's

livelihoods as well. Australia is leading the world in terms of testing regimes, with

more than 175,000 tests conducted here. That is doing an enormous amount to enable us

to keep Australians safer and to slow that spread. We are going to continue to respond to

the health advice on these things.



LANGDON: See, I'm not sure if people are now thinking, here, that Australia is leading

the charge. You look at New Zealand, and going why on earth are they so far ahead of

where we are? They are at lockdown four, we are at lockdown two. I mean clearly New

South Wales and Victoria are breaking away. But Simon, when will you take us to

that level? When will we see suburbs lockdown?



BIRMINGHAM: Lets appreciate, it's only a few days since we shut down hotels, clubs,

pubs, gyms and enforced a range of other measures to stop people from gathering

together. Put in place the four square metre rule and have told Australians firmly to stay

away from one another. Now, we have limited levels of community transmission in many

parts of Australia. Different situations, across different states and territories. But indeed,

our testing regime is better than South Korea's, better than most other countries, that's one

of the key things that is helping to keep us track cases, keep us safe and make sure that

we can continue to slow that spread. It's what we are going to continue to do. We don't

want to rush to tighter measures that will absolutely adopt them if necessary.



STEFANOVIC: Richard, I can hear you groaning in the background. Off you go.



MARLES: I think there is a heroic claim there to suggest our testing regime is better

than South Korea. It really worries me that -



BIRMINGHAM: Per head of population, it is.



MARLES: In terms of Simon talking about not rushing to deal with issues around

social distancing, it seems to me that's exactly the wrong logic.



BIRMINGHAM: That is not what I said.



MARLES: But that is actually what you said.



BIRMINGHAM: No, we are not going to rush to more extreme measures.



MARLES: There is this approach from the Government which seems to be a

proportionate response to the increased spread of the disease, which is almost a recipe to

make sure that you are following the spread of the disease, which occurs at an exponential

rate. That is a recipe for being behind the game. What we have seen is this step by step

approach, which just isn’t right.



STEFANOVIC: Richard, I get it, I get it. There is another thing I want to raise, because we

are running out of time here. Simon, another one of these problem areas, I think, a local

election in Queensland that are going to go ahead over the weekend. There is also a

by- election at Currumbin that's going ahead. This is exactly the kind of gathering of people

that we are trying to avoid, and yet the State Government and the Premier in Queensland

is going ahead with it. Come on, surely you need to step in there.



BIRMINGHAM: Karl, I'm in Adelaide and the federal government doesn’t control

Queensland.



STEFANOVIC: Yeah, but you know what I mean.



BIRMINGHAM: I'd say to Queenslanders, very clearly, show patience with one another,

keep your distance. This shows, again, the scale of the problems that come along in

terms of its impact on things like elections. But the Queensland Government needs to

absolutely make sure that if people have to go out and vote on the weekend they get all

the messages to stay as safe and as far away from one another.



LANGDON: But why do they need to vote on the weekend? Why not just delay it? Do it

in three months’ time, Six months.



BIRMINGHAM: That's really a matter for the Queensland Government to answer because

they are the ones who are overseeing these local Government elections there. The

message I give to the Queensland viewers is; if you haven't postal vote- if you haven’t

undertaken a postal vote and you have to go out, then keep your distance, keep safe and

the Queensland Government needs to make sure that that occurs at every single one of

those polling places.



STEFANOVIC: Well, if people don't vote they are going to get fined as well. How good

is that?



BIRMINGHAM: I hope that is waived, Karl.



MARLES: A healthy dose of common sense there.



STEFANOVIC: Okay, thank you, you two. Best of luck. It's a tough time at the moment. We

get all that, but please do everything you can to make sure that we are being looked after.

We appreciate it, make sure there is a consistent message, I think is what we are all

looking for.



ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













