

Support to keep people active and healthy as COVID-19



restrictions continue



health.gov.au



/ministers/senator-the-hon-richard-colbeck/media/support-to-keep-people-active-and-healthy-



as-covid-19-restrictions-continue



29 March 2020



Media release



Senior Australians and young people will benefit from a $1.1 billion funding package



aimed at ensuring they stay healthy and connected during the campaign to stop the



spread of COVID-19.



The additional boost announced by Prime Minister Scott Morrison will target mental



health services, domestic violence support, Medicare assistance for people at home and



emergency service relief.







Minister for Aged Care Richard Colbeck said the package provided targeted support for



those who needed it most.







It includes $10 million for a Community Visitors Scheme to help ensure Senior



Australians are not socially isolated as a result of visitor restrictions.







The funding will support extra staff to train volunteer visitors, who will connect with



older people in aged care both online and by phone, and assist seniors to keep in touch



with the community and loved ones.







“Connecting with each other has never been more important,” Minister Colbeck said.



“This support will ensure the most vulnerable Australians remain connected with



family, friends and the vital support services they need.”







Younger Australians will also be able to stay on track in their education and training



and prepare them for the workforce with $6.75 million provided to deliver the



headspace digital work and study service and “eheadspace”.











Minister Colbeck said mentors and headspace vocational specialists working in an



1/3



integrated team will offer technical and life skills, providing a comprehensive digital



support service for all young Australians during the COVID-19 pandemic and after.



More broadly, a $669 million injection will be used to expand Medicare-subsidised



telehealth services for all Australians.







This will give people of all ages access to support in their own home using phone or



video conferencing features like FaceTime to connect with GP services and a wide range



of services including support to patients in aged care facilities, children with autism,



after-hours consultations and nurse practitioners.







Minister Colbeck said the delivery of health services at home remained a key weapon in



stopping the spread of COVID-19.







“Limiting unnecessary exposure of patients and health professionals to the virus



through phone and video conferencing will be a necessary mechanism in ensuring we



focus on saving lives and saving livelihoods,” he said.







Minister Colbeck said guidelines for Aged Care facilities remained in place.







A fact sheet for Senior Australians is available on the



Department of Health website



.







Advice for retirement villages is available on the



Department of Health website



.







Guidelines for in home care workers is available on the



Department of Health website



.











Guidelines for workers in residential aged care is available on the



Department of



Health website



.



Information for families and residents regarding visitation is available on the



Department of Health website



.



Ministers:



Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck



2/3



Is there anything wrong with this page?

3/3

