

TERRI BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT AND WATER

MEMBER FOR GRIFFITH





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

PRESS CONFERENCE

BRISBANE

MONDAY, 23 NOVEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Koala audit; Koala funding; No national koala conservation

strategy since 2014; Threatened species; Recovery plans; Environmental

mismanagement.



JOURNALIST: Terri; kick us off on the koala plan, what do you make of it?



TERRI BUTLER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT AND

WATER: Yeah, so today the government has announced $2 million for a koala

census and frankly, Labor has been calling on them to organize a national

ecological audit since January.



We went of course to see what was happening with the bushfires. And there

has just been devastation.



Of course, since then we know that 3 billion animals have been killed or

displaced, millions of hectares burned. And yet the government is now in

November, 10 months after Labor first called for and ecological audit, finally

starting to get their act together and call for a census of koalas.  They need to

do more.



Koalas are at real risk in this country. In fact, koalas are one of the species that

the government is meant to have provided a threatened species recovery plan

for, but they haven’t.



You know there’s 171 outstanding threatened species recovery plans and 170

of them are late. One of those is for the koala.



The government also has completely failed to put into place a national koala

conservation strategy. The last one ran out in 2014. Six years later, we're still

waiting to see a national koala conservation strategy.



The government actually needs to get their act together.



We don't want a situation where Australians are learning about the koala in the

history books, where our kids and grandkids will never get the chance to see a

koala. Actually Australians expect the government to stand up for the koala. We

don't want to see it go extinct and certainly don't want the government to stuff

around for months on end, not get their act together when it comes to this

important national icon.



JOURNALIST: And in simple terms, they don't care about as you say, what is a

national icon.



BUTLER: This is a national icon, if they really cared about it, then they

would’ve done what we said to do back in January. And that's get a national

ecological audit underway, in the wake of the bushfire crisis.



We actually need a government, that will care enough about threatened

species to actually try to recover them, to protect them. We need a government

that cares enough about threatened species to put plans in place and do the

work. Not stuff around for months on end. That's what we need.



JOURNALIST: Why do you think they’re hiding from doing that audit and why

have they hidden it for so long?



BUTLER: Well, I just don't think that they're organized. This is another example

of the Morrison Government being all about the photo op and never about

follow up. You know they’re happy to have their photo taken with koalas, have

their photo taken with wildlife, but why would it take from national bushfire crisis

at the beginning of this year, to November to announce this koala audit. Why

would it take that long?



There's no excuse for it. We have had a lot of crisis this year, it's been a difficult

year. Of course we have a recession, we've had a global pandemic. But the

new crises came hot on the heels of the bushfire crisis. And you have to be

able to manage all of those.



Australians expect that the government will protect the koala it’s a national icon.

And there's not really any excuse, it's just not good enough.



JOURNALIST: And as you said this, you know, the bushfires were last summer

over that period, the coronavirus really started to become a factor in say

March/April, there’s months there, where they could have acted.



BUTLER: Absolutely and you know the koala auditing work that we’re taking

about now could be done partly by drones, could be done with help from



animals, could be done through social distancing through citizen science and

scientists, all of that work could have been done, there isn't really a good

excuse for not doing it. Except this government is all about the photo op and

never about the follow up.



They make the big announcement but then they don't really follow through.



So we'll be watching to make sure they follow through on this one. Australians

expect the government to protect the koala, it's a national icon, and they expect

the government to protect all the other threatened species as well.



ENDS.



MEDIA CONTACT: RICHARD ALCORN 0438 804 563









Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













