TRANSCRIPT

Monday, 31 August 2020

Minister for Education Dan Tehan interview with Jim Wilson, 2GB Drive

SUBJECTS: NAPLAN, Job-ready Graduates package, Parliamentary inquiry  into foreign interference in Australian universities

Jim Wilson: Well, a war of words has erupted between the Commonwealth and the states on  the issue of NAPLAN tests. Now, NAPLAN, as I’m sure you know, is the National Literacy  and Numeracy Assessment. Last Friday, the results of an independent review of NAPLAN  were released. The review has proposed what’s been described as a rebranded testing  regime, with something called the Australian National Standardised Assessments to take the  place of NAPLAN. But, the report has also endorsed the role of standardised testing. Now,  this new test would take place at the start of the year, with results to be delivered to schools  within a week. At the moment, it takes months. New South Wales Education Minister Sarah  Mitchell writing today in The Australian says, ‘If there’s ever a time to advance NAPLAN into  a test our education system needs, it’s right now.’ Her story appears under the headline,  ‘NAPLAN works but the future’s brighter.’ Now, Sarah Mitchell argues NAPLAN is  considerably out of date and no longer up to the task. She writes, ‘To blindly support  NAPLAN when there is an obviously superior alternative on the table is ignorance at best,  perhaps pig headedness at worst.’ As someone who, well, could be argued is in the  pigheaded corner, is Federal Education Minister Dan Tehan. He’s accused Sarah Mitchell  and her state colleagues in Victoria and Queensland of destroying the only national test that  provides evidence of how students are progressing. And, Minister Dan Tehan is on the line  this afternoon. Minister, welcome to Drive.

Dan Tehan: Jim, pleasure to be with you.

Wilson: Thank you for your time. From your perspective, is NAPLAN all about?

Tehan: So, what we want to do with NAPLAN is, first of all, is get all the states and territories  adopting NAPLAN online. We can’t do anything to advance NAPLAN until we have all the  state and territories online with NAPLAN, and that is the focus of the Commonwealth  Government. That’s what we want to see all states and territories agree to. Then we can  look at, okay, what are some sensible changes that you could make once you have  everyone online. But, until we get there, looking at other things that you would do with  NAPLAN is premature.

Wilson: Okay. You say NAPLAN was created to measure what students have learnt, so  parents, students and educators can track progress in education. How well do you think  NAPLAN is doing on that front?

Tehan: Look, I think it’s doing very well. It’s telling us how well our students are achieving.  And, the fact of the matter is, what it’s demonstrating is that we need to put more effort into  literacy, into numeracy, and making sure that our students are getting the knowledge that  they need to advance their education. And, the problem we’ve got at the moment is,  everyone is blaming NAPLAN for the fact that our results are flat lining. That’s like blaming a  thermometer for you having a temperature, rather than seeking to address the issues which

are causing the temperature, and that’s what the Commonwealth wants us to focus on. We  want to make sure we’ve got the curriculum right. We want to make sure we’ve got the  literacy and numeracy standards right. We’ve got to make sure that we’re providing the  support to our teachers that they need, and our principals. That’s what we need to be doing  to lift outcomes.

Wilson: Now, this review I mentioned, was commissioned by the education ministers in New  South Wales, Queensland and Victoria. What do you …

Tehan: … And, the ACT.

Wilson: And, the ACT. What do you make of the recommendations?

Tehan: Look, there are a couple of things which I think are sensible, if you have every state  and territory online. For instance, bringing forward when you hold the test, I think, has some  sense to it. So, that would be one thing that we would support. But, there’s no point us  agreeing to all this until we have every state and territory online with the test. So, there are  some elements of this which we should consider and, as Education Council should, but not  until we have everyone committed to adopting NAPLAN online. Because, otherwise, all  we’re doing is making changes when we haven’t got the right tools in place to be able to  make those changes.

Wilson: But, Minister, if NAPLAN is going to be a diagnostic tool, then getting the results  back inside a week rather than the current months and months, isn’t that something we  should support?

Tehan: Yes. There’s no reason why we shouldn’t be aiming to get the results back quicker.  But, once again, the only way you can do that is if you move from paper-based to online  testing, and that’s what I want all the states and territories to agree to first. There’s no point  saying, ‘Oh yes, we all agree that we should have the results back in a week or two weeks,’  yet we’re still doing paper-based testing, when we know that that just can’t happen. This is  all, I’m worried, is just all a distraction to start tinkering with NAPLAN and move away from  the focus that we need, which is, first of all, get everyone online, and then we look at, okay,  how can we take sensible steps to improve it. One of the other things that’s suggested is,  basically, we do away with writing. Now, I think parents would not agree to us taking writing  away from NAPLAN, and not being able to see how our children are progressing when it  comes to their writing skills. So, there are things like that which, obviously, we wouldn’t  agree to. But, first of all, if we could get students all online in doing their test, then, yes, you  could think about bringing the test forward, and, yes, you would look at ways to how you can  improve turning around the outcomes from the test. But, until you’ve got everyone online,  that’s not going to be achieved.

Wilson: Minister, you announced earlier this year plans to create more university places and  to change the way students are charged. New modelling from the Parliamentary Library  shows some students will take 20 years to pay off their debts under the new system. For  some students, that’s an almost doubling of the time they’ll need. How concerned are you by  that?

Tehan: Well, that was Greens modelling, and what they did was ask specific questions about  specific subjects. It wasn’t balanced. They didn’t look at the subjects that we are reducing

the cost of. They only looked at those that we’re increasing the cost of. They didn’t take into  account the employment outcomes that you get from taking certain degrees. So, that was  Greens modelling which was done in a way which I don’t think really stands the test of being  properly scrutinised. What our changes do is provide 100,000 new university places, puts $2  billion into the higher education sector, and for those who are doing nursing, teaching,  maths, English, languages, IT, reduces the cost of your degree, because we know they’re  the types of degrees that we’re going to need people in the workforce into the future.

Wilson: We’re also told today, Minister, how the Federal Government will launch an inquiry  into foreign interference in Australian universities, and how the Chinese Government has  recruited academics to a secretive program that paid lucrative salaries and allowed research  to be patented in China. What can you tell us?

Tehan: Well, Jim, what I can tell you is that we’ve been working with the university sector to  ensure that we do have the policies in place to deal with foreign interference, and we had  our intelligence agencies work with the sector to put in place guidelines. Now, we want to  make sure that those guidelines are addressing all the potential issues when it comes to  foreign interference in Australia, and that’s why we’ve now asked the Joint Parliamentary  Committee on Intelligence and Security to look at those guidelines and look at other things,  and inform the Government whether there are other steps we need to be taking to make  sure that we are protecting our universities from foreign interference.

Wilson: You’re obviously very concerned, though, as far as that overseas interference or that  foreign interference, as far as our universities are concerned?

Tehan: We are Jim. We want to make sure that when it comes to our universities, when it  comes to the incredibly important research that they’re doing, for instance, on trying to find a  vaccine for COVID-19, that we know that they’re protected from intellectual property theft,  from cyber-attacks which might steal secrets that are being worked on for a vaccine. Those  types of things. We want to make sure that our universities are protected.

Wilson: Minister, thanks for your time this afternoon.

Tehan: Always a pleasure, Jim. Thanks.

Wilson: That’s Federal Education Minister Dan Tehan.

