



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au

TRANSCRIPT

INTERVIEW ON SUNRISE, CHANNEL 7  15 December 2020





7:25AM

E&OE

Subjects: Trans-Tasman Travel Bubble;

MONIQUE WRIGHT

New Zealand has agreed to establish a Trans-Tasman bubble with Australia early next year meaning  there would be no need to quarantine when travelling between the two countries. The bubble is  conditional on coronavirus levels remaining low but the Australian Government has welcomed the  initiative, saying it is the first step back to some normality. Joining us now is the Deputy Prime  Minister Michael McCormack.

Thank you so much for being with us Deputy Prime Minister, we appreciate it. Just how significant  will this trans-Tasman bubble be for our post-COVID recovery - people are pretty happy about it?

MICHAEL McCORMACK

Absolutely happy. It is going to get New Zealanders coming to Australia, of course, for holidays - half  a million last year, they brought with them $2.6 billion to the visitor economy. Now, they have  already been travelling to Australia since the 12th of October and indeed, 8858 of them have come  on 121 flights, but with two-way travel - Australians being able to go to New Zealand - that is the  catalyst for a post-COVID recovery. So, that is the first of these international air routes being  restored and restarted and it is really exciting, Monique.

MONIQUE WRIGHT

Indeed it is, in the event of an outbreak in either country, what is the threshold here? How many  cases do we need to have for this travel bubble to be shut down?







MICHAEL McCORMACK

Well, of course, we have got that hotspot definition - three cases, over three days, over a ten-day  average - and so we’ve got the hotspot definition but it will be letting the COVID cases be very low.  Look, we have only had eight cases yesterday in Australia, that is significant. We have only had one  death in a number of weeks. We are getting on top of it and of course, with the hope of a vaccine  and with people doing the right thing - and I say again to those people, those great Australians,  thank you so much for doing everything that you have been asked to do. With the self-isolation, with  the quarantining and making sure that you practise social distancing. All of those things are  important and so we need to continue to be our best selves. This is a great announcement through  the two Governments and we will work towards making it a success.

MONIQUE WRIGHT

Well, I am half New Zealander so I am very happy to hear about this. Delightful stuff. Thank you so  much, Deputy Prime Minister Michael McCormack.

MICHAEL McCORMACK

Thanks Monique, all the best.



ENDS 7:28AM

Media contacts:  Jo Williamson, 0418 475 668  Dean Shachar, 0418 202 860



