

Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA

MEDIA RELEASE

OFFICIAL

1 September 2020

LOCAL TASKFORCES TO AID JOBS RECOVERY

More than 900,000 job seekers are set to benefit from local jobs taskforces with specialised  expertise and knowledge to get more Australians back into work.

Recognising the importance of local knowledge, the Morrison Government is investing $62.8  million in a Local Jobs Program to support the nation’s recovery.

As part of the program, 14 Employment Facilitators, in addition to the existing 11 facilitators,  will be engaged and expanded to help connect job seekers to local employment opportunities.

The Employment Facilitators will act as on-the-ground presence that work with local job  seekers in specific regions to connect them with training, job opportunities or other support.

These Employment Facilitators will chair Local Jobs and Skills Taskforces across Australia.  The taskforces will bring together local employers, employment and training providers and  other local stakeholders, to develop projects to get job seekers back into work. Local  Recovery Funds will be available in each selected region to support this approach.

Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business, Senator the Hon Michaelia  Cash, said tailoring solutions specific to each local area was vital to helping regions recover.

“Small and family businesses rely on their local communities and we want to tap into their  expertise and connections to get people working again” Minister Cash said.

"As the economy recovers from COVID-19, the jobs that are created may look different to  those that existed before.

“The recovery is also likely to look different across sectors and communities which is why it  is critical to provide tailored support to help Australians find work in their local regions.

“Local knowledge and collaboration will be vital to achieving this.”

Using information provided by the National Skills Commission, each ‘Local Jobs and Skills  Taskforce’ will develop a local jobs plan, identifying the region’s priorities, opportunities and  skills gaps.

“For instance, a taskforce might use National Skills Commission data to explore what  industries are growing in their region,” Minister Cash said.

“The Employment Facilitator can then work with employers, employment services providers  and training providers to match jobseekers with appropriate employment and training  opportunities.”

The Local Jobs Program will run until 30 June 2022.





OFFICIAL

OFFICIAL





The employment regions included in this measure are:

Employment Region

New South Wales

Illawarra South Coast *

Hunter *

New England and North West *

Mid North Coast

North Coast

Sydney Greater West

Sydney South West

Queensland

Cairns *

Wide Bay and Sunshine Coast *

Townsville

Wivenhoe

Gold Coast

Tasmania

North and North Western Tasmania *

Hobart and Southern Tasmania

Victoria

Gippsland *

Western Melbourne *

Inner Metropolitan Melbourne

North Western Melbourne

South Eastern Melbourne and Peninsula

South Australia

Murray and South East *

North West Country *

Adelaide North

Western Australia

Perth South *

South West WA

Northern Territory

Darwin and Alice Springs

* These 11 Employment Regions already have an Employment Facilitator.  The role of these  existing facilitators will be expanded to include oversight of the Local Jobs Program.

For more details visit: www.dese.gov.au/local-jobs-program



MEDIA CONTACTS  Guy Creighton - Guy.Creighton@dese.gov.au - 0438 815 302  Brittany Higgins - Brittany.Higgins@dese.gov.au - 0449 171 294

