

GED KEARNEY MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR SKILLS

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR AGED CARE

MEMBER FOR COOPER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC AFTERNOON BRIEFING WITH PATRICIA KARVELAS

THURSDAY, 30 JULY 2020



SUBJECTS: Victorian coronavirus crisis and lockdown; paid pandemic

leave; aged care; early superannuation access scheme.



PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: Time now for my political panel. My guests this

afternoon Assistant Minister for Aged Care, Ged Kearney and Liberal Senator

Andrew Bragg. Welcome to both of you.



GED KEARNEY, MEMBER FOR COOPER: Thank you, PK. I wish I was the

Assistant Minister.



KARVELAS: Did I call you the Assistant Minister - the Shadow - yes. Now the

Prime Minister has warned Ged that further measures will be required to bring

the COVID-19 outbreak under control in Victoria, conceding the lockdown is not

getting the results we would have hoped for. So what might need to be done

here?



KEARNEY: Well, of course, we will rely on the expert health advice that I know

Dan Andrews is taking very seriously. I also know that the Prime Minister will be

having discussions with his experts as well and we have heard from the

Premier that they have been working very well together. So I'm sure they'll have

a discussion about whatever extra precautions we need to take. I'm sure they

will consider them very carefully because, as you know Victorians were

alarmed at the rise today. But we do know that the cause of the pandemic is, of

course, there will be ups and downs until we see a steady downward turn and

that the precautions that we take now actually start to have an impact.



KARVELAS: Andrew, given what we're seeing in Victoria and those high

numbers of cases linked to workplaces, is there a case for paid pandemic leave

now to try and ensure, we were told today, for instance, by the Premier that one

person when they turned up, some householder said they're at work after they

tested positive with COVID-19. Does that demonstrate that we might need a

scheme to make sure everyone's covered?



SENATOR ANDREW BRAGG: Good afternoon PK. I think it is a case by case

and industry by industry basis upon which you would have to look at that

question. Certainly with around 40% of people are able to work from home in

some form, there is a large part of the economy which simply cannot, you know

work from home. And in cases, as we've seen, like with aged care, the Fair

Work Commission has been able to provide paid leave for aged care workers in

some circumstances. So I think there will need to be an industry by industry

examination of that particular proposal.



KEARNEY: Can I just say, what we're saying is that we know from what the

Premier is telling us that aged care is a very specific case, but also it is the

workplace generally. And his greatest concern is that people are going to work

and Labor of course called for paid pandemic leave over 100 days ago, and I

think that this is going to be an incredibly important part of the next stage.

People, and maybe the Senator doesn't understand this, but there are a lot of

people that live day to day. We have people in my electorate that ring and say

'if I have to stay home for three days and I missed two days of work that is

serious for us. We live pay to pay, hand to mouth'. That is a serious issue to

lose even three days, let alone 14 days of pay. I think it has to be in the mix and

it has to be a seriously considered by the Federal Government.



KARVELAS: Senator Bragg that's the case, isn't it? That's the material reality

for many people. You know, if you've got COVID-19, you shouldn't go out. But if

you can't feed your family any other way, and you're not entitled to pandemic

leave, it doesn't really put you in a situation where you've got very good choices

does it?



BRAGG: I think there are a lot of people that are living very close to the line

and where they're unable to work from home effectively, if they are forced to go

into the workplace and potentially spread the virus around that is the last thing

that we want. So I think wherever there are proposals to look at particular

sectors which require that form of leave it could be looked at, but I don't think

that this is an economy wide approach we need to deploy because, in fact, the

way that the whole Fair Work System, which I've been very critical of may I

add, is structured you basically have an industrial court that makes these

judgments as they look at particular awards. So the whole industrial system is

actually broken down into different sectors. So you need to look at it in that

way.



KARVELAS: Ged Kearney with the outbreaks we've seen in Victorian aged

care providers, what's required to ensure this doesn't happen again, or in

another state? The federal government, of course, has implemented a range of

measures, including the Victorian Government cancelling elective surgery to

get people out of some of these nursing homes. Is this the right approach? Are

you confident this will work?



KEARNEY: I think what we are seeing in aged care facilities now is a result of

years and years of neglect of the system. Neglect that has been talked about

by the Royal Commission in the interim report, neglect that the unions have

been raising for a long time, that we have been raising, that I personally have

been raising for so long ever since I started at the Nurses union way back in

2010, we knew the aged care system was in strife. We have a weak regulator

that cannot really take strong measures. I mean, that needs to be dealt with.

We have an underpaid, under resourced workforce that is not skilled to deal

with everyday needs of people in aged care facilities, let alone a pandemic.

There's not enough staff, not the right skills mix. And we have a sector that well

aged care broadly gets about $20 billion from the government for which they do

not have to be transparently accountable for. So I think there's lots of problems

in the sector. And it's just built all the way up to this where we've seen this

disaster and the pandemic. In response to your question, are they doing the

right things now? It's a lot, I think, too late, but yes, I think that they are sending

in skilled and qualified nurses who know about infection control and who can

help the other workers deal with this. We're finally seeing residents being sent

to hospital. We are seeing much more accountability around infection control

and other issues that should have been done a long time ago. The whole sector

should have been resourced up by the federal government to do this from the

very beginning. They should have been sending in hordes of people with

expertise in infection control, PPE training, from the very beginning, we knew

that this was going to be a problem.



KARVELAS: Andrew Bragg, I just want to change the topic before I let you

both go because Australians have now withdrawn $42 billion from their

superannuation accounts, which is twice the government's initial projections.

Does this indicate that people are really struggling? I mean, what's your

analysis of why it would be at this rate because some of the reasons that

they've taken it out are clearly a much broader range of reasons than we

thought I would.



BRAGG: Well, one of the things that we've seen with this hugely popular

scheme is that  people have decided that they will pay down debt, including

paying down their mortgages, as we saw today with the Treasury figures. And

so I think it's a good idea that people are able to pay down their mortgage, pay

down their debt, because that is effectively the best thing you can do to have a

safe and secure retirement. I mean, you're much better off having a home in

retirement than having your super if you can only have one thing. And so I

know that super industry, and the unions and Labor don't like, you know, any

money coming out of super, but we have to take a broader view about what is

in the best interests of each individual Australian, and for many Australians,

having a home or having a first home is frankly much more important than

having a super fund.



KARVELAS: Okay, Ged a quick right of reply. My next guest is waiting, but I

won't short change you, especially given there is such a disagreement on this

issue.



KEARNEY: There is huge disagreement. I mean, there isn't a country in the

world that doesn't look at our superannuation system without absolute envy,

they think it is wonderful. It gives people dignity in retirement. It's trillions of

dollars that we can invest in our economy. And it's actually deferred wages that

belong to people that they can spend as they wish in their retirement. I think it's

incredibly important. It takes pressure off the public purse, it assists the

government with retirement costs and expenditure as well. And sure, it can be



used for emergencies. This is an emergency but it's a great pity that people a)

don't earn enough money that they can actually get a deposit for a house right

now. We know wages and desperately low under this government. And it's a

great pity that they are not given hope, post pandemic, that they can actually

leave their savings in their superannuation accounts and they have to dip into.



KARVELAS: All right, we're over and out with you two, but thank you so much

for joining us.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ANNA LONG 0412 618 355





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













