UNOFFICIAL





The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT HOUSE, ACT  FRIDAY 23 OCTOBER 2020



EO&E…

PRIME MINISTER: Well, good afternoon everyone. Today in Sydney the friends and family, colleagues  have gathered to farewell Susan Ryan. We thank her for her amazing service to this country. In  remembrance of her today, because of National Cabinet, I was represented there today by the Deputy  Prime Minister and I thank him for representing the Government and for all those who’ve gathered, a  remarkable and wonderful Australian, and we thank her greatly for her service to our country.

Also, just moments ago, 161 Australians touched down from London, in Darwin as part of a series of flights  that the government has been organising to support other changes in cap arrangements, which is steadily  and surely ensuring that more and more Australians are getting home. And I'll come back to that in  reporting on the outcomes of National Cabinet. And, of course, the acting Chief Medical Officer Paul Kelly  will report on the usual matters.

At National Cabinet today. We agreed in principle, given that we had a number of jurisdictions today who  are in caretaker arrangements, that constrains a bit of what they can do at each meeting, even here in the  ACT. While the outcome there was fairly clear they are still not finalised in those arrangements so  technically in the ACT, they were still in caretaker. But we agreed in principle, again, - with the exception  of Western Australia and their reservations were outlined on a previous occasion - with the reopening  framework for Australia by Christmas. And this is the plan and it sets it out. It'd be very familiar, I think, to  many, the reopening plan to get Australia open by Christmas of this year. Importantly, this plan not only  details the opening of various activities within our economy and within our community and society. An  important part of this plan is that it includes the necessary actions and that are needed on a public health  response to support that plan. And the work that Alan Finkel has been doing, in particular, the work that  has been done on hotel quarantine and improvements in all of those areas are vital and essential to the  achievement of that goal by the end of this year. Premiers and Chief Ministers reiterated their support for  that goal today. And we have made further progress and that will come back again to National Cabinet  when it next meets on the 13th of November. And indeed, where things can be progressed before that,  they will be. But over that time, we will also have further actions coming from the Finkel work that has  been done around tracing mechanisms around the country. As I’d indicated after our last meeting.



We also agreed the recommendations of the hotel quarantine review that was undertaken by Jane Halton.  And that report will be released after this media conference. It was also agreed to develop a risk  stratification approach, as it is known, to international arrivals and their quarantining arrangements. Now,  one of the great challenges, as we discussed today, particularly early on in the pandemic, was there were  many things that had to be done extremely quickly to respond. And what we want to be, is in a position  as we go forward and when we're in a position to make decisions down the track, not today, but down  the track when it comes to other types of international arrivals that may be able to come to Australia  again when we're in a position where we can reopen some of those arrangements, particularly in relation  to things like international students and migration, these types of things, then we want to be sure that  we've worked the options well, we’ve trialled and tested them so we can give Australians great confidence  that we're in, when we're in a position to do that we have worked through those. So whether that's  quarantining in home, on farm, in camp, at a mining camp, on campus or any of these options - we'll be  looking at, and working together with states and territories to both identify and trial some of these  options. So when we're in a position to make further decisions on arrivals to Australia, then they will be  well worked through and we can have a great degree of confidence about their implementation when  that occurs.

We agreed to increase caps again for a number of jurisdictions, which will further assist Australians coming  back from overseas, an additional 140 next month in Western Australia, another 150 in Queensland. But  we've also got continued support out of South Australia at the ACT and we have the arrangement in  Northern Territory that I announced last week. Tasmania stands ready to assist. I want to be very clear,  but as they don't yet have an international airport and those systems in place, if we need to stand that up  in order to achieve what we've set out, then we will certainly do that. They are our further standby option.  I want to thank Premier Gutwein for his working together with us to achieve that and it would be on very  similar arrangements to what we've done in the Northern Territory. But of course, we're continuing with  our work together Premier Gutwein and I, as part of the Hobart City deal to stand up the international  airport in Hobart, and we will be having further discussions on that in the weeks ahead.

All jurisdictions, though, have offered their support, particularly to provide flexibility around caps to  enable us to get the most vulnerable of Australians home. Now, I can confirm when we made our  commitment on the 18th of September. There were registered, some 26,200 Australians. 4,100 of those  were vulnerable. So far, 1,278 of that vulnerable cohort have come home. That doesn't include those  who've just arrived in Darwin and 4,591 have otherwise returned out of that cohort of 26,200. So we  continue to make good progress towards returning Australians home. And we want to do that as  effectively and quickly, as safely as possible. And we'll continue to work with all state and territory  jurisdictions to facilitate that wherever we can. And I thank them for their cooperation to date.

We adopted the very important report of the Conran review. Now, you recall some months ago up in the  committee room upstairs, I made the announcement of the National Cabinet and the new framework for  federal-state relations. Well, at that time, as you would have recalled, there was a large number of various  committees and forums and ministerial groups which had built up over time under the old COAG process.  And we asked former Cabinet Secretary Peter Conran, who'd attended his first AG’s State Ministerial  meeting back in 1982. And his first COAG meeting as an official in 1992. So he knows a bit about how all  of these systems work. And he's made recommendations which we will release in his report, which were  adopted, all 33 recommendations of that report today, which basically streamline how we work together  as a federation. Importantly, in that, we'll be elevating one particular area of work, the National  Federation Reform Council, that will meet at the end of this year on the 11th of December. That will be

its first meeting in its new format. And that meeting will establish a Veteran's wellbeing taskforce. Now,  the purpose of the National Federation Reform Council is really to deal with those whole of government  broader societal challenges. There are already task forces that deal with indigenous affairs, indigenous  Australians, one that deals with women's safety. And we agreed today on my recommendation that we  should be also establishing ones for veterans wellbeing so we can look at how government right across  federal, state, local is dealing with the challenges that veterans face in our community. And I think that's  a very good step, which had the unanimous and enthusiastic support of all Premiers and Chief Ministers.  So we will release that report today, which basically streamlines further the federal state relations process  and ensures that the National Cabinet imperative, which is leaders making decisions, leaders providing  direction into the system about what we want to see achieved in so many areas gets the focus, not the  accretion of bureaucratic agendas, which slows everything down. And I think all the Premiers and Chief  Ministers for the support of these very important changes. And in that mode, we also established the  National Cabinet Reform Committee on Health, which was one of the small number of subgroups of  National Cabinet that we had agreed to appoint some months ago. That National Committee will be  focussing on the COVID health response, but it'll also be focused on the reforms needed to improve mental  health and suicide prevention. The work that has been done by the Productivity Commission, the work  been done by the National Suicide Prevention Adviser to me, and as well as things like the Mental Health  Royal Commission in Victoria. So that will provide a strong group to be able to take those issues forward,  as well as working together on a national response to the Aged Care Royal Commission. So aged care,  mental health, suicide prevention and the COVID health response will be the focus of that group's work  and that will report into the National Cabinet.

And with that, I'll ask the acting Chief Medical Officer Paul Kelly to provide his report.

PROFESSOR PAUL KELLY, ACTING CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER: Thanks, PM. So just a few numbers first. So  as of today, 27,476 cases in Australia, an extra 10 so far today. There's a couple of states that haven't quite  reported yet, but that's where we are at the moment at midday. No new deaths so far reported today,  905 therefore, total since the beginning. We've got only just over 200 active cases in Australia now, only  19 in hospital and nobody, nobody in intensive care. We haven't had a new aged care resident diagnosed  with COVID-19 since the 28 of September. So the second week in a row on the common operating picture  that we have where we have had no new cases of aged care residents.

So we're doing remarkably well. In the last seven days, only 109 new cases, of those, almost 80 per cent  are actually overseas acquired. So that's back to that first wave. You may remember early on in the  pandemic where most of our cases are coming from overseas, very few local cases. In fact, the 14-day  rolling average now in Victoria is continuing to decrease. It's now 5.8 cases per day and 3.1 cases per day  in New South Wales. And that's stable and no other locally acquired cases elsewhere in the country.

So we're doing extraordinarily well, continuing to do testing where that's required, and particularly in  those geographic areas where cases have been found or wastewater or sewerage testing has shown that  there may be cases. And so, again, an appeal to the Australian population. When you're asked to get a  test, please get a test. This is the way we'll know where we have problems. So we're doing remarkably  well. We are part of a global pandemic, yet the international situation is completely different. So when  you consider what has happened in the last week in the UK, over 100,000 cases in the UK alone, 2.4 million  new cases worldwide and 36,000 deaths in the last week. There are literally millions of people, active  cases of COVID right now in the world. In many parts of Europe, the intensive care units are full. The  hospitals are overflowing and lockdowns are being introduced or planned in many countries. In fact, other  than the Western Pacific region of which we're part of in terms of the World Health Organisation regions

everywhere else is doing it tough. And I think that's something we should remind ourselves of how well  Australia has done to now and also how important the issues that the Prime Minister's mentioned about  that risk stratification approach to overseas arrivals that we really take into account where those issues  are in the rest of the world.

I think I'll leave it there PM.

PRIME MINISTER: Thank you. Well, let’s just deal with National Cabinet first, and I'm sure there're other  issues you'd like to go to.

Brett, yep?

JOURNALIST: PM just on repatriation, you mentioned there's still about 2,800 vulnerable travellers  overseas. Are there extra steps being taken to get them home? And on a particular case in Lao. There's  around 40 vulnerable Australians who've been unable to get home. They've attempted to hire their own  plane they were given approval to land that plane in Cairns. They bought tickets and late yesterday they  were told that that had been cancelled. Can you update us on that charter flight, please?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, that is something you'd need to raise with the Queensland government, because  I understand that's the issue that ultimately prevented that flight from coming to Australia. I understand  it was supposed to land in Cairns. And so you would have to raise those matters, it had other clearances  already in place. So you'd have to raise that matter with the Queensland government. But you're right,  there are still remaining, a number of Australians, quite a number, who still want to come back home. And  this is the first of some 8 charter flights, which I mentioned last week that have been arranged and they'll  be taking place and where there's a need to further supplement the commercial flights that are available  to Australia to get people back to Australia. Well the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade is working  with its officers around the world to facilitate that.

So it's good to see 161 Australians coming home. Welcome home. Is my message to you as you come into  Darwin and as you go off to Howard Springs, where you'll get great care and I'm sure your families will be  looking forward to you coming back to your home cities when you're able to do that in a few weeks time.

Phil?

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given that the plan to open by Christmas and things getting under control  in Victoria. And we're coming to a period now where we're not going to have any election, state or federal,  for a while. Was there any indication out of the National Cabinet today about more willing or better  preparedness to adopt a national hotspot definition rather than resort to border closures again, in the  future, should there be more outbreaks?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, the focus of the discussion, I think, was moving more towards the public health  capability to ensure that you wouldn't need those sorts of closures in the future. I mean, where Victoria  has been able to get to now, and I'm sure Paul will agree. We're very pleased that those numbers are now  where they are. And obviously that provides the opportunity to open up again. And I'm sure all Victorians,  and particularly those in Melbourne, would like to see that occur. And I understand the Premier will make  some further announcements this weekend. That’s a matter for him to do, as he regularly does each  weekend. And so we're obviously keen to see that opening up, whether it be in the hospitality sector or  other parts of the economy. The shut down in Melbourne that has had obviously a terrible impact on

Victorians, on their mental health, on their economy. The Premier knows that. And so we continue to  encourage him and his government to move forward with reopening there. But what will prevent a further  set of measures having to be put in place in Australia, is this the strength of the public health system to  respond to any outbreaks. And that's why the work of Dr Finkel is so important because that stress testing  and match fitness of the tracing regime, I mean, it will be a good problem to have we hope, that our  contact tracers will have no sort of live experience in the weeks and months ahead. But the work that  we're doing with those tracing regimes is to ensure that they remain match fit, that they do the desktop  exercises, they do the stress testing. And so if things were to occur, if there is an outbreak somewhere,  through whatever risk that may present, then we can have confidence that we can move quickly, as indeed  New South Wales has done on so many occasions, to ensure that that outbreak can be contained. So I  look forward to the continuing opening up of the country. Western Australia, we understand there are  some special circumstances there. I've made that very clear in Western Australia. The nature of their  economy and how it works and the Premier continues to maintain his position on that. That's a matter for  him. But around the rest of the country, they have their timetables and we look forward to that opening  and the commitment by Christmas of this year. Certainly seven out of the eight states and territories will  be open and that'll be a great day for Australia. You never know, there might be eight.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the repatriation issue, officials from your Department said the other day  that there were discussions going on with Melbourne about reaccepting international flights and that that  would be a game changer. You mentioned just now that you might, we might see something happening  with Tasmania in coming weeks. How close is Melbourne to reaccepting?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, what I said about Tasmania is they are a reserve option because there is not an  international flight capacity reception arrangements in Tasmania. But I just wanted to be clear that there  was no lack of willingness on the Tasmanians part to be part of that process. They're very, very willing and  I spoke separately to Premier Gutwein earlier today. Yes, I have had these discussions with Premier Dan  Andrews and we are hoping that they'll be able to make a move on being able to receive international  arrivals. That day isn't here yet, but I know that it's a priority for the Premier because he wants to see  Victorians come home. These are Victorians who are overseas. Many of those who are seeking to come  back from around the world are from Victoria and the ability to come and quarantine in their home city I  think would be very welcome to them. So we look forward. I think that will give a great boost. If we can  get Victoria opened up again in the weeks ahead, preferably, or hopefully not longer than that, then that  will really, really give us a bit more pace in getting people back before Christmas. Of those 26,000, as I  said before, we want to get them home by Christmas and that's what we're working to achieve.

JOURNALIST: Would you take a question on another subject?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, that's a matter for your colleagues.

JOURNALIST: Will Australia move from a system of compulsory hotel quarantine to allowing quarantine  in other settings? What will be the benchmark for that shift? And how many of the Australians stranded  overseas are you committing to bring home by Christmas?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I just answered the last question. It's our goal to get those 26,000 Australians  home that were registered by Christmas. Now, whether we achieve that or not is going to be dependent  on many factors. It's going to be dependent on the flights. It's going to be dependent on the continued  cooperation of the states and territories. It's disappointing to hear about the arrangement that has  occurred up there in Cairns. But as I said, I'll leave that to the Queensland government. We've had good

cooperation from the Queensland government on these other caps. So that's what we're doing there. In  terms of other forms of quarantine, that's the very questions you're asking are the same questions we're  asking. And that's why we've set up the group today to go and do that work, identify what these other  quarantine options are and how they can be used for different areas. I mean, we're already doing that  when it comes to seasonal workers who are coming under the seasonal workers programme. That's  happening right now. That's been happening at Howard Springs. We're already doing it in Queensland,  which I think is a very innovative on-farm quarantine arrangement when it comes to some of these  seasonal workers as well. That's a good initiative. I know there's a lot of interest from universities to look  at on-campus quarantine. I know that with large corporates, there's a strong interest in the National  Coordination Commission under Nev Power’s chairmanship has been looking at how corporates  themselves can set up their own quarantine facilities under strict guidelines and standards, obviously  overseen and accredited by state health authorities. But the more of these options we can identify, the  more of the other capacity it frees up and the more we can move back to sort of more normal  arrangements. But we’re in… there is no undue haste here. There are risks here. And so what we agreed  today is before we make any of those decisions, we want to know what the options are. We want to know  whether they work. And we want to know whether they're safe. So, you know, you don't want to build  that aeroplane in the sky. You want to build it before it takes off. And that's exactly what we're doing.

JOURNALIST: Just on mental health today…

PRIME MINISTER: I'm still dealing with National Cabinet, so if you could just..

JOURNALIST: Qantas has brought home 161 Australians today. At their annual general meeting today  they've flagged that they want to be able to do COVIDSafe travel to Japan, places in South-East Asia and  had some very strong words about the border closures in Western Australia and Queensland, blaming  them for $100 million losses. Do you share those views on the borders and how far off would travel  bubbles be with Japan and South-East Asian nations?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I couldn't put a timetable on international and the airlines understand that. They  know that. We've already moved on New Zealand and that's gone well, I'm pleased with how that is  proceeding. There were no issues raised about that today. So that's good. And I think we'll just keep  moving ahead with those arrangements. I think the quarantine issues that we've just, that's the first thing  you've got to resolve. How would people quarantine if they're coming and in what arrangements and  what are the commercial arrangements for that as well? So that's the work we'll do now. I think what's  important is what we're signalling to the community and whether it's airlines or others and all those who  work in airlines who depend on it for their jobs is where we're already moving forward to try and solve  these problems so we can be proactive about this. Early on in the pandemic, of course, there were many  challenges and we had to be very responsive and reactive at those times. But now, once we've got  Australia, once again, after this Victorian wave to get the cases again under control, we can be planning  for that next step. And that's exactly what National Cabinet was doing today. I mean, you all remember  the early meetings of National Cabinet. It was, you know, a phone book of announcements on almost  every second or third night. Now, we're well past that. We know a lot more about the pandemic and how  it works and the economic issues and we've learnt a great deal and our officials have too. So it enables us  to plan for this. So on issues of borders, the states and territories have already, with the exception of  Western Australia, already indicated what they're doing there and that's welcome. The states will make  their own decisions on those and I've never disrespected that. But I've also made it very clear that borders  don't come without costs. They're there to do a job as the premiers have outlined and they can only ever  be justified on health advice, on no other grounds. But they do come at a cost. They do cost jobs. They do

impact businesses. And that cost has to be weighed up with the benefits and Premiers have to explain  that trade-off.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Productivity Commission review into mental health has not yet been  released. Why has it not yet been released and when can we expect to see this come out?

PRIME MINISTER: Before the end of the year.

JOURNALIST: Victorian officials have speculated potentially looking at using ankle bracelets for returning  travellers so they could isolate at home. How comfortable would you be with that being part of the  framework going forward?

PRIME MINISTER: Look, I'm just going to let those experts who are going to work on these options do  their job. It's not for me to do a running commentary on every thought that someone has about this or  speculates in the press. Let them just do their job, let them do their work, let them work out what will be  most effective and can best facilitate us getting back to us to a COVID normal in the future with these  arrangements. But I expect them to be innovative. I expect them to think about new ways of doing things  and they'll bring that back to the National Cabinet, the AHPPC, Paul, which you lead, will be heavily  involved in this process to ensure that the health elements of this are not compromised in any way, shape  or form. That is a strong view of the National Cabinet that that input is necessary. I mean, there's a  spectrum. Of course, Western Australia and it has expressed great reservations about it any time having  those international arrivals. I understand their position. Other states, New South Wales is already  receiving a large number. So, look, there's a spectrum of, I think, of caution when it comes to these things.  So let's just get the systems right first, and that will lead to better decisions when they are ultimately  taken.

JOURNALIST: Just in relation to Australia Post…

PRIME MINISTER: I'm still on National Cabinet, Sam, so I will come back to you. Yep?

JOURNALIST: Professor Kelly, obviously good news today about the aged care cases. But a month ago, the  Aged Care Royal Commission handed down a report about COVID in aged care and I quote, ‘Measures  implemented by the Australian Government on advice from the AHPPC were in some respects insufficient  to ensure preparedness of the aged care sector.’ It also said that there were no aged care specialists on  the Committee. Was this something that was discussed today? What have you done in response to better  that Committee and what are we doing to protect our elderly now?

PROFESSOR PAUL KELLY, ACTING CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER: So there's a Royal Commission, as we know,  and the counsel assisting has been reporting on his views in the last couple of days. There was, as you say,  that interim specific list of recommendations. I believe there were six about COVID. And the Government  is taking those on board. The first recommendation was to report by the 1st of December. So we will  report.

JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]

PROFESSOR PAUL KELLY, ACTING CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER: We've got an advisory committee that's been  set up under the auspices of the AHPPC in relation very specifically to aged care, which has a range of

aged care specialists, practitioners, geriatricians and so forth. They're meeting three times a week. So they  are really very active and giving us information and advice.

JOURNALIST: And that was discussed today at the meeting?

PRIME MINISTER: Aged care was discussed today and, as I noted, the National Reform Committee of  Cabinet, the subcommittees of health, they will be taking on those issues and reporting back up to the  National Cabinet and that's where the carriage of that will be from a state-federal basis. But all the  recommendations that were provided by the Royal Commission have been adopted and are being  implemented by the Government.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister?

PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I think we've moved on from National Cabinet? Unless… yes.

JOURNALIST: Thanks, Prime Minister. Yesterday, you said he was shocked and appalled by the gifting of  four Cartier watches to Aussie Post executives. Are you equally appalled that the head of the corporate  watchdog, no less, should have pocketed $118,000 when he shouldn't have?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, that is a matter which the Treasurer has already issued a statement on today. He  may have actually already conducted a press conference. I'm not aware, I haven't been able to check that  since I've come out today. And he is standing aside, the Chair, and the recommendations of the ANAO are  being followed.

JOURNALIST: Chirstine Holgate, the Collingwood football captain, president, I should say, Eddie McGuire  said today that what he's watching is a pile-on, a beat up, an attack on one of the most impressive women  that he's ever met by dullards. Are you, as he suggested, engaging in the politics of envy? And if $3,000  Cartier watches are so unacceptable, why are the bonuses that have been paid to these executives that  are worth hundreds of thousands of dollars more Ok?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, we are the shareholder on behalf of the taxpayers and not only the matter that  you referred to, but the other matters that came forward in evidence yesterday, is sufficient to demand  this investigation that we've put in place. And that investigation is not just into the management and the  executive into all the matters you've raised, but into the conduct of the board as well. And I didn't pull  any punches on that either. So, no, I don't agree with the assessment that Eddie has made. Eddie and I  agree on some things. We don't agree on others. But no, I don't agree with his assessment on that. I don't  think what we learnt yesterday would have passed any test with the Australian public when it comes to a  company that is owned by the Government. Companies that are owned by the Government, they I believe,  and through their board and their management executives, will be held to that standard. And I think I  applied that very firmly yesterday. Mark?

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in regards to the protection of taxpayers interests you just referred to there  and Andrew's question, the statement that the Treasurer and ASIC have released makes plain that ASIC  gave tacit approval for this arrangement, basically a blank cheque from the corporate regulator. And then  we had this instance yesterday with Australia Post. There's a lot of community interests about the level of  remuneration and bonuses that are paid in that organisation. Is it time to have a broad…

PRIME MINISTER: Australia Post?



JOURNALIST: Australia Post. But is it in those instances being current? Is it time to have a full investigation  on audit of remuneration and tax arrangements and bonus arrangements for all these government  appointees to see whether there's some sort of systemic issue and that taxpayers are being ripped off?

PRIME MINISTER: I think it will be important to receive the recommendations of the reports and enquiries  that have been initiated and it may well be that that comes forward. Let's wait and see. I'm very open to  those recommendations. Let's see. Let's see. But I think there wouldn't be a board member of a  government agency or a CEO of a government agency that didn't get my message  yesterday. I think they  got it with a rocket. And so my advice to them, is to get it.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on that, would you say that there's a culture problem in the public sector  under your watch? And do you think it's fair and reasonable that Christine Holgate will continue to be paid  while the Government conducts its four week investigation? We estimate that would be more than  $100,000.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, the answer to the first question is no. On your second question, that is a matter  upon which the Government has to take legal advice and that is what the Government has done.

JOURNALIST: Just one follow up repatriation. You said that Hobart is ready and willing to assist if that  becomes necessary. If not now, when there are thousands of Australians who want to get home now?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, the issue with Hobart is that we can replicate those arrangements, whether in  the Northern Territory, we could replicate them in Cairns. We can put them in South Australia, where  there are existing Border Force and other international receiving arrangements then we will use those  ports. And as I said, we have eight charters running now. One has just returned. And as more, if they  become necessary, we have some coming out of India, we've got some coming from South Africa, we will  use the ports where the facilities are there because that will be the most rapid way. But the most effective  way we're getting through getting Australians home is by increasing these caps. And so I welcome the  decision from the Queensland and Western Australian governments. As we keep increasing the caps,  when we get Victoria on line as well, then I think that will only aid us as we continue along the path we  are on, to get Australian open by Christmas and to get Australians home by Christmas. Thank you all very  much.

[END]

Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

