

19 October 2020

KAP will stop the sell-off of Qld

KENNEDY MP, Bob Katter says his party, the Katter’s Australian Party (KAP), will block the major parties  attempts to sell Queensland’s assets, and that KAP is tenaciously opposed to foreign ownership.

The comments come after Mr Katter and the KAP candidates for Townsville, Mundingburra and Thuringowa  held a demonstration at the Willows Markets on Sunday.

The rally involved a cardboard cut-out of Labor Leader Annastacia Palaszczuk, whose party privatised  Queensland Rail to Aurizon, and a cardboard cut-out of LNP Leader Deb Frecklington, who has announced  plans to privatise the retail electricity network in North Queensland.

Mr Katter and the KAP candidates stormed into the mock auction, where the auctioneer was selling off  Australia. Then KAP Townsville candidate, Josh Schwarz painted ‘not for sale’ on the map of Australia.

“We chanted ‘I don’t know what I’ve been told; KAP is brave and bold. I don’t know what I’ve been told;  Australia’s never going to be sold,’” Mr Katter said.

“Everywhere I go I ask people what issue concerns them most and nine times out of ten they say foreign  ownership and the sell-off of our country.

“People like my Great, Great Uncle fought and died at Gallipoli to defend our country. Nowadays not only  can we not defend ourselves, but we are actively selling off and giving the country away. Labor and LNP are  traitors to this country. The Liberals effectively sold the Port of Darwin to China and despite all the noise  they’ve made this year they haven’t taken it back.

“Labor are no better. Victorian Premier, Dan Andrews has signed his state up to the Chinese Communist  Party’s ‘Belt-and-Road’ initiative, and all that has done is bring Covid-19 into the country.”

KAP Thuringowa candidate, Julianne Wood said the event was to remind people that Queenslanders owned  the state’s assets, not the major parties.

“We are here to say no more sales,” she said.

“We want the assets kept in our hands, they are not to be sold off. We need to build the country rather than  sell it off.”

-ENDS-



Note: Photos and videos can be found here -  https://drive.google.com/folderview?id=1Sf6EPxEEAA701MtSjUpaXvDlXAaEHBaI

