

JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW   PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  TUESDAY, 1 DECEMBER 2020

SUBJECT: Morrison Government failures in aged care.

JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS: Sadly, 685 older  Australians died during the COVID outbreaks recently in Australia. Yesterday at the 11th  hour, the Government tabled its response to the Royal Commission's special COVID report.  What that government response clearly shows in black and white, is it that the Government  has yet to fully implement the recommendations of the Royal Commission in relation to  COVID, in our aged care facilities particularly. I am very concerned that at the 11th hour the  Government has tabled this document, but it has not yet fully implemented the  recommendations of the Royal Commission.

It is not acceptable for the Government to try and pretend that it has implemented these  recommendations when clearly its own response to the special report from the Royal  Commission shows that it has not. And the fact that it has not is totally and completely  unacceptable. We are seeing families getting ready to celebrate Christmas with loved ones  missing. We know that if the Government had done more sooner, that some of these  deaths were avoidable. We know the Government was not prepared. The Royal  Commission said the Government did not have a COVID-19 plan for inspections in aged  care. That was apparent. It was apparent to everybody. We are now eight months on from  the first infections in New South Wales aged care facilities. And still, the Government has  not done enough, particularly in relation to infection controls and ensuring that qualified  staff with appropriate training are in facilities around Australia in relation to infection control  in residential aged care. What we have seen, it's been an absolute tragedy and my  sympathies are extended to those families and loved ones who will look at this report and  acknowledge that the government still hasn't done enough.

The sad reality is the Government cannot be trusted and is not trusted by the Australian  public to deliver on the recommendations of the Royal Commission when it delivers its final  report in February. We've seen two reports from the Royal Commission. One, the interim  report with recommendations. This COVID special report, again with recommendations.  And what we've seen from the Government is smoke and mirrors, but very little  implementation on the ground where it matters and changes on the ground where it matters



in relation to aged care.

There is no way that Australians can have faith that Scott Morrison and his failing minister,  Richard Colbeck, can actually implement the recommendations of the Royal Commission's  final report.

JOURNALIST: Doesn't it you know, this is a huge sector implementing this many changes  that quickly, even though it is a pandemic. Do you have at least some sympathy for the  logistics here? I mean, there's a lot of logistics behind what this, what actually needs to  happen?

COLLINS: It's been eight months since the first outbreak in New South Wales, the  Government hasn't done enough soon enough. The Royal Commission has been very clear  that the Government didn't have a specific COVID plan. The Government is now  scrambling, it hasn't done enough and people just do not have faith in Scott Morrison or  Richard Colbeck to implement the recommendations.

JOURNALIST: What about in terms of the Government's report, we saw the outbreak in  Victoria. The Government's got this kind of blitz strategy of sending in teams with those  infection control specialties and all that kind of thing. Do you acknowledge that the  Government might, when there has been outbreaks, the Government has acted very  quickly or did act to get to eventually slow that outbreak down?

COLLINS: What I think was important was that the Government eventually got around to  responding together with state governments in relation to the aged care response centres. I  wrote to the Government months and months ago about the aged care response centres  and making sure that we have them available to stand up in every state and territory  because we can expect more outbreaks in Australia, in other states and territories. We're  seeing at the moment where there are active cases in South Australia, is some workers in  aged care facilities. We need to be ready. We need to be better prepared. The Government  has had eight months. I think the public are losing faith in the Government's ability to fix this  and to deal with it and to make sure we're better prepared.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119









