





SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Deputy Leader of the Government in the  Senate Senator for South Australia



TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Interview on Channel 7 Sunrise with Natalie Barr  Topics: Repatriation of Australians stranded overseas; Opening up of the Howard Springs Facility.  10/23/2020  07:33AM

Natalie Barr: The first of eight repatriation flights for Australians stranded overseas will land in Darwin later  today, where passengers will quarantine at the Howard Springs Facility for two weeks. The first flight is  coming from London carrying 175 passengers identified as most vulnerable, including nine infants who are  coming home for the first time. Minister for Trade and Tourism Simon Birmingham joins me now. Morning to  you. How long is it going to take to bring the tens of thousands of stranded Aussies home?

Simon Birmingham: Well good morning. Look, it's great news today for these 161 Australian who join the  almost 400,000 Australians who have returned home successfully since the start of the pandemic. So we’ve  seen massive numbers managed to be repatriated so far. We’ve been working hard with the states and  territories to increase the quarantine capacity and we’ve opened a new facility at Howard Springs in the  Northern Territory to make sure that's the case. And so hopefully that means we’ll be able to see more on the  further charter flights coming, as well as more over time on the commercial services coming into Australia,  and hopefully we can add to that 400,000 tally of those who’ve already returned home.

Natalie Barr: We’ve been doing stories on the 30,000-odd people stranded overseas for months now. Why  has this taken so long or why couldn't you have increased the caps on bringing people home?

Simon Birmingham: The caps are a function of the number of people that the states and territories believe  they can safely accommodate in quarantine, and what we don't want to do is undermine the safety of Australia  in terms of our successful suppression of COVID-19. We’ve seen, in Victoria, with tragic results what happens  when quarantine goes wrong and it spreads out into the community. So we’ve had to respect the states and  territories there. We’ve worked with them to add thousands of places to those quarantine caps. In opening up  the Howard Springs Facility in the Northern Territory, we’re creating another 5000 places over the next six  months. And hopefully, we can see a situation soon where Melbourne again opens up to return travellers and  safely quarantines them this time, and that again can add thousands of additional spots. But it has to all  be done in a safe and secure way, and that's why it takes a little bit of time.

Natalie Barr: Okay. Minister, thanks for your time.

Simon Birmingham: Thank you. My pleasure.

END

Media Contacts  Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.

