





SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Deputy Leader of the Government in the  Senate Senator for South Australia



TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Interview on Radio National, Breakfast with Fran Kelly.        Topics: Australia’s trade deal with Indonesia; Update on the Bali Nine members; Coronavirus;  10/02/2020  07:35AM

Fran Kelly: And in better news for bilateral ties, Indonesia has finally ratified a free trade agreement with  Australia which is expected to draw the two countries into a closer economic and diplomatic partnership.  Simon Birmingham is the Trade Minister. He’s in our Parliament House studio. Simon Birmingham, welcome  back to Breakfast.

Simon Birmingham: Good morning, Fran. Great to be with you.

Fran Kelly: Just before we get to trade, can I ask you about the five members of the Bali Nine who are  still serving life sentences in Bali. Will the Prime Minister heed Renae Lawrence’s plea there and urge the  Indonesian President to show leniency?

Simon Birmingham: Well Fran, I’d make two points on that. One is firstly, that anytime a story like this  comes up, it is a reminder to Australians that when you are travelling overseas, you do so under the laws of  other nations, not Australia, and Australia doesn’t set the rules in terms of how you’ll be treated by those legal  systems. In terms of the representations Australia makes, look, our strong history is that the best way to make  those representations is to do so privately. That’s what we’ve always done in relation to these types of  consular matters and that’s what we will continue to do rather than to play them out in a media context.

Fran Kelly: Well okay. I know you don’t want to sort of do it through a loudhailer but some of the Bali Nine  were just in their teens when they were arrested back in 2005. Matthew Norman was only 18 years old, Scott  Rush was 19. They’re now in their 30s. Has our Government been making any representations to try and  even get them home to serve the rest of their sentences?

Simon Birmingham: Australia …

Fran Kelly: Is it on our agenda?

Simon Birmingham: In a general sense, Fran, Australia always continues to monitor the consular welfare  and wellbeing of individuals even after their sentencing and [indistinct] cases through …

Fran Kelly: Well that’s a different thing. Are we making representations to change them?

Simon Birmingham: And as I said, in the best interests of individuals in these circumstances, our tried and  tested method is that it works far better to engage quietly, privately with governments than to do so with a  loudhailer across the airwaves.

Fran Kelly: Okay. Let's go to the trade deal with Indonesia. Given all the problems with China and  coronavirus, Australian producers need some good news. How long will it be before this agreement is actually  implemented and the benefits start to flow?

Simon Birmingham: I would hope now that this agreement will enter into force around April or May this  year. The Indonesian Parliament, as you said in your introduction, did make the final- take the final steps in



terms of allowing its ratification late last week; that follows the Australian Parliament having done so late last  year and now, there's just some technical details of exchanges of notes and so on to go and a 60-day clock  that is started and then we should see that entry into force. And that is great news for Australian farmers,  businesses, investors and those in Indonesia as well who see enormous opportunities for this to be a pillar of  growth in their economy which is also central to Australia's future.

Fran Kelly: Can you put it in terms that everyone will be able to relate to, what would it- what change will  this bring about for our producers? What's the major change?

Simon Birmingham: So this sees elimination, vast reduction of around 99 per cent of tariffs in terms of  goods that go into Indonesia. What that means is take rolled coiled steel, for example, there’s around five  Sydney Opera House- sorry, Sydney Harbour Bridge worth’s of steel that will be able to enter Indonesia duty  free; around 500,000 tonnes of grain. A huge boom particularly for our West Australian grain growers and big  opportunities in terms of the cattle trade, the horticulture trade but also in the services space, enormous  potential in terms of now new opportunities for Australian education providers, our universities and vocational  education providers to operate in Indonesia. Opportunities …

Fran Kelly: Have you quantified it? Is there an independent assessment of the economic impact of this  deal?

Simon Birmingham: There've been various assessments done by others not by Government, Fran, who  find significant benefits and quite clearly, Indonesia is one of the world's most populous countries; it's forecast  to have strong growth and it is right on our doorstep and it's an economic relationship that historically has  been underdone. This comprehensive economic partnership agreement gives us the opportunity to really step  it up that level in terms of trade volumes, investment flows. And from all of that, we strengthen not just the  economics but also the people to people ties and other things that fall under the comprehensive strategic  partnership such as our cooperation in national security and maritime security.

Fran Kelly: The trade relationship is anemic. I mean two-way trade is worth only about $18 billion a year.  This is- Indonesia almost our closest neighbour compared to China which is $194 billion a year, two-way  trade. Why has the economic relationship been so underwhelming?

Simon Birmingham: Well in part, because we have these significant trade barriers that have been in place  and that's become especially more relevant as Australia has struck trade agreements especially during the life  of our Government with countries like Japan, Korea, China, of course, the Trans-Pacific Partnership. And so  in relative terms, Indonesia has looked like a less attractive place to do business. I hope though that in  addition to what we’re going to do in terms of making market access to Indonesia better, make the terms of  trade more encouraging for business, that also we will see a cultural shift where Australian business as a  result of this agreement pays more attention to the opportunities of Indonesia. To its growth rates that are  currently in excess of 5 per cent, and its plans to drive that even higher, its booming middle class population  which means that the demand for consumer goods will only grow. And we know from-

Fran Kelly: Just again Minister, sorry to interrupt but given what you’ve just described there about this  booming economy so close to us, again, why has our trade relationship been so anaemic. Is it more about  politics and other diplomatic issues- tensions?

Simon Birmingham: Well no Fran, as I said, I think one factor is the relativities that higher trade barriers  with Indonesia relative to other with whom we’ve already done free trade agreements because there’s been a  barrier to trade-

Fran Kelly: Yes, but why has that all taken so long? Is that because of tensions in the relationship?

Simon Birmingham: Well, this agreement has been in negotiation for a little while but we've got it done.

Fran Kelly: A long time.

Simon Birmingham: We've got it done and that's what matters, and it now creates the opportunities for  Australian businesses to have a new chance to diversify. Ultimately, trade agreements don't automatically  mean more trade. They open doors for business and it will be up to Australian businesses as to whether they  choose to walk through that door.

But we're already undertaking a range of actions through Austrade and the other agencies of government to  make sure that when this agreement does enter into force there's plenty of support given to Australian  businesses to understand the Indonesian market, to be able to take advantage of it. And also to make sure



that Indonesian business opportunities for investment there. And one of the things I know that President  Widodo is very passionate about is the growth of the Indonesian tourism industry and there are opportunities  there for Australian investors, Australian tourism expertise to be able to help to facilitate that in training, in  planning, and investment, in ownership - all of which can provide a win for Australia as well as a win for  Indonesia in terms of meeting their job creation targets.

Fran Kelly: I want to come to tourism in a moment, but the government has been warning that the impact  of the coronavirus on the Australian economy will be significant. Obviously a trade deal like this is presumably  part of government strategies to try and reduce our very heavy reliance on China. As Trade Minister, how  concerned are you that China could soon start cancelling or delaying shipments of iron ore and LNG? I mean  they're already delaying copper shipments from Chile for instance.

Simon Birmingham: I'm very concerned about all aspects of the China slowdown, Fran. I don't want to  single out one business sector who might suffer pain ahead of others. We know already our tourism sector, as  you said, is facing pain, our seafood industry is facing pain. Orders for Australian wine are slipping and no  doubt our meat and livestock sector will face impacts. And yes, in terms of a slowdown in the Chinese  economy, in Chinese manufacturing industries our resources and energy sectors may well face impacts to  come as well. So we don't underestimate the scale of the potential impact here. It's impossible at present to  quantify because nobody knows how long this will go on for and how quickly the Chinese economy will  rebound afterwards.

But first and foremost, we've put the safety and security of Australians first. Of course opportunities like the  one we're striking today with Indonesia provide more choices for Australian businesses to diversify in the  future as well.

Fran Kelly: You’re listening to RN Breakfast. Our guest is the Federal Trade Minister, Simon Birmingham.

Minister, Joko Widodo is demanding a better deal for Indonesians wanting to travel here to Australia. They’re  currently hit with a $140 visa application fee. They have to fill out a 17-page lengthy questionnaire which has  some pretty dramatic questions on it, for instance, have you ever committed an act of genocide? By contrast  Australian tourists are allowed into Indonesia free of charge for up to a month. The President wants visas to  be quote: reciprocal and fair. Will you give him that?

Simon Birmingham: Fran, I imagine this will unquestionably be a topic of discussion not only today but  working forward.

Fran Kelly: Are we going to give ground on it?

Simon Birmingham: And what we've seen where we've done trade agreements with countries previously  is that then there is a need for increased business to business flow of individuals and there are different ways  that we can pursue that. And models of other countries have included the creation of a 10-year visa that can  therefore provide for, essentially, 10 years’ worth of short term travel in and out of the country to enable  business to be undertaken. So there are different solutions that I'm sure we will consider and work through  with Indonesia.

Fran Kelly: But you’d, presumably, want to see more Indonesian tourists in Australia. Would that help  offset the downturn in Chinese numbers due to the coronavirus?

Simon Birmingham: We would welcome more Indonesian tourists as we do from around the world and we  want to see more business travel between Australia and Indonesia too. Yes, in terms of our tourism markets,  first and foremost we're investing already in a big domestic tourism campaign and it’s part of the $76 million  urgent response the government made to assist the tourism industry at the start of this year. And we're  looking as to how we stimulate other international markets when it is right to do so. And noting of course that  the coronavirus is having global impacts in terms of people's intentions to travel, not just impacts relative to  their travel to Australia.

Fran Kelly: I’ll come back to the coronavirus in a second, but this 14-day ban on Chinese nationals  entering Australia is up later this week. Will you be arguing it be lifted to try and get the tourist sector back on  its feet?

Simon Birmingham: Fran, I'll be doing as all members of the government do and that is heeding the public  health advice, so the safety of Australians comes first. We appreciate there are real impacts, as we just  discussed, on the Australian tourism industry, other parts of Australian industry. But we should remember-



Fran Kelly: So, would you expect it to be extended then, beyond this week?

Simon Birmingham: Fran, I'm not going- I’m not the public health expert and I'm not going to pre-empt that  advice as to whether there might be some circumstances where more people might be allowed to travel or  not. They’re matters where we will hear that advice, we'll work through those issues.

I would remind you and listeners though that China had before we undertook these decisions, already made  the decision to ban group travel tour out of China and to urge China's(*) to restrict unnecessary travel to other  countries. So the impacts that we are feeling in Australia are in large part and would have occurred in any  event. We just took the additional steps on the advice of public health officials to protect the safety of the  Australians.

Fran Kelly: Okay. Can I just ask you, finally, on the coronavirus - there's been no confirmed cases  detected in Indonesia yet. Is the Australian Government concerned about that? Concerned about the testing  regime? Will this be raised in the talks?

Simon Birmingham: Our cooperation with Indonesia, and with all of our near neighbours in terms of public  health support, is real and genuine. If there is a need for any assistance in Indonesia's testing regimes, then I  have no doubt Australia would provide that. But in terms of discussions that would take place there, I'll leave  that for the Health Minister.

Fran Kelly: Simon Birmingham, thank you very much for joining us.

Simon Birmingham: Thank you, Fran.

Fran Kelly: Simon Birmingham is the Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment.



Media Contacts  Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.

