Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg







THE HON KEITH PITT MP

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia  Member for Hinkler

KEN O’DOWD  Member for Flynn

GEORGE CHRISTENSEN  Member for Dawson



MEDIA RELEASE

26 August, 2020



Labor again trying to kill off Queensland coal jobs

Labor’s latest attempt to stop any new mining jobs in Queensland has failed after a Senate  resolution paved the way for a study into the possibility of a new high efficiency low emissions  (HELE) coal-fired power station near Collinsville.

Labor tried to use the Senate to continue its war on the mining industry and block a Coalition  election commitment to investigate the feasibility of the new power station.

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt said the decision will be welcomed  in central and north Queensland.

“The Government can now get on with a feasibility of a new HELE power station in Collinsville that  would use latest technology to generate low emission and low cost energy,” Minister Pitt said.

“It was disappointing to see Labor stick to its blind anti-coal ideology to try to and stop the study,  and the potential for new mining jobs in regional Queensland.”

“Only the Coalition is standing by the mining industry and its workers in regional Queensland.

“I am looking forward to the outcome of the study that could open up opportunities for hundreds of  new regional jobs, which will is the Government’s key priority as we emerge from the coronavirus  pandemic.”

Member for Flynn Ken O’Dowd said the Government commitment recognises the mining industry as  the backbone of the local economy.

“Coal will play an important role in the global economy for many years to come and Labor should be  working with the Coalition to make the most of the opportunities the industry provides,” Mr O’Dowd  said.

Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg



“Instead they continue to abandon regional workers to chase the inner city Green vote that wants to  tear the mining industry down.”

Member for Dawson George Christensen said Labor should be thanking local miners, not trying to kill  off their jobs.

“The resources sector and its workers have gone to extraordinary lengths to stay operational during  the COVID-19 pandemic and keep local communities safe,” Mr Christensen said.

“That’s helped keep the state and national economies going during the current downturn and it will  be the mining industry that leads the recovery.

“Labor should join the Liberals and Nationals in promoting new opportunities like this for the local  mining industry, not playing games in the Senate to destroy them,” Mr Christensen said.

ENDS

Media contact: Minister Pitt - Matt Dunstan 0411 535 072

