



The Hon Stuart Robert MP  Minister for the National Disability Insurance Scheme  Minister for Government Services

MEDIA RELEASE



Authorised by S. Robert MP, Canberra

Friday, 4 September 2020

Independent review into the circumstances relating

to the death of Ms Ann-Marie Smith

The NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commissioner, Mr Graeme Head AO, has today released the report  from the independent review commissioned by the Commissioner in response to the tragic death of  National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) participant, Ms Ann-Marie Smith, in South Australia.  The ‘Robertson Review’ was conducted by former Federal Court Judge, the Hon Alan Robertson SC.

Ms Smith’s death remains subject to a criminal investigation by South Australia Police, which has  resulted in a charge of manslaughter against her former carer.

The Robertson Review examined the adequacy of the regulation of the supports and services provided  to Ms Smith and the action taken by the NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission (NDIS  Commission) in the exercise of its regulatory functions.

Mr Robertson did not identify any significant failings in the NDIS Commission’s performance of its  functions. Mr Robertson also made a number of broader observations for legislative and policy  changes to better support vulnerable or at-risk NDIS participants.

Minister Robert said he shared the deep distress and concern felt across the Australian community in  response to the death of Ms Smith.

‘The Government has already taken action to strengthen systems and processes to bolster support for  vulnerable or at-risk NDIS participants,’ Minister Robert said.

‘Since the beginning of the coronavirus outbreak, the National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA)  has reached out to around 70,000 participants who have been identified as being at greater risk, not just  to coronavirus but to the impacts of the pandemic, including isolation.

‘Proactive outreach activities to ‘check-in’ on NDIS participants will be a key feature of the NDIS  going forward.’

A number of Mr Robertson’s observations go to improved information sharing between the NDIA and  the NDIS Commission, as well as with state and territory governments. In recognising this, the NDIA  and NDIS Commission have already agreed a memorandum of understanding and a range of  Operational Protocols that provide for improved two-way exchange of information.

Minister Robert said this is already assisting the NDIA in identifying vulnerable or at-risk participants  who may require more regular check-ins, and providing the NDIS Commission with enhanced  information to monitor and investigate NDIS provider practices and processes.



Authorised by S. Robert MP, Canberra





A number of the observations involve responsibilities of state and territory governments outside of the  NDIS, such as child protection, public guardian or law enforcement. At their meeting in July 2020,  disability Ministers agreed to a project to improve the identification and support for vulnerable or at-risk people with disability. This project is ongoing and is due to be finalised in by the end of 2020.

‘I welcome state and territory Governments’ commitment to reducing the risks for people with  disability, and look forward to continuing our collective work to improve the quality and safety of  supports and services accessed by people with disability,’ Minister Robert said.

The Robertson Review has also supported specific legislative changes that build on steps the  Government is already taking to strengthen and expand the regulatory framework as a result of  feedback from other inquiries, such as the independent review of the NDIS legislation by Mr David  Tune AO.

Minister Robert said the Government will consider these changes alongside existing proposed  legislative amendments, in close consultation with people with disability and state and territory  governments.

‘We currently have a Bill before Parliament to strengthen the banning powers of the NDIS  Commission, so that we can prevent unsuitable providers and workers from working with NDIS  participants, regardless of whether they are active in the sector or not,’ Minister Robert said.

To support the work of the NDIS Commission, the Morrison Government can today announce it is  providing it with approximately 100 more staff and an additional $92.9 million over the next four  years.

This follows a scheduled review of the NDIS Commission’s operating budget in early 2020, as was  envisaged when the new regulator was announced in the 2017-18 Budget.

‘This additional funding will ensure the NDIS Commission has the resources required to expand into  Western Australia (which had not signed up to the national NDIS model in early 2017), carry out its  vital role in regulating NDIS providers, improve the quality and safety of NDIS supports and expand  its compliance and investigative capacity into disability services.’

‘We will take no chances with the safety of people with disability,’ Minister Robert said.

‘We are committed to ensuring the quality and safeguarding framework we have put in place for NDIS  participants is as robust, comprehensive and responsive as it can be.

‘Our work will continue to be informed by this report and the other independent investigations and  inquiries underway, including the Royal Commission into Violence, Abuse, Neglect and Exploitation  of People with Disability.’

Anyone who has a concern that a support or service provided by an NDIS provider is not, or may not  be, safe should report it to the NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission on 1800 035 544, or to  www.ndiscommission.gov.au/about/complaints

The report from the independent review by Mr Robertson is available at www.ndiscommission.gov.au

[ENDS]  Media contact:  Minister Robert’s Office (02) 6277 7200

