

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA  THURSDAY, 10 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Appalling situation with the intervention on Auspost  Executive; Victoria.

TOM CONNELL, HOST: Deputy Labor leader, Richard Marles, thanks for your  time. We'll get to the Melbourne situation in a moment what did you make of  this story first of all?

RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR  PARTY: I think this is astounding. And the double standard that we've got here  is absolutely palpable. I mean you've got a Government which is working with  Christine Holgate and Pauline Hanson to put in place regulations which exist  now which effectively doubled the delivery time in capital cities. You've got  Australia Post saying to people that they can't expect their mail to be delivered  on time on Father's Day. But if you are Pauline Hanson, you can contact the  CEO of Australia Post and make sure that your stubby holders get delivered to  the council towers in Victoria. That is an appalling situation. And it says  everything about how this Government goes about its business but how there is  a complete double standard out there. Pauline Hanson can get delivery straight  away, via personally the CEO, everything else has to wait for their mail.

CONNELL: Well is there any evidence Pauline Hanson was the one? Wasn't it  Australia Post that were told the deliveries wouldn't happen and then insisted  this is a basic right, that you can't edit someone's mail for want of a better  word?

MARLES: Of course, and it is a basic right. And we should be getting our mail  delivered on time and people should have got their mail on Father's Day. And I  think a regulation that the Government has put in place which sees the delivery  times of mail almost doubled in capital cities is appalling. Mail should be

delivered on time. I'm just not sure why Pauline Hanson gets personal  exception in circumstances where the CEO of Australia Post personally  intervenes to make sure that her mail actually gets delivered in the way that she  wants. I mean, the Government from the outset of corona have been using this  crisis, the coronavirus crisis, to cut services to Australia Post, to cut delivery  times. That's what's going on here and that's what the regulation which has  gone through has done-

CONNELL: Alright, well-

MARLES: It's gone through with the support of Pauline Hanson; Christine  Holgate is right there in the middle of it. I think this is scandalous.

CONNELL: And obviously the issue the Government and Australia Post say  was that it wanted to prioritise packages, a lot of them being sent at the  moment. But let me just clarify this; you're saying the Australia Post boss here,  Christine Holgate has done anything wrong.

MARLES: Well, what we're seeing here is personal intervention at the level of  the CEO of Australia Post when it comes to Pauline Hanson's mail. That's what  we're seeing. But when it comes to everybody else’s mail-

CONNELL: Is that wrongdoing?

MARLES: Well Tom, I will tell you what is wrong; what is wrong here is that  every other Australian has to receive a message from Australia Post that their  mail on Father’s Day, is going to be delayed. That we've got a regulation which  has now gone through which sees delivery times almost doubled. That's what  applies to everybody in Australia but if you are Pauline Hanson you manage  somehow to see the CEO of Australia Post act in your interests to make sure  your mail is delivered on time. I don’t think that any of those-

CONNELL: Are you drawing the direct link between legislation that One Nation  supported and the CEO weighing in, in this circumstance?

MARLES: Have a look at the timing. Have a look at the timing, Tom. And I think  all of this is absolutely outrageous. At the end of the day, the Australia Post  CEO has to explain why she in respect of one individual has gone to such  lengths to ensure that her mail is delivered on time whereas the rest of  Australia has to wait and not see their mail delivered on time for Father’s Day.

CONNELL: We've invited her onto the program, so still welcome in case  anyone at Auspost is watching, still welcome to come on and explain the issue.  Let's move on to the situation in Melbourne. Just interested, what did you make  of Bill Shorten's comments? He said that he would have liked restrictions to

come off earlier. His indication here is this is a bit of a conservative path out by  Daniel Andrews. Do you agree?

MARLES: Look, the Roadmap that's been put in place has been developed on  the basis of all of the best medical advice. This is a difficult situation that we're  in. But I think we need to take a step back and just remember two things; firstly,  Victorians are doing a magnificent job in abiding by a really difficult set of  regulations towards an end and that end is being achieved. You know the  numbers are coming down. I'm not sure what choices the Victorian Government  have here. At the end of the day we've got a Prime Minister who is saying we  need to see borders be opened around the country. I mean, I think it would be  good if we could have borders open around the country. But if you are sitting in  Gladys Berejiklian’s chair, what do you need to see happen in Victoria in order  for you to open up Victoria-New South Wales border and let's work our way  back from here. When you think about it through that lens, I'm not sure that  Victoria has any choice but to go down the path that Daniel Andrews is taking  us.

CONNELL: Well let's talk through the choice then. What's being asked here  including by epidemiologists and even some that were asked to contribute to  the modelling, is why not have different parameters? You can have- this might  be termed plan A the most conservative route, but why not have a plan B that  talks about improved contact tracing and possible earlier dates and indeed  higher numbers to open at. Because if you have better contact tracing you don't  need the cases to get as low. Wouldn't that have provided some more hope for  Melburnians?

MARLES: Well first, I think there is hope. The numbers are coming down. The  measures that have been put in place already by Daniel Andrews are working.  But what will be required for the New South Wales Government to make a  decision to open the border with Victoria? And I don't say that with any  criticisms of the New South Wales Government, I can well understand the  situation they’re in. I think when you see it through that prism it becomes clear  that the problem that the Victorian Government's trying to solve here is pretty  difficult. And the other point is that we absolutely cannot under any  circumstances see a third wave hit this state- that would be appalling. This is  difficult and difficult decisions are being made and I get here's a bit of a pile on  going on in relation to the Andrews Government at the moment. You can make  criticisms and pick holes here and there; at the end of the day no one denies  the fact that it's a really a situation, a significant intervention has been put in  place by the government and it is working. But what we're seeing from our  Prime Minister, and bear in mind Victoria is part of Australia and the federal  government has a whole lot of responsibility here, is a guy who is basically  leading the cheer squad for the pile on in respect of Daniel Andrews. I mean we  don't have a Prime Minister here who's rolling up his sleeves standing shoulder-

to-shoulder with the Victorian Government in order to get us through this crisis,  he has gone to the sidelines and is doing nothing but heckling.

CONNELL: What he wants to do, and is pushing for is to see the in-depth  modelling and see if there is a possible earlier way out. That would be helpful  wouldn't it? And not just government-to-government level, but why not get all  the information out there, we don't have the full modelling released. Don’t we  need all the information on the table here. This is a huge decision. There's not  just health advice, they go, right, here's what to do. There's modelling, there's  parameters, there's decision, there's risk appetite. Don't we deserve to know all  that information when we're told that the decision that's been made based on  it?

MARLES: Of course, the more information that you can put into the, or  governments can put in the public domain the better, there's no doubt about  that. But why does Scott Morrison choose to make (inaudible)? Why isn’t Scott  Morrison making the basis of his activity standing shoulder-to--shoulder with the  Victorian Government in dealing with what is obviously a difficult situation?  Instead what we've got is a Prime Minister who is using this moment to point  the finger at Daniel Andrews and try and have the whole world blame him for  everything that's going wrong in relation to the coronavirus, that is one of the  most low rent acts that I've seen a Prime Minister engage in. This is not a man  who is getting into the mix here and was actually making a difference. This is a  guy who has relegated himself to the sidelines as doing nothing other than  being the cheerleader for those who want to pile on in relation to Daniel  Andrews, in the hope that he escapes any blame. Let's be clear, the most lethal  part of everything that has occurred in Victoria has happened in relation to aged  care, wholly and solely the responsibility of the federal government, and where  is Scott Morrison in relation to that? I mean we are not seeing a Prime Minister  here. We're just seeing a guy -

CONNELL: That continues to be Federal Labor’s emphasis, not the handling  by the Andrews Government, not the hotel quarantine issue, 99 per cent of the  second wave stemming from that, not the fact that contact tracing by Daniel  Andrews, his own concessions this week was just not up to scratch. Shouldn't  you be commenting about that as well?

MARLES: But Labor is doing that, Tom. Were there problems with hotel  quarantining? Yes. Daniel Andrews has acknowledged that. Is there problems  with contact tracing? Yes. And Daniel Andrews has acknowledged that. Daniel  Andrews has stood up for something like 70 days in a row and taken absolute  responsibility for failings that have occurred in this pandemic-

CONNELL: But what is responsibility if we can’t find out the basic things such  as who made the decision on quarantine and if it was a decision somewhere



that ultimately goes back to a minister, that minister would lose their job, that's  responsibility isn't it?

MARLES: And in the very first days in relation to this, Daniel Andrews sets up a  Judicial Inquiry which is looking at all of those questions without fear or favour,  and we're going to get to the bottom of all of that. But put that in contrast to  what we see from Scott Morrison. Scott Morrison isn’t doing anything remotely  like this when it comes to aged care, he's not standing up and taking  responsibility day in and day out in relation to those issues, I mean there is a  vast gulf between the way those two people are leading.

CONNELL: Whomever has made that decision, whoever's ultimately  responsible for that hotel quarantine decision in this inquiry, I mean they should  lose their job, right?

MARLES: Well let's see what the Inquiry says I'm not about to prejudge that,  but let's see how that rolls out. But the important point-

CONNELL: Alright.

MARLES:  The important point to understand now, Tom, in terms of those  question is that wherever that leads it was initiated by Daniel Andrews at the  get go. No hesitation at all, acceptance of responsibility, putting in place a  process where they get to the bottom of the issues of things that have gone  wrong. We do not see anything remotely like that from Scott Morrison

CONNELL: Right out of time, Richard Marles. We'll talk again soon, Thank you.

MARLES: Thanks, Tom.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363









