

MADELEINE KING MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE  MEMBER FOR BRAND

ADDRESS TO AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

PERTH

WEDNESDAY, 25 NOVEMBER 2020

*** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY ***

Thank you.

Can I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet here  today, the Whadjuk-Noongar people.  I pay my respects to their elders past, present and  emerging.

I’d like to thank to the Australian Institute of International Affairs for inviting me tonight for  this important discussion about trade.  The work you do in promoting a greater  understanding of international affairs in Australia is highly valuable.

Australia is a nation built on trade.

So before I come to some of the more contemporary and newsworthy issues affecting  trade, I’d like to delve into some of our history.

Tens of thousands of years before European settlement in Australia, our First Nations  peoples established valuable domestic trade routes stretching for thousands of kilometres.

Boomerangs made in Central Australia found their way up to Arnhem Land and nearby  islands.  Didgeridoos from Arnhem Land reached Central Australia.

Pearl shells from the Kimberley were traded into South Australia.

The indigenous people of WA’s Mid-West mined ochre from the Weld Ranges for use in  medicine, rock art, and in the preservation of animal skins, and they delivered it on foot to  neighbouring tribes.

International trade started in the 1700s when Sulawesi fishermen reached Australia’s

northern coast and discovered it was bountiful in trepang -- or sea cucumbers -- which  were in high demand in China.

In return for access to certain fishing areas, the Aboriginal people received goods such as  cloth, tobacco, rice and knives.

This trade had a positive influence on the local people.  It’s believed that some indigenous  men travelled to Sulawesi and back aboard the Makassan boats, and learnt to speak their  language.

The Makassan culture was reflected in the songs and dances of the northern Indigenous  people.  Fast forward a few hundred years and international trade remains an overwhelmingly  positive story for Australia.

It’s also beneficial for our trading partners in the region, where hundreds of millions of  people have been lifted out of poverty in the past several decades.

In modern-day Australia, one in five of workers is employed in trade-related activities.  Australia is the world’s largest exporter of iron ore, coal, natural gas and wool.

We are the second biggest exporter of beef and aluminium ores. We’re fourth for wine,  cotton and sugar. Fifth for pearls and silver. Sixth for gold. And so the list goes on.

Here in Western Australia, the China-fuelled resources investment boom that began in the  mid-2000s transformed our state’s export sector into a genuine powerhouse.

WA’s merchandise exports - led by our resources and agricultural products -- now account  for about half of the nation’s total exports.

And this year, the export success of our miners and farmers has really cushioned the  sharp blow that COVID-19 has delivered to our national economy.

Australia relies on open markets and a rules-based multilateral trade system in order to sell  our goods and services to the world.

But as I speak, there are genuine reason to be worried about the immediate future.  For starters, of course, the global economic and trade outlook is bleak.

Our economy is in a deep recession - as are most of our major trading partners.

The World Trade Organisation has forecast a 9.2 per cent decline in the volume of world  merchandise trade in 2020.

The good news is this projected decline is less than what the WTO had forecast back in  April, as the first wave of the pandemic took hold.

And the falls in Asia of around 4.5 per cent will be smaller than in other regions.

Trade volume growth is expected to rebound to 7.2 per cent in 2021 -- but will remain well  below the pre-crisis trend.



The pandemic has closed borders and damaged global supply chains.

On top of this, we’ve seen a drastic breakdown in recent years of the multilateral system  that, since World War II, has fostered open trade and underpinned global economic  growth.

I sincerely hope the incoming Biden administration in the United States can help to restore  American leadership to the multilateral system. Time will tell.

Australia must do all it can to work with the US and other like-minded nations in defending  free trade and reviving the World Trade Organisation, which has been debilitated in recent  times.  As you can see, it is a difficult and precarious climate for trade.

And that’s before we even discuss Australia’s tensions with China, which are making life  even more uncertain for exporters.

The list of Australian exporters who have had trouble getting their products into China  seems to grow by the week.

So far, the trade disruptions have affected barley, wine, red meat, coal, cotton, seafood,  sugar and timber.

Other industries are left to wonder if they’re next.

Make no mistake - billions of dollars in trade and thousands of Australian jobs are at risk.

Over the past few weeks, I’ve been speaking to a number of Australian business people  who are deeply concerned that the Government is not doing enough to seek to resolve  these tensions.

They fear the Government has no real plan to repair the trading relationship between  Australia and China.

Our exporters are appealing to the Government for leadership.

Some of them feel abandoned.

I am often asked: Well, what would Labor do differently?

My immediate response is to say that Labor is in opposition and it is therefore up to the  Morrison Government to draw on its diplomatic resources to fix this situation.

But I do have some ideas that could help, and I’ll share a few of them with you tonight.

First - let me acknowledge that Labor understands the relationship with China is  increasingly complex and we believe it must always be managed in the national interest.

But we can stand up for our values at the same time as we have a productive trading  relationship with China.  This has happened before - in fact, it was the case for decades.



The Government should be making it clear at every available opportunity that Australia  seeks a strong economic relationship with China.

That although Australia will have differences with China, we cannot decouple.

Trade is, after all, mutually beneficial. The biggest losers from a reduction in trade volume  are the Australian and Chinese people. That message needs to be hammered home.

Second - the Government must immediately appoint a dedicated Minister for Trade to work  on resolving this crisis.

Some of you may know that the Government last month effectively downgraded the Trade  portfolio by making Senator Simon Birmingham the Finance Minister as well as  Government Leader in the Senate.

That’s in addition to his portfolios of Trade, Tourism and Investment.

He’s now the Minister for Everything!

Apparently, the Prime Minister will appoint a new Trade Minister at some point soon -- but  as yet we don’t know who that will be or when that will be.

Frankly, there couldn’t be a worse time for this important portfolio to be in limbo.

Third - the Government should draw on the expertise of Australian businesses who  actually do business with China.

The agricultural and resources industries, along with many others, have long-term trade  links with China.  They are the ballast in the relationship.

These business leaders have a legitimate place in this important national discussion.  Yet those who do speak up about the need to strengthen the relationship with China often  have their motives questioned, labelled as ‘China sympathisers”.

Geoff Raby, Australia’s former Ambassador to China, lamented this month that China  policy in Australia has been reduced to a binary debate between "sycophancy and  hostility".  This has to change.

The Government could start by respectfully listening to corporate leaders who hold grave  concerns about the way the relationship is being managed.

Fourth - the Prime Minister needs to step up and lead this important national discussion  about China.

As our former foreign minister Julie Bishop said recently, we need some “very calm and  considered diplomacy” if we are to resolve this situation.

What we see instead is a Prime Minister who has failed to admonish inflammatory and  xenophobic comments about China by some of his own backbench MPs.



China, of course, takes note of these comments. This only serves to make a bad situation  even worse.

Finally - the Government must develop a clear strategy to genuinely diversify our export  markets.  This is something I have been speaking about for some time.

Our exporters need a Government that does more than simply point to free trade  agreements and hope that this leads to increase in trade.

True diversification takes years and it needs real commitment. But this Government has  failed to do the hard work to open up new markets.

The most glaring examples of this is their failure to implement 19 of the 20 priority  recommendations of the 500-page India Economic Strategy that was released back in  2018.  This excellent report, written by former DFAT secretary Peter Varghese, laid out a blueprint  for how we as a nation can improve our deteriorating economic ties with India.

It found that no single market over the next 20 years offered more growth opportunities  than India -- in areas such as education, agriculture, energy, resources, tourism,  healthcare, financial services, infrastructure, science and sport.

But here we are more than two years later -- and just one of the 20 recommendations has  been acted upon.

Meanwhile, official figures show India’s share of Australian merchandise exports is more  than 30 per cent below the 2018 level when Mr Varghese delivered his report.

It’s a similar story with another of our emerging giant neighbours, Indonesia, which  accounts for just 2 per cent of Australia's exports.

Of course, we hope that the Indonesia-Australia Comprehensive Partnership Agreement,  which came into effect in July and was supported by Labor, will help to boost trade  volumes.  But more work needs to be done, and the Government must lead it.

Free-trade agreements and encouraging words by politicians achieve only so much.

This government seems to believe that it's the responsibility of Australian companies to  open up new markets.

But it is evident from our history that little will happen unless the Commonwealth takes the  lead.  Former prime ministers like Bob Hawke and John Howard understood that new trade and  investment relationships do not occur by accident.

They both played active roles in actively overseeing and lending support to business deals  that opened up new markets in China for iron ore and LNG.



Finally - I will conclude by restating my belief that Australia can thrive in the future if we  remain a nation engaged with the world.

A nation that is open to trade. A nation that shuns insularity.

Ten days ago, Australia signed the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, a free  trade agreement that includes 15 of our Indo-Pacific neighbours, including China.

The RCEP has the potential to enable greater regional economic integration, creating  better rules-based trading arrangements that will provide more certainty for Australian  businesses.

Labor has always supported trade agreements that create jobs for Australians, boost  economic growth and improves living standards.

In fact, Labor was the party that famously opened up Australia to competition in the 1980s  and helped make our exports globally competitive.

I hope to one day be a member of a Labor government to help continue that legacy.  Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ANDREW BURRELL 0437 290 112







