

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING  MEMBER FOR SYDNEY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS ALAN JONES SHOW  THURSDAY, 26 NOVEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Australian Special Forces Report; COVID-19.

ALAN JONES, HOST: Let's go to our female panel, Tanya Plibersek, the former Deputy  Leader of the Labor Party and Amanda Stoker the Liberal Senator from Queensland. May I just  say to my viewers, we're not here to agree with one another. We are really here to think and  my panellists know we want their views. They are under no limits, say it as you see it. You're  the voter at the end of the day, you'll have the final say. From time to time of course I stick my  sixpence worth in don't I? As you would expect. Now look, it's no use gilding the lily. Anthony  Albanese a nice bloke. As Richo said last night, as I'm speaking now more than 80 per cent of  our electricity is coming from black coal. If Albo can't bring himself to acknowledge that he's  gone. And significant sections of the Liberal Party know no better. Honestly Matt Kean the  Liberal Minister for something has gone mad. The point being, given the volatility of politics  there could be a new leader of the Labor Party come the next election and that'll really rattle  the Coalition. But the Morrison Government has done appallingly on this Brereton Report. The  next challenge facing Scott Morrison will be the Ministerial reshuffle. Will people as talented as  Amanda Stoker get a guernsey? No government can talk about wanting the nation to be the  world's best in anything, if they can't pick the best to govern. Now, I don't want to dwell on this  Brereton Report, but I do want a comment from both of the ladies. Amanda you first because  you were a lawyer of significant distinction, a Commonwealth prosecutor, a judge's associate  in the Supreme Court of Queensland and the High Court of Australia. The Prime Minister's first  comments on this report was to warn the nation of brutal truths. Amanda this report’s been  written from evidence that's not been tested in a court. How can a Prime Minister talk to the  world about brutal truths?

SENATOR AMANDA STOKER: Well the brutal truth with which we are faced is that Brereton  in his inquiry reached the conclusion that non enemy combatants had been killed and that was  outside the heat of battle. Now that will need to be tested-

JONES: It was an allegation Amanda.

STOKER: I agree-

JONES: It’s not a truth

STOKER: That will need to be subjected to the scrutiny of a judicial process-



JONES: But I know you're in a difficult position Amanda, but you're a lawyer. That is not a  truth. It's an allegation, you know the difference. It's a big difference.

STOKER: And what's important is that anybody to whom such an allegation is directed has the  benefit of the opportunity to have a full judicial process where the evidence is presented in full.  It is tested according to the laws of evidence. And accountability is attributed appropriately.

JONES: It’s not a truth! The Prime Minister of Australia told the world it was a truth. Tanya, this  inquiry was not bound by the rules of evidence. There's now talk that all of these men, 3000 of  them or more will be stripped of their meritorious unit citation. But worse than that there are  reports today that the Government were planning months ago to strip the meritorious unit  citation from those who served in Afghanistan. Five months before Defence had seen the  report and now 10 have been asked to show cause why they shouldn't be sacked. Isn't this  standing justice on its head?

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING, TANYA PLIBERSEK: It's for the  Government to explain why they're making decisions like that. But I go back to first principles  Alan. Of course people are innocent until proven guilty. And this is the beginning of a process.  These reports do contain some very concerning allegations. But those allegations have to be  properly tested in a court of law with the proper rules of evidence and so on.

JONES: But the Prime Minister said they were truths Tanya.

PLIBESERK: Alan, I think one of the things that it's really important to remember is we do  support our troops overseas. We are grateful to them. They serve on behalf of our whole  nation. And the complaints in these reports were initiated by serving personnel and former  personnel because they saw things that concerned them. They are whistleblowers, and they  deserve our support too.

JONES: That can be investigated

PLIBERSEK: That must be investigated properly.

JONES: He said they were brutal truths. Now Tanya, both of you. How do you defend the  nation by demoralising those who are asked to defend it, Amanda? I can tell you - you must  have had calls - people are really genuinely upset. This has opened old wounds and old  sores.

STOKER: My colleague Andrew Hastie, who as you know has served in the SAS as a troop  vommander put this, I think really well earlier this week when he wrote about it in the Aus. And  the way he put it is to say, we protect the honour and the standing of our service men and  women when we take these allegations seriously, when we tackle them head on and we don't  hide them from view. I have had feedback from members of the community in line with the  comments that you read out shortly before this segment on your show. But I've also had really  strong feedback from serving and former members of the ADF saying I don't want my unit or  my service to be tarred by allegations like this, and so I want it to be flushed out and cut out as  much as is possible. There's no reason why this kind of scrutiny is incompatible with  perpetually increasing the capability and the morale-

JONES: But Amanda no one is objecting to scrutiny. But see Tanya there are thousands of  these people who served in Afghanistan. They're all threatened. You've got Campbell writing to



the Governor-General to take away their meritorious citation award. All of them, no one's  named. All I'm saying, no one's objecting to scrutiny, but we cannot have this level of  demoralisation, and there is a lot of hurt out there. Do you have a final comment about that  Tanya?

PLIBERSEK: I think Alan it's really important to be very clear that we are we are grateful. We  are proud of our serving personnel, current and former. And that allegations against a few  should not tar the reputation of the many, many brave men and women who have served on  behalf of their country.

JONES: Okay well I want to ask you one question before you go, this is called repetition by the  way. Now I know both of you are married and so you don't have to get married on Saturday.  But if you were getting married on Saturday under these ridiculous coronavirus rules and no  one can give me a piece of paper that says this is why we're doing it. If you get married on  Saturday, you can have 150 at the wedding, but if you get married next Saturday can have  300. Amanda what's going to happen between this Saturday and next Saturday. Can someone  please tell me I'm just a dumb person? Can you tell me?

STOKER: The Prime Minister and the Morrison Government have been trying really hard to  get transparency and consistency out of the state governments in the way that they apply  these restrictions. It's very hard to understand in a similar comparable example how it is that  it's okay to have people confined in an aeroplane at well more than one per square meter, but  you can't have more than two per square meter in an open-top boat, which is core to the  tourism industry getting back on its feet. All of this kind of madness demands consistency. It  demands the evidence that underpins it.

JONES: But you've transition beautifully from being a lawyer to a politician because you didn't  answer my question. Tanya before we go, you can get married on Saturday married have 150,  but next Saturday 300. What's happening between this Saturday and next Saturday that I don't  know about?

PLIBERSEK: Alan I think we should go back to the to the old days of a few months ago where  you could have half a dozen and save an absolute fortune on dinners for people that you're  barely know and who your parents invited to your wedding. I think there'd be a lot of people  who are worried about the fact that we're increasing the number allowed at weddings.

JONES: Yes you're most probably right, certainly those who have to pay the bill. Thank you  both always, lovely to talk to you. Talk to you next week. There they are Tanya Plibersek and  Amanda Stoker.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350





