

THE HON SUSSAN LEY MP  MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT

THE HON GREG HUNT MP  MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEDIA RELEASE

Sunday  22 November 2020

AUSTRALIA TO LEAD IN ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE   The World Health Organisation has announced the appointment of Minister for the Environment Sussan  Ley to the first One Health Global Leaders Group on Antimicrobial Resistance, which will promote urgent  action to combat the threat of antimicrobial resistance worldwide.

In accepting her appointment, Minister Ley said she would be a strong advocate for awareness and  global action to protect human health, animal health and our natural environment.

“Tackling antimicrobial resistance is a priority for the Australian Government,” Minister Ley said.

“In Australia, we are taking forward a joint initiative combining health, agriculture and environment to  develop a One Health Master Action Plan to support our National Antimicrobial Resistance Strategy,  2020 and Beyond.

“The strategy reflects a commitment to addressing the threat antimicrobial resistance poses across  different sectors including Australia’s unique and diverse environment.

“Antimicrobials enter the environment every day and can accumulate over time, leading to increased  resistance and potentially harmful effects on human and animal populations.

“Drug resistance also endangers the world’s ability to fight numerous diseases, including COVID-19.

“The formation of the global leaders group represents a major step forward towards tackling  antimicrobial resistance and solving these international issues.

“As part of the One Health Global Leaders Group, I will be a strong advocate for our collective health as  well as the livelihoods of Australians and our natural environment.”

Minister for Health Greg Hunt welcomed Minister Ley’s appointment, and said the Government was  taking strong steps to address the risk of antimicrobial resistance.

“The Australian Government has committed $22.5 million in this year’s Budget to address the priorities  identified in Australia’s National Antimicrobial Resistance Strategy - 2020 & Beyond,” Minister Hunt  said.

“We are working to ensure Australian prescribers are turning to antibiotic, antiviral, antifungal and  antiparasitic medicines only when they are absolutely necessary.

“Antimicrobial Resistance is a significant global health threat and we are committed to taking action to  protect human health, animal health and our natural environment.”

To find out more visit the website https://www.who.int/groups/one-health-global-leaders-group-on-antimicrobial-resistance

ENDS

Environment Minister’s office:   John Brady 0427 867 638  Ben Flores 0448 463 094

Minister Hunt’s office:  Matt Kelly 0417 101 712

