

T h e  H o n . D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

TRANSCRIPT

Sunday 9th August 2020

Minister Littleproud IV Sky News

KIERAN GILBERT: Let’s bring in the Agriculture Minister David Littleproud now. Minister,  thanks so much for your time. As Andrew reported there, increased anger very evident  from the Treasurer, from the Assistant Treasurer Michael Sukkur this week, really about  the hotel quarantining. Given we came so close as a nation to getting on top of this thing,  do you share their frustration as well?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: There’s total frustration across the country, I think. We braced  ourselves for victory and then it’s been snatched away from us through the actions of a  few. And that just goes to show how vulnerable we are to this virus and that every protocol  needs to be lived up to to the letter T. It cannot be let go and if it does then you get these  outbreaks, and it’s cost the Australian taxpayer an extra $15 billion just because people  couldn’t do what they were being asked to do. That’s where the frustration comes and the  reality is each and every one of us have to pay that back on top of what we’ve already  spent. We’re racking up a fairly big debt and it just goes to show, and it’s beholden on  each and every one of us that we have a responsibility to one another to do what we’re  being asked to by our health officials, to get this right. Because if we don’t, it’s going to  cost the next generation a lot of money, and we’re going to have to repay that. This is not  something you can just walk away from, this is something that’s going to be there for  generations. So every Australian has a responsibility, we’re in this together, and we’re  expectant of every government to make sure that the protocols they’ve put in place are  policed, and policed properly so that we can get ourselves and our economy up and going  again and get ourselves out of this COVID recession.

KIERAN GILBERT: One of the key elements in support at the moment is JobKeeper.  Should businesses in a downturn, say in Queensland or WA, which aren’t facing  shutdowns like Victoria, should they get the same support as Victorian businesses which  are completely locked down under stage four?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: This is a national program, Australia’s in this together. While  Victoria’s got some significant issues at the moment, we’ve made it very clear that all  Australians will be treated equally on this and we’ll continue to work through and be agile  around the application of JobKeeper, in a calm methodical way, and continue to review it  as the economy continues to move and evolve out of this COVID-19 recession. We’ll  continue to change as the circumstances change, and that’s what the Australian public  would expect, that you be treated equally. But obviously they’d expect that the  Government is agile enough to move with the circumstances as we have from the very  start of this. Obviously we’d like to see Victoria get out of these lockdowns sooner rather  than later. Because that means that the entire economy starts to benefit from that. They’re

Transcript



TRANSCRIPT



25 per cent of the nation’s economy in Victoria, so it’s important that we get them up and  going again and we can ease some of those restrictions and get movement of the  economy. And there are some businesses that are doing okay, and they’ll be filtered out of  JobKeeper quite appropriately as we continue to move through this. But it’s a national  program and it’ll continue to be treated as such.

KIERAN GILBERT: The PM and Treasurer have both called on the states to step up their  fiscal contribution in this next phase of support. But how much scope is there at the state  level to do that?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, it depends on the state, obviously, in terms of some of their  previous financial management. The only reason that we’ve been able to spend what we  have, 16 per cent of GDP, to support the economy is because of the economic  stewardship that we’ve taken over the last six years, the prudential requirements that we  put in place around our spending to ensure that we’ve got money for these dire times. And  I think that’s what Australians expect of their governments of all levels, and it’s now  beholden on the states also to do some heavy lifting. The Federal Government has been  out there doing the majority of it. When we’re doing 16 per cent of GDP and they’re around  2 to 3 per cent, you’d have to say that their opportunity to step up and have targeted  approaches into local economies, particularly that have been more harder hit than others,  and industries, is there for them to take the bat. And I think the Prime Minister and  Treasurer have been quite right in saying: we’re all in this together and it’s also up to the  states. They just can’t go back to their old business model of using the Federal  Government as an ATM, they just can’t put the card in and get as much as they want. It’s  now time that we all put the shoulder to the wheel, that we all pull the levers, the economic  levers that will grow the economy through productivity, through profitability, and create jobs  in building infrastructure. That’s not just in building infrastructure, that’s in the operation of  the infrastructure. So it won’t be Pink Batts that we’ll be putting our money into in  infrastructure, it will be stuff that will actually create jobs not only in the construction but in  the operation. It will grow productivity, profitability into our economy. Because that’s how  we’re going to get out of this recession. The Government can’t spend its way out, but we  have to, money that we do spend of Australian taxpayers, it has to be targeted, and the  states have an opportunity to do that as well.

KIERAN GILBERT: When you look at the situation for your colleagues in Victoria, Darren  Chester, Member for Gippsland, Damian Drum, another regional Member, a National Party  MP, one of your colleagues, I spoke to them in the last week or so. Both hugely frustrated  that their areas, with little to no cases of COVID, are going back into restriction. Should  there have been two approaches to this? The metro Melbourne approach and surrounds  and other heavily affected areas, and a much more relaxed approach in those regional  areas and towns where there is no COVID?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: They’re spot on. And my understanding of the medical advice is  that localised lockdowns are the way in which we should be approaching restrictions. And  in fact Queensland was doing that at some point, around Sydney and not isolating the rest  of New South Wales. And that’s where the tracing that’s advanced and the way that we’ve  treated these cases as they’ve come through, we’ve been able to contact trace very  quickly and therefore be able to localise the lockdowns. And that’s where, I think, their  frustration bears from, is that if you undertake all our actions predicated on the best  science, the best science is saying that was the best way in which we could attack this  virus, in localised lockdowns rather than broad lockdowns bringing all of Victoria into it.  And particularly when regional Victoria is such a powerhouse of Australian agriculture and

Transcript



TRANSCRIPT



processing and manufacturing. It’s important that the Victorian Government understood  that and understands that. And that’s where the frustration of Damian Drum and Darren  Chester comes from, and quite rightly. They’re passionate Victorians and they can see  what’s happening to their state, but they see the contribution they make to this nation. And  it’s important that we work together and that state governments implement the medical  advice provided to them appropriately.

KIERAN GILBERT: As Agriculture Minister you know that Victoria is quite a food bowl for  the rest of the nation. In terms of beef, Queensland and New South Wales are still  rebuilding herds, trying to get numbers back after the drought. Could we see Victorian  cattle trucked to processing plants interstate that have room, in order to pick up the  shortfall from Victoria’s beef processing?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: That’s a great question, Kieran. I think you’ll find that there’ll be  some structural adjustment around that where there is capacity in the processing sector.  The Victorian red meat sector will see a 33 per cent reduction in their capacity through the  restrictions that the Victorian Government’s put in place. So the industry will obviously  work around that where the capacity is. I have to say that the industry themselves have  been forward-leaning on this from the very start back in January-February. They were  putting in place protocols around their workforce to keep them safe and to make sure that  we could keep supply chains going. The Victorian situation now has escalated to a point  where the Victorian Government’s put some more restrictions on them. But there is  capacity because of the drought across eastern Australia where our processing sector  does have some capacity to take it up. That’ll be a burden both on the producer in terms of  extra freight costs, you’ve got to appreciate that it’ll come at a cost, these types of  measures. But we are seeing record beef prices at the moment and I think that’s been  because of the drought, because of the demand for Australian beef not only here in  Australia but around the world, that our producers are still making really good money. But  it is all predicated on rain and we’ve had some up here in Queensland this weekend. We  just need a bit more and we’ll be up, away, and we’ll be the beef capital again up here in  Queensland, mate.

KIERAN GILBERT: [Laughs] Well, I tell you what, there’s rain everywhere at the moment,  certainly in this part of the world. Let’s look at lamb as well, because I know, talking to the  meat and livestock people this week, the next six weeks heads into what’s known as the  spring lamb flush, a lamb bonanza, where they’ve really got to have it processed, their  lamb, at that time, otherwise they miss the window. If this lockdown is extended, what  mechanisms need to be put in place to ensure that that lamb market is not crippled by this  lockdown?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, and that’s where the capacity around the country will be  looked at in terms of the processing sector, and where that can be lifted, particularly up in  the northern parts. There’s not as many processors for the sheep job up in Queensland  and New South Wales but there is capacity there, and also in South Australia. What we did  do last year is change the definition of lamb as well, which I think is important for people to  understand, is that we brought it in line with our export trading competitors to make sure  that it aligned with New Zealand. And what that meant is that basically the definition of a  lamb meant that it could be an extra 20 to 40 days older, so it could stay in the paddock  longer and still be defined as lamb and get the higher price. So that’s also going to kick in  and give our producers some advantage. But there is real constraint. We’ve got to be  honest with people. This COVID-19 has laid bare some of the constraints we have, and  we’re working with industry as quickly as we can, and the processing sector again has

Transcript



TRANSCRIPT



some capacity, and I’m sure that they’re obviously very keen to take that up, particularly in  the next month or so as we hit that window for them to take that up and be able to take  advantage.

KIERAN GILBERT: Is it inevitable that people will have to pay more at the checkout as a  result?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, obviously this will continue to unfold, but it simply comes  back, as any economy does, back to demand and supply principles. But we are rebuilding  the herd and you’re already seeing high beef prices and lamb prices are very high as well.  And that’s being predicated on the fact of demand and also the supply being, us trying to  rebuild the herd. And that will continue to evolve but those pressures will continue, but I  think the capacity and the maturity of the processing sector will see that there will be  downward pressure on prices because they will be able to take up some of this processing  capacity. It’s just going to, again, mean that a lot of producers will pay more for freight than  what they normally would have.

KIERAN GILBERT: In terms of getting the produce across borders, into other markets,  whether that be from Queensland to New South Wales, Victoria, into South Australia or  whatever it may be, are those supply chains secure in the face of the border shutdowns  we’re seeing?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, they are. But there’s been some annoyances, I suppose is  the best way to frame it, Kieran. Some of the states have made some calls around the  restrictions they want to put on freight, and particularly for trucking businesses and around  asking truckies to have COVID tests some seven days before. There’s some real  impracticalities, and while I appreciate that the health officials make blanket and very  broad COVID demands, the practical application of this sometimes doesn’t fit the purpose.  And that’s where I have to say that my state counterparts, agricultural counterparts, have  been very strong in working with their state health officials and transport officials to make  sure they understand the practical application of the restrictions that the health officials in  capital cities are putting across regional Australia, and what impacts that has not just on  their own state, but on the entire nation, whether that be for meat, whether that be for our  groceries. And I think there’s now an appreciation, particularly by the Victorian  Government, that there needs to be some common sense, some practical understanding  of making sure that we continue to keep our supermarkets stocked appropriately, but we’re  also continuing to export.

You’ve got to understand, Australians shouldn’t panic. There’s no need to panic buy.  We’re a nation of 25 million people, we produce enough food for 75 million. So farmers are  just calmly and methodically going about their business. The tucker will be on the shelves.  You just don’t have to put the pressure on the supply chains by hoarding and going there  every five minutes to get another toilet roll or another piece of meat. It will be there if you  go about your business as normal, and Australian farmers have your back and there’s no  need to worry about it, and the impracticalities that sometimes are imposed on our  producers and supply chains are being worked through from the Federal Government with  each of our state officials.

KIERAN GILBERT: Okay. A couple of quick ones before you go. The labour market  shortages, they’ve been there before COVID, they’ve been worsened by the coronavirus  crisis. Does the Federal Government still support an ag visa? Because it’s something you  and the Prime Minister have said you do support. Is it going to happen?

Transcript



TRANSCRIPT



DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well we support, but I think what every primary producer that  looks for labour, is simply wants them on the ground. They don’t care what you call it.  Whether that’s an ag visa or whatever you may call it, I don’t think they particularly care.  Now, we’ve created and in fact continue to enhance the Pacific Island and seasonal  worker, and in fact only recently, a couple of Sundays ago when we started up the  Indonesian Free Trade Agreement, there’s now 4,000 Indonesians that will be able to  come and work. There are challenges that we’re continuing to work through. We  announced some pilots around the seasonal worker for Darwin, and we’ll continue to look  at the entire nation, because there will be some pressure points as we get towards the end  of the year. There are a significant number of Australians that are unemployed. We’ve got  to work through the mutual obligations responsibilities there. But you’ve got to understand  a lot of those people that are unemployed are thousands of kilometres away from where  those jobs are. So there’s, again, some practical applications to this that we’re working  through.

KIERAN GILBERT: And just one quick one before you go. The last question today relates  to the Prime Minister’s commitment for a plan to basically create ag into a $100 billion  industry by 2030. What’s the latest on that? Will there be some detail on that plan soon?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, and obviously we’re working through that with stakeholders.  But the main opportunity around that is enhancing our research and development, making  sure that we continue to rely on the smarts of the best minds in agriculture right here in  Australia to improve productivity. And then also it’s around export markets and it’s about  water. We’re obviously being hamstrung significantly by the states because they don’t  want to dig a hole, they don’t want dams. There’s been 20 dams built since 2003, 16 of  those have been in Tasmania. The rest of the country’s done three-fifths of bugger all, and  it’s time that the states work with us. We’re not turning our back on it, it’s just  constitutionally it’s illegal for me to pick a shovel up and dig a hole, it’s the states’  responsibility. But we’re going to pay them, we’ve got the money, we’ve said to them: we’ll  cut the cheque, you dig the hole. It’s not complicated stuff. And that’s going to be the big  inhibitor and we need the states to work with us on that. But those are what will drive  agriculture to $100 billion and beyond.

KIERAN GILBERT: David Littleproud, as always, thanks. Appreciate it.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks mate, great to be with you.



Media contact  0455 448 985

