1





The Hon. Christian Porter MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Industrial Relations  Leader of the House



TRANSCRIPT  Radio 6PR

Wednesday, 5th August 2020



E&OE

Subjects: Borders, paid pandemic leave, Beirut explosion

GARETH PARKER:   Christian Porter is the Attorney-General. He's back on the program. Christian, good morning.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   Good morning Gareth.

GARETH PARKER:   So, the politics became too difficult in the end, do you apologise to West Australians for this?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   Well, I'm very sorry that the case was started in the first place. But I can't wish it away. I have  an obligation as the first law officer of the Commonwealth to the court to tell the truth, to assist  the court. I've got an obligation as a Cabinet Minister to protect all Australians and, obviously,  I'm a local Member of Parliament. Sometimes finding the balance between those three  positions means that you make yourself unpopular with all three of the people that you're trying  to help. But I'm not sure that that balance could be struck any differently in the early stages of  this. But, over the course of the weekend, I spoke at length with the Prime Minister. I think,  ultimately; the decision for us was about the fact that being in the matter as an intervener was  degrading our ability to act at the highest levels of cooperation with the Western Australian  Government. That is the Federal Government with West Australian Government, to keep West  Australians and all Australians safe.

GARETH PARKER:   So, what's the suggestion? That the McGowan Government was so angry about your  intervention in this, that it was threatening National Cabinet solidarity or threatening efforts to  fight the coronavirus?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:

2



No, I'm not saying that there were any threats of any nature whatsoever. But, I mean, clearly,  the McGowan Government were very annoyed at the fact that we were an intervener in the  matter. And as I say, as was in the Prime Minister's letter, the most important thing we thought,  ultimately, in all the circumstances was to preserve the co-operative nature of the relationship  which has been very, very successful so far. But, look I'm an Officer of the Court-

GARETH PARKER:   …So- right.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   … the High Court, and I have an obligation, as Attorney-General, to assist them and to do that  in a way that has the Commonwealth, tell what we think is the truth about a situation that  relates to the Constitution. Now, some people in running health strategies and protective  strategies will say the Constitution doesn't matter or should go out the window. I've sworn an  oath, that I will be the one politician in Australia who doesn't do that.

GARETH PARKER:   So, on that, there's a direct quote by the Premier, who said that: ‘we're in a pandemic;  constitutional niceties, I'm not interested in those’. Is that a wrong position at law?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   Well, that's the position that many people might be inclined to take, and fall on the side of what  they perceive to be the most protective response. But there is an obligation, ultimately, to  preserve people's safety in a way that's sustainable. And the point of having the Commonwealth  intervene was to try and find what is the best outcome given section 92 of the Constitution,  which is pretty clear in its terms; what is the best outcome for a sustainable policy that protects  West Australians and all Australians from the transmission of the disease that is at the core of  this pandemic. Now, the safest position you can have is the position that is in the long run  sustainable and, you know, the Commonwealth being in or out of this case doesn't change the  constitutional question, doesn't change the fact the court's going to consider it. And I think that  there is a real question around how you prepare for what is a possible, if not likely, outcome.  But the present circumstances and policy is found to be unconstitutional.

GARETH PARKER:   Do you sort of stand by this claim that you are no more than a middle man? Because the  Government aren't having it; the McGowan Government aren't having it. They're saying that  without your expert witness, without your evidence, Clive Palmer's challenge would've fallen  in a heap because it was so hopeless?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   Well, we're an intervener. We filed a notice of intervention and when this matter first started  up, there was the West Australian issue. There were applicants from Queensland; one of them  was called Travel Essence, they had five applicants, small businesses, individuals. There is a  standard form by which you intervene, but the nature of intervening is that there are two sides.  There's the plaintiffs, of which there were multiple when this thing started. There's the other  side which were the state governments, who had the total border closure policies, and the  Commonwealth intervenes. We intervened assisting the court. Now, we put a position that we  thought that there was a high likelihood that the policies, as they were formulated originally,  in the long run would be likely found to be unconstitutional. I've said that on your show a  number of times and there's no retreat from that fact. And I think that if this matter goes all the

3



way, that could well be the likely outcome. But that doesn't mean that we're cheerleading or  barracking for either side. We're before the court, assisting the court as an intervener, telling  the court what we think to be the truth of the constitutional situation and I think something  about the evidence needs to be understood here. There were multiple experts who produced a  joint report and the nature of that report is to try and find the common ground, between all of  the experts. Expert from WA, experts from the Commonwealth, experts from the plaintiff. And  there was a joint report including evidence from the West Australian Chief Medical Officer  that the hard border closure to everywhere versus travel bubbles doesn't make that much  difference to the transmission of the disease. Now that's not our evidence, right? That was  evidence in the joint report from Western Australia. So, where the State Attorney-General said  last week that the case would already be over in WA, it would've won if we hadn't been in it, I  don't think that's being upfront. That's not how this matter is proceeding or has proceeded or  will proceed. Like they're short of the plaintiff withdrawing, there is the real prospect that you  face a decision that goes against your policy.

GARETH PARKER:   Do you think, in a political sense, despite your oath to defend the Constitution, do you think in  a real political sense that the Liberal brand has been damaged here? Clearly Liza Harvey was  desperate to get this issue off the agenda because she faces an election. Do you think that the  federal Liberal brand in WA has been damaged by this affair?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   It's just not what it's about. Like, I mean…

GARETH PARKER:   …It is in the mind of the public though.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   Well, but that's not what it's about for decision makers, Gareth. It's really not. Like, I mean, the  State Government here is doing their level best to help people to save lives and save  livelihoods. That's what the Commonwealth Government has been doing since the beginning  of the pandemic. There will be moments in it where there are disagreements. There'll be  moments of high cooperation. Commentators will talk about whether or not, during moments  of disagreement, one or other brand has been damaged. But ultimately, everyone is trying to  find the best balance as to how you prevent, slow the transmission of the disease but also not  destroy hundreds of thousands of economic livelihoods across Australia and in Western  Australia. Like, that is the very difficult balance that we've been trying to strike from the  beginning. And you're not always going to get that balance perfectly right, but if in trying to  cooperate and form that balance, at times, you'll find yourself in a position where you've done  something which is unpopular, well that's just how it is...

GARETH PARKER:   Okay.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   …This isn't a popularity contest, it's a contest to try and find the best results for individual  human beings in Australia for both their health and their economic future and their kids'  economic future.

GARETH PARKER:

4



So, on that, is there any further consideration to extending pandemic leave to other professions  outside aged care? The $1500 emergency payment in Victoria, could that be extended to other  states if necessary?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   Yeah. I mean potentially. So, as you point out, there's been a Fair Work Commission which  has given pandemic relief to people specifically in the aged care sector. Some other companies,  large companies, have decided on their own terms to give two weeks pandemic leave. We, as  the Commonwealth Government, have now tried, as part of a cooperation with the Victorian  Government, to have a consistent position in Victoria. So, if you like, the Victorian  Government is going to pay $1500 for pandemic leave for people who are required to isolate  to people in Australia on visas. We will pay the $1500 to Australian citizens who are here but  required to isolate and don't have any other means of support. So we're doing that cooperatively  with the Victorian Government. We've got that up and running now, and there's a number that  people in Victoria can ring. And if other states want to talk to us about mirroring that  cooperative relationship, if a set of circumstances approximating those that have arisen in  Victoria occur in another state, then that is clearly an open door. But it is an example where  there's compromise, cooperation at the highest levels, to try and fix a problem, and it's a  problem that we don't even know the scale of. I mean, whether or not this is a reason why  people are not abiding by requirements to isolate, we just don't have the data on. But if it is a  possibility, then closing off that reason or potential reason for people not to do the right thing  is definitely, I think, good policy and we've done it in a cooperative way. And yeah, it could  be extended but that's a conversation to have between the Prime Minister and premiers and  through National Cabinet, I think.

GARETH PARKER:   Dreadful, frightening situation in Beirut with that explosion. Do you have any updated  information from DFAT about whether any Australians or any other Australians are affected?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   Look, there's been a report of one Australian who may have lost their life but I can't confirm  that at this stage outside of the reporting that's occurred. I've not been officially briefed on it.  It's moving pretty quickly and those briefs go in first instance to the Foreign Minister. But I  mean, like a lot of Australians, I've seen the footage and the nature of the explosion. This thing  is quite massive. So, obviously there's going to be an enormous amount of work done to try  and work out potential causes, and we're working very hard with our resources in Beirut to  find out exactly what or how many Australians might have been affected.

GARETH PARKER:   We'll keep waiting for updates. Christian, thank you for your time as always this morning.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   No problem Gareth. See you next week.

Authorised by Christian Porter, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

