



THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP  MINISTER FOR POPULATION,  CITIES AND URBAN  INFRASTRUCTURE

SENATOR DR SAM  MCMAHON  SENATOR FOR THE NORTHERN  TERRITORY





THE HON MICHAEL GUNNER  CHIEF MINISTER OF THE  NORTHERN TERRITORY







PROF. SIMON MADDOCKS  VICE-CHANCELLOR OF  CHARLES DARWIN UNIVERSITY



MEDIA RELEASE

The Hon Alan Tudge MP, Minister for Cities, Urban Infrastructure and Population

WANTIRNA SOUTH, VICTORIA





24 September 2020

MAJOR DESIGN TENDER FOR CHARLES DARWIN UNIVERSITY CITY CAMPUS  GOES LIVE

Charles Darwin University (CDU) has released the latest tender for the design of the  $250 million Education and Community Precinct, a key element of the Darwin City Deal.

The 32,000-square-metre, seven-level project has moved through the masterplan,  concept design and scheme design phases.

CDU is now advertising for a Principal Design Consultant and sub-consultants to  progress the project through the design development and construction documentation  phases.

Federal Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure Alan Tudge said it was a  major multi-million dollar contract that would span three years of work until the project  was complete.

“That means jobs opportunities for architects and building engineers, but also highly  specialised skills such as wind engineering, acoustics and wayfinding,” Mr Tudge said.

“Every local job we support means one less worry for another Australian and their family,  more reliable work on the books for local companies and more cash flowing through local  businesses and communities doing it tough due to COVID-19.

Chief Minister of the Northern Territory Michael Gunner said the Principal Design  Consultant would need to have a strong presence in Darwin, continuing the Deal’s focus  of creating local jobs using local businesses.

“Construction of this new precinct is expected to support 700 jobs and I want the  majority of those jobs going to locals.

“The Territory is the nation’s comeback capital and will emerge from the coronavirus  crisis with a jobs-led recovery.

“We threw the kitchen sink at saving jobs, and now we are on the road to recovery we  will keep doing it with jobs.”

Senator for the Northern Territory Dr Sam McMahon welcomed the news, saying the new  campus would be a game-changer for Darwin.

“Building this world-class university campus is also expected to provide a $600 million  boost to the Darwin economy over a 30-year period, create an estimated 54 ongoing jobs  every year and provide a long-term boost to local businesses,” Senator McMahon said.

“Through this City Deal, we are emphasising some of the best this great city has to offer  while creating sustainable infrastructure and jobs to stimulate the local economy.

“That’s exactly what this precinct will do, by attracting more students to the city and allow  the University to provide even more specialised courses.

“This means even more people will get a taste of what makes Darwin a great place to  live, study and work and I am excited to see this major tender go out.”

CDU Vice-Chancellor Professor Simon Maddocks said the tender also outlined design  principles that will help create contemporary learning spaces in an iconic building  designed to incorporate the latest environmental technology and science.

“Principles include how to activate the precinct’s street fronts, creating safe and  welcoming pedestrian links and how the use of small retail spaces, community activity  zones, attractive seating and building entries can make a positive visitor experience,”  Professor Maddocks said.

“Another principle covers how landscaping could create green walls as well as attractive  and environmentally sustainable landscaping at ground level.

“The new Principal Design Consultant will be encouraged to engage with the Darwin  Living Lab (DLL) and its work when developing heat mitigation, energy efficiency and  smart building measures, as the new precinct represents an ideal opportunity to further  our knowledge on these measures.”

The City Deal is a joint initiative of the Australian and Northern Territory governments  and the City of Darwin.

The Darwin City Deal Implementation Plan is available at   www.infrastructure.gov.au/cities/city-deals/darwin.

[ENDS]

Media Contact:  Minister Tudge - Michael Bennett 0434 782 923  Chief Minister Gunner - Maria Billias 0401 119 746  Senator McMahon - Electorate Office (08) 8948 3555  Vice-Chancellor Maddocks -  Rebecca Marrone (08) 8946 6040

