

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT HOUSE, ACT  FRIDAY 11 DECEMBER 2020



EO&E…

PRIME MINISTER: Thank you all for joining us and can I start today by, you will be pleased to know, that  the National Cabinet is a red tape cutting organisation and we have agreed today that I will make a brief  statement at the start and then we will go to questions. The old COAG arrangements would have had us  here most of the afternoon at this press conference making statements. So I thank the Premiers and Chief  Ministers for further streamlining action by the National Cabinet.

Australia is working together, we are working together and Australia is coming back from COVID-19. On  the health front, on the economic front and so many and I want to thank my colleagues who are here with  me today and Premier McGowan joining us remotely for the amazing job they have all done individually  in their own jurisdictions in Australia’s toughest year in generations. But I also want to thank them for  their tremendous support working together with each other but also with ourselves  as part of the  Commonwealth as part of this innovation of the National Cabinet. This has been a very important group,  a very important leadership group for this country, bringing together our Federation, seeing it work in a  way that this country I don’t believe has ever seen. And so I am indebted to all my colleagues here. We all  run our own Governments, our own cabinets are paramount in decisions we make, federally here and, of  course, in each of the state and territory jurisdictions. But the way we keep coming together, we get in  the room, we get things done and I thank my colleagues very much for their cooperation and support.

We're also joined by Professor Kelly and the ACT Australian of the Year, Professor Brendan Murphy. I’m  sure the ACT Chief Minister will give a big shout out to Brendan and they will be joining us to answer  questions on vaccines and the normal health issues that come up at our post-National Cabinet briefing.  Today we have the opportunity to discuss the vaccine issues that the Health Minister and I reported on  earlier today and talk through further issues about the vaccine rollout. We are making very good progress  there and I am sure you will have questions but we are on track for that rollout and working closely  together with the states and territories for what is a very unique rollout of the vaccine. The states and  territories are always partners in the administration of any vaccine and we absolutely trust them, as you  would expect us to, because we are partners in the delivery of health services around the country. This is  a very unique vaccine and a very unique rollout so the bespoke arrangements we have here continue to  build on that partnership.

We also agreed today on the need to tighten some arrangements, particularly around aircrew and as well  as on diplomats. These are the vulnerabilities that I wouldn’t say are at a great scale but they are important  vulnerabilities. As the year goes on and as our success continues, the states and territories become even  more laser-like focused on the areas where potential vulnerabilities can emerge and so we have had good  discussions on how we can tighten arrangements in both those areas, working both bilaterally with the  Commonwealth as well as together.

It was also very important today we agreed that we could go forward on developing bilateral  arrangements for seasonal workers in Australia. Each of the states and territories are confronted by  different circumstances on the ground and different capabilities and capacities. In Queensland, for  example, there has been a very, very successful on-farm quarantine for seasonal workers program that  has been under way and it has really been supporting the Queensland agriculture sector and the primary  producers. But now we want to ensure that we can move to other arrangements in states and territories  where that need is critical. Premier Andrews, I know, it is a very important issue in Victoria presently, as  it is in many other states and we have agreed that bilateral arrangements will be made on health orders  that will be applied to seasonal workers coming into states and that will unlock the ability for the  Commonwealth to then provide seasonal worker visas which will confine those seasonal workers in those  jurisdictions so they remain completely under the health control of those states and territories and that  will be resolved in the bilateral arrangements that exist between the state and territories and the  Commonwealth.

We also agreed on very practical emergency services, fire services protocol for the upcoming and we are  very much in it now, summer season and that is just a very practical set of arrangements because you  know we move emergency services and other volunteers and workers around the country in the course  of our disaster seasons and that has been a piece of work under way by officials for some time. Just a very  cooperative and practical piece of work.

Other issues, we agreed on the economic front today the progress of the JobTrainer program. It is now  operational in all states and territories bar the Northern Territory and that will be very soon implemented  in the NT. This is a game changer for young people in particular but all people of all ages who are changing  careers, additional places. It is a big partnership, it’s a big financial partnership, a billion-dollar partnership  between the Commonwealth and the states and territories on top of our existing commitments to  vocational education and training and data sharing is important to ensure that program stays up to the  mark.

We also agreed today on two important regulatory congestion busting initiatives that we’ve discussed on  earlier occasions. The first one is with the EPBC Act which is as you’ll know federally the subject of changes  that we are seeking to pursue as a Commonwealth government. Premiers, Chief Ministers and I agreed  today that the first priority, the first priority, is to ensure we streamline the administrative processes.  Samuels Review, which will be released soon, will make recommendations as the interim report has  flagged, on the environmental standards at a Commonwealth level. But what is important in the first  tranche of legislative change and the priority is to ensure that the existing standards that relate to the  existing legislation and regulation, no more, no less, must be codified and that we can streamline the  approvals process to a single touch decision that occurs at the state level. Now, we estimate that a  Commonwealth level a few years ago, to be costing the Australian economy almost half a billion dollars  every year for projects which should go ahead, they should comply to environmental standards and the  regulations. That will occur. There will be important reporting arrangements that ensures compliance with  those standards as they are administered by the states and territories but we all agree it needs to happen

faster and it needs to happen in accordance with the standards that we have now. A second phase, after  we are able to legislate those arrangements, is to take into account the recommendations of the Samuels  Review that may make recommendations about any improvements or changes to those standards more  broadly. But we do not have to solve that problem in order to solve the first problem, which is making  things go faster.

To that end, we also agreed today that the Commonwealth has supported to lift the threshold for  Infrastructure Australia assessment of co-funded projects by the Commonwealth from $100 million to  $250 million. This will free up Infrastructure Australia to focus more on the big projects and it will de-clog  the process of getting these projects moving sooner. We want to see these projects on the ground because  it is are a critical part of the economic recovery that will continue in 2021. And today, seven states and  territories, and I don’t think it will be too long before ACT comes on board as we resolve a couple of issues  which are quite bespoke to the ACT and its geographic arrangements more than anything else, is mutual  recognition of occupational registration. This doesn’t sound like a terribly illuminating issue or one that is  going to capture national attention but I can tell you that if you are tradie and you need to have multiple  registrations, as an electrician or some other worker, because you're moving between states and  territories, it is a pain and it costs you money and it slows your business down and it costs jobs. And I want  to particularly thank the treasurers as part of the Council of Federal Financial Relations who have done  the heavy lifting on getting that agreement today and seven states and territories have committed to that  and, indeed I understand, signed it today.

Next year, we will stay focused on the recovery, both on the health side and the economic side. The  National Cabinet, we all agree, is a great privilege to be involved in. Each and every one of us, we take  those responsibilities and our respect for each other very seriously and that will continue to provide the  platform for what I think has been a game-changer in the Australian Federation this year and we want to  see that game-change3 impact so many other issues. This afternoon, the Federation Reform Council will  meet and an issue that is close to every single one of our hearts is mental health and the need to work  together to address the gaps that occur in mental health across Australia. We all have responsibilities here  and this year has taught us just how important people’s mental health is in this country. It’s reminded us  of that again and we look forward to applying this very effective mechanism to solving those difficult  challenges. With that, I will throw to questions.

JOURNALIST: On bringing people into the country, and hotel quarantine, what is the thinking in National  Cabinet about the capacity of the system to bring in more people and I am not just thinking about  Australians who want to return home, I’m thinking about workers and also foreign students that the  universities want for next year. I know there are different views around National Cabinet but what is your  thinking - is there any consensus about what happens next? And are there any Premiers, for instance  Queensland and Victoria who might want to comment on the capacity of that system?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I will speak briefly and then my colleagues will as well. Our first priority as a  Commonwealth Government is Australians, and Australians returning home and I want to thank all the  Premiers and Chief Ministers for the work they have done. And I must say, particularly NSW because they  carry half the burden for the country, and they are not all NSW Australians returning, they are Australian’s  from all across the country who find themselves coming through NSW. Victoria has begun again and the  Premier and I are looking forward to see that uplift in the New Year as we work through the capacity and  have quarantine fully functioning again in Victoria, that will add additional capacity, Queensland and WA  are both up to their capacity and this is a very productive I think working relationship but what we all  understand is, there are physical limitations on the hotel quarantine capacity, but that is the safest and

most effective way for people to come home and quarantine. I think we all agree that the health standards  on quarantine is the most important issue. Where we can create capacity for people to return who are  non-residents, who are not Australian citizens, such as on seasonal workers, then we can develop the  bespoke arrangements which Queensland is particularly done on on-farm quarantine, which provides over  and above capacity to see those economic needs met. But the first priority is the quarantine capacity for  returning Australians and residents and that will continue to be our focus. Where we can create additional  net capacity above and beyond that, that doesn't prevent an Australian returning to the country, well, we  remain very open to that. But I’ll leave it to others to make comments.

THE HON. DANIEL ANDREWS, PREMIER OF VICTORIA: PM, I might just add quickly, the first thing to do is  on behalf of all Victorians thank, principally, New South Wales but all other first ministers from across the  country who have been required to have more and more people in their hotel quarantine systems because  ours was closed for a period of time. It has now reopened. The Prime Minister and I had a conversation  last night about us lifting our numbers and we're very confident we will be able to do that. But that has  got to be done safely and I think we will get to the end of the summer and we will certainly be processing  more people. I think significantly more people than we are now. That has just got to be done in a steady  way. On workers, particularly for our horticulture industry, if we want to guarantee economic activity, we  want to guarantee that those crops are in fact harvested, that fruit is picked, stores are full, and people  can buy the products that they love at anything like an affordable price, then we have to find a way  forward here. We need 15,000- 20,000 workers and no hotel quarantine system will be able to cope with  that. But we have had a really good, really good discussion last night and again today and I am very  grateful, Premier Palaszczuk shared her best in class system of farm quarantine with us, we will learn from  that. We are also continuing to work with Dr. Kelly around some other countries where a bubble might be  able to be set up. Again, always safe. We have reintroduced hotel quarantine, we're growing it, but I really  just wanted to take the opportunity, and your question allows me to, to say thank you to my colleagues  for having shouldered more of the burden and they probably expected to.

JOURNALIST: [Inaudible] what was your response when Mr McGowan said he would not be attending in  person? He is the only leader not to. Is it disrespecting the National Cabinet process?

PRIME MINISTER: Not at all. Not at all. We were heartbroken of course that Mark couldn't join us here.

THE HON. DANIEL ANDREWS, PREMIER OF VICTORIA: Almost as much as him.

PRIME MINISTER: Almost as much as him. It's OK, WA gets to keep the GST, there’s not a… But of course,  Mark and together with all my colleagues here have made great contributions to this group. And we  understand every state and territory has its rules and those rules need to be held up to and so we  understand, but obviously miss our colleague and look forward to him joining us next year and we look  forward to, I look forward to coming to Western Australia again and seeing him there. We wanted to get  Australian Open by Christmas and we are going to achieve that, I believe. We are going to achieve that.  And that has been made possible, I think, by the patience and the steady work of everyone you see here  in front of you, and I think that should be a great encouragement to Australians. Even when we disagree  from time to time we keep moving forward. We keep looking to the next thing we have to do and things  that have happened behind us, they stay behind us because, frankly, we've got too important a job to do.  So we miss you, Mark, we miss you.

JOURNALIST: You pointed to- for seasonal workers, we know the New South Wales Premier is keen to see  international students back in Australia, very important for the economy, can you see a scenario where

there are bespoke quarantine arrangements on university campuses and we have also heard potentially  that there may be some sort of plan for that in Victoria. I know there’s a few questions there. But we  would be keen to hear your plan for international students?

PRIME MINISTER: Again, it is Australian citizens and residents returning first, that is the priority for hotel  quarantine in Australia. Of course we want to see a resumption of so many aspects of the services trade  that Australia has, and international students are an important part of that. But that cannot come at the  cost of Australian citizens, who have every right to return to their home country, particularly when we see  around the world the great distress that the rest of the world is. I mean, here we sit as a group, presiding  over, with the great efforts of Australians, Australian businesses and workers and health workers and  everyone who has done such an amazing job and you compare that to what is happening around the rest  of the world, then Australia is in a very select group of countries and that is through no small effort from  those who sit around me here, around this table. And so on international students, where net additional  capacity can safely be established, then that is something we have always been open to. But that must  satisfy the public health requirements of the states and territories who have jurisdiction over those things  and it can't take away from an Australian's ability to come home and that is our requirement. So where  that can be achieved I think the guard rails are set pretty clearly on that. I know states are keen to see  that international services opportunity return, but I know they also are very committed to seeing  Australians come home.

But Gladys, did you want to?

THE HON. GLADYS BEREJIKLIAN, PREMIER OF NEW SOUTH WALES: Sure. Thanks, PM. As you know we  are bringing back 3,000 Australians every week through New South Wales, 45% of those actually go on to  other states, and 55% are staying in New South Wales. The Prime Minister has made his position very  clear, which I support, in relation to getting Aussies back home. But I would like to have a conversation  next year not just about international students but also about skilled migrants. That is a conversation we  can have next year. But clearly the priority is to try and reduce the list of Aussies coming back home. And  I completely support the PM in that. But I do think at some stage next year we need to broaden the  conversation. I'm not happy to see the quarantine system move out of the hotels at this stage. I think that  would be too high a risk. That is just New South Wales, I know other states do have other arrangements.  And so for that reason the cap of 3,000 is not going to change in New South Wales and so it's a question  about when Victoria comes online and other states come online, how far can we eat into the 39,000  Aussies that are still waiting to come home and once that is dealt I’m sure there will be opportunities for  us to consider all those other categories which will boost our economy and prospects for jobs in the future.

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah. And we agreed to come back to that in January and we are constantly monitoring  that level of Australians who are seeking to come home. But I can confirm that 45,954 Australians have  returned since the 18th I think it is of September. And at the time you will recall there were 26,200  Australians who were registered to come back. So we have got home 45,954. We still have, right now  registered overseas, some 38,655. But we will continue to monitor through contact directly with people  overseas about their need to return home. That may change over the next month. That may change as  vaccines are introduced, particularly in the United Kingdom, which is one of the key areas where  Australians are seeking to come home from. The biggest area, the biggest number of people seeking to  come home is from India. There are over 10,000 there. There is around about, just under 5,000 in the UK  and there are a range of other countries.

Andrew?



JOURNALIST: Can I ask about contact tracing. In recent months you have been complementary of New  South Wales and Queensland's systems. You’ve been less complimentary about Victoria. Are you now  confident that the system of contact tracing is consistent and of good enough standard across the  country? I would like the good professors at the back to venture a view on that. But also with regards to  the fellow on the screen, do you think WA is match fit when it comes to contact tracing as well?

PRIME MINISTER: I am going to throw that to both Paul Kelly and Brendan Murphy. Because my view on  that is based on their advice. And, in Australia, particularly over the last six months, there has been an  absolutely significant investment that has been made by the states and territories, looking and learning  from each other to ensure that their contact tracing systems are world standard. And New South Wales,  I have been very clear about, I think has led the way in that area. What we have seen most recently and  Premier Marshall might want to comment on this, particularly in relation to Western Australia, one of the  things the contact tracing system I think has achieved more recently is the ability of its federal capabilities  and by that I don't the Federal Government, I mean the states and territories swarm to support a problem.  When we had the issue in South Australia the state that actually did the most in support of South Australia,  it is fair to say, was Western Australia. And the match fitness of Western Australian's contact tracing  system was one of the key things that was assessed in the Finkel review which we have reported on  previously. But there has been an enormous amount of sharing and learning between jurisdictions in this  issue. That's not to say every system has been perfect and I wouldn't agree with the way that you  suggested I had characterised other systems at all. I have tended to focus on the positives. What I think is  important though is all the states and territories have worked together, learnt from each other, supported  each other and now where I have a great confidence is if it happened in Queensland or in Western  Australia or in the Northern Territory, there is a national effort that can be brought to bear on contact  tracing with the support of one system to another.

But Paul, did you want to speak about that?

PROFESSOR PAUL KELLY, CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER: Thanks, PM. So just to echo the PM's summary there.  We did have Professor Alan Finkel, the chief scientist, lead a national review of contact tracing and looked  at all of the elements of testing, tracing, and isolation, and his conclusion was that all the states were  actually strong. We have learned through this epidemic and we are supporting each other. There were 22  recommendations in that report and we are working through those. Some of them are completed.  Particularly the issue of data exchange across borders, and so Victoria, New South Wales, and the ACT  have progressed that work with the Commonwealth over the last month and so all of those things gives  me great confidence in what we can do as a nation, but also in all of the states.

PRIME MINISTER: Jono?

JOURNALIST: What is your position on vaccinating Australians currently overseas? And once Australians  have been vaccinated here, will they be free to travel at will overseas to holiday and for work?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, on the latter point, these are still decisions that are still to be taken, and to that  end I might throw to Professor Murphy who is leading the Commonwealth's vaccination strategy and also  its roll out. Brendan?

DR BRENDAN MURPHY, SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH: Thanks, PM. I think we still don't  know what the vaccines will do in terms of complete prevention of transmission of the virus. So the

vaccines can prevent disease. We know that very clearly. The extent to which they will effectively prevent,  for example, asymptomatic transmission or people bringing the virus with them when they travel, we still  have to find out. So this is an evolving place and there may well come a time when we have evidence that  vaccines are very good at preventing people contracting the infection and in that circumstance it may be  appropriate to allow quarantine free travel. But this is an evolving space and we just have to watch and  wait as it develops.

JOURNALIST: Any idea what the time frame might be to make a decision? Because lot of people would  like to start planning for the future and such.

DR BRENDAN MURPHY, SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH: I think over the course of next  calendar year, as we get more and more information on more and more vaccines we will have a much  clearer picture.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given the Pfizer vaccine has received approval in the UK and the US, why  can't Australia now also give the vaccine approval and Greg Hunt mentioned this morning that 10 million  units was appropriate for Australia. Why? Don't we need to buy more of this vaccine?

PRIME MINISTER: Again, I will direct that to Professor Murphy. On the issue of the accreditation approval  of vaccines in Australia, we will do that on Australian rules with Australian officials and on the Australian  timetable. Australia has one of the highest rates of vaccination in the world. The reason for that is we take  these issues incredibly seriously and we have the best people in the world making those decisions to  protect the safety of Australians. We want to ensure that Australians, and I think all of us feel very strongly  this way, have full confidence, absolute full confidence that when it gets the tick, they can get the jab.  And they can make that decision for themselves and for their families confidently. So we are aware of  what is happening in other states and in other nations around the world. We have a front row seat, frankly,  as they go through that and work through any potential issues that may arise in the data sharing  arrangements that we have, particularly with the United Kingdom, will be very instructive, I think, as they  are the first ones to go around the block on this full. But there is a difference between what is happening  here in Australia and what's happening overseas. Overseas vaccination is the only thing they’ve got,  frankly, now to address what is a level of communication of the virus that is happening in the community  in those places. Because of the hard work done by Australians here and the arrangements that have been  put in place by all those you see in front of you and our governments, Australia is not in that situation. So  that means we can make this decision in the same way we always would, carefully, based on the best  science, so when I tell you that it's safe to happen, I can do that with the greatest possible confidence that  I can and that is what I owe to every Australian and particularly every parent.

Brendan, did you want to add to that?

DR BRENDAN MURPHY, SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH: Just to say, as the Prime Minister  said, we are not in the position of having to do emergency use registration for a vaccine, which is how the  Pfizer vaccine has been reached in those countries. We have the time to take our normal process through  the TGA. We continue to look at the mRNA vaccines around the world, but I wouldn't underestimate the  huge value of what we announced today, that we are now having full population coverage of an onshore  manufacture of the AstraZeneca vaccine. Onshore manufacturing is a very precious thing in terms of  getting good access over the course of next year. So we will continue to look at the mRNA vaccines over  time as well.

JOURNALIST: Why were the warnings about the likelihood of a false positive HIV - for the University of  Queensland vaccine -  why were those warnings ignored and how much taxpayer dollars has been  wasted?

PRIME MINISTER: I will let Brendan also speak to the medical issues here. Every cent we have invested in  getting the best and most early available and safe vaccines for Australians in the middle of the COVID-19  pandemic has been money well spent. Every single cent. I mean, there are no guarantees when it comes  to vaccine development and if you don’t put investment in across a range of opportunities and options,  then you don’t get one come out the other end. And I think the expectation that they would be 100  percent success rate across these is naive. It is just not true. Australia has made the right investments in  science. We have made those decisions based on best scientists and expert medical advice on where we  should place those investments and the net result of that is now not just three vaccines which would  administer doses to Australians and I should say vaccinate them fully under those programs twice over.  But on top of that, we have ensured that we have enforced our manufacturing capability for important  vaccines. I'm advised today that Australia is only one of 20 countries that can manufacture these vaccines.  One of 20 countries. So once again, we enter into an elite circle of countries that has been able to respond  on behalf of their population.

But Brendan?

DR BRENDAN MURPHY, SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH: Thank you. So no warnings were  ignored at all about the possibility of false positives was raised by the University of Queensland  researchers very early on and was seen as a very, very unlikely possibility because the fragment of the HIV  virus molecule was small, very unlikely and it was unfortunately an unexpectedly high rate of false  positives that resulted when the data came in. This was very clearly known at the time and the risks were  appropriately taken and unfortunately it just became a bigger problem than anyone had anticipated.

JOURNALIST: PM, just in terms of the broader picture here, with three of the leaders around you have  had elections this year but we now seem to have a window, a clear window ahead expect for Mr McGowan  next year who has an election. But we have a period now of sort of relatively free of election politics. Is  there any recognition amongst the group either at dinner last night or the meeting today or even this  afternoon’s gathering that this is an opportunity to tackle a bit of serious reform in the Federation with  regard to the economic challenges you all face as state leaders and as Commonwealth? That no-one has  the immediate pressures of an election to contend with and  you might be able to, you might be able to  you know, take a few sticky decisions.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks Phil. I am happy to defer to my colleagues on this as well. One of the standing  items on the National Cabinet agenda, which was agreed and suggested by the Premier of New South  Wales, who has been an advocate on this front as a Treasurer, as a Premier and we've made quite a lot of  progress, I've got to say, this year, having it's not just about whether they're elections or not. It's, frankly,  if you've got the right systems in place to achieve it. And the National Cabinet now and its six priority  reform committees that sit beneath it on energy, on regional Australia, on skills and a range of other areas.  They now provide, I think, the proper structures and systems which actually can deliver more and so there  is a standing item. I mean, today, what we're doing with occupational licencing. It seems like a small thing,  but it's actually a very big thing. There are bigger things that we are very keen to discuss which go to the  switching of what Commonwealth may do and what states may in important areas and we've undertaken  to look at those areas for next year. But I think we've got the structure right to achieve that, whether

there's an election or not. I think we've got the model right for how we can get through some of those  decisions.

But Gladys, did you want to make a few comments?

THE HON. GLADYS BEREJIKLIAN MP, PREMIER OF NEW SOUTH WALES: Thanks, PM. I just wanted to echo  the PM's comments. I think we do have a great opportunity to keep the momentum going in reducing red  tape and streamlining, improving, modernising state-federal relations around a whole range of things.  And I was pleased the PM's putting as a standing item that agenda item, so that if there's anything we  want to put on there, we can actually resolve it. And I think National Cabinet has demonstrated our ability  to get things done more quickly. And what COVID has taught all of us, the state jurisdictions nut I think  also as a national government, is that you can do things better and differently and let's use this  opportunity to keep improving the quality of life of our citizens and streamlining our processes. I think  we've also had an extra bit of confidence to say Australia can actually punch above its weight in terms of  responding to global issues like this and let's use that confidence and that momentum to make real  positive change and I'm delighted that that's what we will be doing moving forward.

THE HON. ANNASTACIA PALASZCZUK MP, PREMIER OF QUEENSLAND: I might just add to that, I think we  shouldn’t gloss over the fact too that this National Cabinet has worked in the best interest of all  Australians. That, you know, we haven't met face to face for nine months but during that time, we've had  30 National Cabinet meetings. We have been provided at all times with expert advice on health and at all  times expert advice on the economy. So that has been absolutely critical to the way the National Cabinet  has worked and how I think it's going to work into the future and as long as there's that goodwill amongst  everyone, you will see substantial change that's happening with the cohesiveness of this group working  together.

JOURNALIST: On environmental protection and biodiversity, you’re speeding up the administrative  processes. How will that single touchpoint work at the state level? What projects and sort of industries  do you think might benefit? And given that the states control a lot of the levers in this area, can I ask the  Premiers of Victoria and Queensland, how committed are you to actually speeding up project and business  kind of approvals in this area, given there's often a lot of pushback from environmental groups and  progressive activists?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, the first part, a single touch approval process means exactly that. There's a single  touch. It will be done by the states, ensuring that they reference and ensure that the federal standards  are adhered to in the decisions that they make on projects. Now, this will relate to any projects that  require federal approval under the EPBC Act. And this means you go through one process, you go through  one decision maker. There will be an overarching assessment that is done on each state and how they're  fulfilling that over the course of the year. But that's not an appeal jurisdiction and that's not done on a  case by case basis. That's just to ensure that the Commonwealth continues to have the assurance that the  standards that are there and that is set at that level are being appropriately addressed. So this is going to  be a very big change, I think. We've tried to do this before and that hasn't succeeded and that's why I  really want to thank all the Premiers and Chief Ministers for their commitment to see this done faster.  The standards have to be kept and in the first step, we’ll make sure that the standards that we have right  now that are part of existing laws, that won't change. That will be done and codified for the states to see  next month so they've got a clear idea of what those standards are. And then it is my great hope that  when the Parliament returns next year, we will be able to see passage of the legislation that can give

effect to giving that authority to the states and territories. But I'll leave it to Dan and to Annastacia to  speak to that.

THE HON. DANIEL ANDREWS, PREMIER OF VICTORIA: This is a logical extension of changes we've made  at a Victorian level where we do planning and environmental effects assessments at the same time. So  we run a dual track system so that instead of completing one and then beginning a fresh new process at  the end of that and taking basically twice as long to build the road, rail, hospital, school, important,  fundamentally important infrastructure that we need now and for the future, we've sped that up. Now's  the time to make good decisions, but make them as quickly as you can. Because our economy and  communities, not just in my state, but across the nation, need those jobs, that confidence, that sense of  momentum. This is a really important change and one that we're pleased to support. It's about how you  make the decision, not the decision itself. It'll still be against the highest of standards, standards that I  think we at a jurisdictional level and nationally are very well known for.

THE HON. ANNASTACIA PALASZCZUK MP, PREMIER OF QUEENSLAND: Yeah, I think you can see the  results of those standards to make sure that there is confidence out there in the public that they are high  standards. And in some cases, everyone can sometimes say, oh, the states are holding up things. But in  other instances we've got projects where we're waiting on federal approval. So I think it works both ways  and a streamlined process is, I think, going to be well received by everybody.

PRIME MINISTER: The standards, just to be clear because you'll be aware of the Samuels Report, the first  set of standards will be the standards that effectively are there now and they need to be codified very  clearly, not a comma more or a comma less when it comes to those standards. The second phase would  relate to addressing recommendations of the Samuel Report, which require a broader discussion on, I  suppose the overall substance of the standards themselves. We've got time for two more. I'm sorry,  because we've got other meetings this afternoon.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I ask you, do you want to put a stop to Victoria's Belt and Road  agreement with Beijing and Premier Andrews can I ask you, what is it you want to get out of the Belt and  Road agreement and do you think it presents a sovereign risk?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, we will follow through on the legislation that has passed the Parliament in  accordance with the process, which will sit there and make the appropriate assessments and then make  any decisions from there.

THE HON. DANIEL ANDREWS, PREMIER OF VICTORIA: And I'm happy to add that, that agreement, like all  agreements that Victoria enters into and I expect the Commonwealth and other states are no different,  it's all about making sure that more Victorian product gets sent to our biggest and smallest customers.  Whether it's to China or any other part of the world, it's all about jobs. It's all about jobs. And I'll leave the  Commonwealth Government to make their assessments.

JOURNALIST: Premier [inaudible] is what I'm asking.

THE HON. DANIEL ANDREWS, PREMIER OF VICTORIA: We are comfortable with the arrangements we  have in place. But I'll be, if I can put it to you, I think that we'd be probably better off in our relationship if  all of us focused on the fact that I think the Prime Minister and I and all of us that you're looking at, even  the professors, are all about having the best economic partnerships with customers large and small in  every part of the world, because that means jobs and prosperity and profitability for families back home.



JOURNALIST: On this issue to another one, border battles have obviously dominated National Cabinet.  Have the New South Wales and Queensland Premiers managed to resolve your personal differences?  You've been feuding via duelling press conferences. And do either of you have regrets about the decision  you made on the borders?

THE HON. ANNASTACIA PALASZCZUK MP, PREMIER OF QUEENSLAND: No.

JOURNALIST: You would do it all again? Your response?

THE HON. GLADYS BEREJIKLIAN MP, PREMIER OF NEW SOUTH WALES: My response is contrary to what  might be out there, we have constructive dialogue within National Cabinet and I've made my position on  borders very clear from day one and I maintain that position and I guess that's the beauty of the  Federation. It allows, although from time to time we won't agree on everything, it allows us to come  forward with our own views on how to move forward. And I'm pleased now, as the PM said, the important  thing is we’ll all be open by Christmas and I think that's what our citizens want and expect and I hope that  this is sustained until the end of the pandemic. So we don't want to go backwards.

PRIME MINISTER: When Australia - and we’re going to have to leave it there - when Australia was  established as a nation, it was done to federate states. If, when Australia was established as a nation, the  idea was that it should be only one government in the country, well, that's what they would have done  but they didn't make that call. They made the call to have states and territories. And as a federal nation, I  think one of the things that we have demonstrated this year is that, of course, there's going to be  differences between states and territories from time to time. I think the assessment that is made that if  there's a difference of view or a disagreement then somehow the Federation is not working is again, I  think a very naive view. The Federation is working, the Federation has worked for Australia and most  importantly, it's got Australia working in one of the most important years that we've had and the  challenges we face in many generations. Thank you all very much.

[END]

Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

