



MEDIA RELEASE



Senate COVID Committee tables interim report into Government's

response to pandemic and recession



The Australian Greens support the recommendations and the interim findings of

the Senate Select Committee on COVID-19 majority report and have tabled

additional comments and findings.



COVID-19 has exposed the void created by neoliberalism and the damage that

it has done to the capacity of our nation to govern in the collective interest. To

handle this pandemic and its impacts there was a 180 degree turn required by

the government if it was to listen to the scientists rather than the vested

interests, and if it was to put the wellbeing of the Australian people ahead of a

budget surplus.



Neoliberalism is the doctrine by which this government has lived, and scientists

and the public interest are the very things that neoliberalism has systematically

and relentlessly attacked for the last forty years.



Now the Government is now rushing to claim that the recession is over to justify

the withdrawal of economic support measures. The winding back of support

measures is premature and will set back our economic recovery.



Through this pandemic the Government has continued to ignore and deny the

evidence that women, young people, older women, disabled people, First

Nations peoples, those on income support, people in insecure work, temporary

visa holders and the arts and entertainment community have not been

adequately supported.



The Government’s decision not to extend the Coronavirus Supplement to

Disability Support Payment and Carer Payment recipients is mean-spirited and

lacked evidence.



Both the Royal Commission into the violence abuse and neglect of disabled

people and the Aged Care Royal Commission have been scathing in their

assessment of the Government's response to assisting disabled and older

people in aged care through this pandemic.



The pandemic quickly exposed the perversity of linking income-support

payments to conditionality and compliance. The Greens condemn the re-introduction of mutual obligations in August 2020. It was premature and has

resulted in hundreds of thousands of Australians having their income support

payments suspended. A punitive approach to income support will not support

Australia’s economic recovery or help Australians back into jobs.



The Government’s reduction of the Coronavirus Supplement to $250 a fortnight

in September 2020 and $150 a fortnight in January 2021 will have devastating

consequences for people on income support payments.



These cuts have been made in an ad-hoc fashion and in the absence of any

hard evidence or data.



The Government has now secured multiple deals for the supply of Covid-19



vaccines in Australia. However as a vaccine starts to be rolled out in the UK,

Australians have no clarity about what the Government’s plan’s are for the

rollout in Australia.



The National Covid-19 Commission Advisory Board is a publicly funded, hand-picked body that has been responsible for coordinating advice to the

Government on non-health aspects of the Covid-19 pandemic.



It’s no wonder the NCC Advisory Board has recommended a gas-led recovery

given it and its advisory bodies (including the Industrial Relations Working

Group; Manufacturing Taskforce; and Charity, Philanthropy and Fundraising

Advisory Group) have so many representatives from the fossil fuel sector.



The Australian Greens continue to hold serious concerns about the NCC

Advisory Board’s transparency, accountability and structures.  Since the NCC

Advisory Board became part of cabinet deliberative processes in July, it has

been able to avoid proper scrutiny by this committee and other bodies.



Media Contact

Lucy Cowcher-Guthrie: 0418 401 180



