

THE HON JOSH FRYDENBERG MP  Treasurer

MEDIA RELEASE

Media contact: Kane Silom — Office of the Hon Josh Frydenberg MP — 02 6277 7340  The Hon Josh Frydenberg MP | Treasurer | MELBOURNE

11 November 2020

JOBMAKER HIRING CREDIT PASSES THE PARLIAMENT

The Morrison Government is continuing to support our economic recovery and secure Australia’s  future by today passing legislation to establish the JobMaker Hiring Credit, giving businesses access to  up to $200 per week for each eligible employee.

The $4 billion JobMaker Hiring Credit is a key part of the Government’s economic response to the  COVID-19 pandemic.

Youth unemployment was particularly impacted by restrictions imposed as part of the health response  to the COVID-19 pandemic, with the JobMaker Hiring Credit specifically designed to encourage  businesses to take on additional young employees and increase in employment.

The JobMaker Hiring Credit is a fixed amount of $200 per week for an eligible employee aged 16 to 29  years and $100 per week for an eligible employee aged 30 to 35 years paid quarterly in arrears by the  Australian Taxation Office.

This will help young people access job opportunities and reconnect them with the labour force as the  economy recovers from the effects of the coronavirus.

To be eligible, the employee must have been receiving JobSeeker Payment, Youth Allowance (Other)  or Parenting Payment for at least one of the previous three months, assessed on the date of  employment.

Employees also need to have worked for a minimum of 20 hours per week of paid work to be eligible,  averaged over a quarter and can only be eligible with one employer at a time.

The hiring credit is not available to an employer who does not increase their headcount and payroll.  The legislative framework also prohibits both employers and employees from entering into contrived  schemes in order to gain access to or increase the amount payable.

Existing rights and safeguards for employees under the Fair Work Act will continue to apply, including  protection from unfair dismissal and the full range of general protections.

The JobMaker Hiring Credit will ensure hard-working Australians and businesses have the support to  get back to work and is part of the Government’s Economic Recovery Plan to create jobs, rebuild the  economy and secure Australia’s future.

Ends

