

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RN BREAKFAST  TUESDAY, 28 JULY 2020

SUBJECTS: AUSMIN

FRAN KELLY, HOST: Richard Marles is the Shadow Defence Minister and  Deputy Labor Leader. Richard Marles, welcome back to Breakfast.

RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR  PARTY: Good morning, Fran. How are you?

KELLY: I'm very well thank you. Australia's going to be asked tonight to do  more with the US to muscle up to China in the Indo-Pacific, I think that's clear.  Is it in our interests to do that?

MARLES: Well our interest lies in the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea.  The ability to be able to navigate the high seas is critically important to us as an  island trading nation, and 60 per cent of our trade goes through the South  China Sea. So obviously that's a conversation that we need to have very  carefully. We've got core national interests at issue, in terms of navigating the  South China Sea. It's important that we are clear what our interest is, it's also  incredibly important that we are clear what our national interest is not. The  various territorial disputes which exist between the countries surrounding the  South China Sea are not where Australia's national interest lies. But I think in  terms of asserting the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea and the South  China Sea, I think that's fundamentally important to Australia.

KELLY: So what does that mean then? Because it's pretty clear the US is  going to ask Australia to join freedom of navigation operations, within that 12  kilometre limit, close to the artificial islands. It's also quite clear that our  Ministers are unlikely to agree with that because that's been the position of  Australia up until now. But in the past you have supported Australian joining

those freedom of navigation operations. Do you think it's now important- more  important than ever now to stand up to Beijing by doing those sail past and  flyovers? Do you think our government has been too cautious?

MARLES: I think our national interest hasn't changed. The freedom of  navigation within the South China Sea remains critical to what Australia is  about. And it's critical to our trade.

KELLY: So what does that mean? In 2016 you said our view is very clearly, the  Navy should be fully authorised to engage in freedom of navigation operation.  So does that mean you would be in support of the Australian Navy joining the  US in freedom of navigation operations close to the artificial islands?

MARLES: Well we've made it clear that as a matter of principle we think  freedom of navigation operations should be on the table. The full range of  options for Australia should be there. Exactly how, when and where is a difficult  question- or actually an impossible question to answer from Opposition, they  ultimately are operational questions which are going to depend on the  circumstances and you need the briefings of government to be able to make  those specific decisions. But what you can say from Opposition, given  information we have, is that as a matter of principle that does need to be on the  table and that's been our consistent position over a long period of time and it  remains our position because our national interests in the South China Sea  remains the same.

KELLY: So does that mean you're critical of the Coalition Government's  position up unto this date, in which we understand is likely to be the same  which is that Australia will have joint naval exercise in the international waters  but won't officially engage with the US in freedom of navigation operations  within that 12 mile limit?

MARLES: Well I think it's very important that Australia speaks with a clear  voice. Now, we've been consistent, Labor has been consistent over a long  period of time in relation to this. I think it is important that the government  asserts Australia's national interest in the context of the South China Sea and  that lies in asserting the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea. And freedom of  navigation operations as a matter of principle should be a routine thing around  the world and we engage in them around the world because as I said, as an  island trading nation the freedom of the high seas is very important and it's no  more important for Australia than in the South China Sea where most of our  trade traverses.

KELLY: So there wouldn't be a problem joining the US in those operations?  Yes or no?

MARLES: Well, in a sense, the specifics- it's difficult it's impossible to answer  yes from Opposition because the specifics of that are going to determine on the  operational questions which are based on a whole set of facts and information  which in Opposition we don't have-

KELLY: Okay.

MARLES: But as a matter of principle, as a matter of principle we've made it  clear; and that is that we think that this should be on the table. And from there,  the specific operational judgment about whether any particular operation be  engaged in, needs to be answered by the Government.

KELLY: The Government has used that declaration to the UN to spell out in  various unequivocal terms its opposition to the construction of artificial islands.  Does Labor endorse that statement at the UN?

MARLES: Yeah I think that's important. Because the decision of the  International Court of Arbitration found that the construction of those islands  were in contravention of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea. And this is  the point; we need to be very clear and laser like about where our national  interest lies. It lies in UNCLOS. And those islands have been found to be in  contravention of UNCLOS.  And on that basis it's appropriate that we're making  those statements and that we've always said that that decision we regard as  having significant meaning and it continues to do so.

KELLY: The speculation heading into these talks is that agreement could be  reached on up to five separate defence cooperation issues. The US being keen  to base intermediate ballistic missiles in Australia for instance, we know that.  Do you think that's likely to be on the table at AUSMIN? And is it a good idea?

MARLES: Well I doubt that and I'm not sure that that really has been a request  from the United States previously. I know there was reporting at the last  AUSMIN but I actually don't think that that was being requested by the United  States. Look, I actually think that that would be a very big ask. It is important  that Australia, in terms of the way in which we engage with the United States  does so in terms of our own national interest. Now we do have a very shared  interest with the United States in terms of building a global rules based order  and that's why something like the U.N. Convention on the Law of the Sea is  fundamental. But it's also important that we keep clear our national interests  when we're talking about questions such as that. So that there isn’t- I mean  there isn’t a blank cheque in relation to our relationship with the US as there is  there is no blank cheque in respect of our relationship with any country.

KELLY: And has the national interest in terms of relations with China and the  US shifted? Just last year, I remember I spoke to you about your call for closer

military cooperation with China. You said labelling Beijing as an enemy was a  profound mistake. Since then we've had China, it's behaviour around the  pandemic, the national security laws imposed on Hong Kong and now we've  got the US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, calling for Australia's allies to  stand up to what he calls Chinese tyranny. Is your view still the same as it was  when you were calling for closer military cooperation with China? Or has that  boat sailed?

MARLES: No, no it is. And I think that the important point here is that it would  remain a profound mistake to define China as an enemy. I have been critical-  and we've been critical of the way in which the Government has handled our  relationship with China. It's a difficult relationship, it's complex but it's one which  contains lots of opportunities but it's also one which contains lots of challenges.  And what that means is that we have to have firstly a clear set of guiding  principles about the way in which we engage with China and then we need at a  political level to do our diplomacy well. And it's precisely so that there is the  ballast in the relationship such that we can exercise our voice in our own  national interests when that differs from Chinese actions such as what we've  been talking about in relation to the South China Sea. But what we've seen on  the part of the Government is far too often the senior figures in the  Government- the Foreign Minister and the Prime Minister- pretty quiet in  relation to the relationship with China. And it's really fringe dwellers on the side  of the Government who have been filling the space and that becomes a major  problem in terms of the way in which we're relating to China. I think it's- the  gratuitousness of some of those comments-

KELLY: That is changing now, though.

MARLES: Well no, I think it's some of-  it's the gratuitousness of some of those  comments of the fringe dwellers which I think has really impacted the  relationship with China. Here's the thing, Fran; you can't point to a single  significant relationship that exists between a member of the Australian  Government and a senior member of the Chinese Government- not one-

KELLY: But whose fault is that? I mean Trade Minister Simon Birmingham has  told us publicly he's tried to engage his counterpart and he won't take his calls.  Whose fault is that?

MARLES: Well the only behaviour we get to control, is our own. And what I  know is that when you see silence on the part of our Foreign Minister when you  see silence on the part of our Defence Minister when you see a whole lot of  fringe dwellers, who are part of the Government filling the space, and you see  the relationship souring as a result, it seems to me that the fundamental  diplomacy- the ballast that would underpin the relationship which allows for  difficult moments such as what we've been describing inthe South China Sea is



not there.

KELLY: Just finally and briefly then; the Presidential Election campaign-  election is just 100 days away now. The Trump Administration has become  increasingly bellicose in on a number of fronts including anti-China rhetoric. Do  you think there's a danger that our Foreign and Defence Ministers could get  dragged into the Trump re-election campaign? And do you think they did the  right thing by flying to Washington rather than holding these talks by  teleconference?

MARLES: No, I think they did the right thing by going to Washington. I do  accept that this AUSMIN, I think is fundamentally important and I accept the  characterisation in your introduction that it's one of the most important in recent  years, and that's really a function of the COVID-19 crisis and the impact that it's  had on our strategic circumstances globally, and the way in which it's kind of  acted as an accelerant on a whole lot of trends that were out there. I actually  think that it is important in the context of that being an election year in this  sense; our relationship with the United States transcends politics both in the US  and here, and there's been a pretty good record of AUSMINs occurring during  election periods in the US and election periods in Australia and that should  continue. But what needs to be at the heart of that is a sense of continuity and  obviously were anyone to get caught up in the context of a US election  campaign, in terms of what, how Australia exercises its voice, would be a  profound mistake.

KELLY: Alright, Richard Marles thank you very much for joining us.

MARLES: Thanks, Fran.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363







