



SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women



STATEMENT

TREATMENT OF DR YANG HENGJUN



The Government strongly objects to the formal indictment of Australian citizen and academic Dr  Yang Hengjun (Dr Yang Jun) in China on suspicion of espionage.

The Australian Government is very disappointed that the Chinese authorities have not yet  provided formal advice on Dr Yang’s indictment.

Since his detention over a year ago, the Australian Government has repeatedly expressed its  strong concern about the treatment of Dr Yang.  Dr Yang’s case continues to be of key interest  to the Australian community.

Crises are a time for nations to pull together. It is not in the spirit of mutual respect and trust that  our continued advocacy for Dr Yang has not been acknowledged.

Dr Yang’s poor health makes him especially vulnerable to COVID-19. In our most recent  representations, we appealed for humanitarian considerations to apply to Dr Yang’s situation.

We deeply regret that for over a year, our requests have not been taken up. Dr Yang has had  no access to legal representation and has been held in harsh conditions that have been  detrimental to his physical and mental health.

We have asked repeatedly that basic international standards of justice, procedural fairness and  humane treatment apply.

The Australian Government will always support Dr Yang.

We have not been permitted contact with Dr Yang since our last consular visit on 30 December  2019. In the absence of consular visits as a result of COVID-19, we have requested contact by

telephone or correspondence. Both requests have been rejected This is unacceptable treatment  of an Australian citizen.

We call for Dr Yang’s immediate release and that he be allowed to leave China and travel to  Australia with his wife.





Media Contacts  David Wroe: +61 429 531 143  Melanie Ruiz: +61 427 888 392



Authorised by Senator the Hon Marise Payne, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Women,  Australia.

