

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE

SENATOR FOR THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY





E&EO TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RN DRIVE

THURSDAY, 12 MARCH 2020



SUBJECT: COVID-19 Stimulus Package.



PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: Labor has been critical of what it sees as the

Government’s slow speed in responding to the COVID-19 Pandemic. But the

Opposition has broadly welcomed the $17.6 billion in stimulus measures

announced today. Senator Katy Gallagher is the Shadow Finance Minister and

joins us tonight. Senator Gallagher, welcome.



SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR

FINANCE: Thanks for having me on, Patricia.



KARVELAS: Your colleague Jim Chalmers says Labor will be inclined to

support these measures. Are you satisfied by what's been announced today?



GALLAGHER: We're certainly coming at it from a point of view where we want

to support the Government stimulus package. We want to be cooperative. We

think there's for some time, some weeks now it's been clear that we've needed

an economic response to the Coronavirus and you know, our approach is

basically we'd like to see this money out in the economy as soon as possible

and so we broadly supportive. Time will tell, like through the detail about

whether it's going to do everything the Government hopes it will but we are

certainly keen to get the package moving and through the Parliament as quickly

as possible.



KARVELAS: Labor’s stimulus measures during the Global Financial Crisis

meant Australia did avoid a recession. Is that the test you're setting for the

Coalition?



GALLAGHER: Well, I think the Prime Minister's tests that he set for himself in

the comments he's made over the last couple of days is more about, you know,

making sure that jobs aren't lost, that businesses don't fold and that Australia

avoids an overall downturn in the economy. So I think there's a few tests there

that we will be watching. And certainly we'd want to see the Government make

every effort to meet the tests they've set when in the past the tests they’ve set

themselves they haven’t met. It's really important that the government delivers

on that.



KARVELAS: One of the keys to whether or not this is effective will be how

quickly the support reaches businesses and households. Do you agree that this

needs to be passed as quickly as possible? It needs to be just finished, no

amendments or nothing substantial, no arguments. Just pass through the

parliament?



GALLAGHER: Well, we've said today, I think there are certainly, you know, this

package that we broadly support and we'd want to see it move through the

Parliament as soon as possible. We're working through the detail though. I

think there are some issues about casuals that we have some concerns about.

So there's, you know, there are issues that we'll be looking at over the next few

days, but our approach and we do want to see this money flow through as soon

as possible. We sit in that second last week in March, I think, the week after

next and I would imagine that this package would pass through that week.



KARVELAS: Are you going to insist on measures to be put in place to ensure

that businesses use the support they get from the Government, the money they

get to pay wages and keep people employed, I mean they'd been asked to, but,

there's no strings attached it seems.



GALLAGHER: Yeah. Well I think I've, I listened to the interview I had with Josh

there. I mean the Government is designing this program. They've got the

advice presumably from the experts in Treasury about how to make this money

flow. I think the fact that it is flowing in the economy, we want to make sure that

it actually goes to support worker because that's what it's about. Support

businesses to maintain workers and keep people in jobs and so that is a focus

for us. We will obviously get some briefings from the department about why it's

been designed this way and you know, why they believe this is the best way to

get the outcomes that the Government's seeking. But I think there is a

responsibility on businesses that are receiving this money to really look after

their workers. Cause that's what this package is largely about.



KARVELAS: The ACTU says the decision to offer casuals and contractors who

have to self-isolate or be quarantined a Newstart equivalent payment is cruel.

Will you try and argue for a better deal and push for a better deal in your

negotiations?



GALLAGHER: Look, I think there are some issues around casual workers that

we're looking at. I mean I think the process to actually get on new start is, you

know, quite lengthy at times. I'm not sure Centrelink is being resourced or

geared up to meet some of the extra demands that might come on in that front.

And I think the other issue will be people making those decisions about, well, I

get more if I go to work than if I accept this payment, therefore I balance it out,

I'm going to go to work despite the fact that I might have some symptoms of

cold and flu. So I think they're the ones, they're the issues that we need to

understand a little bit more about.  But in terms of the package, there may be

things that we continue to do and as the Government continues to respond to

this that we continue to agitate over but certainly in terms of this package as a

starting point, I think we are going to work with the Government to see it

through.



KARVELAS: The Grand Prix is on this weekend. Labor MP, Josh Burns says

he's not going to the Melbourne Grand Prix and he's warned others against

going. Should it be cancelled?



GALLAGHER: Well, in a previous life I was a health minister for eight years

and I think when you're trying to - when you're dealing with a health challenge

or a health crisis, it is really important that we rely on the advice of experts. And

in this instance it’s the Chief Health Officer. He and all the Chief Health Officers

around the country are providing that advice to government about containment

strategies and I think they are the experts on this. If the Chief Health Officer is

not advising the cancellation of mass gatherings at this point, then I'm with the

Chief Health Officer on that.



KARVELAS: Thank you so much for joining us.



GALLAGHER: Thanks a lot.





KARVELAS: Senator Katy Gallagher who is the Shadow Finance Minister.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: PAT CRONAN 0432 758 224





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











