

THE HON BILL SHORTEN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT SERVICES    SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE  SCHEME

MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC INSIDERS  SUNDAY, 16 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: National aged care and disability response, Ruby Princess  report, Daniel Andrews, hotel quarantine, JobKeeper & JobSeeker, Gas,  Hekmattullah, Morrison simping to Trump

DAVID SPEERS, HOST: Time to talk to Bill Shorten, to take us there  here was the Prime Minister on this idea from the Royal Commissioner of  a new national pandemic coordinating body specifically focused on aged  care.

SCOTT MORRISON VIDEO PACKAGE: The matters that were raised  that needed to be addressed very much mirror the actions that the  government has indeed been taking. And I know that there are  proponents of particular methods and particular ways of doing things or  particular groups that should be established. What matters to me is  simply the action and the action that is being taken is very consistent, I  believe, with what was set out yesterday as a proposal.

SPEERS: Bill Shorten, welcome to the program.

BILL SHORTEN, MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG: Good morning.

SPEERS: So let's start with the immediate question. Is enough being

done right now to protect aged care residents?

SHORTEN: No. I had a neighbour who lived two doors down and went  into St. Basil's home and his family couldn't find out for five days what  happened to Theo. But these five days were the days that the  Commonwealth was running St Basils, it wasn't before then. Then we got  the phone call that no one wanted to get that he had passed on that fifth  day, the Saturday night after we'd been hitting the phones. But the  Commonwealth still rang Theo's family on Sunday and said he's doing  fine. So there is a major problem. And I just want to give a shout out,  though, to all the aged care workforce. There are a lot of places getting it  right, David. And aged care, I think, is a disaster.

SPEERS: So what needs to happen then right now?

SHORTEN: Well, first of all, as my colleague Julie Collins has said, we  should be pursuing the Royal Commissioner's suggestion of a national  pandemic aged care coordinating authority. The government set up a  response unit in Victoria, which is good as far as it goes, but it doesn't go  far enough.

SPEERS: What would the difference be, because what we just heard the  PM saying what they're doing with these state based response centres is  adequate. Can you explain what difference would a national body make?

SHORTEN: Well, first of all, clearly the left hand doesn't talk to the right  hand in government bureaucracy. I mean, we've got staff who need PPE  training, personal protective equipment training. We also need to make  sure that personal protective equipment is provided. And also, I was  listening to what your panellists were saying beforehand, the reality is that  the government introduced a retention bonus, but it's not going to all of  the people working in aged care. So what that means is we've set up an  industry for 20 years, ever since Howard helped privatise it, and in order  for the low paid casual workforce to make enough money, they've got to  work in multiple centres. They're not getting the support. So a  coordinating authority, I think, deals with all of the issues.

SPEERS: Can’t though, just to be clear on this point, can’t state based  response centres deal with those issues? Are you saying they’re unable  to?



SHORTEN: It would be good if they can. But if you set up a Royal  Commission and the Royal Commissioner makes a direct intervention,  why are we second guessing it? Why do we leave old people, elderly  people and vulnerable people, with a second class system? The people  in the system are working hard, but this has been the dirty secret of  Australian politics. And COVID-19’s just revealed it.

SPEERS:  Well, what does it what does it reveal? What's the bigger  picture here, Bill Shorten? You refer to the privatisation of the sector.  What are you suggesting?

SHORTEN: How on earth can you ensure that - how can you serve two  masters? How do you serve the master of profit, making a profit, and  care? And this is the problem. Looking after elderly people with a  diagnosis of dementia is not cheap. So if we want to make a profit and  you want to look after people, then you create fault lines in the system.  COVID-19, right across Australian societies, revealed things which have  been glossed over. But if you're a worker in this system, and there are  great people working in this system, they're doing the hard and the tough  work. They have to work at multiple centres just to make a living.

SPEERS: So are you saying there should be no profit making in aged  care?

SHORTEN: I'm saying that we need to put people before profit. I'm saying  that if you can make a profit, that's good. But the problem here is that  we're seeing profit being made, but people not getting looked after.

SPEERS: When you just said you can't serve two masters -

SHORTEN: You've got to make a choice in a beauty parade. You've got  to make a choice who you want. And I want us to look after our elderly  Australians.

SPEERS: But you're not, you know, no place for profit.

SHORTEN: No, but I am saying that what we see is the system relies on  the workforce who get paid crap, who have to work at multiple centres,  who are casuals. And we expect them basically to do what governments

are not prepared to do, which is take up the load.

SPEERS: What's the answer to that? I mean, we've got a huge number of  unemployed now. We've got a demand for care workers, not just in aged  care, but disability care, and we'll get to that, in child care and so on.  What's the answer here? How can government fix both problems?

SHORTEN: Well, I think from every crisis, there's an opportunity. We're  still in Stage 4, so talking about opportunity in Melbourne sort of seems a  bit like waiting for a sunny day, but we've got the opportunity to pay  people properly. Train people properly. Put more money into aged care.  Don't rely on a casualised workforce who, whilst they do the work of  angels, are effectively treated like fruit pickers. We’ve got to stand up and  say that if we care about our parents and our grandparents, which we do,  and most Australians would agree with that, you can't do that on the  cheap.

SPEERS: Let's talk about disability care. There are some growing  concerns about the numbers that we're seeing there in terms of the virus  and a lot of similar issues when it comes to casual workers, the need for  training and access to personal protective equipment, masks and so on.  There are 89 active cases now in Victorian residential disability  accommodation, 67 of them are staff, 22 residents. I understand the  Victorian Government has been requesting these sort of state response  centres like we have now with aged care for disability care. Instead, the  Commonwealth hasn't agreed to that, but the state has set up its own  one. It does have NDIS representation on it. Is that adequate?

SHORTEN: Well, first of all, I'd like the health authorities to report the  number of people with disabilities who are actually dying from COVID.  The Victorians have got some data, but I think that's a federal  responsibility. I don't think it is adequate enough. Did you know, for  example, that disability carers often have the same skills as aged carers?  The UK showed that two thirds of people who died there had a disability,  yet disability carers can't even get a retention bonus. So the very problem  that we're identifying as the trigger in aged care, low paid, casualised  workforce forced to go to work in multiple centres, that's happening in  disability right now. There's 720 group homes and there's a simple  solution. Rather than asking a single organisation to either pay, force their  workers not to get a lot of money, is we should look at it as a sector wide

workforce. So facilities who don't have the disease and the virus can at  least tap some of their workforce to help out rather than putting in  untrained people.

SPEERS: Hasn't that happened? The Minister, Stuart Robert, did put out  a press release this week saying that they've made four large providers,  they’ve put them on standby to provide workers to provide  accommodation for the smaller.

SHORTEN: Yeah, that is a step in the right direction.

SPEERS: So what needs to happen right now, then, for disability care?

SHORTEN:  Well, what I would do is, first of all, I would give disability  workers the retention bonus. I'd make sure that we had pandemic leave  for them. And I'd also make sure that we think of disability like aged care  as a whole sector, and that we use all of the resources rather than asking  individual organisations when there's an outbreak to handle it on their  own. I mean, when you think about aged care, it isn't just to be expected,  and I don't agree with Mr Morrison - do you know we are the second  worst in the world now in terms of COVID-19 proportionately and aged  care? That is not the country we see in the mirror, we want to see in the  mirror. Second worst in the world.

SPEERS: Let me ask a few questions on the economy.

SHORTEN: Sure.

SPEERS: As mentioned, a lot of unemployed, more than a million, as of  the jobs figures this week. Do you think the rates of JobKeeper and  JobSeeker should still come down in about six weeks?

SHORTEN: Absolutely not. I got an email last night from a lady in  Ringwood, Rebecca, who knew I was going on the show today. And her  story speaks why we shouldn't be cutting JobSeeker and JobKeeper at  the moment. She said she's a mother of four. She she will lose 12  hundred dollars a month as soon as the reduction comes in. I live in  Victoria. It's pretty bloody obvious that we should be extending  JobKeeper and JobSeeker into the next year. And I also want to give a  mention of sole traders and partnerships, who are slipping through the

cracks. Small business, you'd think, with Mr Morrison they’re his  heartland so he says, they'd be missing out and casuals are still getting a  raw deal.

SPEERS: Well, Labor's position, as I understand it, is they should  consider maintaining the right of JobKeeper and JobSeeker. You're  saying this morning they should be maintained

SHORTEN: Labor will arrive at its position. But as a Victorian, I see the  hardship. You know, in the city, in the Block Arcade, beautiful, iconic  arcade, seven or eight small businesses probably aren’t even coming  back. The problem's real. And if we know that, we're going to have to  maintain JobSeeker and JobKeeper and JobKeeper has, on balance,  done more good than harm. Let's just get on with it.

SPEERS: Sure, but just in your comment, are you suggesting that Labor's  taking a little - is a bit slow to get to that position?

SHORTEN: No. not at all, I think Labor has been ahead of the  government on a range of issues, paid pandemic leave, what to do on  aged care. And Jim Chalmers has made it very clear, our Shadow  Treasury spokesperson, that the modelling on JobKeeper was based on  there being one spike. Well, as John Maynard Keynes, the economist,  says, as the facts change, so does his opinion.

SPEERS: If you'd won the election last year and you were leading  Australia through this crisis, what sort of reforms would you be looking at  to get people back into work to grow the economy?

SHORTEN: Well, we didn't win the election and Labor will unveil all its  policies in good time before the election. But I think COVID-19’s actually  changed the way we do things in Australia. COVID- 19 has shown I think,  and there's been plenty of people, plenty of views so this is just early  thoughts - when you're locked down, you have time to think. Aged care is  a basket case, not for the people in it, but for the lack of support it gets.  Childcare. Why are we making childcare workers, for example, not be  able to get JobKeeper and create some second system? There's no  doubt in my mind it's highlighted inequality. The people who are doing it  worse under COVID-19 are the people who rely upon income, who don't  have a whole lot of property.



SPEERS: Has it changed your thinking on tax at all?

SHORTEN: I think in I.R, it reinforces some of what I thought, which is  that we've relied on 70:30 split in our workforce, 70 per cent permanent  30 per cent casuals. The casuals are the ones copping it in the neck.  Probably what it has made me do is realise that sole traders and  partnerships don't fit neatly into a whole lot of government programs. And  that I think is worth a lot more creative work. The other thing, though,  which I'm absolutely even more redoubled in my conviction, is  manufacturing. We've run out of items in our supply chain. It's about time  that we double down our investment in making things here.

SPEERS: Just on that, some suggest we need to do more on gas to  make manufacturing more affordable, even taxpayer subsidies for  infrastructure when it comes to gas. What do you think?

SHORTEN: I think that if we want to transition to more renewable energy,  we still need baseload energy. And that gas, I think, is part of that  answer. You know, I was formerly a union rep. I used to look after  workers in manufacturing. You can't have a manufacturing sector from  Quenos in Botany and Altona through to foundries, through to the four  smelters in aluminium, the steel industry, unless we have low price  energy. I think gas does tick some of those boxes.

SPEERS: Couple of quick ones, on the Ruby Princess, Bret Walker found  in his report on Friday that the Australian Border Force and for that  matter, the Department of Home Affairs, do not bear any responsibility for  the Ruby Princess mishap. Do you accept that?

SHORTEN: Well, I haven't read the report, but I've seen the media  coverage. It certainly does make it clear that Bret Walker sheets a lot of  the responsibility to New South Wales Berejiklian Government health  representatives.

SPEERS: Is there any evidence that Border Force did anything wrong  here?

SHORTEN: Well, I don't know. And the point is, it would have been good  if Mr Morrison had allowed his federal officials to give evidence.



SPEERS: What about in Victoria? As you mentioned, we're here in Stage  4 lockdown at the moment. How would you rate Dan Andrews handling of  the virus?

SHORTEN: I think Dan has been doing a pretty good job. And when  we've had the problems that we've seen in Victoria of hotel quarantine,  say what you like about Dan Andrews, he fronts up every day. He shows  what I think a leader should do. He takes the questions, for better or for  worse.

SPEERS: Does he answer them though? Are you satisfied with the  explanations?

SHORTEN: Well he’s set up the Coate inquiry. I think we'll get to the  bottom of it. But I noticed that the government, the federal government,  always seems to be out there blaming the states. I brought this book  along today. It's called the Constitution. I’d like Mr Morrison to read it. It's  sort of like his job description. And if he doesn't want to read the whole  lot, Section 51, which I have open, sets out, like his day job and his  powers. People might not realise, quarantine is a federal government  responsibility. It's at Section 51, sub nine.

SPEERS: Section 51 of the Constitution seeing as you've got it there, it  says Parliament shall subject to the Constitution, have the power to make  laws for quarantine. It doesn't say it's responsible for managing hotel  quarantine, does it?

SHORTEN: Well, if it says quarantine in the Constitution at the very least  -



SPEERS: Are you saying the current arrangements are unconstitutional?  Where the states are running hotel quarantine?

SHORTEN: I guess I'm saying that, from Shorten QC to Speers QC  talking constitutional law, I'm saying that the federal government has  some role in quarantine. And I think people just want to see the system  run properly, not get into the blame game.

SPEERS: What role are you talking about there, what should the

Commonwealth be doing with hotel quarantine?

SHORTEN: The Commonwealth is the big dog of Australian politics. It's  the biggest player

SPEERS: So what should it do here?

SHORTEN: I think they should be doing as much as they can working  with the states.

SPEERS: But what specifically, should the Commonwealth be doing with  hotel quarantine that they're not?

SHORTEN: Well, I think that they should be providing as much  knowledge and capacity working with the state government. My point is  very simple. Mr Morrison, unlike Dan Andrews, doesn't stick around for  the tough questions quite often. And I think when it comes to quarantine,  we've heard about Ruby Princess. We've heard about hotel quarantine.  The feds have got a job to play here.

SPEERS: Final question. Can I ask you about the Afghan soldier,  Hekmatullah, who murdered three Australian soldiers back in 2012. He's  now going to be freed apparently, from jail, under a prisoner swap  agreement. The prime minister says he has written to President Trump,  about this. Is there more Australia should be doing?

SHORTEN: This is a terrible story. Hekmatullah turned his rifle on three  Aussie diggers and killed them in cold blood. The Americans have  captured him, which is a good thing. This is where I probably think  Malcolm Turnbull, even though I disagree with him on a lot certainly, I  thought he did a better job standing up to Donald Trump. On this matter, I  think that the families of Australian diggers who were murdered in cold  blood should know what the government's doing. We all should. I don't  think our closest ally militarily should be releasing a Taliban gunman who  killed three of ours, just let him go scot free. I think we need to do more  and we need to be transparent with what's going on, or fundamentally if I  can put in really plain English, Mr Morrison needs to make sure that he  doesn't look like he's just a simp to Donald Trump on this very important  issue.



SPEERS: Just explain  simp?



SHORTEN: Soft.

SPEERS: Bill Shorten, thank you.

ENDS







