

CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC BRISBANE DRIVE WITH STEVE AUSTIN

THURSDAY, 6 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: COVID-19, COVIDSafe app, vaccine, PPE.



STEVE AUSTIN, HOST: Chris Bowen, thanks for coming on this afternoon.



BOWEN: Pleasure Steve, good afternoon.



AUSTIN: Do you have the COVIDSafe app on your phone?



BOWEN: Yeah, I do. I do. I downloaded it the day it came out and we have

supported the concept of the app. We've always said, it's up to the Government

to design it correctly. But you know, we're not going to stand in the way of the

app unlike some National Party MPs who discourage people from downloading

the app. We constructively said, it's a good thing to download it. 6.9 million

Australians have. So that's enough Australians for it to work, but it isn't working

anywhere near as well as it should.



AUSTIN: Why isn't it?



BOWEN: There's been a number of problems with it. The bottom line is that we

are not entirely sure. The Government will tell you that it has traced you know,

lots of people, but they've been people who've been traced manually anyway.

The key is how many people has the app found that the manual contact traces

could find?



AUSTIN: Yes.



BOWEN: And it's a very small number, 14 in New South Wales, we believe

none in Queensland, none in Victoria. Now. That means it is really adding no

value. They've got contact traces, one of whom you heard from this morning,

working their guts out particularly in Victoria, really tough work and -



AUSTIN: It's found no one in Victoria despite what's happening there, it's not

been successfully used in Victoria.



BOWEN: That's the last update we had. And the Victorians found it so

frustrating they stopped using it for a while. Again, I think people would cut the

Government some slack. Fair enough, they are acting fast. But I think the key

thing is to admit that it hasn't been working, and then explain why. Now there

are some IT experts that have said that it would freeze after 100 contacts, and

it's not many. You think how long would it take you to come across 100 people

within a metre and a half. Not long, if that's true, that's a big problem.



There was an update this week, which might have solved the problem or

certainly would have improved it, we certainly hope that works. But we're also

concerned that many, many people would still be using the original version of it,

not everybody updates their apps all the time. I know I don't always update my

apps.



AUSTIN: It doesn't happen automatically.



BOWEN: Not always no and if the Government wants people to update, they

really need to have that community information as well. So, again, you know,

the Government says it's found these people I'm sure Stuart Robert will try and

ramble with hundreds of numbers Scott Morrison did he said 'it's been involved

in at that point 300 contract traces' but they are people who had already been

found. Now that's like saying that was, you and I are involved in a test cricket

match. We go and watch it. We're just sitting on the sidelines. Not really

involved. We stay on the sidelines.



AUSTIN: My guest is Labor's Shadow Health Spokesperson Chris Bowen. This

is ABC Radio, Brisbane. So the IT quirks, we've done a number of stories in the

past but was not able to at the time to get any federal government rep

spokesperson onto to respond. But there are problems with Apple iPhones in a

particular sort of related to their brand. For some reason there were other

problems. You don't think those IT quirks have actually been ironed out or fixed

properly yet.



BOWEN: Not well enough, and certainly if the upgrade is what is required to fix

them, it would have been better if the Government had just come out and said

okay, we've got a few things wrong to start with but the upgrade fixes it please

go in your app store and upgrade your apps. But they haven't done that. And

it's the same as everything else. If

you don't admit a problem you can't fix it, if the government just won't, just be

honest with people say the app wasn't working, then they're not going to be

able to properly fix it by encouraging people to upgrade the app or update it.

You know, they had choices here I don't second guess those choices, but they

had choices it didn't have to be designed this way. They're also options around

the Google Apple app, which was jointly developed by those two companies to

avoid some of the interoperability issues. There's issues in how those systems

can collaborate with each other, or don't collaborate with each other, which has

stopped the app working on some occasions. I don't say this with any sense of

triumph. I wish it had worked and I still hope it does, because it can play a role

if it's done properly, and I certainly, let me be very clear, I certainly wouldn't

encourage anybody to delete the app. I mean, it's not doing any harm. It's just

not doing anywhere near enough good.



AUSTIN: It's an expensive way to not do enough good, though. Does - the

federal Government's seemingly gone quiet about the app. Unless I've missed

it they were advertising significantly encouraging Australians to download it.



BOWEN: Yeah. Millions of dollars on advertising.



AUSTIN: I think they've stopped that unless I've missed it, I could be wrong.



BOWEN: Certainly a lot less if at all that's right. They spent about two million

developing the app but many, many more, advertising it to convince Australians

to download it. And okay, yeah, we did need Australians to download it

because if not enough Australians downloaded it then it clearly wouldn't work.

But Australians did respond. We did,

enough of us to make it work, to get that critical mass 6.9 million Australians, is

not bad. But it's still just found those 14 people - that the contact tracing app

found.



AUSTIN: Now they had a contact tracer from Queensland here on the program

on this radio station this morning with Rebecca Levingston and the person said,

'we think it has worked somewhere, but they haven't'. And it's very difficult to

find any case of it being successful and your latest update that the Federal

Labor has had, as it's been not successful at all in Queensland, not successful

at all in Victoria, but has found 14 instances in New South Wales.



BOWEN: That's right. That's right. That's the best advice we have. Obviously,

you know, we hope that improves, we hope it improves very much, particularly

in Victoria.



AUSTIN: What should the federal Government do? I mean, a technology

company was paid 3.8 million to develop it, I think the total of about 6 million,

and it was also sorted out what should the federal Government do to get

everyone else on it.



BOWEN: I think the first thing to do would be to be honest, so I think the

ministers responsible should hold a press conference and say, here's the

update, here's why it hasn't worked as well as we would like, what went wrong

and fair enough. Again, I think they will cut them some slack if they were honest

about that. And here is how it has improved and here's what we need you to

do. And we need you to update your app. That would be, I think, the reasonable

and fair approach, but they're not doing that. They just bluster through and say

so it's nothing to see here, no problem that's working. Give nonsense figures

about how many people it's traced when they'd already been found by the

manual contact traces. So that's adding no value whatsoever.



AUSTIN: My guest is Chris Bowen. Chris Bowen is the Shadow Health

spokesperson for Federal Labor. Before I let you go, I'd like to ask you about

personal protective equipment. I understand hearing you recently with another

journalist that you had done a bit of digging around to find out what Australia's

stocks were of personal protective equipment prior to the virus. And what went

wrong. Just tell me just how you see this. There's a lot of discussion now that

we need to bring the tools of production back home and manufacturer essential

products here in Australia, largely stemming from what nearly went wrong with

PPE. What can you tell me?



BOWEN: That's right. Well, I mean, it's a very legitimate discussion we need to

have as a country. We're not going to make everything here, but we need to

make more things here. But we also need to stockpile, now there was a

National Medical Stockpile, PPE stockpile, which is right and proper, the federal

government owns PPE ready for a disaster. But as we went into this crisis we

had 20 million masks. That didn't last very long. So we had a shortage of

masks. There was a time when not an hour would pass when I wouldn't have

an MP ringing me saying the doctors in my community, the nurses, the

disability workers, the aged care workers, can't get masks, because there just

wasn't enough. 20 million just doesn't last very long.



AUSTIN: We have the same calls to this station as well,



BOWEN: I'm sure I'm sure. And even worse we had no gloves, gowns, no

goggles.



AUSTIN: None?



BOWEN: None.



AUSTIN: In our National Stockpile?



BOWEN: Correct. That's right and just a few years ago we had millions. Again,

I'm not here to criticise you know, I'm not saying it's somebody's fault, I'm

saying, well, let's get this right. We don't know. Let's just say we get through

COVID-19. there's a, there's a vaccine soon, touch wood, all hopes on that. But

let's say that we get through this. And there's another pandemic, it could be a

particularly virulent fluid next year. We just don't know, this might not be the big

one Steve. So we need to be taking big steps. We know that there were

shortages in the stockpile. It wasn't big enough, we need to be building that

stockpile. We know the international supply seizes up, again, I give the

Government some credit, I give them a tick, they tried really hard to get more

masks, but so was the rest of the world it was too late, you know, and most of

the worlds masks are made in Wuhan in China, I mean, the supply just froze

up. And so we just can't let it happen again, and the other thing we need to be

doing much more of is getting ready for the vaccine. And we might have a

vaccine in the next twelve months. Australia needs to be in there.



AUSTIN: And we'll be lucky if we do.



BOWEN: We will be lucky. But you know, every researcher in the world is -

`there's about 200 vaccines under development in the world, we know the

failure rate of vaccines is around 96 per cent. So out of those 200, a small

number might work, but we need to be investing much more in those vaccines,

in that vaccine development, the Government's put in 5 million dollars to the

University of Queensland. Well, that's great. But the Queensland Government's

done double that. So the state government's done double what the federal

government has done, and other governments are spending billions, and that

means they will be at the front of the queue for those vaccines. And, you know,

we don't want all the vaccines in Australia, but we want our fair share. And I

think the federal government needs to be doing much more now to get access

to those vaccines, because if we wait until the rest of the world has done their

deals and by the way they already have we will be missing out. So I think that's

a failure that needs to be rectified as a matter of urgency.



AUSTIN: Have we solved the supply problem of PPE? In other words are we

now manufacturing what our own country needs without having to go overseas

to China.



BOWEN: It's better now but there's still a long way to go. There's been a lot of

manufacturers, switch to PPE, so people used to make other things, clothes

and other things have switched to masks. That's great, a very patriotic thing to

do. And hand sanitizer is another example. There were big shortages of that, a

lot of alcohol distillers have switched to that, so there is now enough hand

sanitizer to go around, there was a shortage, people were running out of that.

So again, while things are better I do think we need to be ensuring that we're

better placed for the next pandemic and we don't know how long this will last.

We'll be lucky if we get a vaccine. I think we will. We might not, it might take a

while. A vaccine for this would normally take about 15 to 17 years to develop.

They are trying to do it in one and it can't be done quicker than that because

they have to test it and they have to test it on many many people. Make sure

there's no side effects,



If you get side effects in just a small number of people, you know serious side

effects then that vaccine is no good. They need to do lots of testing and it's

going to take some time. So we've got a long way to go before we are through.



AUSTIN: Well given the normal 15 year horizon to get a successful vaccine.

And given the 96 per cent failure rate of vaccines should we be planning to

have - others say we're gonna have to bite the bullet - that's the wrong phrase.

But either way we're going to have to live with the virus longer term find a way

of actually strategically living with it. Yeah, well, we're certainly gonna have to

adapt regardless. I mean, this, this virus is not defeated anywhere, until it's

defeated everywhere. As long as it exists anywhere in the world. Until we have

a vaccine then we are vulnerable. We've seen how easy it is for people, with

the strictest border protections, how easy it is for people to sneak past or

people who are sometimes asymptomatic don't know that they've got it and we



know how easy it is we know how contagious it is. We know what a dangerous

disease it is. And while it is rampant in other parts of the world, we have to

remain on high alert.



AUSTIN: Quick question a listener wants me to ask you with the 20 million

masks we had just prior to the pandemic, the listener wants to ask, there were

rumours going around that they went overseas or that our PPE went overseas.

Do you know anything about that?



BOWEN: There were some concerns about you know, privately held stocks

being sent overseas but the National Stockpile is our National Stockpile and

that went to Australians.



AUSTIN: And when the Coronavirus hit, we had no PPE gear.



BOWEN: No gloves, gowns or goggles. We did have 20 million masks.



AUSTIN: We're fixing it now. But it's still not properly fixed.



BOWEN: There's a long way to go. Again, I'm not here to say you know, this is

a particular individual's fault. I'm here to say let's get this right.



AUSTIN: Thanks for your time.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH - 0424 512 512





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.









