

LINDA BURNEY MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND SOCIAL SERVICES  MEMBER FOR BARTON



FAMILIES FACE TOUGH PREDICAMENT UNDER INCOME TEST

The Government’s JobSeeker Payment income test creates a perverse predicament for  couples and families impacted by the coronavirus pandemic, where they can end up with  less income if one partner keeps their job.

Australians who lose their job or have hours reduced can apply for the JobSeeker  Payment.

Through the JobSeeker Payment, Australians are also eligible for the Coronavirus  Supplement, Rent Assistance, the Energy Supplement and other support depending on  their circumstances.

However, if their partner earns an annual income of $48,000, the couple loses access to  this social security. Even if one person has lost their job.

EXAMPLE A - one person loses job  Partner 1: loses job which paid $50,000 per year and has no income   Partner 2: keeps job earns $49,000 per year

*This couple family will not receive any assistance because of the partner income test.  Despite losing most of their income. They will need to rely on the remaining income of  $49,000.

EXAMPLE B - both people on JobSeeker Payment  Partner 1: loses job and has no income  Partner 2: loses job and has no income

*This couple family will receive an annualised figure of $55,161 in JobSeeker Payment for  the next six months. Plus Rent Assistance of $3,380 per year. And Energy Supplement of  $410.80 per year. In total, annualised secial security payment of $58,951.

Labor has called for the government to urgently adjust the partner income test.

It is good that the Government has suspended the asset tests and Liquid Asset Waiting  Period for JobSeeker Payment - but many families without assets to fall back on wont  benefit from this. They will just be hit hard by the partner income test.

These are many lower and middle-income families who have been forced to take on big



mortgages and pay high rents in recent years. And who simply can’t adjust to losing most  of their income overnight.

Amendments secured by Labor give the Government the power to fix the partner income  test by regulation.

Last week in the Parliament, the Government said they would do this.

Labor has consistently called for a wage subsidy to keep Australians connected to their  jobs, and we look forward more details from the government.

It is also critical that the government works to ensure a strong and inclusive social safety  for Australians out of work.

For the many people who will inevitably need to rely on JobSeeker Payment, time is of the  essence.

We look forward to further announcements on this from the government.

MONDAY, 30 MARCH 2020

MEDIA CONTACT: DARYL TAN 0422 028 222









