

PAT CONROY MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

AND THE PACIFIC

SHADOW MINISTER ASSISTING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE

SHADOW MINISTER ASSISTING FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR SHORTLAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

WEDNESDAY, 4 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Sport rorts; economic stimulus package.



PAT CONROY, SHADOW MINISTER FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND THE

PACIFIC: Well we saw new revelations in the sports rorts affair yesterday. We already

knew that on April 10, Bridget McKenzie sent to the Prime Minister a list of projects she

intended to approve, and then that list got sent to Sports Australia the next day, 17 minutes

after the election was called.



But what we found out during the Senate estimates process is that the list sent to Sports

Australia on the day the election was called was different from the one that was sent to the

Prime Minister’s office the day before. And why was it different? Because the Prime

Minister’s office requested changes. According to the National Audit Office, the Prime

Minister’s office demanded that one project be added, and then another project be

removed.



And that wasn’t the end of the revelations. We also found out that a subsequent

spreadsheet was sent to the Prime Minister’s office four hours after caretaker period

began, and they then sent it on to Sports Australia with another nine changes.



All of this demonstrates that the Prime Minister’s office just wasn’t a conduit for

backbenchers keen to get sports grants, they were up to their neck in the rort. They were

up to their neck in determining what projects got funding and what didn’t. They demanded

changes, and Bridget McKenzie gave those changes. So the Prime Minister is up to his

neck in it, and the Prime Minister yesterday in Parliament lied about lying. This is a Prime

Minister who is addicted to lying, and he continues to lie about the sports rorts affair.



And why does this matter? This matters because thousands of mums and dads spent

hundreds of hours doing applications for their local sporting clubs, only to have no chance

of getting their applications approved because they were in the wrong electorates. This is

why it matters, because these mums and dads wasted hundreds of hours trying to do the

right thing.



We also saw a waste of taxpayers’ money going to projects that were clearly inappropriate.

Half a million dollars to the very rich Mosman Rowers Club, $50,000 for solar panels for

the elite Adelaide Golf Club where one membership’s fees could probably have paid for

those solar panels, and $120,000 to make a golf club into a wedding reception venue. This

is an appalling waste of money.



Ultimately this goes to trust in this government and trust in this Prime Minister. If we can’t

trust him on issues like this, how can we trust him on other challenging affairs?



Happy to answer any questions.



JOURNALIST: What economic stimulus would you like to see to boost the economy amid

the coronavirus outbreak?



CONROY: Well we’ve been very clear that the economy was incredibly sluggish before the

coronavirus and before the bushfires. We saw stagnant wages, stagnant growth, retail

sales going backwards - this economy was in urgent need of stimulus well before the

coronavirus hit. And we’ve been very clear about what the Prime Minister and this

government should do; he needs to bring forward stage two of the tax cuts, he needs to

bring forward real infrastructure spending because so far it’s out in the never never in 10

years’ time, and thirdly they need to consider Labor’s business investment allowance that

we took to the last election.



JOURNALIST: Is that something you have put to the government, that you have put to Mr

Morrison?



CONROY: We’ve said this repeatedly both in Parliament, in the media, and we have

written letters to the Prime Minister. No one could deny that Labor hasn’t been calling for a

stimulus package since the second half of last year. This economy has been very slow,

underemployment was at a record high before the natural disaster of the bushfires, before

the coronavirus, and this government needs to take urgent action.



JOURNALIST: Can I ask a question about what you went to the last election with. You

were putting up $380 billion worth of new taxes, how would that actually stimulate the

economy when you’re taxing taxpayers more money out of their pay packet?



CONROY: Well that’s complete rubbish. That’s just not true that claim by the government,

and secondly, some of the initiatives -



JOURNALIST: Why isn’t it true?



CONROY: Some of these initiatives that we brought to the last election would have

stimulated the economy. For example, our investment allowance would have actually

stimulated the economy by providing a really strong incentive for companies to invest in

necessary capital equipment earlier than possible. Our tax cuts were fairer; they would

have put more money into the pockets of lower and middle-income earners, people who

spend all that they earn, so they would have spent money in the economy straight away.

So our package that we took to the last election would have stimulated the economy a lot

more effectively than the government’s.



JOURNALIST: You’re saying adding more taxes to people’s pay packets stimulates the

economy?



CONROY: Well I reject the premise of what you’re saying. We were actually taking tax cuts



to support lower and middle-income earners. Lower and middle-income earners would

have been in a much better position under Labor’s policy approach to the last election than

this government’s approach.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: AMANDA TURNER 0439 828 365



