LINDA BURNEY MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AUSTRALIANS



SENATOR PATRICK DODSON

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR RECONCILIATION

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RECOGNITION

OF INDIGENOUS AUSTRALIANS



SENATOR MALARNDIRRI MCCARTHY

CHAIR OF LABOR FIRST NATIONS CAUCUS COMMITTEE





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

CANBERRA

MONDAY, 9 NOVEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: NAIDOC 2020; Labor supports the Uluru Statement in full.



SENATOR MALARNDIRRI MCCARTHY: Okay. Good morning everyone. My name is

Malarndirri McCarthy and I'm the Senator for the Northern Territory and the chair of First

Nations Caucus. And this morning on this beautiful day in terms of NAIDOC Week we are

on Ngunnawal country and Ngambri country and we certainly pay our respects to elders

past, present, and emerging. With me today is Linda Burney, Warren Snowdon, Senator

Pat Dodson, and also Senator Jess Walsh from Victoria, who are part of our caucus. But

most importantly, we are here at Winnunga in Canberra, and I'd like to introduce Beth and

Julie, who have invited us here today and along with Libby. Over to you Julie and Beth.

Thank you for having us here.



JULIE TONGS: I want to firstly acknowledge the traditional owners the Ngunnawal people

and pay respects to elders past and present. I'd also like to acknowledge and thank the

Labor caucus members for choosing to come to Winnunga on this wonderful day, NAIDOC

Day 2020, and because it has been such a challenging year, and particularly for

Winnunga, as we provided COVID testing clinic and a well persons clinic. We didn't close

the doors for one day, and we're working on a construction site. So I want to say …



MCCARTHY: … and you’ve had a few of us here for testing.



TONGS: And Winnunga is a wonderful service, we provide comprehensive primary health

care. So we don't do body parts, we see the whole person and we keep it real.



LINDA BURNEY: Look, thank you, everyone. I'm here as the Shadow Minister for

Indigenous Australians, and part of the Labor Party Aboriginal Caucus Committee, or First

Nations Caucus Committee, I should say. And I'd like to thank Winnunga and Malarndirri

for making sure that we're all safely here this morning. It is important that we put the

message out that Labor’s position on the Uluru Statement is rock solid. Labor’s position is

that we support a constitutionally enshrined voice to the parliament. That has not changed.

We support the establishment of a Makarrata Commission, which will have the

responsibility for agreement and treaty making. And that's very much part of Labor’s

position. We also support a national process for Truth-Telling. So ‘Voice, Treaty, Truth’ is

what Labor believes in and our position on the Uluru Statement is absolutely rock solid. It

seems to me that the only political party in Australia that fully supports the Uluru Statement

is in fact the Labor Party. And I reiterate today again, that Labor’s position on Uluru is what

it was two months ago, one month ago, two weeks ago. The support for Uluru and all the

elements of the Uluru Statement. The Uluru Statement was an invitation to the Australian

people to be supporting what Aboriginal people - what First Nations people across this

country have said and Labor understands this and Labor's position Uluru is absolutely rock

solid.



SENATOR PATRICK DODSON: Today we are gathered here at Winnunga a very, very

important medical service that looks after Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal people in the

Canberra district and has provided a COVID clinic for some of us. Certainly, I've been here

to be tested for the for the virus. And I want to thank the staff and all the people that work

here because of the marvellous service they perform. And last time I was here I think they

were preparing bags to be given to people living in the prisons because they had no

clothing or no essential materials to go home. So they perform a very diverse function.



Today is also the beginning of NAIDOC Week. The theme for NAIDOC Week is Always

Was, Always Will Be. And that's a theme, despite the many adversities that have

happened to Aboriginal people from the very beginnings of dispossession; of

destabilisation of our societies; to programmes and policies that have been inept, and

certainly failing to deliver justice, particularly in the area of criminal justice - the high levels

of incarceration rates; the levels of juvenile detention; and the constant need for better

social reform and the needs of families.



The Uluru Statement is a very important invitation to the nation, in order to take things

forward and deal with a Voice to the Parliament, have that constitutionally entrenched; to

deal with the Truth-Telling about our history, and our relationship, and an understanding of

how it's intertwined, and has contributed good things as well as many sad things. But it's

also an opportunity for us to relook at our relationship and enter into agreements around

the many things that still cause consternation to First Nations peoples, and that actually

diminish our nation because we've been haven't resolved them. So today is an important

day, an important day that the Labor Party certainly recommits yet again to the Uluru

Statement, and makes it very clear that we're up for the discussion with the government.



We know there's a report sitting on the minister's desk, as a consequence of consultations.

We look forward to seeing that report at some stage and engaging positively with the

minister in order to take things forward to achieve aspirations that the First Nations people

have put forward. But today, we're celebrating the fact that First Nations peoples have

always been here, and will continue to be here, despite the adversities that have befallen

us, and that there is a real challenge for the non-Aboriginal Australians to really look again

at how the survival of First Nations have taken place, despite the many inadvertent obtuse,

often ignorant, and sometimes racist activities that have sought to undermine us and

diminish us. So this is a chance for Australians to relook at our direction forward and to

respond positively to the Uluru Statement in particular, and then in the longer term, to get

on with the other business of solving the inequities that still exist. Thank you.



BURNEY: Can I just add one thing to that? Thank you, everyone. The final point is that is

not too late for the government to recommit itself as Patrick has said to Uluru, which

includes [aircraft passes overhead]. Who’s that? Is that ok? It is not too late for the

Government to change its trajectory. They have walked away from the Uluru Statement.

Labor has not. We call on the Government to commit itself to the three elements of voice,

treaty and truth.





MCCARHTY: Happy NAIDOC everyone.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DARYL TAN (BURNEY) 0422 028 222



