









SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate  Senator for South Australia



MEDIA RELEASE



10 September 2020

Backing Australian exporters to go global

The Morrison Government is backing Australian businesses to grow their exports and create jobs  through reforms to the Export Market Development Grants (EMDG) scheme, after an independent  review of financial assistance for small and medium enterprise exporters.

The EMDG scheme is a key Government financial assistance program to help aspiring and current  exporters increase their marketing and promotional activities in international markets. Last year  alone over 4000 Small and Medium Enterprises accessed the EMDG scheme, employing almost  69,000 Australians and generating exports worth $3.7 billion

Federal Trade Minister Simon Birmingham said better assisting Australian exporters to enter new  markets or expand their presence in existing markets would be critical to boosting export activity  and supporting Australia’s economic recovery from COVID-19.

"The EMDG scheme has played a critical role in helping hundreds of thousands of Australian  exporters to expand into international markets, develop brand recognition overseas and form  relationships with potential customers,” Minister Birmingham said.

“COVID-19 has presented new hurdles for Australian exporters including the disruption to supply-chains and loss of markets, and it is more important than ever that they have the support  mechanisms in place to help them their reach their export potential.

“Maximising support to Australian businesses as they look to go global or expand their overseas  footprint will be vital to continue growing the number of Australian exporters and the total value of  Australian exports into the future which will help create more jobs.”

In October last year, the Government commissioned the independent review into the administration  of the EMDG scheme. It was led by Ms Anna Fisher, co-owner of Zontes Footstep who was  assisted by Australia Post CEO Ms Christine Holgate and Aspen Medical CEO Mr Bruce  Armstrong.

Minister Birmingham said the Government accepted in-principle all ten recommendations from the  review which centered on cutting red tape, increasing awareness of the scheme and giving  exporters more funding certainty.

“Whilst the review found many businesses were overwhelmingly positive about the EMDG scheme,  it did find the current reimbursement model provided a lack of funding certainty and that  administrative processes were too complex,” Minister Birmingham said.









“By shifting away from a reimbursement model to a grants scheme, eligible exporters will now  receive funding closer to when they incur costs, giving more confidence that EMDG funding will  genuinely boost their international marketing and promotional activities.

“At the same time, simplifying application processes and reducing the administrative burden on  exporters whilst still maintaining integrity in the scheme will allow recipients to focus on boosting  export activities and ensure maximum return on taxpayer’s investment.

“I would like to thank Ms Fisher, Ms Holgate and Mr Armstrong for their work in ensuring the  scheme remains fit for purpose and will support exporters to be competitive on the world stage into  the future.”

Legislation to give effect to these changes to the EMDG scheme is scheduled for introduction into  Parliament this year. The new scheme is intended to commence on 1 July 2021 once the new  legislation has passed Parliament and associated rules are in place.

Consultations on scheme design and program rules will occur prior to changes coming into effect.

For further information, including the Reviewer’s report, go to:  www.austrade.gov.au/Australian/Export/Export-Grants

Media Contact:  Benn Ayre: +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs: +61 417 097 644

