Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



The Hon Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health

Dr Omar Khorshid  President, Australian Medical Association

JOINT MEDIA STATEMENT

9 September 2020



ADDITIONAL COMMONWEALTH SUPPORT TO PROTECT  HEALTHCARE WORKERS FROM COVID-19

The Australian Government is implementing three new measures to help provide increased  protection to help reduce the number of healthcare workers being infected with COVID-19.

Today, three new measures will be introduced to help all states and territories learn from what  has occurred in Victoria and new information from around the world.

Firstly, a new partnership has been established between the Infection Control Expert Group  (ICEG) and the National COVID-19 Evidence Taskforce led by the Living Guidelines  Consortium.

With so much evidence emerging so quickly, this partnership will bring together Australia’s  leading infection control practitioners, many of whom are frontline clinicians, with other  senior healthcare workers, to review the latest evidence on infection prevention and control  during COVID-19.

The partnership will contribute to national infection control guidance by providing consensus  guidelines on specific infection control issues that have emerged during COVID-19.

Secondly, the AHPPC has endorsed an expansion of national surveillance of healthcare  worker infection to ensure we have a better understanding of COVID-19 among healthcare  workers at the state and territory level.

This will provide more information on the type of healthcare workers who are becoming  infected and enable state and territory governments to target their investigations and  interventions based on national-level data.

Thirdly, the Australian Government has funded a new network of epidemiologists - or  “disease detectives”. These ‘COVID-NET’ epidemiologists will be available on request by  state and territory public health units to assist investigating healthcare worker outbreaks. They  will also gather and analyse data on healthcare worker infection at a national level.

We are committed to assisting the states and territories to understand where workplace  controls designed to protect healthcare workers have can further strengthened. It is important

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.

healthcare facilities to continue to review their controls and strengthen these to ensure  workers are better protected.

The Australian Government continues to support hospitals in their efforts to protect their  workers from COVID-19.

This includes the provision of vital personal protective equipment, drawn from the National  Medical Stockpile.

Since March, over 73 million masks have been dispatched from the National Medical  Stockpile to support healthcare workers, aged care workers, States and Territories and to  support the disability sector.

Our healthcare workers are doing an outstanding job of bravely caring for the health and  wellbeing of Australians who have either contracted - or are suspected to have contracted - COVID-19.

They are at the frontline of our fight against COVID-19 and deserve the greatest possible  protection from contracting the virus themselves.

The Australian Government is committed to assisting state and territory governments to  ensure healthcare workers receive the protection they deserve.

-ENDS-

