

JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN



IT’S TIME FOR SCOTT MORRISON TO TAKE RESPONSIBILITY FOR  COVID-19 AGED CARE DISASTER

Scott Morrison must take responsibility and answer questions about the series of shocking  Commonwealth Government failures to prepare Australia’s aged care system for COVID-19.

Deeply concerning new reports have today revealed further failings in Scott Morrison’s  response to COVID-19 in aged care after damning evidence at the Royal Commission this  week.

It has been revealed his Government was warned in April about serious staff shortages in  aged care homes due to COVID-19 in a review it commissioned into the outbreak of the  virus at Dorothy Henderson Lodge.

This is despite Scott Morrison saying this same issue that caused tragedies in Victorian  aged care homes, where residents were left without care with little staff, could not have  been ‘anticipated’.

“What had occurred over the weekend, in particular, which rapidly escalated the situation  in a number of these facilities was the complete withdrawal of the workforce. That is not  something that happened at Newmarch House in New South Wales. This was a new  situation, something that had not been anticipated or foreshadowed at a state level or  considered at a federal level.”

SCOTT MORRISON, PRESS CONFERENCE, 29 JULY 2020

Another report indicates the Morrison Government had spent less than half of the money it  promised the aged care sector for COVID-19 by the end of June when tragic outbreaks hit  Victorian aged care homes.

Much of the money the Morrison Government has pointed to in defending its failure to  prepare for COVID-19 in aged care was not even spent on protecting vulnerable older  Australians in aged care homes.

These new reports follow extraordinary evidence this week at the Royal Commission which  confirmed what Labor has been saying: time and time again the Morrison Government has



been behind the eight ball as a terrible tragedy has unfolded in aged care.

It is up to the Prime Minister to answer questions about why his Government was so ill  prepared for these tragic outbreaks.

The Federal Government is responsible for aged care in Australia.

Scott Morrison needs to take responsibility for any failings and provide families and loved  ones with answers to what has gone wrong.

The public needs to know that its Government has learnt from previous outbreaks and  everything possible is now being done.

Why was the Morrison Government not better prepared for outbreaks that would impact  our nation’s most vulnerable?

The Morrison Government must do better for our most vulnerable older Australians.

THURSDAY, 13 AUGUST 2020

MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119









