

Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA



TRANSCRIPT

19 March 2020

Doorstop

E&OE

Subject/s:  ABS Labour Force figures, Government stimulus package, Qantas stand down  of staff, COVID-19’s fallout, Youth unemployment

MINISTER CASH: Today we have seen the labour force figures for February 2020 handed  down. The Government is pleased that for the month for February the economy continued to  create jobs, in fact we saw the economy create around 26,700 jobs. We currently have a  record number of Australians in employment of in excess of 13 million Australians in work.   We also have a record number of Australians in full time employment. We also saw for the  month of February the unemployment rate fall, from 5.3 per cent to 5.1 per cent.

Whilst the Government welcomes these figures we also know they do not reflect the effect of  COVID-19 is having and will have in future on the economy. But what the figures do show  and we have a record number of Australians in employment that we are facing this crisis, we  are coming from a very good base. As the Prime Minister has made very, very clear, the  Government’s focus at this point in time is the health of all Australians and that all businesses  remain in business and to the extent we can, that Australians remain in jobs. We have, as you  already know, announced our first stimulus package of a $17.6 billion stimulus package that  was all about getting cash flow into businesses that desperately need it so that they can stay in  business and to the extent that we can that Australians are and can remain in employment.

As we know though, as the Prime Minister, the Treasurer and the Minister for Finance has  made clear, businesses will close and some Australians will lose their jobs. I want to reassure  Australians that the Government is doing everything it can to cushion the blow at this time to  get you through this period and so that we emerge stronger on the other side. I have been in  meetings day in and day out with my Cabinet colleagues, the Prime Minister and the  Treasurer looking at what the appropriate response is for the second round for our stimulus  package.

As we are aware, the Prime Minister has made clear the package we are now focusing on is to  ensure that Australians losing their jobs as a result of the Coronavirus, that they are given the  support necessary to get them through and that we all emerge stronger on the other side.

As I said, the Government does welcome the employment figures for February 2020, we did  see against market expectations an increase in employment in excess of 26,000. We have a  record number of Australians in work, in excess of 13 million. We have a record number of

Australians in full time employment and we also have a record number of young people in  employment but we also acknowledge that these figures do not represent the impact of  COVID-19 but as the Prime Minister has said, we are focused on the health of Australians,  we are focused on keeping as many businesses doing what we need them to do and stay in  business and we are focusing on keeping as many Australians we can in work and for those  that we know will be losing their jobs; finding them alternative employment as quickly as  possible and giving them the appropriate support that they need to get them through this  period so that we all emerge stronger at the end of it.

Are there any questions?

JOURNALIST: Do you have an estimate on how many Australians could lose their jobs as a  result of this virus?

MINISTER CASH: Treasury are modelling a number of scenarios. Today we saw the  announcement by Qantas that they will be standing down around 30,000 employees  (Correction: 20,000). Can I just congratulate Qantas for working very, very closely with the  Prime Minister, with the Treasurer and other members of the Cabinet in relation to what they  propose to do and I am pleased that Qantas are going to ensure that to the best of their ability  stay connected to the Qantas workforce. And when you look at the announcement and the  measures they are putting in place they are ensuring that employees are taking whatever leave  they have, they’re bringing forward long service leave if you need to. The important thing is  employees are being stood down and they are able to access all their entitlements and they  will maintain that connectivity with the workforce. I would like to see, as I know the Prime  Minister, Treasurer and other Cabinet Ministers would like to see the extent to which  employers are able to maintain that connectivity for their employees with the workforce as  much as possible. Keeping people connect is a major focus of the government.

JOURNALIST: Do you think it is fair that Qantas employees have to give up their leave to  support the company?

MINISTER CASH: At this point in time I think all Australians understand that we are in a  very different situation to what we have experienced previously. We come at this situation  from a very good economic base; that is reflected in the employment figures for the month of  February. I think all Australians and certainly the people I have been speaking too, and I am  happy to speak about small business and their resilience. They understand this is a very  unique situation and are prepared to do what they need to get through the next few months  and emerge stronger on the other side. As an employee, if you face losing your job versus  being able to be stood down, able to utilise your leave requirements, bring forward your long-service leave and maintain that connectivity with your employer knowing that you are able to  have a job at the end of this; I think Australians understand that is the best course of action at  this point in time?

JOURNALIST: the Leave they have been banking up, some for decades, this is their  retirement - what does that mean for them?

MINISTER CASH: At this point in time, a very unique situation. We haven’t really been  through this before as a country. To the extent that people are able to maintain that  connectivity with the workforce, but the Prime Minister has also made very clear and he  made this very clear last night in a number of interviews he did, we are currently working on

finalising our next package to provide to the Australian people and this will be all about  ensuring those that who don’t have leave and those that will be in this situation to not being  able to work over the next few months or longer that they will be given support to get them  through this point in time. As the Employment Minister I will be working to ensure the extent  someone is not able to work and has to leave their job, if we can find them a job in a critical  industry elsewhere how quickly can we turn that around and get them into work. That has  been widely welcomed in particular those employers who are seeking staff at the moment,  there are some employers out there at the moment in a recruitment drive, they’ve been  welcomed by many of the people I speak to who know they may not have a job over the next  few weeks and months but if there is an alternative form of employment, it may not pay as  much they know that, but would rather remain in the workforce doing something than the  alternative. This is the next package the Prime Minister, the Treasurer and the Cabinet are  working on and that is the package that will ensure that those in particular who will be out of  work will be given support to get them through this crisis so we all again emerge stronger on  the other side.

JOURNALIST: youth unemployment - that has risen in February to 18.3 per cent, this is  obviously before the virus has taken hold, what should youth workers expect? Especially  those in retail and hospitality sectors?

MINISTER CASH: Amazingly for the month of February, we see a record number of youth  in employment. That again is a good thing. A lot of youth work in causal industries, the retail  and hospitality industry and those industries will be and already facing significant challenges.  What that means for the Government is regardless of your age, we need to do the best we can  by you through this period. There are employers out there who are recruiting, we have seen  the statements issued in particular by the big retailers in the Coles Group and Woolworths,  they are looking for people and they have been inundated with applications. The  government’s role at the moment is for people who are losing or will lose their job, to ensure  that to some extent we can keep them in employment we do that.

JOURNALIST: What do you expect the number to rise to?

MINISTER CASH: Treasury are doing modelling but I don’t think it’ll be any surprise to  anybody that it will be a significant rise in unemployment given the global situation but in  particular we are seeing a ban on international flights, domestic travel is decreased and this is  done though in the best interest of Australians to ensure that the health of Australians, but we  have been clear on this, businesses will close and there will be job losses. Our role as a  government is to do the best we can by the Australian people to ensure that you are able to  get through this crisis and emerge on the other side. That is certainly the package we are  developing.

JOURNALIST: Do you have a plan in place if the unemployment rate does hit double  figures?

MINISTER CASH: Our role as a government, this is the first stimulus package, the $17.6  billion I am very pleased about the work the banks are doing, they are talking to the Treasurer  and the Prime Minister on a very regular basis in terms of how they will step up to ensure that  small businesses have access to funding they need - that package will obviously be  announced later. Certainly our role as a government to keep businesses in business and  Australians in jobs to the extent that we can, if you lose your job we want to see that you are

redeployed in to another role as quickly as possible. We want you connected with the  workforce and for those who are unable to find alternative work we want you to have enough  money through this period and emerge on the other side. The Government, the Cabinet we  talk all the time, we are in constant meetings, we are talking to stakeholders  and certainly as  the Prime Minister has said, economically we approach this crisis from a good basis. In terms  of employment figures, we approach this crisis from a good basis and that is now what we are  going to work on and now putting in place the appropriate packages and as the Prime  Minister has made very clear, these packages are targeted, they are measured but most  importantly and this has been really welcomed by the stakeholders that I am speaking toon a  very, very regular basis - they are scalable. As things change, as circumstances change, as the  medical advice changes as a cabinet as a government we will ensure that our policies will  respond appropriately.

On that note I do now have to go off onto another meeting and to continue policy  formulation.  Thank you very much.

-ENDS-

