

Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE GOVERNMENT IN THE SENATE  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA



MEDIA RELEASE

15 December 2020

COMMUNITY CONNECTIONS FOR SEASONAL WORKERS

The Australian Government will provide $1 million over two years to better support Pacific  and Timor-Leste workers in the Seasonal Worker Programme (SWP) while they are in  Australia.

The Seasonal Workers Programme assists Australian employers to meet critical seasonal  labour needs in select locations for the agriculture and accommodation industries while  contributing to the economic development of nine Pacific nations, as well as Timor-Leste.

Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business, Senator the Hon. Michaelia  Cash, said the funding will provide additional welfare support to workers and connect them  with their local communities.

“We want to help foster closer connections between participants of the Seasonal Workers  Programme and the local communities they’re working in,” Minister Cash said.

“Stronger community connections can increase worker satisfaction, reduce homesickness and  boost productivity.

“This support from the Australian Government will ensure participants of the Seasonal  Workers Programme are well looked-after while they are in Australia while providing  additional safeguards and welfare support.

“In addition, the Australian Government is employing 19 Pacific Labour Mobility Officers to  undertake additional welfare, monitoring, compliance and accommodation checks.”

These measures are part of the Australian Government’s $9 million Pacific Labour Mobility  Safeguarding the Welfare of Workers package announced in the 2020-21 Budget.

More than 48,000 visas have been granted to SWP workers since the program began in 2012,  with recruitments resuming in August 2020 to help address seasonal labour shortages created  by the COVID-19 pandemic.

Details of the Request for Tender can be found at www.tenders.gov.au with the successful  tenderer expected to be announced in early 2021.

For more information about the Seasonal Worker Programme, visit  https://www.dese.gov.au/seasonal-worker-programme



MEDIA CONTACTS

Guy Creighton - Guy.Creighton@dese.gov.au - 0438 815 302  Brittany Higgins - Brittany.Higgins@dese.gov.au - 0449 171 294

