

THE HON ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  SPRINGVALE  SATURDAY, 1 FEBRUARY 2020

SUBJECTS: Lunar New Year; Vietnamese community; Coronavirus.

CLARE O'NEIL, MEMBER FOR HOTHAM: Good afternoon, everyone. My  name is Clare O'Neil and I'm the Federal Member for Hotham, and we're right  in the heart of my electorate today in Springvale, celebrating TET, the Lunar  New Year. It's wonderful to have Anthony Albanese here in my electorate and  of course, Mark Dreyfus, one of my neighbors. And I'll hand over to Albo to  address some of the issues today.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY:  Thanks very much, Clare. It's been a great celebration here today of 45 years  of contribution of the Vietnamese community here in Australia. And to be here  with Clare O'Neil the local member, but also Mark Dreyfus and Julian Hill, a  strong Labor team showing how connected we are with the Vietnamese  community. And indeed, a celebration of multiculturalism and the success that  we have as a nation due to our diversity whereby people who have come here  escaping persecution and war, but to make new lives for themselves and their  families. And what Labor is about is creating opportunity for people and  certainly this is a community that have worked very hard to do that.

Just a short while ago, I spoke to the Prime Minister and I thanked him for  keeping the Opposition informed about changes that need to be made due to  the coronavirus being upgraded, in terms of the threat that it represents. Labor  supports the upgraded measures. We believe very clearly that there's a need  for the precautionary principle to apply. That we should be taking all the advice  of the medical experts and when upgrades are required, which has been  suggested by the Chief Medical Officer, that it is important that that occurr in  order to keep the Australian public safe.

There's no need, in my view, for alarm and the medical advice is that. But we  do need to be cautious. And we do need to put in place precautionary issues



regarding migration and entry into Australia from people who have visited  mainland China in the last recent days. So from tomorrow there will be new  regulations put in place. Labor supports those changes. We have asked to be  informed on an ongoing basis and I know that Chris Bowen has been receiving  briefings on a daily basis as our Shadow Health Minister. Issues like this should  not be the subject of partisan politics and Labor will support any precautionary  measure which is put in place, which is sensible and which is aimed at taking  that medical advice. Thanks.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT:  LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053







