

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY  DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  SYDNEY  THURSDAY, 2 APRIL 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; nurses on Working Holiday Maker visas should  be fighting coronavirus - not being forced to pick fruit; where is Peter  Dutton?; ongoing cruise ship debacles; coronavirus modelling; Geoff  Wilson and franking credits; intensive care nurses; Australians travelling  overseas; quarantine measures; Australian Defence Force’s role in the  coronavirus crisis; Shaoquett Moselmane; Peter Dutton not stopping the  one boat that mattered.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks for coming this  morning. Of course, we are seeing some early signs of some encouraging  figures in the slightly slowing growth rate of COVID-19. But there is a long, long  way to go and there is no cause for complacency. We need to ensure that  we're testing widely and we're gathering every case of community transmission,  as well as those cases which have come in from overseas before travel bans  were in place. I welcome the fact that more and more testing is now focused on  community transmissions, but until that is the case we won't have a full handle  on the extent of the spread of COVID-19.

We need to do two things, flatten the curve and also prepare for the peak. In  that vein, we very much welcome the announcement this morning from the  Government and the Chief Nurse about the extension of an invitation to retired  nurses, and to additional critical care training for 20,000 nurses. These are  good steps which allow full support, of course, we need to ensure the hospitals  and intensive care in particular is fully staffed at the time of the peak of COVID-

19. And these are sensible measures which we support. In keeping with our  approach of making constructive suggestions to the Government we're also  making another suggestion today.

There are, we estimate, slightly more than 1000 nurses in Australia who are  international nurses, they are here on working holiday visas. Their requirements  require them to go and do things like pick fruit, not to work in hospitals. In this  crisis that is simply not sensible. And we do believe the working holiday visa  requirements on those nurses should be waived. We need every possible nurse  working in hospitals. We need every possible nurse available for the medical  fraternity and medical services. And the Government recently made some  changes to nursing students, international nursing students, which again  welcome come but these are fully qualified nurses who we need operating.

Kristina will talk in a little more detail about how the working holiday visa  arrangements we're suggesting would work. And of course she will also talk  about the farce of the cruise ships and other matters present.

KRISTINA KENEALLY, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE AND  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Thank you, Chris. So yes, in  Australia, we estimate there are probably around 1000 nurses fully qualified,  who are currently prevented from working continuously in our hospitals and  what better place for a nurse than in a hospital. But due to the requirements of  the working holiday visa, they are required after six months with one employer  to go and work in a in a key area, most often picking fruit.

We have had stories of nurses who have been sent out of hospitals off for a  three months stint to pick fruit in order to maintain their visa to be able to stay in  the country. Now, there are some simple fixes to this, the kind of fixes that  Government has done previously in for example, following bushfires. When it  comes to temporary migrants who have skills that we urgently need. We need  all hands on deck when it comes to having the medical support in our hospitals.  And quite frankly, it is not in Australia's best interest if we have fully qualified  nurses in our country and willing to work, in fact, many of them have been  working in hospitals, who have been sent out to do other jobs like picking fruit.

Of course fruit picking is important. And there are ways that we can fill that  labour gap. But when it comes to having a qualified nurse, we need a qualified  nurse and if they are here in the country, we encourage the Government to  make changes to the Working Holiday visas so that these qualified nurses can  come and work in our hospitals.

Now when it comes to the Ruby Princess cruise ship, in fact, the four cruise  ships that have appeared and disembarked their passengers, after the Prime  Minister said there would be no more cruise ships. Well, we are starting to see

the calamitous results of that decision to allow these four cruise ships to arrive  and disembark passengers freely. We're starting to see those calamitous  results unfold. Today front page of the Australian we see that a third of all the  deaths that have occurred in relation to Coronavirus in Australia can be  attributed to those cruise ships. We know that the Ruby Princess cruise ship  now accounts for more cases of Coronavirus outside New South Wales than in  New South Wales. That accounts for about 10 per cent of all cases across  Australia. In fact, we also know that it accounts for about 25 per cent of the  cases in South Australia. On the 15th of March, the Prime Minister stood before  the nation and said that the Federal Government would not allow cruise ships  to arrive. Four days later, the Ruby Princess arrived, it disembarked 2700  passengers, and those passengers have unknowingly spread the Coronavirus  right across Australia. Now we welcome these border measures that have  come in in very recent days, but they have come too late. They have come too  late.

More astoundingly the Commonwealth Government, which is responsible for  our borders at the ports and at the airports has hand balled the responsibility for  quarantine measures to state governments. After trying to blame New South  Wales for the Ruby Princess the Federal Government has now given New  South Wales and Victoria as well as all other states, the responsibility for  implementing quarantine measures at our ports, our airports and our seaports.

Now, it does lead us to ask, why has there been deafening silence from Peter  Dutton? I mean, for heaven's sakes, where is Peter Dutton? We have a border  security crisis on our hands and we have heard nothing from the Home Affairs  Minister. Now when he was diagnosed with Coronavirus, I was one of the first  to wish him well, I have wished him well in letters since then. I wish him well  today. But the Minister for Home Affairs has turned up on 2GB radio, he has  said that he is feeling well, he is capable of working from home. So if he is  capable of working from home and continuing to do his job, it is incumbent that  he stand up and explain to the nation how this border security failure occurred  and what steps he is going to take to ensure that those responsibilities that  have now been handed to the state governments are being implemented in a  way that ensures that Australians stay as safe as possible. Stay as safe as  possible when it comes to the spread of the Coronavirus.

So I look forward to Peter Dutton standing up in whatever form he can, whether  it's from home, whether it's on radio, whether it's an interview through Zoom or  Skype. We're all doing it now. Mr Dutton can do it, and if he's not capable of  doing it, then perhaps the Prime Minister needs to look at appointing an Acting  Home Affairs Minister because we are talking about nothing less than the  security of our Australian borders.

We are happy to take questions. We have some media in the room and I will

just say for the benefit of the media who are on the telephone, we have you  here as well, I have a list. We'll start, though, with the journalists in the room.

JOURNALIST: Regarding the visa nurses idea, is something you've discussed  with the Government? And is it something that they are open to?

BOWEN: Well, I hope they are open to it. We've made a series of suggestions  as we've gone through this crisis, some of which have been taken up, which  were very much welcome. Telehealth expansion was probably the first and  most significant. We suggested amending the Health Package, they've done  that. In the same vein, I would very much welcome them doing this. It's a  sensible move to our way of thinking. It complements what they've already  done, which we've welcomed. And it would be a very natural addition to the  steps already being taken. I mean, let's be very clear. The horticultural industry  is very important, and these visa arrangements make perfect sense in normal  times. But in this crisis, it makes no sense to have fully qualified nurses picking  fruit.

JOURNALIST: If the Government does go with that idea, how soon should  these nurses, or could these nurses, be employed?

KENEALLY: They could, with the stroke of a pen, make this change this  afternoon. They've done it before when it comes to after bushfires and  cyclones, when we have had to make changes to working holidaymaker visas,  they could do it quite quickly. And you would imagine, many of those nurses  would be able to leave near-instantly and come back to the hospitals where  they were previously employed.

JOURNALIST: Does this also include those people who may be qualified  nurses but haven't been previously employed by NSW Health or whichever  Health agency?

BOWEN: They have to be fully registered to operate in Australia. We believe  there's more than 1000 who are -- who have been working as nurses. And then  their time comes under the visa requirements; hospital management says to  them, 'Sorry, your visa requirements require you to go now', and they have to a  regional are to pick fruit. As we stress, under normal circumstances, that's a  perfectly fine arrangement. As with the rules they came to Australia under, they  can't go home, for obvious reasons. They're good nurses, fully qualified, fully  registered, they should be working in hospitals.

JOURNALIST: Have you approached Government with this idea?

BOWEN: What we're doing is suggesting, in the same way we suggested  telehealth expansion, other things, and we very much would welcome taking it

up.

JOURNALIST: Can I quickly ask you another question? Today, the New South  Wales Police Commissioner, Mick Fuller spoke on ABC TV about a plan that's  going to begin in a couple of days before the launch of the cruise ships, which  are docked off the East Coast. Although you don't seem to be in this loop, what  do you think of this idea? And should the military be involved in helping out?

KENEALLY: When it comes to our borders, the responsibility sits with the  Commonwealth Government and the Commonwealth Government need to get  a plan in place when it comes to cruise ships that have both Australian citizens  as well as foreign citizens sitting right off our coastlines. It is not appropriate to  handball all of this to a state jurisdiction. Particularly to a State Police Force that  has multiple other responsibilities during this extraordinary time. Now, I do  acknowledge and support the measures being taken by Premier Berejiklian as  well as Premier McGowan in Western Australia, who are seeking to deal with  this problem. But they are right, as Premier McGowan has done, to call in the  Commonwealth to come in and be part of the solution here. This will require  capacity that is quite simply beyond that of any individual state jurisdiction.  Okay, if I can go now to the journalists on the phone, I have Eryk from Nine  newspapers.

JOURNALIST: A couple of questions. So the Chief Medical Officers appear to  be backing away from publicly releasing their modelling of the virus. Should it  be released and why? And, just quickly, secondly, Geoff Wilson has said  capping franking credit should be considered as part of the measures to pay for  the Government's stimulus package. Should the Government begin now  planning for measures like this to avoid what could be decades of debt?

BOWEN: Thanks, Eryk. In relation to the first question, yes. The more  information that is available to Australian people, the better. And the various  modelling done by experts, Raina MacIntyre and others. If the Government  disagrees with that modelling, it would be better than they released as much  information as possible about their modelling and said they would. If we want  the Australian people to trust governments, governments have to trust the  Australian people. And, that includes providing as much information as  possible, as much modelling, and data, as possible about what is coming. As I  said at the outset, while some of the figures are encouraging, we have a long,  long way to go. And while we're now doubling the rate, or the number, of cases  every six days, on average, that will still bring enormous pressure on our  Intensive Care Units until that doubling figure comes down to a much slower  rate of doubling. So yes, whatever modelling the Government has, it would be  better that was made available to the Australian people. In relation to the  second question, I saw those comments. We're focused on the coronavirus  crisis at the moment. That's our job. That's what we're focused on. All matters

about other revenue measures are a matter for another day.

KENEALLY: We now have a Tegan, Network 10.

JOURNALIST: Good morning, just on the debacle of WA. Is there a solution  that you favour in terms of how it should be fixed? Should crew be flown out?  And also the Government is expected to announce Childcare Package today. Is  a little bit too late to be announcing something like this?

KENEALLY: On the first question, regarding the cruise ships, the Prime  Minister and the Minister of Home Affairs need to get on top of this situation  immediately. It will require a range of measures quarantine, medical assistance,  transport of people back to Australia to remain in quarantine or indeed working  with foreign countries in order to transport their citizens and arrange for the  transport of their citizens back to their home countries. This is not a simple  problem to be solved. It is complex. It requires the Commonwealth  Government, because it requires the Commonwealth Government's  responsibilities at the border, the Commonwealth Government's responsibilities  for biosecurity and the Commonwealth diplomatic relationships to come to the  fore and be part of the solution. The question about childcare; Labor is keen to  see the Government come forward with a package in relation to childcare. We  are already seeing a number of childcare providers starting to shut their doors  or go to extraordinary measures to try and ensure that they can keep the  various subsidy and benefit schemes in place for as long as possible. We  would encourage the Government to bring that forward, as we have been  doing, as soon as possible. Our colleague, Amanda Rishworth, has been quite  vocal on this matter, calling on the Government for clarity. We know that  parents, as well as childcare providers, are desperate for this clarity from the  Commonwealth Government. We have Finbar from AAP.

JOURNALIST: Good morning. Just wanted to know, with the Government's  announcement today about the Intensive Care courses for about 20,000  nurses. Should this be expanded? And, is there any concern about, I guess,  how good this training would be. It's hands on, you know, it's fitting ventilators.  Will online courses be enough to prepare nurses for Intensive Care wards.

BOWEN: Look, Finbar, the Chief Nurse who's in charge of this process, and  she wouldn't, I would have confidence she would not be putting in place a  process which is not fit for purpose and providing good quality training for the  circumstances. You're right, intensive care nursing is a very specialised field.  Having said that, we are dealing with very accomplished nurses who are  experienced and I would have confidence in whatever measures the Chief  Nurse has put in place here.

KENEALLY: Pablo SBS.



JOURNALIST: Good morning just to Senator Keneally. Can I ask you about  what concerns Labor has about the 16,000 Australians that flew out defying this  do not travel advice that was put out by the PM on March 18? And what do you  say to the suggestion, I think from Premier Mark McGowan, that they should  foot the bill for the quarantine when they do come back here to Australia?

KENEALLY: First of all, on the quarantine arrangements, the Prime Minister  has made clear that the quarantine arrangements including the form in which  they take, where they're delivered, and the cost of that and the cost recovery of  that is a matter for individual states and individual states will need to determine  and explain the arrangements they’ve put in place. Again, it is rather  extraordinary that the Commonwealth have abdicated these border security,  biosecurity and quarantine measures to state governments at a time when we  face an unprecedented health and biosecurity crisis. It is the Commonwealth  Government's responsibility, and yet they have handed it to the States. And  each state is now scrambling, understandably so, to make those arrangements.  As a former state Premier, myself, I can't even begin to imagine how much  responsibility is being faced by state governments as they are contemplating  the rapid rollout of ICU beds, the need to have appropriate staff, what is going  on in our schools, how they are going to deploy the police force as its most  effective at this time. And then to be saddled with quarantine responsibilities,  with border security responsibilities, is really quite an extraordinary step for the  Commonwealth to hand them that and ask them to do this. When it comes,  Pablo, to the first part of your question, if you could just repeat that - oh, the  16,000 people. Yes. When it comes to people who have not taken into account  the travel advice, what we don't have is a breakdown for the reasons some of  those people have travelled. The Commonwealth made clear that the advice  not to go overseas did have some exemptions for it in terms of necessary travel  that might relate to aid or charity work or for compassionate reasons. Some of  those people may have actually sought to travel to countries to look after family  in their home country. That being said, we encourage all Australians to take  heed of the travel advice that is being provided by the Commonwealth  Government. Not just in terms of now, obviously, not exiting the country but  indeed we are concerned about those tens of thousands of Australians who are  across the globe and unable to get home. My colleague, our colleague, Senator  Wong, the Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, has been actively encouraging  the Commonwealth Government to make arrangements for charter flights and  the like to ensure that when Australians are trapped by border closures and the  shutdown of international airlines, that we are able to do as Australia, what  other countries around the world are doing, and that is bring our citizens home.  And lastly, I have Daniel from the Guardian.

JOURNALIST: Hello Senator Keneally, Daniel Hurst from the Guardian. I just  wanted to clarify two things. One is what role if any of you see for the Australian

Defence Force in helping to deal with the issue of the ship. I’m obviously not  suggesting that they be pushing people off, but what role do you see the ADF in  resolving the situation with the cruise ships? And secondly, do you see this  developing into a legal quagmire when these companies and (inaudible) with  the state and federal authorities about whether they have to leave or not?

KENEALLY: From the briefings that have been provided to the Opposition, I'm  aware that the Australian Defence Force does stand ready if they are called  upon in a range of ways to assist not just with cruise ships, but other aspects of  the coronavirus and the challenges that it's posing here in Australia. And we  would encourage the Commonwealth as they're developing a plan to deal with  these cruise ships to ensure that they have looked at all the possibilities  including the use of the Australian Defence Force. As to the second part of your  question. I think it's a bit premature for me to be canvasing as to how this might  unfold legally. I think the first and the top priority right now has to be for the  Commonwealth Government who are responsible for border security, who  made some calamitous mistakes when they allowed the Ruby Princess and  three other ships to disembark thousands of passengers without testing or  quarantine measures in place, to now make sure we do not have a repeat of  that. That we have a clear plan in place. That will involve working with state and  territories as well as foreign jurisdictions about how we're going to deal with  these cruise ships that are currently off the coast.

We cannot afford another mistake like the type we saw with the Ruby Princess.  Australians lives and Australians livelihoods are at stake, and it is the  responsibility of the Commonwealth to secure our borders. They need to get on  top of this situation today and as I said earlier, we have a Minister for Home  Affairs. His name is Peter Dutton. We have not heard from him on this issue.  Where is he? What is his responsibility? And what is the Commonwealth doing  to resolve these situations?

JOURNALIST: Sorry is there an opportunity for one more question?

KENEALLY: Sure.

JOURNALIST: Just Home Affairs Minister Peter Dutton has called for New  South Wales Labor MP Shaoquett Moselmane to resign after he made  comments, saying that President Xi Jinping, praising him for his unswerving  leadership in handling the kind of coronavirus crisis and talking about how he  had made empathetic and decisive actions. Do you agree with those  comments?

KENEALLY: I haven't seen Mr Moselmane’s comments in full but I have to say,  I think Peter Dutton has more important things to do, than to comment on what  a New South Wales Opposition State MP is saying. Quite frankly, we are



having a crisis on our borders - at our ports and our airports. Peter Dutton, who  pops up on 2GB for his weekly chat, has not popped up anywhere else, has not  put his head up anywhere else to explain to the Australian people what he is  doing. What the Commonwealth are doing in order to secure our borders. I  mean, this is a Commonwealth Government that says they stopped the boats.  Well, they didn't stop the boat that mattered - the Ruby Princess. They didn't  stop the boat that mattered. Now Peter Dutton and the Prime Minister said the  Commonwealth would stop the cruise ships. That did not happen. The  calamitous results are being seen right across the country. And quite frankly  Peter Dutton needs to stop playing political games and start dealing with the  border security questions - the crisis - that is confronting him and the  Commonwealth Government. Okay, thanks, everyone. Thanks everyone on the  phone too.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACTS:          TIMOTHY DUNLOP (KENEALLY) 0428 043 110  LIZ FITCH (BOWEN) 0424 512 512











