MADELEINE KING MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE

MEMBER FOR BRAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW   6PR MORNINGS WITH GARETH PARKER   TUESDAY, 1 DECEMBER 2020

SUBJECT: Australia’s trading relationship with China.

GARETH PARKER, HOST: Now barley is heading to the WTO. Wine is likely heading to a trade  dispute as well. Yesterday we spoke with Jeffrey Wilson from the Perth USAsia Centre who said,  ‘don’t take the bait here’. Well, too late for that. This is where we’re at. On the line, the Shadow  Trade Minister, the Member for Brand from the Labor Party. Madeleine King. Good morning.

MADELEINE KING MP, SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE: Hi Gareth, how are you doing?

PARKER: Do you think that Scott Morrison has mismanaged this relationship?

KING: I think what we need to reflect on is that Australia entered into a free trade agreement with  China just under five years ago. Literally, the anniversary is in about 20 days’ time. And we’ve seen  a decline in the relationship from that peak to this very new low. So I do think there have been errors  along the way and perhaps there’s been a bit of inattention. But if I can be very clear about what  happened yesterday and that image that came out from a Chinese official. I totally support what the  Prime Minister has said in relation to that, it’s obscene and abhorrent. My heart skipped a beat when  I first saw it, I’ve got to say. And I think everyone in this building, which is the Parliament in  Canberra, felt pretty much the same thing all at the same time. It’s plumbing new depths. And that’s  why we really need to think about how can get out of this. Because it’s clearly in our nation interests  to stand by our beliefs as a nation. Our belief in democracy and the rule of law and an open media.  But equally it’s in our national interest to ensure we maintain our economy and maintain the trade  relationships that feed into that economy.

PARKER: But if that’s the Chinese foreign minister’s attitude, and he’s out there trolling Australians  and trolling our leaders, which is clearly what this post is designed to do. It’s designed to provoke.  He knew and knows exactly the sort of reaction it was going to provoke. Doesn’t it undermine the  claim that this is all Australia’s fault?

KING: I agree, it’s designed to provoke. How could you possibly post such a thing and then face  such follow-up without the intention to provoke? It’s clear these government officials know our  language very well. I’m not saying it’s Australia’s fault. I’ve said in my piece in the paper today that  the Chinese haven’t been without fault here. They have changed in their diplomatic stance to many  nations across the world. And that’s a reflection of some of the internal issues within China. There  are two countries involved, two competing and different sets of histories and attitudes towards one  another. We’re lucky in a way in Australia that we don’t have a historical fight with China so to speak,

it’s not like the relationship between Japan and China which historically has been full of conflict. But  now we’ve hit this kind of boulder in the road and it’s going to need the strength of the Prime Minister  and someone who can speak clearly about Australia’s intentions, while also acknowledging that we  have to keep trading with China like we have to do with the rest of the world. We can’t decouple from  this economy, which is unique in relation to us.

PARKER: So what should we have done differently, what should we do differently?

KING: I think, and I notice the Government has started to do this in recent days, we need to always  emphasise the positives in our economic relationship. It’s mutually beneficial and has been for many  years. A number of prime ministers have worked very hard at making this relationship work. whether  it’s with investment in projects in WA in particular. Bob Hawke led the charge for the investment in  the Mt Channar iron ore mine with Rio Tinto. And John Howard led the call for Chinese investment  for the North West Shelf. We have to reflect on what we’ve done and the positives that came from  that. We also need a dedicated Trade Minister. We know Mathias Cormann announced his  retirement nearly six months ago. So from that date this Government knew there was going to be a  reshuffle. And then in October we heard the now Minister for Trade, he’s also the Minister for  Finance, Special Minister of State, Government leader in the Senate. He’s got all those positions but  why are we still waiting many months later for a Trade Minister to do that job of …

PARKER: Well it’s pretty hard when the Chinese won’t pick up the phone. I’m not carrying water for  Simon Birmingham but it’s pretty clear that there’s a deliberate campaign by the Chinese to freeze  Australia out. And I’m not quite sure what Australia could do about it other than prostrate ourselves  and apologise for stating our values on thing like the coronavirus inquiry and stating our values on  things like the freedom and democracy in Hong Kong. I mean you’re surely not saying we shouldn’t  have done those things?

KING: I don’t disagree. I do think how we led charge on the call for the Covid inquiry was a misstep.  I’ve said that publicly before, so has Labor through our foreign affairs spokesperson. But I think what  the Government could do is make sure they include business and the voice of corporate Australia in  these discussions. Because at the moment many of our business leaders, who run the companies  who employ literally thousands and thousands of Australians, are being excluded to some extent  from this discussion. They’re made to feel like they’re not welcome as part of this really important  national discussion on our most important trading relationship. They need to be part of this  discussion. Business leaders understand like you and I understand that we can’t swap out our  beliefs in democracy, freedom of speech, rule of law. We just can’t. But nonetheless, we can be  thoughtful and moderate in our language towards a nation who quite frankly is not been moderate  and thoughtful, it’s being exactly the opposite. But nonetheless, we have to do what we can because  thousands of jobs depend on it.

PARKER: As the Labor Party’s trade spokesperson, do you think it would be prudent for Australian  exporters to develop new markets away from China as quickly as they possibly can?

KING: Look, I’ve been saying this for many, many months. Diversification is key. Absolutely it is. But  the thing is it doesn’t happen overnight. You can’t replace a market like China. You just can’t,  because obviously it’s the biggest country by population in the world. Our geography is really  matched to it and the products it wants to buy like our iron ore, gas and bulk commodities, are really  complementary with China. Diversification takes decades. And what we’ve seen is the potential of  India. The Government commissioned a report by Peter Varghese, the former head of the

Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Two years later, one recommendation of 20 has been  implemented, and that’s for a trade office in Kolkata. And that’s it. We have roadmaps and the  Government has invested money in finding ways to diversify, but it’s failing to even follow its own  recommendations, which are sound. I totally believe in diversification. But everyone has to  understand that it’s going to take years and years, and dedicated commitment and effort by a lot of  people. And I’m up for it. I’m totally up for it. But we need to get government on board to lead it.

PARKER: Madeleine King, thank you very much for your time.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT:  ANDREW BURRELL 0437 290 112

