



The Law Council of Australia is the national voice of the legal  profession, promoting justice and the rule of law.







Friday, 13 November 2020

Law Council congratulates new Family Law  Appointments

The Law Council of Australia congratulates Judge Tom Altobelli and Ms Kylie Beckhouse on  the announcement of their appointments to the Family Court of Australia and Federal Circuit  Court respectively.

Law Council President, Pauline Wright, said “the professional excellence demonstrated by  Judge Altobelli and Ms Beckhouse make them both highly deserving appointments”.

“Judge Altobelli and Ms Beckhouse have had distinguished careers and are very well  regarded and respected by the legal profession,” Ms Wright said.

“We look forward to the contribution we are confident they will each make to the judiciary, to  upholding the administration of justice and serving the Australian community in this  important area of law.

“The Law Council would welcome further appointments of similarly high calibre to assist both  the Federal Circuit Court and Family Court of Australia with their significant and growing  workloads and backlogs,” Ms Wright said.

The appointments of Judge Altobelli and Ms Beckhouse are sorely needed at this time and  will fill judicial positions left vacant some months ago by retiring judges who had not promptly  been replaced. Ms Wright noted that “the Family Court and Federal Circuit Court are each  facing backlogs of more than a year’s worth of cases, and additional appointments are  urgently needed.”

“These backlogs have been caused by a decade of chronic under-funding and under-resourcing, and delays in replacing judicial officers. This has only been exacerbated by the  COVID-19 pandemic,” Ms Wright said.

The Chief Justice of the Family Court was quoted in the November 2019 issue of The  Proctor, saying, “an extra judge in every major registry would make a massive difference” to  backlogs.1

“Additional judicial officers are urgently needed to help alleviate some of the pressure these  backlogs place on families already facing the stresses associated with this fraught area of  law, as well as judges struggling to manage unsafe workloads,” Ms Wright said.









1 Quoted in Tony Keim, ‘A family (court) affair’, Proctor (November 2019 V 39, pg.32)



Contact: Dr Fiona Wade, P.  0403 810 865   E.  Fiona.Wade@lawcouncil.asn.au

