





SENATOR THE HON LINDA REYNOLDS CSC  Minister for Defence  Senator for Western Australia



THE HON DARREN CHESTER MP  Minister for Veterans Affairs  Minister for Defence Personnel  Member for Gippsland





JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

ADFA welcomes newest leaders





The Australian Defence Force’s newest leaders have today graduated from the Australian  Defence Force Academy (ADFA).

316 Navy, Army and Air Force trainee officers, as well as 24 international graduates from 11  countries, took to the ADFA Parade Ground for the final time as the culmination of their three  years at the Academy.

Minister for Defence, Senator the Hon Linda Reynolds CSC congratulated the graduating class on  this significant career milestone.

“As these future leaders take the next steps in their professional development, today is a time to  reflect on how far they have come,” Minister Reynolds said.

“ADFA training develops foundational leadership skills vital for ADF officers as they progress  through their careers and pursue the exciting range of opportunities offered by Defence.

“These midshipman and officer cadets have not been immune to the challenges all Australians  have faced this year, from bushfires to COVID-19.

“ADFA played an active role in Operation Bushfire Assist, providing respite accommodation for  firefighters battling blazes in the ACT and southern New South Wales.

“With the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, ADFA moved its education and training online - a test  that was met with commitment and ingenuity by the graduating class.



“Overcoming challenges, being adaptable and showing resilience in the face of adversity are the  hallmarks of an outstanding leader. Today’s graduating class have demonstrated these qualities,  and a determination to go from strength to strength.”

Minister for Defence Personnel Darren Chester said today would be a proud moment for the Navy  midshipmen and Army and Air Force officer cadets graduating, and their families.

“Those graduating today are the future of our Australian Defence Force. They can be proud of  what they have achieved so far and can look forward to the experiences that lie ahead,’ Mr  Chester said.

“To those families who cannot be here today to see your loved ones graduate, I have no doubt  this will be a proud day for you too — a culmination of three years of their hard work coming to  fruition.

“As our future leaders, I know you will lead by example and do us all proud.”

Trainee officers at ADFA combine military training with university studies delivered by the  University of New South Wales Canberra.

ADFA trainee officers are paid while they obtain a degree in the fields of Arts, Business, Science,  Engineering or Technology. ADFA’s trainee officers benefit from the best university teacher-to-student ratio in the country, with a guaranteed job on the completion of their degree.

Graduates will be posted to establishments across Australia to either continue their training, or  commence operational duties.

Media note:  Imagery is available at: http://images.defence.gov.au/S20203825

Media Contacts  Nicky Hamer: (Minister Reynolds’ office) +61 437 989 927  Defence Media: media@defence.gov.au



Authorised by Senator the Hon Linda Reynolds CSC, Minister for Defence, Australia.

