

The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au

31 August 2020



STEADY HANDS ON INFRASTRUCTURE AUSTRALIA BOARD

The Australian Government has reappointed the current Chair and two members to the  Infrastructure Australia (IA) Board, keeping an experienced and steady team at the helm of the  Government’s independent infrastructure adviser.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said he was pleased to reappoint the current Chair Julieanne Alroe and Board members  Deena Shiff and Reece Waldock AM for another year.

“These reappointments ensure a strong and experienced leadership team will continue to oversee  IA’s work at a critical time, as it delivers a 2021 Australian Infrastructure Plan to back an  infrastructure-led recovery from COVID-19,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“These reappointments will provide organisational stability as IA steps up to help the infrastructure  sector tackle some of its toughest challenges yet.

“The current Board’s extensive experience and knowledge will support IA’s ongoing work in providing  advice on Australia’s infrastructure priorities.

“Strategic advice and expert planning will help guide the Australian Government’s record $100 billion  nationwide infrastructure pipeline, which is creating jobs, driving regional economies, supporting  communities and getting Australians home sooner and safer.”

Julieanne Alroe has been the IA Chair since 2017 and a Board Member since 2015, having previously  been CEO and Managing Director of the Brisbane Airport Corporation.

Deena Shiff brings substantial corporate governance experience to the Board as a former senior  executive in the telecommunications industry, including as a Group Managing Director at Telstra.

Reece Waldock has extensive management experience in state government transport agencies,  including as Director General of Transport in Western Australia and a current Commissioner of the  National Transport Commission.

The Infrastructure Australia Board consists of 12 members, including the Chair.

Ends.

Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Dean Shachar 0418 202 860

