Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania







Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE GOVERNMENT IN THE SENATE  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA





Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck  MINISTER FOR AGED CARE AND SENIOR AUSTRALIANS  MINISTER FOR YOUTH AND SPORT



10 November 2020



Boosting work opportunities for young Australians



The Australian Government is providing additional incentives to encourage young people to  undertake seasonal work across the country.

Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business, Michaelia Cash and Minister for  Youth and Sport, Richard Colbeck, said the Government was working hard to ensure young  people impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic had better options for a brighter future.

“Young Australians have shown enormous resilience as they face the challenges of 2020,”  Minister Cash said.

“The Australian Government is committed to providing a clear pathway for young people,  particularly those acutely affected as a result of abrupt changes to how they study, work and  socialise.”

The Morrison Government is investing $17.4 million from its Budget 2020-21 to help job  seekers with relocation assistance to take up an ongoing job or to temporarily relocate to carry  out seasonal agricultural work.

It comes as demand for seasonal workers increases across the country, particularly in  Queensland.

The measure is supported by the 2020-21 Budget which includes new independence criteria  for Youth Allowance and ABSTUDY which will back Australia’s agricultural sector while  helping young people into work.

Under this new measure, a person can be deemed independent if they earn at least $15,000  working in the agricultural sector up until 31 December 2021, and if the combined income of  their parents is less than $160,000 a year (plus $10,000 for each child).

Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania







Minister Colbeck said creating jobs and boosting the skills of all Australians to help them get  back into work is at the heart of the Government’s economic recovery plan.

“The Government continues to invest in programs to make sure young people can participate  in all aspects of Australian life and reach their full potential,” Minister Colbeck said.

“The Government is investing in apprenticeships, creating jobs and boosting the skills of  Australians to help them get back into work.

He urged young Jobseekers to consider seasonal work as a pathway to a rewarding future.

“Not only is it meaningful work, but a driver for young Australians to experience farm life,  build new skills, see new parts of our country and carve new friendships.

“These are all things that will benefit young people in their future career and life.”



[ENDS]















































