

THE HON ANGUS TAYLOR MP  MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND EMISSIONS REDUCTION

THE HON KEITH PITT MP

MINISTER FOR RESOURCES, WATER AND NORTHERN AUSTRALIA

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE



Friday, 27 March 2020

GAS SUPPLIES SECURE UNTIL AT LEAST 2023 - AEMO

Australia’s domestic gas supplies are secure for at least three years, but more gas will be needed in the  southern states to meet demand in the longer term, according to a new report by the Australian Energy  Market Operator (AEMO).

The AEMO’s Gas Statement of Opportunities report for 2020 found domestic gas supplies are secure  until 2023, but supply in the southern states is set to fall by 35 per cent over the next five years unless  new gas resources are developed.

Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction Angus Taylor said the AEMO report underlined the  essential role state governments can play to solve this problem by bolstering the supply of gas and  removing restrictions on exploration and production.

“It is very clear that the best way to solve the potential gas shortfall is to increase supply,” Mr Taylor  said.

“While there has been some progress - NSW has agreed to add an extra 70 petajoules to the gas market  and Victoria will lift their moratorium on unconventional gas exploration and development in 2021 -  consumers need more certainty.

“The Government has made gas a key focus of energy deals done with states and territories. The  principle is: no gas, no cash.”

Minister Taylor also noted that the progress the Government has made to secure extra supply has not  come at the cost of increasing prices.

AEMO, the Australian Energy Regulator (AER) and the Australian Competition and Consumer  Commission (ACCC), have confirmed that wholesale prices have already fallen from their peak in 2017.



East coast prices fell on an average of 26 per cent over the 12 months to the end of 2019, which means  more money in consumer pockets. This is essential important during this difficult time for all  Australians.

The Government’s measures, including the recently agreed COAG transparency measures, the ongoing  investigation into pipeline regulation, and the extension of the Gas Supply Guarantee aim to improve  the medium-term outlook. However, they cannot be fully effective without cooperation from industry  and the states.

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt welcomed recent progress in New South  Wales and Victoria.

“We have seen some encouraging signs recently in the southern states,” Mr Pitt said.

“As we have seen repeatedly, gas development closest to demand centres is the best way to secure  lower prices for consumers. I would encourage southern states to follow the lead of Queensland, to  follow the advice of more than 15 science-based independent inquiries and to listen to what regulators  all say - that unconventional gas can be developed safely and deliver enormous benefits to local  communities and to manufacturing” Minister Pitt said.

“The Australian Government continues to take decisive action to secure affordable gas supplies for  Australian households and businesses.

“The Government’s Australian Domestic Gas Security Mechanism (ADGSM) and Heads of Agreement  with LNG exporters continue to be effective in boosting domestic gas supply and easing market  pressures. And we are considering options to establish a national gas reservation scheme for new  projects.”

With the challenges that Australia and the world face from COVID-19, Australia’s gas and broader  resources sectors have an increasingly important role to play in providing secure and affordable energy  supply and to lead the bounce-back of the Australian economy.  ENDS

Minister Taylor’s office:                           Liam O’Neil,  0428 113 617  Minister Pitt’s office:                                Matt Dunstan,  0411 535 072



