





THE HON MELISSA PRICE MP  Minister for Defence Industry  Member for Durack

ANDREW WALLACE MP  Member for Fisher

MEDIA RELEASE

CALOUNDRA FIRM WINS DEFENCE EXPORTS  BOOST

Leading Caloundra aerospace company HeliMods has won more support from the

Morrison Government to help it reach new opportunities in global markets.



Minister for Defence Industry Melissa Price today announced the Sunshine Coast

business has received $150,000 under the Defence Global Competitiveness Grants

program.



“The funding is part of the Morrison Government’s commitment to building a stronger,

more sustainable and globally competitive Australian defence industry,” Minister Price

said.



“HeliMods has used its funding to purchase plant and equipment to manufacture large

machined components used in the modification and upgrade of military and paramilitary

helicopters.



“The grant will assist HeliMods in boosting its capacity to make components with shorter

lead times, increasing export opportunities into North America and Europe.



“In 2019, while leading a major defence trade expo with Australian companies, I

announced Helimods had received funding support to help them on the global stage.



“These grants are another way the Morrison Government is helping small businesses

reach their export goals faster.”



The Australian Defence Export Office was set up to provide practical assistance to small

businesses and help them become export-ready.



Member for Fisher, Andrew Wallace, said HeliMods was a great local success story

that, with the Morrison Government’s support, was working to grow stronger on the

international stage.



“I believe that the Sunshine Coast today has the skills and the drive for innovation to

play a part in developing critical new sovereign defence capability in Australia,” Mr

Wallace said.



“HeliMods is proof that the Sunshine Coast can lead the way, and I was really pleased

to be able to arrange a virtual tour for Minister Price of their Caloundra facility in August.



“COVID border restrictions weren’t going to stop us demonstrating to the Minister the

great work of this Sunshine Coast firm.



“HeliMods’ ability to deliver world-leading capabilities is known throughout Australia, and

sought globally, as proven by their growing export opportunities into North America,

Europe and Asia.



“I’ll continue to work hard to support more local companies to take up the opportunity to

expand overseas, strengthening our local defence industry and creating more diverse

opportunities for Sunshine Coast locals.”



Defence Global Competitiveness Grants are available to Australian small-to-medium

enterprises seeking international accreditations, procuring capital items and more.



Applications for the Defence Global Competitiveness Grants program can be made at

any time through: www.business.gov.au/dgc



Media Contact

Ben Spencer (Minister Price’s office): +61 412 754 310

Simon Thwaites (Andrew Wallace’s office): +61 439 972 667

Defence Media: media@defence.gov.au





Authorised by the Hon Melissa Price MP, Minister for Defence Industry, WA, Australia.





