Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg







THE HON KEITH PITT MP

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia  Member for Hinkler

DR SAM MCMAHON   CLP Senator for the Northern Territory

MEDIA RELEASE

05 August 2020

Mineral deposits near Tennant Creek show huge potential

New scientific data provided through a Federal Government-funded mining exploration  program has revealed the enormous economic potential of just some of the Northern  Territory’s natural resources.

Analysis of new geological data and mineral potential assessments has found an area east of  Tennant Creek possibly holds new deposits worth up to $12.4 billion in gross value.

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt said the data and  assessments were collected as part of the Coalition Government’s $225 million Exploring for  the Future program.

“This program has a strong focus on boosting investment in the resources sector, generating  jobs and maintaining a strong economy,” Minister Pitt said.

“The date shows that the key to economic growth in the Northern Territory will be investing  in its gas and resource potential.

“This analysis by ACIL Allen estimates the overall direct net economic benefit from  exploration in the East Tennant area could be around $638 million,” he said.

“Detailed data collected in the East Tennant area suggests it could host a new mineral  deposit with characteristics similar to those of the Ernest Henry near Mount Isa - one of the  largest copper-gold mines in Australia.

“Geoscience Australia, in collaboration with the Northern Territory and Queensland  geological surveys, identified the region’s potential through a range of activities undertaken  between Tennant Creek and Mount Isa.

“Lying between two remote towns known for their mineral deposits, it is not surprising the  East Tennant area turned out to be prospective.

“Exploring for the Future has helped narrow down the search down for mineral explorers,  giving them the pre-competitive data they need to make an investment decision.

Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg



Minister Pitt said the East Tennant area was just one promising example of resource  potential uncovered by the program between Tennant Creek and Mount Isa.

“Based on data collected by Exploring for the Future, oil and gas company Santos has  committed $95 million to exploration in the South Nicholson Basin, on the border of the  Northern Territory and Queensland, through a farm-in with Armour Energy.

“Understanding the resource potential of these underexplored areas of Australia is key to  continuing our economic success story and supporting the recovery post COVID-19. The  data and information collected by the program will support and de-risk resource decision  making, investment and jobs creation for years to come.

“The Coalition Government believes the resources sector will be a key driver of supporting  the economy post COVID-19, so the success of the Exploring for the Future program and  realising the resource potential in regional areas is an important component of ensuring the  mines and ultimately jobs of the future.”

Senator Sam McMahon welcomed the news for the Territory, acknowledging the find could  result in hundreds of intergenerational jobs and opportunities right across the Territory, but  particularly in the Barkly region.

Senator McMahon said, “The Federal Government’s Exploring for the Future program is a  great example of how targeted Government spending can assist industry to not only  identify, but have confidence in the projects they invest in.

“This project alone could return $638 million to the Territory, noting exploration of new  deposits in the East Tennant Creek area capable of providing $12.4 billion in revenue - sadly  it won’t wipe the huge debt accumulated under the Gunner Government, but it will go a  long way in ensuring the Territory gets back on track with its economic recovery”.

Exploring for the Future

Led by Geoscience Australia, the Exploring for the Future program uses cutting-edge  techniques to collect new data and information about potential mineral, energy and  groundwater resource systems on the surface and deep underground.

A $100 million investment in Exploring for the Future by the Australian Government in 2016  has delivered a detailed picture of potential resources in northern Australia. In June 2020,  the Australian Government announced it will invest an additional $125 million over four  years to expand the program nationwide.

Information about Exploring for the Future can be found at ga.gov.au/eftf

New exploration in the East Tennant area was one of three case studies included in the  return on investment analysis of the Exploring for the Future program by ACIL Allen, which is  available from acilallen.com.au/projects/program-evaluation/exploring-for-the-future-program-return-on-investment-analysis



ENDS

Media contact: Matt Dunstan 0411 535 072

Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg

















