Media inquiries: Aaron Langmaid 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania













Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck  Minister for Aged Care and Senior Australians  Minister for Youth and Sport





16 March 2020



COVID-19 prevention guidelines issued to Aged Care providers



Residential aged care providers will be encouraged to limit visits from today under national guidelines  aimed at the prevention and control of coronavirus.

Aged  Care  Minister  Richard  Colbeck  said  the  advice  from the  Communicable  Disease  Network  of   Australia issued  to  aged  care  facilities  around  Australia outlines the  precautionary  measures  for   residents,  staff  and  their  families  as  the  Federal  Government  continues  to  implement  strategies  to  contain the virus.

It includes the recommendation that family and friends limit visits to residential care centres,  particularly for residents already suffering from chronic illness.

``Given the risks to older Australians from COVID 19, particularly those with chronic disease and  other  frailties,  we  now  recommend  that  residential  aged  care  providers  restrict  visitor  access,”   Minister Colbeck said.

“Our plan is to slow the spread, to save lives.”

Minister Colbeck said he was aware of the emotional burden restrictions would have on families of  residents in palliative care.

“We know that visitations are important and we will ensure that this is respected,” he said.

“The restrictions will be handled professionally and sensitively.

“All  residential  aged  care  facilities  are  required  to  have  an  infection  control  plan  which  can  be   activated in the circumstance of an infectious outbreak like Norovirus or influenza.

“Access restrictions are a normal part of those plans.”

Media inquiries: Aaron Langmaid 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania



The  Health  Department  will  continue  to  work  with  aged  care  peak  bodies  to  finalise  more  detailed   guidance  developed  by  the  Communicable  Diseases  Network  (CDN)  regarding  visitor  access,  the   management of non-compliant residents and physical distancing.

It follows the release of AHPPC recommendations for wider distancing measures.

Minister Colbeck said the measures are of most importance for people over 60, particularly those with  chronic illness.

“COVID-19 can be much more serious, even fatal, for people who are more vulnerable,” he said.

The Minister said two forums and a webinar with specialist clinical infection control experts focused  on primary care, aged care and in-home care had so far successfully outlined how providers could play  their part of helping keep senior Australians safe.

“These discussions provided invaluable feedback from both sectors,” Minister Colbeck said.

The Chief Medical Officer has also written to the aged care sector with advice about preparedness to  support aged care recipients.

It’s  hoped  the  implementation  of  the  guidelines  will  reinforce  the  Australian  Government’s   comprehensive  $2.4  billion health  package  which  includes  allocations  to  fund  a  new  Medicare   telehealth service, a dedicated COVID-19 national hotline, bulk-billed pathology tests within aged care  facilities and infection control training for residential and in home aged care workers.

“Communication  with  the  sector  - and  with  each  other  - will  remain  key  during  this  season  of   uncertainty,” Minister Colbeck said.

“We continue to encourage residents, staff and their families to practice good hygiene, act on advice as  it becomes available and importantly, understand this situation will improve.”

Additional advice will be provided following further considerations by the CDN.

Fact sheets are available at the Department of Health’s website and will be updated as new information  becomes available.

A 24-hour Coronavirus Health Information Line, run by healthdirect, has also been set up for public  enquiries at 1800 020 080.



-ENDS-





