

CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY

DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

PRESS CONFERENCE

SYDNEY

WEDNESDAY, 25 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: The need for clear coronavirus messages; Ruby Princess

disaster; Private Health Insurance rebate; coronavirus and school

children; stage 3 response; Virgin airlines; stimulus and Centrelink.



CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks for coming this

morning. In a crisis the Australian people need leadership. Last night, they got

a list. They need clarity; last night they got confusion. Scott Morrison had a

simple message to present - the more people who stay at home, the fewer

people will die.



The Government was right to say that people have to comply with rules. Of

course they’re right about that. They're wrong to make the rules so confusing.

We were told last night that you can go to an exercise group outside with 10

people, but a wedding can only have five. A funeral can have 10. These rules

are so confusing for the Australian people. I've been deluged with calls from

people saying, "we do not understand." The Government must have a clear and

simple message to the Australian people. Stay at home unless you have to go

out. By all means, go for a walk, exercise, but exercise social distancing when

you're going about your daily business. This is vital. We are currently doubling

the number of coronavirus victims every three days. If we keen on that

trajectory, our whole system will be under enormous pressure soon. The

Government must be clear up and strong. You know, the Government

commissioned a report from experts which recommended- go now, go hard and

go smart. They haven't done those things. They need to do those things. They

need to do those things urgently. They also need to get on top of the issue with

the cruise ship and Kristina will be dealing with that this morning.



KRISTINA KENEALLY, Deputy Labor Leader in The Senate and Shadow

Minister for Home Affairs: Thank you, Chris. Well, Labor has been

constructive during this coronavirus, health and economic crisis. We have

sought to be constructive and work with the Government. We passed the

stimulus package quickly, even though we had reservations about the urgency

or the lack of urgency in the stimulus package, and that the help was going to

get where it was needed most. We have worked with the Government to

support their health messaging even as we have called for more to be done

and more to be done more quickly. But when we look back at this coronavirus

crisis, we will see that the Ruby Princess cruise ship is a tipping point. Let's

understand what this one ship has brought to Australia's shores. We have now

133 passengers and counting from the Ruby Princess cruise ship that have

tested positive for coronavirus. The Ruby Princess cruise ship coronavirus

cases account for 10 per cent of the cases in New South Wales and, quite

tragically, there has already been one death.



Now, on the 15th of March, the Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced to the

Australian public and I quote, "The Australian Government will also ban cruise

ships from foreign ports arriving at Australian ports." Those were the Prime

Minister's words. He looked the nation in the eye and said there will be no more

cruise ships. Except there was. there was another cruise ship - the Ruby

Princess. It disembarked 2700 people just four days after the Prime Minister

made that statement. Just four days later, 2700 people disembarked that cruise

ship and now we have seen the disastrous results. As I said, 133 passengers

and counting already tested positive. And as these people got off these cruise

ships, they spread right across the country. They went into taxis and public

transport. They took domestic flights, they interacted with friends and

neighbours They went to shops. Yes, they were directed to self-isolate but they

were allowed to travel freely across the country. It is gobsmacking that we are

in this circumstance today. The Prime Minister said he would stop the cruise

ships; he did not stop the cruise ships. And we need to ask, we need to

demand how this happened and we need to ensure that it does not happen

again. The Australian Government needs to get on top of this situation very

quickly. We see today the Australian Border Force out speaking to their actions

around the cruise ship. I see that the Commander Michael Outram of the

Australian Border Force has said that the operation was successful. Well, the

operation might have been successful but the patient has died. The reality is

people were allowed to get off a cruise ship. The border security measures that

the Commonwealth Government put in place failed the Australian people. And it

does need to be asked, what is the advice the Australian Border Force is

getting from the Commonwealth? The Australian Border Force are not doctors;

they implement the health advice they are provided. And just like the Australian

people, the Australian Border Force are getting mixed messages when it comes

to the steps they should take to protect Australians health and their lives. So

the Commonwealth needs to sort this fast.



My colleague Chris is exactly right. There is one simple message that needs to

be delivered by the Australian Government. And that is this - the more people

who stay at home, the fewer people will die. And when it comes to our borders,

the Minister for Home Affairs Peter Dutton and the Prime Minister Scott

Morrison need to get control of our borders today. To ensure we do not have

another calamitous arrival as we have seen with the Ruby Princess. Now we're

happy to take questions in the room and I understand we have at least one

member of the media on the phone. We may have others joining us, but we will

start with those people in the room.



JOURNALIST: Just a question for Mr Bowen - do you think the annual private

health insurance premium should go ahead?



BOWEN: There are premium increases that have previously been approved. I

think that people are doing it tough, obviously, with many people losing their

jobs and heartbreaking scenes machines across the country. The absolutely

heartbreaking scenes we're seeing outside Centrelink offices across the

country. I recognise this is a complicated issue and the Government's got to

think about the viability of private health insurance but anything which can take

pressure off people at a time when budgets are under enormous pressure

should be very much considered.



JOURNALIST: Just in regards to the cruise ship, there's obviously two of those

cases this morning in the updated figures were linked to children, has Labor’s

position changed at all given that children are obviously at risk of contracting

this disease?



BOWEN: Well, children have always been interested in contracting the

disease, all the medical evidence is that they get it more mildly than other

people. But they've always been at risk of getting it. That's been all the medical

advice to me. And, you know, publicly as well. The concern has always been

primarily about schools and children - to go to the nub of your question about

the impact of spreading. Parents should be ensured that by and large now all

medical advice is that children will get through the virus more successfully than

older people. But it's about public health. And here, this is frankly a mess.



You have got the Prime Minister, encouraging people to send their children to

school. We've got the Premier of New South Wales encouraging people not to

send their children to school, Victoria closing schools, we've said consistently

that as school closures become increasingly likely, the Government should put

in place measures to help health care workers and communicate to parents

what the arrangements are. Instead, we have this game of open shut them

between the Prime Minister and the Premier of New South Wales, which is

sending terrible mixed messages to families and parents who really don't know

whether to listen to the Prime Minister or the Premier. I think most of New

South Wales are listening to the Premier. And the Prime Minister has got to

provide national leadership. The Government has got to stop hiding behind the

so called "National Cabinet” which is a COAG hook up, and actually provide

some national coordination because in the absence of that Gladys Berejiklian

and Dan Andrews showing the leadership of dealing with schools and giving

kids and parents clear messages.



JOURNALIST: Just on Dan Andrews has flagged that there's potential for us to

go to stage three at some point. Do you think that going to stage three quicker

would potentially help clear on some of those mixed messages that you're

talking about?



BOWEN: Do more, do earlier. That has been our consistent message to the

Government. If you think something's going to happen, do it now. We know

from all the evidence overseas, if you leave these decisions too late, you'll have

to do more anyway. And more people will die. Statement of fact. If in doubt, do

more. There is no such thing as an overreaction to this crisis. And let me say

this final thing in relation to your question. I see people saying, well, the

Government's got to balance the economy against health. No. I completely

reject that. The best economic plan for the country is to beat this virus quickly.

That's the best stimulus. that's the best thing that will keep people in work,

that’s the best thing that will save businesses. Don't let this virus take hold.

Beat it. Which means taking action earlier, taking it stronger and taking it more

smartly.



JOURNALIST: Where Labor sit on the latest Virgin airlines announcement of

job losses and is there any potential for nationalisation of that company to

prevent a monopoly going forward?



BOWEN: Well, we've made it clear that the Government should step in to

support airlines. We don't want to see good airlines go under. Because of what

is a temporary crisis facing the aviation sector. Australia needs two airlines.

Catherine King and Anthony Albanese have been consistent on that through

this crisis. It's terrible announcement this morning. I completely understand the

pressure on Virgin and it’s terrible announcement for those affected that so

many people have had that news over the last 48 hours, whether they work at

Qantas, Virgin, or their local cafe or gym. They're getting the same message.

And it's a terrible message to receive. And hence, we're disappointed the

Government hasn't been more ready to support those people with the actions

and support that can be provided and is been provided in a very slow fashion

by Centrelink. Full support for the frontline staff at Centrelink doing an amazing

job under enormous pressure they should be getting more support from the

Government.



KENEALLY: Labor during the stimulus legislation that went through on

Monday, made the point that the wage subsidy, which is in effect, what the

Government are seeking to provide business is about 20 per cent. In the UK,

they're providing 80 per cent. The idea that what the government are doing in

their economic stimulus package is going to help employers maintain a

relationship with their employees is quite simply proving false. We see this

happening today with this Virgin announcement. We have seen some 88,000

people in hospitality alone lose their jobs last week, their forecast 200,000 more

in coming weeks. The fact that there are queues around the Centrelink offices

is an indictment of the social service support system. Yes, it's unprecedented

demand, but it was not unexpected demand. It was not unexpected demand.

There are people there are parents who had jobs last week who could provide

food and pay rent. And now they are wondering how they are going to do that

next week. And under the Government's economic stimulus package, many of

those families if they are lucky enough to be able to get their application into

Centrelink will not see one dollar until the end of April. That is quite simply not

good enough.



That's why we raised concerns. That's why we moved amendments. That's why

we called on the Government to act more urgently. This is an unprecedented

health and economic crisis. And today, parents are waking up and what do they

hear from their Prime Minister? It's not okay for your child to have a birthday

party in the backyard with 10 of their schoolmates, but it's okay for them to go

to school with 30 of their school mates, or 300. This is such mixed messaging.

No wonder parents are confused. No wonder Australians don't know what rules

they're supposed to follow. Chris is absolutely right. It is time for the

Government now today to have a clear and simple message to Australians. It is

time for them to ensure that Australians have the support they need to have



shelter and food. We are talking about basic income support, and people need

it now.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACTS:

LIZ FITCH (BOWEN) 0424 512 512

TIMOTHY DUNLOP (KENEALLY) 0428 043 110





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











