

THE HON ANGUS TAYLOR MP  MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND EMISSIONS REDUCTION

MEDIA RELEASE



Wednesday, 25 November 2020

EMISSIONS REDUCTION AND RENEWABLE ENERGY SECTORS REMAIN RESILIENT  THROUGH 2020

Australia continues to be a world leader in renewable energy and there has been a step  up in Emissions Reduction Fund (ERF) projects this year, according to the Clean Energy  Regulator’s latest Quarterly Carbon Market Report.

Australia is deploying new renewable energy capacity ten times faster than the global  average (on a per person basis), and the share of renewable energy in Australia’s  electricity generation is expected to reach around 30 per cent by the end of 2020.

Despite COVID-19 restrictions almost halving rooftop solar installation rates in  metropolitan Melbourne in August and September, Australia remains on track for a  record 2.9 gigawatts (GW) of new rooftop capacity in 2020. The previous record was 2.2  GW installed in 2019.

Modelling commissioned by the Clean Energy Regulator forecasts investment in rooftop  solar will remain strong, indicating installed capacity could double over the next four  years to 26 GW.

The report also reveals there has been more investment in large-scale renewables in the  first nine months of 2020 (2.5 GW) than in the whole of 2019 (2.3 GW), a remarkable  achievement in what can only be described as a uniquely challenging year.

Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction Angus Taylor said the report shows  Australia is and will continue to be a world-leader in renewable energy.

“Claims by Mr Albanese and the Labor Party that investment in renewables has  ’collapsed’ aren’t supported by the facts,” Minister Taylor said.

“Australian families and businesses are adopting new energy technologies like rooftop  solar at record-breaking rates, and we expect this trend will continue for the  foreseeable future.”

“The Morrison Government is committed to ensuring the right policy settings are in  place to deliver affordable, reliable power while reducing emissions.

“That is why initiatives like the $1 billion Grid Reliability Fund are so important.”

The Grid Reliability Fund will support investment in new generation, storage and  transmission projects that will put downward pressure on prices and enable continued  investment in renewables.

The September quarter also saw a highly successful ERF auction with 7 million tonnes of  abatement purchased, up from 1.7 million tonnes in the previous auction.

In a sign of continuing strength, the volume of new ERF projects has also increased, with  44 new projects registered between July and September. These projects are estimated  to deliver 36 million tonnes of abatement over their lifetime. 87 new projects were  registered in the first nine months of the year, more than triple the number of projects  registered in the whole of 2019.

“Interest in soil carbon projects is emerging with a pipeline of 50 soil carbon applications  on hand,” Minister Taylor said. “This is a welcome trend that can help bring new income  streams to Australia’s farmers as well as boosting agricultural yields and resilience.”

“As we recover from the pandemic, the Government remains committed to reducing  emissions without imposing new costs on businesses or reducing their international  competitiveness.”

The Government provided an additional $40.4 million to the Clean Energy Regulator  through the 2020-21 Budget, to halve the time it takes to develop new ERF methods and  reduce the costs incurred by businesses as they register projects and trade Australian  carbon credit units.

More information can be found in the Clean Energy Regulator’s latest  Carbon Market  Report here.



ENDS

Minister Taylor’s office:                             Liam O’Neil, 0428 113 617

