Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health



MEDIA RELEASE

8 October 2020



Australian Government finalises University of Queensland-CSL COVID-19  vaccine agreement

The Australian Government is investing a total of $2.3 billion to support home-grown researchers  and manufacturers to develop and produce a COVID-19 vaccine, while engaging in strategic  international partnerships to support access for Australia and our region.

Under its COVID-19 Vaccine and Treatment Strategy, the Australian Government is investing $1.7  billion to pre-order 84.8 million doses of vaccine with leading Australian manufacturer CSL  Limited (Seqirus) and UK-based AstraZeneca.

On 7 September 2020, the Australian Government announced that should promising trials prove  successful for the University of Oxford/Astra Zeneca and the University of Queensland vaccine  candidates, more than 80 million doses of the two potential COVID-19 vaccines would be made  available for the Australian population, almost entirely manufactured in Melbourne.

This followed from the execution of a binding Heads of Terms between the Australian Government  and CSL/Seqirus for the University of Queensland vaccine candidate.

The Government has now entered a final supply agreement with CSL/Seqirus around the supply of  51 million doses of the University of Queensland (UQ)-CSL COVID-19 vaccine candidate,  including key terms to support clinical and technical development activities for the vaccine  candidate.

Phase IIb/III trials of the UQ vaccine candidate are scheduled to start in early December 2020 in  numerous countries and over more than 100 sites. The study will evaluate efficacy, immunogenicity  and safety in adults aged 18 years and above.

The Australian Government has also joined the COVAX facility, providing access to a large  portfolio of COVID-19 vaccine candidates and manufacturers across the world. The Government’s  upfront payment of $123.2 million guarantees we receive offers to purchase a number of vaccine  candidates from around the world as they become available, meeting safety and effectiveness  standards.

This is Australia’s second commitment to the COVAX facility, with $80 million donated in August  to the COVAX Advance Market Commitment - a collaborative effort to provide doses to  developing countries, enabling more countries to protect their most vulnerable groups.

Australia’s contribution supports a global coordination effort to ensure equitable and affordable  access to COVID-19 vaccines, which is essential to reinvigorate the global economy.

-END-

