

ANDREW LEIGH MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR TREASURY  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR CHARITIES  MEMBER FOR FENNER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC CANBERRA BREAKFAST  THURSDAY, 13 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: The Liberal Party hosting fundraisers in the midst of the worst  pandemic in a century; charities facing falling donations; stranded Canberrans  returning home from the NSW/Victoria border.

LISH FEJER, HOST: In a couple of weeks, parliament will be sitting and already there are  MPs and their staff quarantining here in Canberra. But there are preparations being made  for three proposed Liberal Party fundraising dinners to make the most of the time with  politicians back in town. Ben Morton, who represents the WA seat of Tangney, said the  events were not being organised by his office but by the Tangney campaign, which is part  of the WA division. A spokeswoman for Ben Morton and the Tangney campaign told The  Guardian that the Australian Government advice is that Australians should comply with the  relevant advice in the state or territory where they're located, as appropriate. These very  small events, said the spokeswoman, will only go ahead if they strictly comply with the  relevant COVID safe rules that apply for venues in the ACT.  Dr Andrew Leigh is the ALP  Member for Fenner and former professor of economics, and joins us this morning. Hello.

ANDREW LEIGH, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR TREASURY AND  CHARITIES: G’day, Lish. G’day, Adam.

FEJER: So, what have they done wrong here? You're taking them to task.

LEIGH: Yes. We've had a lot of parliamentary sitting days cancelled. Now that parliament  is finally getting together, all politicians’ focus should be on the main game. And that  shouldn't be on raising money for the Liberal Party. It should be on doing the work that our  constituents want us to be doing. We need to be very careful and cautious about the  spread of coronavirus. I know all politicians are being judicious in terms the number of face  to face meetings they take. Our office is still doing phone calls and zoom where that works,  just as a safer way of making sure we reduce any chance of the spread of the virus. I just  don't think it passes the pub test to have a two and a half thousand dollar fundraiser at the  moment.

FEJER: I wonder what listeners think? 0467 922 666, whether it does pass the pub test.  Because if they're doing everything according to current health advice here in the ACT,  what's the problem?



LEIGH: Well, it's that the focus that needs to be on the needs of our constituents right now.  People are dying of COVID. We have outbreaks in aged care centres. Parliament is  coming together to focus scrutiny on the government at a time in which we're spending  unprecedented amounts of taxpayer money. All of the focus should be on the central job  that we’re sent to Canberra to do, not on raising money for political parties in this way.

ADAM SHIRLEY, HOST: But Dr Leigh, if the attendees, if the MPs themselves follow strict  protocols that ACT Health has set down, if they can guarantee that in terms of distancing,  the number of people attending, what law, rule, what issue are they breaking?

LEIGH: They’re not breaking the law, Adam. No one’s suggesting that. The point is that  this doesn't seem to be an appropriate use of their time right now-

SHIRLEY: That’s down to perception though, isn’t it, Dr Leigh. That is a subjective  assessment you’ve made.

LEIGH: It sure is, absolutely. Adam, just to be clear here, we’re not debating in a court of  law whether or not the Liberal Party have broken the law and should go to jail. The debate  here is whether or not this is an appropriate thing for people like Paul Fletcher and Simon  Birmingham and Ben Morton to be doing right now. This is, in my view, not the right focus  at the time in which there is a pandemic raging. This is the worst pandemic in a century,  the worst economic downturn since the Great Depression. Our eyes need to be on the  main game.

SHIRLEY: Have you attended any Labor Party fundraisers, functions, get togethers out of  core Parliament sitting hours since COVID-19 hit?

LEIGH: No, I haven’t.

SHIRLEY: Would you consider it at all in the months ahead?

LEIGH: No, I don’t think it’s appropriate in the current circumstances. I think we really need  to be focused on getting through the pandemic. I understand political party coffers are  running dry at the moment. I've certainly read those reports in the press. But the big focus  needs to be on the fact that unemployment is hitting double digits, that there is a huge  challenge on getting our economy on track. I'm worried about the end to JobKeeper, and  the way in which the Government is managing the crisis in aged care. And there's certainly  challenges around what happened over the Ruby Princess, and questions that the  Government needs to answer on that. All of those issues of accountability need to be top  of mind for parliamentarians.

SHIRLEY: So do you concur here with Dr Andrew Leigh, who's the Labor Member for  Fenner on ABC Canberra Breakfast. Is it fair and just that the WA branch of the Liberal  Party is organising fundraising campaigns, and if they comply with social distancing and  other ACT health Directorate rules, should they go ahead? 1300 681 666 is the phone  number to call. The SMS is 0467 922 666 here on Breakfast. Lish Fejer and Adam Shirley  with you at twenty to nine.

FEJER: And I know a lot of charities are really struggling at the moment, because they  have been unable to get donations. Their normal fundraising has not been able to happen  due to COVID. So have you been able to get around this as well? We'd love to hear from

you. One text says ‘donating? Why are we donating to political parties in Australia? US  election spending is obscene. Imagine how many working poor people could be fed with  that money’. How much of the Labor Party, for example, goes into the coffers from  fundraising?

LEIGH: I’m not sure I understand that question, Lish.

FEJER: If fundraising is a part of parties, and we understand that the donations are down  due to COVID, with the Labor Party, are their donations down as well?

LEIGH: As I understand it, but I'm really only going off what I’ve read in the press. My  focus as the Shadow Assistant Minister for Charities is actually on those organisations that  are right out there assisting people in the pandemic. And for charities, this has been an  incredibly tough time. They’s seen a big fall in donations, the JB Were survey suggesting a  7 per cent fall this year, 12 per cent fall next year. An ANU study suggests that two thirds  of volunteers have had to cut back, and yet we've seen a huge demand for services -  domestic violence services, mental health services, food banks. Charities need our support  right now and anyone who’s able to assist in the vital work of charities, who is in the  position of still holding onto their job and is able to help out there, I really encourage people  to do that.

SHIRLEY: You would know, from nine o'clock this morning - in fact, 20 minutes from now -  some Canberrans are being allowed to transit through New South Wales and make their  way home. What work did you do behind the scenes to try and assist these constituents  getting back to the border?

LEIGH: I was regularly in touch with the ACT Government, as well as putting a bit of public  pressure on the New South Wales Government. I’ve been on ABC Sydney a couple of  times, and just making sure that the constituents of NSW knew that the decision that was  being made by the Berejiklian Government made no sense whatsoever. Finally, they've  done the right thing, but it shouldn't have taken the best part of a week to get Canberrans  home. You talk to those that those people who've gone down on mercy missions, to be  with a dying father in one case. That’s something that all of us would do, and the idea that  suddenly the rules were changed on them and they found themselves stuck in Wodonga  was just bizarre. So you’ve got that playlist going together - my recommendation be Willie  Nelson's On the Road Again, and I'm sure people will enjoy it as they’re finally coming  down the highway to Canberra.

SHIRLEY: Interesting to hear Deputy Premier of NSW John Barilaro tell this program a  couple days ago, the reports that Victorian MPs were able to pass through in spite of the  changes to the permits whilst other citizens weren't. He said if that occurred, then that's a  double standard that's not acceptable. Do you agree with John Barilaro on that?

LEIGH: Absolutely. And that's certainly a point that I've made on Sydney radio as well, that  it made no sense whatsoever to have one rule for MPs and another rule for those who’d  gone on mercy missions. This is a sensible approach that the NSW Government has taken  now, but it's come too late for some people. There are people who've gone to Melbourne  airport, abandoned their cars there, flown to Sydney and going through the self isolation  process there. It's just disappointing when you see the NSW Government not doing the  right thing immediately. I know Andrew Barr worked tirelessly to try to get an outcome. But  in the end, it took a lot of public pressure before the Berejiklian Government moved.



SHIRLEY: Really appreciate your time. Thank you for it today, Dr Leigh.

LEIGH: Always a pleasure, thanks.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHANIE ANDERSON 0431 344 056









