

25 March 2020

Coronavirus exposes our lack of domestic manufacturing   AUSTRALIAN’S are realising we have a lack of vital medical equipment (gowns, hand  sanitizer, ventilators, masks and gloves) due in part to the fact that we do not  manufacture domestically.

Kennedy MP, Bob Katter said if the suppliers were Australian factories then naturally  we would give first preference to Australia.

“If this runs its course as it has in Spain and northern Italy then you are looking at  thousands of deaths,” he said.

“Your federal LNP government decided to free trade; they said we could buy it  cheaper, well now we can't buy it at all.

“Now I read that our rum distillers and ethanol producers are dedicating resources to  the production of hand sanitizer.

“I have been screaming for years for ethanol. When it comes to our national security  there is only one answer; Australia must produce its own fuel. And the thing about  Australia is that we can be self-sufficient tomorrow and Hells Gates will produce 7%  of Australia’s fuel.”

Mr Katter said once federal parliament returns in August he will establish an inquiry  into what essential services have not been available due to the Coronavirus  pandemic, owing to foreign ownership, foreign supply lines or offshoring of the  service.

“That includes everything from parts for water and sewage pumps, call centres for  the banks, airlines and insurance companies and as mentioned earlier vital medical  equipment,” he said.



“The chickens are coming home to roost; we’ve even seen photos of baby formula  being shipped from Australia to China when Australian mothers can’t buy it in our  supermarkets for their own kids.

“You can blame successive governments and their free market ideology over the last  30 years for this.

“Thank the good Lord for our cattle and grain industries. And as for fruit and  vegetables, well the major suppliers have had a picnic. According to the ABS we  import more than we export.

“You disagree? Well go ask the ABS. We have been a net importer of food for the last  five or six years.”

—ENDS—

