

April 2,



2020



AFP deploys members to NT to help protect vulnerable



communities from COVID-19



afp.gov.au



/news-media/media-releases/afp-deploys-members-nt-help-protect-vulnerable-communities-



covid-19



The Australian Federal Police (AFP) has begun



deploying up to 102 police and Protective Service



Officers to the Northern Territory (NT) to help



protect vulnerable and remote communities



during the COVID-19 Pandemic.



AFP officers will be stationed throughout a



number of remote regional communities to



support national efforts to protect Australians



and limit the spread of COVID-19. Deployed members will work alongside NT Police



colleagues, with a key focus on preventing the spread of COVID-19 into remote



Indigenous communities.



The AFP’s deployment comes after a request for assistance from NT Police



Commissioner Jamie Chalker APM.  NT Police will remain the lead agency in the NT, with



AFP providing assistance as required.



1/2



The AFP members will assist with enforcement at biosecurity checkpoints throughout



the NT and with border control at Darwin and Alice Springs Airports.



The deployment will be phased, with groups arriving for pre-deployment training over



the course of this week. The first tranche of deployed members will be split between



Tennent Creek and Katherine respectively.



AFP Commander Jamie Strauss, the officer-in-charge of the AFP deployment, thanked



AFP members who volunteered to assist with the important community safety operation



at short notice.



“The protection of vulnerable and remote communities from COVID-19 is an important



undertaking, which the AFP takes very seriously. We are ready to assist our colleagues in



the Northern Territory to keep Australians safe and play our part in nationally



coordinated fight against this pandemic,” Commander Strauss said.



NT Police Assistant Commissioner Michael Hebb said the Northern Territory Police look



forward to working in partnership with the AFP.



“There are a number of activities underway to mitigate the risk of the COVID-19 to the



community, these are critical times for all frontline agencies to identify opportunities to



protect Territorians, and the partnership with the AFP will further enhance the policing



support that we can provide to the Northern Territory,” said Assistant Commissioner



Hebb.



Media enquiries



AFP Media: (02) 5126 9297



2/2

