







The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology  Federal Member for McPherson

MEDIA RELEASE

FUNDING TO PROPEL COMMERCIALISATION INCLUDING IN KEY  MANUFACTURING SECTORS

23 November 2020

The Morrison Government is backing Australian businesses with projects in the  space, clean energy and medical sectors to commercialise and take on new  markets.

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said the latest round  of the Accelerating Commercialisation grants take the Government’s investment to  date to more than $240 million.

“These latest grants will support companies to turn their great ideas into high quality  products for the global market, including manufacturing-focused projects in the  priority areas of space, clean energy and medical products,” Minister Andrews said.

“This is an example of how our Government is supporting business and products at  various stages of their life-cycle and these grants will work hand in glove with the  Modern Manufacturing Strategy to drive growth in the sector.

“It’s part of our ongoing commitment to open up new markets for Australian  innovators and create new jobs - both during the COVID-19 recovery and for  generations to come.”

In total, 14 Australian businesses will share in almost $8 million in matched grant  funding to help take their innovations to market.

They include Queensland firm Hypersonix, which will use its $952,575 in funding to  deliver an Australian manufactured hydrogen fuelled scramjet engine, designed to  put small satellites into low-level orbit cost effectively.

Sydney-based Sicona Battery Technologies will use its $704,302 matched grant to  build a pilot plant to manufacture batteries using existing Australian supply chains.





Its next generation battery technology has been demonstrated to increase the  capacity of lithium-ion batteries by up to 233% and at lower cost than comparable  technologies.

Nimblic will to use its $328,771 for hospital trials of its innovative platform  Medtasker, that ensures the right message about the right patient gets to the right  clinician every time.

While Victorian company Ker Ker will further develop its skin care ointment that  significantly reduces the healing time of minor burns and Brisbane-based Microbio  will commercialise its revolutionary blood stream infection test panel, to achieve  better outcomes for sepsis sufferers, including the 8,700 Australians that die each  year.

Since the Accelerating Commercialisation grants program first launched in 2014, the  Government has awarded 503 grants and provided 451 businesses with real  opportunities to commercialise their products and bring clever ideas to market.

More information on the grant recipients is available at www.business.gov.au/ac-funding-offers.

Information on how to apply for an Entrepreneurs’ Programme Accelerating  Commercialisation grant is available at www.business.gov.au/ep



Media Contact: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846 / Jen Jennings 0435 121 347

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

