



The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

The Hon. Peter Gutwein MP  Premier of Tasmania



The Hon. Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development

The Hon. Peter Dutton MP  Minister for Home Affairs

Senator The Hon. Jonathon Duniam  Assistant Minister for Forestry and Fisheries  Assistant Minister for Regional Tourism





JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

Saturday 7 November 2020

TASMANIAN TOURISM BOOST



More than 130 direct flights from New Zealand to Hobart packed with tourists are set to sample the  tastes and sights of Tasmania, under a deal struck by the Morrison and Gutwein Governments for  Hobart airport to take around 30,000 international travellers each year.

The new arrangement will see the Morrison Government invest $49.2 million for around 30 Australian  Border Force, Australian Federal Police investigators and biosecurity officers to make Hobart airport an  international gateway for three flights a week from New Zealand and two flights a week in winter.

Prime Minister Scott Morrison said the new arrangement realised the vision set out in the Hobart City  Deal and would be a significant jobs boost.

“Safely opening to Australia and New Zealand will be a shot in the arm for Tassie tourism and jobs,” the  Prime Minister said.

“This has been an incredibly tough year for Australians and particularly our tourism and hospitality  sectors, but this deal will mean tourists from low-risk areas can come to sample Tasmania’s incredible  experiences, sights and produce.



“While the pandemic might have set back the timetable for making Hobart an international airport, it is  just going to mean more pent up demand for the best Tasmania has to offer.”

Tasmanian Premier Peter Gutwein said his government would invest $10 million, as part of a $17.5  million investment in partnership with the Airport’s owners, to upgrade Hobart Airport’s infrastructure  to facilitate its international border arrangements.

“For the first time in more than two decades Tasmania will welcome international flights from New  Zealand,” the Premier said.

“This is a unique opportunity to travel between two extraordinary island destinations, and a terrific  boost for local jobs across our tourism sector, including more jobs at our Airport as we undertake  upgrades in the coming weeks to accommodate international arrangements.

“2020 has been a challenging year, but this is a sensational coup, and I invite New Zealanders to come to  Tasmania and discover what makes this place so very special.”

Mr Gutwein said that he recognised the aviation industry was battling the impacts of the pandemic, and  the Tasmanian Government would help underwrite the services between Auckland and Hobart for two  years.

Deputy Prime Minister Michael McCormack said the airline and tourism industries had been smashed by  COVID-19 and that the deal offered hope to businesses and workers.

“More planes in the sky means more jobs on the ground for Tasmania,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“This deal is going to see more tourists at Tasmania’s museums and galleries, staying at its hotels, eating  and drinking at its restaurants and cafes, and exploring its parks and sights.”

Minister for Home Affairs Peter Dutton said the deployment of officers to process and oversee  international arrivals would help keep Australians safe.

“As well as the risks we’re facing with the pandemic the other threats we face at our borders haven’t  gone away which is why these highly skilled officers will be so important,” Minister Dutton said.

“While keeping our borders secure, the extra 30 officers flying in and out also mean more investment  for local businesses.”

Assistant Minister Jonno Duniam said New Zealand was a critical visitor market for Australia and  Tasmania.

“For too long Tasmania has been compared with New Zealand, and now Tassie has the chance to prove  that one island is better than two,” Assistant Minister Duniam said.

“This is the shot in the arm that Tasmania’s tourism operators desperately need as they start rebuilding  an industry that is stronger than it was before.



“Importantly, this is a giant leap towards Tasmania having a truly international airport, and gives the  state an opportunity to prove it can be done with success.”

The Morrison and Gutwein Governments expect the new arrangement to commence in January 2021  and will be reviewed at the end of the first year.

[ENDS]

Media Contacts:   Prime Minister’s Press office, (02) 6277 7744  Premier’s office: Chris Medhurst, 0410 600 400  Deputy Prime Minister’s office: Dean Shachar, 0418 202 860  Minister Dutton’s office: Merryn Royle, 0409 272 971  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

