Media Release. 7 October, 2020.

BUDGET FAILS TO DELIVER REAL INVESTMENT IN NURSING,  MIDWIFERY AND AGED CARE

The Treasurer may have acknowledged Australia’s local ‘heroes’, our healthcare workers, for  their courage, commitment and compassion throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, but last  night’s Budget provides too little investment in nursing and midwifery and even less for aged  care workers, according to the Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation (ANMF).

The ANMF has also questioned the Government’s claim of ‘record funding for aged care’, given  it is deferring action in chronically-understaffed nursing homes, until the completion of the  Royal Commission in early 2021.

ANMF Federal Secretary, Annie Butler, said today: “It’s a wonderful gesture for the Treasurer to  thank Australia’s healthcare workers, on behalf of a grateful nation and the Government. The  Treasurer said they should be rewarded for their efforts and rightly so. But despite nurses,  midwives and personal care workers producing extraordinary efforts to protect and defend  Australians’ health during the pandemic, especially in aged care, this Budget offers them little  reward.

“There is little investment in the nursing and midwifery workforce and even less for our aged  care workers. Instead, the Government is deferring action in aged care yet again, by waiting for  the release of the Royal Commission’s final report in February.

“It’s disappointing that there’s no action on job security and no action of improving wages and  conditions for aged care workers. So, despite the much-vaunted promises of meaningful  measures for working women, this Budget fails to deliver - the promised ‘thanks’ is just more  words, not real action.

“Even the additional 23,000 extra home care places will do little to reduce the long waiting list  of over 100,000 elderly Australians waiting up to 12-months or more for an appropriate home  care package.

“If jobs are the cornerstone of the national economic recovery-plan, the ANMF is calling on the  Government to act now and address the dangerously inadequate levels of qualified nurses and  care staff working in aged care.”

Ms Butler said the ANMF welcomed the Budget’s funding for mental health services, the NDIS  and PBS listings for drugs to treat a range of diseases, including ovarian cancer, leukaemia,  melanoma and Parkinson’s disease.

ANMF media release authorised by Annie Butler, ANMF Federal Secretary. 1/365 Queen St, Melbourne.

The ANMF, with over 290,000 members, is the industrial and professional voice for nurses, midwives and assistants in nursing in Australia.

ANMF media contact: Richard Lenarduzzi 0411 254 390

