





EMBARGOED 1AM 7 November 2020

MEDIA RELEASE

Business and organisations unite in calling for the government to  adopt the Climate Change Bill

Leaders in business, technology, finance, environment and health have written a joint letter to all  Members of Federal Parliament urging them to adopt the Climate Change Bill.

The letter, signed by over 100 organisations including Unilever, Atlassian, WWF and the  Australian Medical Association, calls for all MPs to support the Climate Change Bill that will be  presented to Parliament on Monday 9 November by Zali Steggall MP, Independent for Warringah.

The Bill would legislate Net Zero by 2050 and provide a clear bipartisan approach for addressing  climate change impacts, with national risk assessment plans and an independent advisory  commission to publicly advise on the best transition pathway.

The letter supports the adoption of the Climate Change Bill to assist the private and public sector  in decision making for the future, whilst reassuring the Australian community that the government  is committed to responsibly tackling climate change.

Zali Steggall MP said the open letter is a great testament to the concern within private and public  sectors that Australia needs a unified, bipartisan approach to acting on climate change.

“Australian organisations want policy certainty and stability. Climate change is the biggest  challenge of our time and the warnings are coming from every sector, from private investment,  banking, health, the environment and our trading partners,” she said.

“As the rest of the world is charging forward and committing to Net Zero by 2050, Australia risks  being left behind,” she said. “This includes countries such as UK, Japan, South Korea, Germany and  France that have all committed to Net-Zero by 2050. It is time Australia follows suit.”

Atlassian CEO Mike Cannon-Brookes said Australia has a responsibility to act:  “We need to commit to a net zero carbon economy for the sake of our kids and our planet. We  have the opportunity to be a pace setter on the issue and improve our economy and our planet.”







Unilever Australia and New Zealand CEO Nicky Sparshott said the Climate Change Bill is what the  nation needs to move forward on climate action.

“If adopted, the Bill would set the direction for Australian businesses, give clarity to planning and  create the right context for change,” she said. “If we don’t take a bipartisan approach to climate  action and set targets now, we risk falling behind the rest of the world and compromising the  future safety and prosperity of our country.”

Australian Medical Association President Dr Omar Khorshid said Australian citizens are waiting for  our Parliament to just get on with action on climate change.

“Australian doctors are needing our Parliament to prevent further climate impacts that exacerbate  poor health outcomes. This Private Members’ Bill is balanced and should be easily supported by  both Government and Opposition alike,” Dr Khorshid said.

Council of Small Business Organisations of Australia (COSBOA) CEO Peter Strong said:

“COSBOA is proud to support the Climate Change Bill. Climate change is a real risk to everyone,  including small business, and most Australians accept that. We need to stop pandering to the  minority of deniers and act on it. It’s about risk management and change management.”

Names of the 106 organisations in alphabetical order that support the joint letter:

COSBOA, 25eight, All the Wild Roses Pty Limited, Australian Medical Association, AMSA, Arowana, Atlassian, Australian  Conservation Foundation, Australian Ethical, Australian Institute of landscape Architects, Australian Religious Response to  Climate Change, BEAR, Benedictus Media, Biome, BioPak, BWD Strategic, Carbon Markets Institute, Citizens Climate Lobby,  ClarkeHopkinsClarke Architects, Clean Energy Council, Climate Health Alliance (CAHA), Climate Council, ClimateWorks,  Community Services.net Pty Ltd (CSnet), Compass Studio, Digital Storytellers, Doctors for the Environment Australia, Dog and  Bone Consulting, DrawHistory, Edge Consulting, Electric Vehicle Council, Electrical Trade Union, Energy Efficiency Council, Fair  Food Forager, Flow Hive. Forward Thinking Design, Freerange Future, Future Super, GOGO events, Good Day Girl, Good  Environmental Choice Australia (GECA), Green Moves Aust Pty Ltd, Hatched, Huddle Insurance, Humane Society International,  Humanitarian Advisory Group, Impact Investment Group, Investor Group on Climate Change, Intrepid Travel, Investa Property  Group, KeepCup, Koskela Pty Ltd, Land & Water Consulting, Landserv, Marlin Communications, Marque Lawyers, Mentorloop,  Micah, Mkt Communications, Nextport, Nation Partners, Ndevr Environmental, Nightingale Housing, One Million Women, One  Stone Advisors (Asia Pacific), Onya, Oxfam, Pablo & Rusty's, Patagonia, People with Purpose, Planning Institute of Australia,  Point Advisory, Portable, Presync, Quiip, Raisely, RAW Travel, Red Wagon Workplace Solutions, Reho Travel, Republic of  Everyone, Responsible Investment Association Australia, Right Lane Consulting, Sample Coffee Roasters Pty Ltd, Sawmill Brewer,  Seated Massage, Sendle Pty Ltd, SGS Economics and Planning, Small Giants, Smart Energy Council, Surfers for Climate Action,  Talent Nation, Tearfund, Telsa, The Body Shop, The Social Deck, The Wilderness Society, Think Impact, Three Blue Ducks, UN  Global Compact, Underground Communications, Unilever, Veternarians for Climate Action, Venturetec, Verdecon, Whole Kids,  WWF

EDITOR NOTES:

The joint letter and logos of the supporting organisations will appear as advertisements across The  Australian, The Sydney Morning Herald and The Australian Financial Review on Saturday 7  November.

For more information go to:

www.climateactnow.com.au / www.zalisteggall.com.au  For media requests call Sarah Whyte on 0407 790 892



admin@climateactnow.com.au       www.climateactnow.com.au











To the Members of the 46th Parliament,



Climate change is a threat to Australia, with immediate and accelerating impacts to  our  environment,  economy and way of  life.  Australia  is starting to experience more  severe  and  frequent  bushfires,  droughts,  floods  and  heatwaves.  Last  summer’s   bushfires showed Australia the worst of those impacts.

At the same time the COVID-19 pandemic has pushed Australia into recession for the  first  time in  thirty years.  The pandemic  has been  a  prelude to the kind of  disruption   that climate change will entail over the coming years but has also offered the prospect  of recovering in a sustainable way.

With time to address global emissions disappearing, we must address both COVID-19  and  climate  change  simultaneously.  However,  if  we  act  decisively  on  both,   Australia will benefit from added growth and employment opportunities.

The Climate Change (Adaptation and Mitigation) Bill 2020 is a sensible national response  to the challenge of climate change. The core pillars of a net zero target by 2050 (with  the  ability  to  be  ratcheted up  in  line  with  the  most  recent science),  national  risk   assessments  and  adaptation  plans,  technology  readiness  assessment  and  an   independent  advisory  commission  have  been  endorsed  by  peak  associations  across   sectors.

The legislation, if adopted as a bipartisan measure, would assist the private and public  sector  in  decision  making.  It  would also reassure the Australian  community that  the  Government is on the right track with addressing climate change over time in a fiscally  responsible  way.

We are calling  on  all  members  of  the  Federal Parliament  to consider  and adopt  this  bill  in  the  national  interest.  We  must  ensure  that  Australia  has  a  comprehensive   bipartisan law to address the challenge of our times. If we get this right, we can ensure  a safe and prosperous future for all.



Signed by the following organisations:







admin@climateactnow.com.au       www.climateactnow.com.au





admin@climateactnow.com.au       www.climateactnow.com.au







admin@climateactnow.com.au       www.climateactnow.com.au





admin@climateactnow.com.au       www.climateactnow.com.au







