







The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology

The Hon Angus Taylor MP  Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

$22B PROJECT TO POWER THE NT & SINGAPORE GIVEN MAJOR  STATUS BOOST

29 July 2020



The Morrison Government is helping fast-track Australia’s largest renewable energy  infrastructure project which aims to power the Northern Territory and Southeast Asia  - injecting billions into our economy and creating thousands of Australian jobs.

Major Project Status has been granted to Sun Cable’s proposed Australian-ASEAN  Power Link (AAPL) - which would be one of the world’s largest dispatchable  renewable electricity systems, supported by the world’s largest battery & solar farm  in the Barkly region near Tennant Creek.

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said the project would  create 1,500 Australian jobs during construction, 350 ongoing jobs in Australia, as  well as indirectly supporting around 12,000 Australian jobs. It will also see the  production of a new solar farm manufacturing facility.

“This project draws on Australia’s world-class solar technology and our high-tech  manufacturing capability to export renewable energy on an unprecedented scale,”  Minister Andrews said.

“Not only will this power link make Australia a world-leader, it will also create  significant economic and employment opportunities here at home with about $8  billion of the $22 billion investment to be injected directly into Australia.





“It’s a strong statement to all Australians that despite the immediate challenges of  the COVID-19 pandemic we will come out the other side stronger and industry is still  investing in opportunities that will drive our economic recovery and create much  needed jobs.”

Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction Angus Taylor said projects like this will  help maintain Australia's long-standing position as an energy exporting powerhouse.

"Australia has long been a world leader in energy exports", Minister Taylor said.

"As technologies change, we can capitalise on our strengths in renewables to  continue to lead the world in energy exports."

Sun Cable CEO David Griffin said, “Sun Cable is delighted that the AAPL has been  granted Major Project Status. It is a significant milestone for the AAPL, which will see  Australia become a world leader in renewable electricity trade, generating  approximately $2 billion worth of exports for Australia annually.

“This project is helping to grow a new industry, utilising intercontinental HVDC  submarine transmission systems, to supply renewable electricity to major load  centres in the Indo-Pacific and support the region's low-emissions goals,” Mr Griffin  said.

Major Project Status is the Commonwealth Government’s recognition of the strategic  significance of a project to Australia. It provides companies with extra support from  the Major Projects Facilitation Agency, including a single entry point for  Commonwealth Government approvals, project support and coordination, and help  with state and territory approvals.



Media Contacts:

Minister Andrews’ office: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846 / Jen Jennings 0435 121 347

Minister Taylor’s office: Liam O’Neil 0428 113 617 / John Hulin 0466 443 917



Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

