

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

TRANSCRIPT

Monday 17th August 2020

Minister Littleproud iv 5AA



LEON BYNER: Now, cost of meat. You might notice if you've been buying meat lately, it's  gone up in price. There are those who say: oh, it's the drought. But there's another more  important issue and I thought the bloke best qualified to explain it is the Federal Agriculture  Minister David Littleproud.

David, thanks for being on this morning. So what have we got here? It seems to me that  we've got a diminished abattoir capacity for a start, which surely would influence the  supply chain, wouldn't it?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well not really to be candid with you. There is some structural  adjustment as we've seen a couple of plants shut down in Victoria, but there is unspent  capacity across the country. And what that means is it just takes time for the cattle to get  from one abattoir to other that might have been closer. Now, they have to go further for  them to be processed. But effectively, the national herd, particularly for beef is at its lowest  and the prices are therefore at its highest since 2015.

So, we are seeing there's some adjustments with some of those processing plants shutting  down because of COVID-19 in Victoria. But look, can I just say that the reality is most of  our abattoirs around the country are not running at full capacity because what was  happening in the drought is that all the farmers were selling their cattle, they were getting  processed and now what's happened since we've had some rain, they're now trying to  rebuild that herd. So they're not selling off as many - simple demand and supply.

Lamb is starting to come back a little bit and so is pork as we start to see those numbers  replenish a little bit quicker. But the reality is it's been predicated just on farmers getting  some optimism some hope now to rebuild their herd after a prolonged drought and that's  putting some pressure on prices.

We think that probably, if we see a decent season, you'll start to see those supplies, as the  progeny come through and farmers get confidence, you'll see those prices ease. But at the  moment, it's basically a demand and supply issue.

LEON BYNER: Alright. I'm glad you clarified that. In fact, pork sellers tell me that pork  prices are very good at the moment.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah. They have been and one of the big challenges we're trying  to do there is to keep African swine flu out. That's a real challenge for us; it's in Papua  New Guinea and in fact, we've sent some of our own biosecurity officers up there to try

TRANSCRIPT



TRANSCRIPT

and stop that because we're the only- one the only countries free of African swine flu. And  it's important we continue to invest. We put $66 million extra into getting more dogs at  airports and in fact, sadly, we keep on finding people that are coming through the airport  system with pork products and we've now- and in fact, I changed it just before the last  election that if it's done with malice, we'll send you home straight away. We'll send you  back on the plane you came in; you're not welcome back for three years.

And we're just about to- and I've got legislation in front of the Parliament now to increase  those fines which are around two or three hundred dollars if you get caught with it in your  bag. We're looking to ramp that up well over $1200, just because of the seriousness of this  and the impact it could have on agriculture, not just African swine fever but also FMD, foot  and mouth disease.

So we just can't take any chances and in fact, we've intercepted some cases of foot and  mouth disease because of our extra patrolling at borders. So this is serious but it's helped  pork prices lift and lamb prices have been strong. Our cockies are finally getting a few quid  in their pocket after a prolonged drought. But I get there's pressures at the supermarket,  but as they start to get more supply and we get some decent rain, prices will level out a  little bit.

LEON BYNER: David, you've been on national news this morning calling for a little bit  more common sense in border communities and we've had this happen today. In fact, our  Government is bringing in 300 international students from Singapore. They come from all  sorts of different areas which are COVID positive. We're told the strictest precautions will  be taken but of course, whilst that's going on, we've got border communities who can't  even cross the border to teach or go to school.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah. This is just where we just need some common sense and  some leadership. I think Premiers of all political persuasions have done a good job but  unfortunately, what's happening is there's some arbitrary decisions made from chief  medical officers in capital cities that don't quite understand the nuances of regional and  remote communities. And particularly those communities that haven't had any cases.

And I think there's an opportunity for some leadership here by the premiers who decide  border restrictions, to actually come together and just work through, actually go out and  listen to these communities, understand the challenges they face, understand the risks  that are posed and that's got to be at the foremost.

But if you can mitigate those risks in a practical way, then work with these communities for  making sure that their lives can continue on. And border- borderlines were put in place a  hundred years ago. Australians- modern Australia has moved past those arbitrary lines.  We actually interact across borders and a lot more and do business by wherever our  closest proximity of our town may be whether that be on one side of a border to another.  We don't particularly care. And that's where we just need some leadership of our premiers.

If they want a modern federation and they don't want to become irrelevant, it's time for  them to understand that they just can't make arbitrary decisions from capital cities without  understanding the importance of regional Australia and the role we play in feeding and  clothing people, but the rights that we should also have in educating our kids. And it's also  more important, our own health and well-being and being able to use medical facilities on  one side of the border to another.

TRANSCRIPT



TRANSCRIPT

We're all Australians at the end of the day. You know, Queensland, we love the town; New  South Wales, up in the Origin and everyone loves to win the AFL or beat every Victorian  AFL club to win the AFL flag. And it's great to be parochial and be proud. But there's some  practical applications.

At the end of day, we're Australians and we should be able to share one another's  resources, particularly for those that are that are just a human right.

LEON BYNER: Now, look, one other question I've got that I know you're across. There's  been a Senate inquiry into pet food. Where are you up to with the implementation for  regulating from the inquiry? Because this was in 2018 and it doesn't seem anything's  happened yet.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah. So look, the states take control of standards within the state  and within the country. The Federal Government looks after what comes in and out of the  border across- out of Australia. The Victorian Government is leading this from memory, in  terms of trying to get a harmonised approach to pet food, to make sure that we don't have  those issues that we've had in the past; to make sure there is a standard. Because there's  no point having a standard in Victoria that's different to Queensland or South Australia.

So the State Agricultural Ministers are being forward leaning on this and in fact, the last  ministerial council, I think there'd been some progress on it and it's out of session work  that's being done as we speak. And I'm hoping that some of that work will near its  completion towards the end of this year.

But I've got to say that some of those AG ministers, in their defence, have been diverting  their attention a little bit to some of the challenges they've been facing with COVID. But it is  still on the agenda and still being worked through by officials as quickly as we possibly can  to achieve that.

LEON BYNER: David Littleproud, thanks for joining us today. That's the Federal  Agriculture Minister just answering some questions on border issues, cost of meat and  indeed, the standards on pet food.



Media contact  0455 448 985





























