



TRANSCRIPT  Senator James Paterson  Liberal Senator for Victoria



Monday 01 December 2020

Sky News: First edition

Subjects: China



Peter Stefanovic: Right now and joining me live is Liberal Senator James Paterson.  James, good to see you. Thanks for joining us this morning. So from China overnight, this  quote, "the Australian side is reacting so strongly to my colleagues Twitter. Does that  mean they think the cold blooded murder of Afghans is justified? The Australian  government should feel ashamed of this." What do you make of their response to our

response yesterday?

Senator James Paterson: Peter, I'm very happy to compare Australia's human rights  record with the Chinese Communist Party's human rights record any day of the week.  Australia is not a perfect country and we admit that. And we as a liberal democracy, we're  open about that. And in the case of the investigation into Afghan soldiers, it was, in fact,  our own soldiers, our own SAS members who came forward, who blew the whistle on their  colleagues, who they believed had done the wrong thing. And the government responded  by commissioning a multi-year investigation to get to the bottom of it. And we're now acting  on it. The contrast with the Chinese Communist Party couldn't be clearer. In 1989, after the  Tiananmen Square massacre, a Chinese general was in fact charged, convicted,  sentenced to five years jail and had his Communist Party membership revoked because  he didn't fire on his own citizens, because he didn't allow his troops to kill their own  citizens. That is the difference between the Chinese Communist Party in Australia. We  punish our perpetrators. They punish those who try to do the right thing.

Stefanovic: Yeah, and you bring up Tiananmen Square. And I was going to ask you about  this, too, because this foreign ministry spokesman who made that tweet yesterday has a  bit of form in the past he suggested that Tiananmen Square, the massacre there was  merely a political disturbance for which China's response was correct. So what do you  think this says about the foreign ministry? It seems to be that they're a bunch of wind up  merchants at the moment.

Paterson: Well, if you think about what the task of a foreign ministry is on behalf of their  nation, it's to increase their stature and standing in the world to improve their relations with  the world. And if you look at the last year of Chinese foreign relations, they've gone  backwards massively. So I suspect the Chinese foreign ministry is trying to distract from

their own failure. I mean, think about what's happened in the last 12 months, even without  COVID, the number of countries that have followed Australia's lead in banning Huawei  from their 5G network have massively surged across Europe, North America and Asia. I  mean, that's a key performance indicator for the Chinese foreign ministry, Huawei they  describe as a state champion they provide enormous support for and they've failed again  and again and again to persuade countries to allow them into their 5G network because  other countries have made the same decision Australia has, which is our digital  sovereignty is too important and shouldn't be ceded.

Stefanovic: Well, Penny Wong, she's already said this morning that Australia is going to  continue pivoting away from China. Matt Canavan on the show a short time ago, he said  the same thing. What's your view? What's what should be the strategy from an Australian  perspective now?

Paterson:  Well, I agree with the comments by Penny Wong and I agree with the  comments by Matt Canavan, and this is a time for national unity. This is a time for all  Australians to stand together to send a very strong message that these sort of tactics will  not work. They will not dissuade us from pursuing our national interests. That will not

dissuade us from standing up for our democracy, for defending our sovereignty, and that  we are a strong and resilient nation. Other countries have been where we are. In 2016 the  South Korean government agreed to an Obama administration request to place THAAD  missiles within their territory. And they were subject to a very similar campaign of  economic coercion. And eventually it passed. It did disrupt the trade. It was damaging for  some sectors in particular, but eventually it passed and it will pass, too, for us, but only if  we demonstrate that we will not be intimidated by it.

Stefanovic:  But if we keep standing our ground, it's going to come at even more of a cost,  right, because I suppose more tariffs are going to come for even more sectors.

Paterson: There's no question Peter, this will be a test of our national resilience. It is going  to be a difficult period ahead in China Australian relations and unfortunately, a very  lucrative trading relationship which has benefited both sides is going to be disrupted. But it

is not going to be disrupted because of anything that we have sought to do. All we've  sought to do is to stand up for ourselves and protect our own interests. We've not sought  to impose our interests on China, only they have decided to do that to us. And so there  really is no alternative. Look at those list of 14 demands that the Chinese embassy has  publicised. Which one of those could we ever agree to? Which one of those would any  Australian government ever agree to? There's not a single one that I would be happy  agreeing to. And if we're not willing to agree to that, then we have to accept that we're  going to have a difficult time in this relationship and all we can do is get through it.

Stefanovic: There had been some critics on this morning, particularly from the Lowy  Institute, that I read about James, that said our response was overly emotive and played  into China's hands yesterday. We shouldn't have deployed our top asset, being our prime  minister to respond to a junior level official in Chinese ministry. Do you believe that the PM  was right to act the way he did?

Paterson: I mean, that sort of commentary is just not real world Peter. Australians expect  their prime minister to respond. He responded completely appropriately and he reflected  the feelings of all Australians when he did so. I've rarely been prouder than when I see a  prime minister standing up on the international stage, representing our country, standing  up for our interests and our values. He's done an exceptional job in a difficult period over

the last few years, and I think all Australians should rally behind him and support him in  our national interest.

Stefanovic: Are you anticipating that Australians may well boycott Chinese products?

Paterson: Well, there's certainly no need for the government to encourage or sanction any  kind of activity like that, because I think Australians will make up their own minds about  that. They'll be making their own decisions as consumers when they walk into the  supermarket to decide how they want, where they want their dollars to go and how they  want that to reflect their values.

Stefanovic: Barnaby Joyce used some pretty colourful language this morning when  describing that foreign ministry spokesperson as behaving like a stupid high school  student. How would you describe it?

Paterson: Well, I think childish is a reasonable description. I mean, China is a  superpower. This is an official spokesperson for the foreign ministry and he is tweeting a  doctored image on social media like like a child would do. It's not a mature thing for a  country to do. It's certainly not something an Australian diplomat would ever do. And if they  did, they'd be fired for it.

Stefanovic: Yeah, and just on that, it's still up. Does Twitter have a role to play here?  Because, I mean, Twitter is very quick in you know, in in censoring tweets from, say,  Donald Trump. But this one's still up and it is a doctored tweet.

Paterson: Yeah, maybe Twitter could redeploy some of the enormous internal team  they've had dedicated to following Donald Trump's tweets and tagging them within 30  seconds of them being posted for disinformation and maybe look a little bit closer at actual  agents of disinformation from the Chinese foreign ministry and their agents and allies in  Chinese state owned media who've been spreading this kind of vile propaganda for years  freely on Twitter without any restriction at all. I think that reflects on Twitter as a social  media platform.

Stefanovic: Senator James Paterson, good to get your thoughts this morning. Thanks so  much for joining us. We'll talk to you again soon.

Paterson: Thank you, Peter.

ENDS

