

March 28,



2020



Three arrested, gun, nun-chucks, crossbows and drugs



seized in WA



afp.gov.au



/news-media/media-releases/three-arrested-gun-nun-chucks-crossbows-and-drugs-seized-wa



Three people are facing charges following a Western Australia National Anti-Gangs Squad



(WA NAGS) investigation into an established WA criminal network.  Search warrants



yesterday also resulted in seizures of various weapons and drug types.



Yesterday (27 March, 2020), WA NAGS members executed a vehicle stop in Yanchep and



four search warrants in the WA suburbs of Stirling, Nollamara and Norandra (two



locations).



Three people were arrested and items seized included; one loaded handgun, one set of



nun-chucks, three crossbows (with arrows), various small amounts of drugs (heroin, GHB,



methamphetamine), drug paraphernalia and $3000 in cash



A 56-year-old female from Stirling was charged with:



One count of ‘Sold or supplied, or offered to sell or supply, a trafficable quantity of



methylamphetamine’ (



WA Misuse of Drugs Act



);



One count of ‘Possession of Prohibited Drugs with Intent to Sell or Supply (Heroin)’



(



WA Misuse of Drugs Act



);



One count of ‘Possession of stolen or unlawfully obtained property’ ($3000.00).



A 27-year-old male from Nollamara was charged with one count of ‘Sold or supplied, or



offered to sell or supply, a trafficable quantity of methylamphetamine’ (



WA Misuse of



Drugs Act)



A 44-year-old male from Alexander Heights was charged with one count ‘Possessed a



trafficable quantity of methylamphetamine with intent to sell or supply it to another’ (WA



Misuse of Drugs Act)



All three were refused bail and are due to appear in the Perth Magistrates Court today,



Saturday 28 March 2020.



These offences carry a maximum penalty of life imprisonment.



Acting Superintendent Paula Fernandez said the AFP is committed to disrupting



organised crime at all levels.



“Our commitment to these investigations will not cease despite the challenging



circumstances we may face here in Australia and across the globe due to the COVID-19



outbreak. The AFP, together with our state partners will continue to work tirelessly to



protect Australians from insidious, organised crime.” Said a/Superintendent Fernandez



1/2



The Western Australia National Anti-Gangs Squad (WA NAGS), which includes members



of the Australian Federal Police and Western Australia Police targets Outlaw Motorcycle



Gangs (OMCGs) involved in moving illicit drugs into Australia.



Media enquiries



AFP Media: (02) 5126 9297



2/2

