

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY  DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  WEDNESDAY, 7 OCTOBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Federal Budget; Scott Morrison giving people $50 a fortnight but taking  $300 away; impact of the Morrison recession on women; tax cuts; impact of the  Budget young Australians; migration, population and partner visas; international  students and people on temporary visas being left behind.

KRISTINA KENEALLY, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE AND SHADOW  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Well Scott Morrison's Budget delivered $1 trillion in  debt and yet had so little to show for it. $1 trillion in debt and yet no plan for jobs. No plan  for the 900,000 unemployed Australians over the age of 35. No plan for women and their  economic participation. No plan for childcare. No plan for aged care. No plan for those on  JobSeeker or JobKeeper. How can a Government spend $1 trillion in debt and have so  little to show for it?

I want to just talk about what's going to happen with people on JobKeeper in relation to  these tax cuts. Now Labor has been calling for the tax cuts to be brought forward and we  welcome the news that the Government are bringing forward the stage two tax cuts. But  let's talk about what's going to happen with these stage two tax cuts for people who are on  JobKeeper under Scott Morrison.

Here in my hand is $50. In my other hand, $300. Scott Morrison, on the one hand, is going  to give people on JobKeeper a $50 a fortnight tax cut. But on the other hand, he's going to  take $300 a fortnight away from them. That's what Scott Morrison's Budget is doing -  giving a $50 tax cut but taking $300 a fortnight away from those who are on JobKeeper.

And of course, JobKeeper is still slated to end in March. No plan in March for those who  are on JobKeeper. In fact, what will happen to them? They'll have their JobKeeper cut. that  support will be cut off and there will be no capacity for them to have any hope about jobs in  the future because this Budget delivered almost nothing for people over 35 who are  unemployed.

Let's also talk about women and their economic participation. We know that in this  recession, the Morrison Recession, the deepest and the hardest for almost a century -

women have suffered the most. The Morrison recession has hurt women the hardest and  there is no plan for their economic participation in Scott Morrison's Budget. Scott Morrison  is leaving Australians behind. Too many people are being left behind and left out by Scott  Morrison's Budget announced last night. So while we welcome the tax cuts coming  forward, there are far too many Australians being left behind by a Prime Minister who's  more interested in a headline than actually a delivery and a plan for the future for  Australians. Happy to take any questions.

JOURNALIST: Is it needless to say that Labor will support the stage two tax cuts?

KENEALLY: Labor’s Shadow Treasurer Jim Chalmers has indicated this morning that we  are going to support the stage two tax cuts. In fact - we probably didn't need to indicate  that as Labor has been calling for the stage two tax cuts to be brought forward since this  pandemic began. We are in the Morrison Recession. The deepest recession the country  has seen for a century. People are being left out and left behind. If there is a measure such  as bringing forward the stage two tax cuts that can assist Australians, we will support it.  And we are pleased to see that this measure has been brought forward. But, too many  Australians are being left behind by last night's Budget. Whether it's women, whether it's  older Australians who rely on aged care, whether it's families who rely on childcare,  whether it is those who are currently on JobSeeker, who face a future of being cut back to  $40 a day. Those who are on JobKeeper - we're going to see that support cut $300 a  fortnight and then cut off in March. For those 900,000 Australians over the age of 35,  there's no plan to get them back to work. This is a Budget that is unfairly leaving too many  Australians behind.

JOURNALIST: Do you think the stage two tax cuts will have the stimulatory effect that the  Government says it will and help the economy?

KENEALLY: Well, we hope that for those Australians who are doing it tough right now,  during the Morrison Recession, that these stage two tax cuts do provide them with some  extra much needed money right now. People are struggling to pay their bills. They're  struggling to pay their rent. They're struggling to pay for basics such as water and utilities,  you know, every little bit will help. But tax cuts alone are not enough. This Government is  cutting people off from support. They're cutting people off from JobKeeper. They're cutting  people off from JobSeeker. They are cutting $300 a fortnight away from Australians and  there is no plan to assist people back into employment. If you're over 35 or if you are  female and you are unemployed right now - where is the plan for you? Where's the hope  for you? Where's the vision for you from Scott Morrison? It was simply missing in last  night's Budget.

JOURNALIST: So given that wage subsidies now very targeted at younger Australians,  what does Labor think needs to be put in place to target older Australians and women?

KENEALLY: Well, right now Scott Morrison needs to explain why he has chosen 35 as the  cut-off for a wage subsidy. Why is it that he is leaving 900,000 unemployed Australians  behind? That's up to Scott Morrison to explain. Labor has been calling for some time that  the job cuts to JobKeeper be reviewed, that JobKeeper be tailored to fit the economic  circumstances. What this Government seems to have launched is an ideological claim, an  ideological play, to take money away from people at a time when they need it most, leaving  too many Australians behind.

JOURNALIST: We see that Australia's Net Overseas Migration is set to fall to negative



levels for the first time since World War Two. What does that mean to you?

KENEALLY: Well for some time now the Government has relied on increasing levels of  migration and an unrealistic birth rate in its projections in the Budget to prop up their  economic assumptions. Understandably, the Net Overseas Migration number is going to  fall dramatically given that the borders are closed due to the health crisis. My concern  about last night's Budget in relation to population and migration is this. Scott Morrison  claims that he is going to increase partner visas by 30,000 by increasing the family intake  stream. But there is a waiting list of 100,000 Australians and 100,000 of their partners for a  partner visa and they are waiting 27 months. What we see in terms of population  announcements in the Budget last night is classic Scott Morrison - all about the  announcement; not about the delivery. He's there for the photo opp; he's not there for the  follow through. There is nothing in last night's Budget that deals with the two year backlog  - the hundred thousand application backlog - of partner visas. So when Scott Morrison  says he's going to increase partner visas by 30,000, it's just a headline, attention-grabbing,  announcement. It actually has no delivery.

JOURNALIST: So do you think that there needs to be more of an effort looking at people  here on temporary visas to have them kind of try and fill that void in some sort of capacity?

KENEALLY: One of the great shames for Australia is that during this global pandemic,  during this global health crisis, we have left temporary visa holders behind. We're talking  about international students. We're talking about temporary skilled visa holders. We're  talking about anyone who is here on a temporary visa has been left behind. They can't  access JobKeeper or JobSeeker. They can't access paid pandemic leave. All they can do  is rely on charities for support. And that has real world implications for all Australians. Not  only do we put our lives and our livelihood at risk by having such a large group of  temporary migrants who are unable to access economic support, who are forced to go out  and work even if they're feeling sick, it also sends a terrible message about Australia. We  have seen now increasingly high numbers of international students say that they are less  likely to recommend Australia as a destination for international study to their friends and  family back home based on their experience during this pandemic. And now that we have  seen international student numbers slump, we have seen a hit that our universities have  taken, we see the real risk to what is our second largest export - international education.  Our reputation now is damaged by the Government's handling of coronavirus and its  impact on temporary migrants. Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TIMOTHY DUNLOP 0428 043 110









