

SENATOR TIM AYRES  SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2NZ INVERELL  MONDAY, 19 OCTOBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Senate Estimates; JobKeeper; ICAC; Federal Integrity Commission;  ANAO.

MONTE IRVINE, HOST: I've been joined on the phone now by New South Wales Federal  Senator Tim Ayres.

SENATOR TIM AYRES: G’Day Monty. Good morning to your listeners too.

IRVINE: And did you get much rain down in Canberra over the weekend?

AYRES: Yeah, they got about 25 mils over the weekend down here. It's good to hear  there's a bit of follow-up rain there too.

IRVINE: Yeah, fingers crossed. We’re predicting rain from Wednesday, right through to  next Monday. So fingers crossed that actually happens.

AYRES: Yeah, that'd be really nice.

IRVINE: Now, Senator, the couple things we're going to talk about. The first thing is you're  about to go into Senate Estimates in the next two weeks.  What is Senate Estimates all  about?

AYRES: Well, your listeners have probably heard of it but many people won't have a real  understanding of how it works. It's one of the key accountability mechanisms that the  Parliament's got. The Senate is broken up into committees, Senators serve on different  committee - I'm on the Finance and Public Administration Committee and the Foreign  Affairs Defence and Trade Committee - and those committees meet over the course of this  two weeks to interrogate and cross examine and run the ruler over government officials  and ministers and the spending decisions that they've made. So, in this case, budget  estimates has a real focus on the budget that usually happens in May and June. But, of  course, because we've had a delayed budget this year because of the Coronavirus, the  budget estimates is doing two weeks straight really focused on accountability. And it's one  of the one of the key ways that the public gets to see into the spending decisions and the  actions of the government.

IRVINE: Senator I assume that one of the things that will be looked at by the Senate

Estimates will be the JobKeeper program. Now there's a report in the Australian Guardian,  saying that Andrew Leigh, who's a front bencher for the Labor Opposition, came out on  Friday and said that more than 200 big companies, including Apple, McDonald's and  Microsoft, had basically been using JobKeeper to subsidise, not necessarily wages, but the  money they've been receiving to pay shareholders dividend and executives bonuses.

And it also gives us an example of billionaire Solomon Lew, the company that he owns,  which is Premier Investments, it's a retail empire. Now it's saying in there that it's declared  a dividend of about $57 million, and of which Mr. Lew is going to receive $24 million worth  of bonus coming through there. They receive $70 million in subsidies from the government.  This is really concerning to see that there's these massive amounts of money being given  to executives and to shareholders in relation to JobKeeper if this is the way it's going to be  used.

AYRES: I've really got two propositions here in relation to JobKeeper. Firstly, the Labor  Party argued at the beginning of the Coronavirus that the government needed a wage  subsidy in the economy to keep the relationship between workers and their firms to hold up  jobs in the economy. And initially, the government poured scorn on that proposition.  They've adopted it. And it's been a critical measure, keeping hundreds of thousands,  millions of Australians connected with their employment. Now, we're at a point in the  deepest recession since the Great Depression, where 160,000 more people are going to  lose their jobs. We've already got a record level of unemployment, sitting at a million  Australians unemployed - there’s never been more Australians unemployed than they  have been around today. And the government's withdrawing JobKeeper from the economy,  reducing the rate and withdrawing JobSeeker from the economy over time.

We will be very focused on holding the government to account over that question because  the government's decisions withdrawing JobKeeper and JobSeeker from the economy are  going to lengthen and deepen the recession. And many more Australians lose their jobs.  And then it takes longer for Australians to get into work. So that's the first issue that we've  got to be focused on overall, what is in the interest of the economy.

Secondly, in this period where the government spent 100 billion dollars in new measures,  we've got a trillion-dollar debt and not much to show for it. We've got to be really focused  on value for money and that every dollar that's being spent in stimulus spending is directed  towards creating more jobs. And it's pretty hard to see - Andrew Leigh’s work in this area  has been very diligent in following this issue through - that JobKeeper money being  allocated to executive salary bonuses, or to dividends for shareholders, is really the way  that most Australians would expect the government stimulus money to be spent. And how  much impact on keeping Australians in jobs. So I think your listeners will be very interested  in making sure that every dollar that the government spends is spent on the right programs  for the right reasons to create jobs for Australians, particularly in regional areas.

IRVINE: It's very, it's very interesting because part of the way that these businesses were  going to receive Job Keeper to start with was to show a 15% downturn in income or profits  at the start, or the month before Coronavirus. Now, if a company such as Premier  Investments can declare a dividend of $57 million, which is profits out of $78 million worth  of subsidies, that doesn't seem to add up- that $57 million probably should have been  invested back into the business rather than being paid to shareholders.

AYRES: Well there are significant design problems in the JobKeeper program, it's not the  program that the Labor Party would have designed were we in government at the time.  It's

a matter for the government now to account for the failures and problems. There's really  two issues. Number one, why on earth are we withdrawing this stimulus measure from the  economy as the recession deepens, and more and more Australians lose their jobs?  Number two, what are the design flaws in the JobKeeper program? And how do we make  sure that the moneys spent in the interest of all Australians?

IRVINE: Exactly. Now, Senator, the next thing I noticed that you were speaking through  the week, in relation to a Federal ICAC.  We've all, particularly here in New South Wales  been focused again on ICAC and the work that they do on a state level because of what's  happened with the Premier and the investigation that's going on currently. I know that it's  something that the Labor Party wants to get installed and wants to happen in the Federal  Government. What is holding it back? Why is there such a delay in getting a Federal ICAC  set up?

AYRES: Well, Scott Morrison promised the National Integrity Commission that the  government's been committed to it for three years and delivered nothing. It's always the  same with Scott Morrison and the Liberal and National Party. They make big  announcements, but they don't follow through and they don't deliver. And I do worry that  the reason that they haven't followed through on a National Integrity Commission and  National ICAC, is because they don't want the scrutiny now they can see the important  work that ICAC does in New South Wales.

It's very uncomfortable for the government at the moment. The key questions for Gladys  Berejiklian, the New South Wales Premier about did she know that Daryl Maguire was  conducting business for himself while he was an MP using his position as a Member of  Parliament to enrich himself and to do property deals, particularly in Western Sydney  around Badgerys Creek? And if she did know, why didn't she do anything about it? That's  the appropriate focus for the ICAC and we'll see more, both from the ICAC and the New  South Wales Parliament.

But it begs the question, why don't we have the same accountability mechanisms at the  Commonwealth level? When you've got somebody paying, or the government paying $30  million for a parcel of land at Badgerys Creek that was worth $3 million. So somebody's  become very wealthy at taxpayers expense. But all the allegations around sports rorts,  around Angus Taylor and his conduct particularly in relation to his own property dealings  with departmental officials about his own property. We've got the biggest budget  expenditure in the economy and precious little oversight mechanisms to make sure that  government is held to account and the decisions aren't made for corrupt purposes.

I'll give you example. The only reason that we know about the Badgerys Creek $30 million  rort or in detail about the sports rorts is because of the activity of the Australian National  Audit Office. Now that the Australian National Audit Office has done its job independent  oversight, the government's cut its budget, through the biggest expenditure of  Commonwealth money and less capacity to oversee Commonwealth expenditure.  This  government doesn't like scrutiny. That's why they're holding back on the ICAC. And that's  why they're going to find I think, a fortnight of Senate Estimates pretty uncomfortable.

IRVINE: I was about to mention that. This is where Senate Estimates is going to have to  really kick in and particularly your job in opposition to really scrutinize where this money is  going, how it's going to be spent and what's the policies behind it to make sure they're not  going to be frittered away?



AYRES: Senate Estimates is a very important parliamentary oversight and accountability  mechanism. It doesn't replace the investigative power and the inquisitorial power of an  Independent Commission Against Corruption or a National Integrity Commission. It's not  designed to replace that, but it's a very important accountability mechanism. And I'm  looking forward to getting stuck into it.

IRVINE: Should be very, very interesting.  Senator, thank you so much for your time this  morning. I really do appreciate it. I'll let you go. Get ready for that scrutiny of the  government's budget.

AYRES: Terrific mate. Catch you next week.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JOE MCKENZIE 0431 377 319





