ANDREW LEIGH MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR TREASURY

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR CHARITIES

MEMBER FOR FENNER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2SM WITH MARCUS PAUL IN THE MORNING

TUESDAY, 10 NOVEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Australia’s largest ever e-petition for a strong and diverse news media;

Four Corners allegations; JobKeeper.



MARCUS PAUL, HOST: Dr Andrew Leigh, the Shadow Assistant Minister for Treasury is

with us on the program. Andrew, good morning, mate.



ANDREW LEIGH, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR TREASURY AND

CHARITIES: Good morning, Marcus. Great to be with you.



PAUL: Alright. So at least it's now official, if you like, this e-petition calling for media

diversity, and we played your piece just a moment ago of the tabling. I don't know, I might

be mistaken, but I'm pretty sure I heard a very audible sigh from the Speaker and I thought

that was a little rude.



LEIGH: I think it might have been just a reflection the sheer size of the petition. I know it’s

an e-petition, but when you bring these things into parliament, you have to have them

physically with you. It was about the size of two reams of paper, so he might have been

looking at the weight I was lifting. And given I’m a runner rather than weightlifter, it

probably looked like a fairly heroic feat.



PAUL: Nicely dodged, Andrew, nicely dodged.



LEIGH: It's just amazing, right? Half a million people, to take the time to sign an e-petition.

It really did feel like a privilege, Marcus, to be carrying their views onto the floor of the

Parliament.



PAUL; Well, what's going to happen with it, mate? That's the question, Andrew. Will they

take it seriously? Will the federal government take it seriously considering that, you know, I

mean, the Murdoch press is basically their protection racket anyway?



LEIGH: I think the federal government should take seriously the views of two former Prime

Ministers, Malcolm Turnbull and Kevin Rudd, and half a million Australians who are calling

for greater media diversity. People are concerned when they see hundreds of local

newspapers closing across the country. They're aware that we have a pretty concentrated

media market, and they know the important role of the media plays in our democracy.

Now, we've seen in the United States recently the strong campaigning that Fox News has

done for Donald Trump, some of the misinformation around climate change and

coronavirus, which is downright dangerous. So the role that Fox has played in that

environment is not the role that you want a diverse, accurate, independent free press to be

playing.



PAUL: What about those that say, ‘well, you know, you've got the ABC and there are

others that perhaps lean toward the left or a Labor viewpoint if you like or ideology’. What

do you say to those that say, ‘oh, well, you know, they're a private company, they can do

and say whatever they want, they can run whatever editorial line they want’ - because

that's what they do - and that, you know, ‘it’s balanced out by the ABC’ and maybe, you

know, programs like this.



LEIGH: Australia's media is much more concentrated when you look at newspapers than if

you look at radio. So if you look at the newspaper market, that's quite narrow and various

experts have looked at it and said newspapers play a particular role - an agenda-setting

role. They tend to be the outlets that do a lot of the investigatory work. That's where a lot of

the careful considered opinion is. If you're looking at finance journalism, for example, that's

largely still newspapers or their online equivalents. So I think it is important that we have

strong, healthy, diverse newspaper outlets. And at a local level, we know that local

wrongdoing is much more likely to run unchecked if there's no local newspaper. There are

now 20 ‘news deserts’ in Australia - 20 regions that just aren't doing any local reporting-



PAUL: What’s a news desert? Just explain to my listeners, what is a news desert?



LEIGH: This is a term that the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission came

up with when they were looking at the industry a couple of years back. It's a part of

Australia that is not served by any local journalists. Where you don't have people reporting

on the ground, going into the local council meetings, looking at mismanagement and

waste, but also just telling the local stories. If you've got a fabulous story of a kid who's

made it from rough circumstances into the national team, there's no one there to tell that

story and make the community's hearts swell up with pride. That's a real loss as those

local newspapers - some of them have been going for more than 100 years and have hit

the wall in the last couple of years.



PAUL: Before we get on to JobKeeper, because I know there are still issues there when it

comes to the payment of bonuses to people on big salaries and you know, we know -

we've talked about this before, we shouldn't be using JobKeeper to prop this up. But I

wouldn't be doing my job if I didn't ask for your opinion on this. Questions have been raised

about federal Attorney General Christian Porter's attitude toward women. I don't know

whether you saw it last night, this Four Corners expose, revealing a history of inappropriate

behaviour - allegedly - including public drunkenness, making unwanted advances to

women, etc. We know the former prime minister made it very clear to senior ministers that

there would be no tolerance if you like for this sort of behaviour. Call it a bonk ban, call

whatever you want. Is there endemic sexism inside the Canberra bubble, Andrew?



LEIGH: My wife and I sat on the couch last night watching the Four Corners episode, just

agog at some of the behaviour. It was completely inappropriate for the federal parliament,

completely inappropriate for any professional workplace. Women have the right to feel safe

and respected in any workplace, and the federal parliament needs to be no different. And

so I do think that there's serious work to be done, in all political parties. But as the program

noted, the number of women in the House of Representatives for the Liberal Party has

gone backwards over the last two decades, and that's I think been part of leading to a

culture of insufficient respect for the women who work in the Liberal side.



PAUL: Alright, I won't press on that. Let's move on to JobKeeper. We know if you're

getting JobKeeper as a corporation, you shouldn't be paying executive bonuses with it. I

mean, that's not what taxpayer dollars are for surely?





LEIGH: Absolutely, Marcus. This isn't just our view. This is also the Business Council of

Australia, the Australian Tax Office - Jeremy Hirschhorn has come out and said very

clearly that it's not appropriate to be taking those taxpayer dollars and then churning them

out as executive bonuses. And yet firm after firm keeps on doing it. Every time we open

these annual reports, we see yet another firm saying that they’ve paid significant bonuses.

Capitol Hill, Domain Holdings, CarSales, IDP, Accent Group, Premier Investments. So

many of these firms seem to think it's okay to get a taxpayer handout and then to give it to

CEOs who are sometimes on seven figure incomes.



PAUL: What can we do about it? That's the thing. You can shout black and blue, I guess,

inside the halls of Parliament. Is anybody listening, Andrew?



LEIGH: I think we need to put our foot down and say it's not appropriate to be getting

JobKeeper and paying out bonuses. We know that 160,000 people are going to join the

unemployment lines before Christmas. We know that many people are doing it tough right

now. It's a critical environment, particularly for people who are in the arts sector, the

university sector, people in regional Australia, older workers who are missing out on those

wage subsidies announced in the in the recent budget for younger workers. So when so

many people are missing out, worried about their future, concerned about how their kids

are going to be faring, we just can't be using taxpayer subsidies to fund executive bonuses.

It's got to stop.



PAUL: Yes. Good to chat to you, Andrew. We'll catch up soon. Thank you.



LEIGH: Thank you, Marcus.



PAUL: Alright, there he is - Andrew Leigh, the Shadow Assistant Minister for Treasury.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHANIE ANDERSON 0431 344 056



