

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

TODAY SHOW

FRIDAY, 3 APRIL 2020



SUBJECTS: Cruise Ships; Government expenditure;



ALISON LANGDON, HOST: Let's bring in Deputy Leader of the Opposition,

Richard Marles and Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment,

Simon Birmingham. Simon, I mean, often we have -normally we have Peter

Dutton on this morning. Where is he?



SIMON BIRMINGHAM, MINISTER FOR TRADE, TOURISM AND

INVESTMENT:Look, Peter has plenty on his plate at present. We are dealing

with serious issues, right across the board as the government. You’ve have me

on plenty of times in the past and I'm pleased to be with you.



LANGDON: Is his health okay?



BIRMINGHAM: Yes, yes indeed, he has been participating in Cabinet

meetings.



KARL STEFANOVIC, HOST: Okay, a simple question for you, Simon

in relation to the cruise ships and the Ruby Princess. Simple question, who is

responsible?



BIRMINGHAM: The cruise industry is first and foremost responsible. Now, the

seeming lack of transparency and questionable practices on board some of

these cruise ships has created a terrible problem, the world over, of

course, and this is a global problem that many countries are facing. Just today

we are going to see a flight arrive back in Australia, bringing Australian

passengers off cruise ships around South America, back from Uruguay.

Similarly today we are going to see more than 120 Australians, hopefully,

disembark cruise ships in Florida. But these have been challenging issues

to deal with in those countries, just as Australia is dealing with foreign nationals

from other countries off of our coastline. And the cruise industry in part, at least,

seems not to have made the situation any easier.



LANGDON: Doesn't the New South Wales Government need to accept

some responsibility here for letting those passengers off and into

the community?



BIRMINGHAM: Look, indeed. The failure of proper checking and so on

of certain passengers in the past has certainly forced the hand to make sure

that we now have the toughest approach in the world, where there is the

mandatory quarantine of individuals coming off of ships, coming off of planes,

however they are getting back here, from overseas, or off of cruise ships. They

go into quarantine, they face those tough conditions. And when we are looking

at situations like the ones you were just discussing, we are also mindful of

making sure wherever possible, people are moved back to their home country

without either setting foot on Australia or as expeditiously as possible- and

they are not a drain on our public health services and we stand up private

companies like Aspen Medical, to provide direct assistance and management

so we preserve public health facilities for Australians who need it, wherever we

can.



LANGDON: Richard, what would you do in this situation? Would you let

passengers off the ship, even if it means- they could take up Australian beds

in ICU. We just actually heard from Quentin Long, that some of ships, one of

the companies wants to get them off the boat so they can charter them home

and they are not our responsibility. What would you be doing?



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR

PARTY: I would be the first to say, this is a diabolically difficult situation and

there are a whole lot of dimensions to it which are really complicated. At the

end of the day, the Ruby Princess has been a complete debacle and there is

no doubt that the Commonwealth Government is responsible for our borders.

Mick Fuller, has been making the point that what needs to happen now is to get

a proper sense of who has got this disease and who hasn't, on the various

cruise ships that are out there. I've got to say, that makes sense to me. But

really the Commonwealth Government has to grab hold of this. There is a

whole lot of blame game going on here. I don't hear the

Commonwealth Government accepting much of the responsibility. At the end of

the day, this is their bag, and they have to get on top of this and make sure this

is sorted out, because they are responsible for our nation's border.



STEFANOVIC: Okay, Simon, let's move on. You are spending money like

the Wolf of Wall Street right now. When are you going to reel it?



BIRMINGHAM: We are going to reel it in as soon as the crisis is over. Because

everything we are spending at the moment is temporary. And that's the key

point, Karl. When we put it in place, the Job Keeper payment, that is the crucial

thing to keep people attached to their employees or the support for childcare

we announced yesterday, or any of the other measures, we have been very

careful to make sure that not only are they targeted where Australians need it

right now, not only are they proportionate to the scale of the crisis we face,

but also that they are temporary measures so that when we start lifting

the restrictions on people's movement, and we get to the other side of

the coronavirus, the spending comes off as well.



STEFANOVIC: Okay, I mean you are looking more and more like the Rudd

Government. Richard, this jams you. They have morphed before our eyes.

They are looking more and more like Labor every day.



MARLES: Well, Karl, imitation is the highest form of flattery. But, look, I think -

look, Simon is right. The critical thing here is to get through the immediate

crisis. There is a lot of money going out the door. And it is going out the door at

a point where Parliament is not really meeting that much over the next few

months. So, it is important that there be some Parliamentary oversight put

in place. We are asking the Audit Office to have a look at this. There is going to

be a bill to pay at the end of it. But right now, the priority has to be making sure

that we get through what is an unprecedented crisis.



LANGDON: Simon, even according to your own medical advice, we aren't

anywhere near the peak of this crisis. How much more debt do you think we

will go into?



BIRMINGHAM: The type of measures we have announced are designed to

see us through it. The Job Keeper payment is something we expect will have to

be in place for around six months, as are many of the other measures that we

have announced. So, we have planned for the fact that this is not a crisis that is

going to be over in days or weeks. It is one that is with us for months. It is also

one of the key things about the public health advice - that the types of

restrictions and actions we take today have to be restrictions and actions

that everybody can live with for the foreseeable future. Now, Australia is doing

very welcome compared to much of the rest of the world in terms of of flattening

the curve and slowing the spread of the virus, but we have to be vigilant and

keep these efforts up to continue to do so.



LANGDON: Is there a figure you are talking about, in Cabinet?



BIRMINGHAM: In terms of the budget?



LANGDON: In regards to money-wise, what we are spending?



BIRMINGHAM: Well, we are spending now upwards of $300 billion in terms of

the additional spend, and there be other implications for the Budget, clearly on

the revenue side. And what we have announced was a deferral of handing

down the next Budget until October, because quite clearly it is impossible in

the current circumstances to be able to clearly and accurately project what's

going to happen in the future. We are keeping a close watch on what is being

spent and spending what is necessary in terms of keeping Australians in jobs.



STEFANOVIC: I can feel the rumblings in your party about how much you’re

spending and how responsible it is and how long it is going to take our kids to

pay all of this back. You can feel it, can’t you? It's something you are going to

have to deal with. I want to ask this before we go; when will business get

back to normal and our borders open? Australians have a right to know what

your modelling is.



BIRMINGHAM: Well as I say, we are planning on this being a months- long



episode, Karl. We can't say precisely when the peak will be. That depends on

how effective our public health measures are, but it is going to take months, not

weeks, to get to the other side of this.



MARLES: Karl, I think the Prime Minister is actually right to be setting people's

expectations around a timeframe of about six months. This is not going to go

quickly, and we need to be, you know, buckling in for that kind of timeframe.



STEFANOVIC: See, it is hard to criticise someone when they are looking

more like your party every day.



MARLES: As I say… What can I say to that?



LANGDON: He is cheeky, isn't he?



BIRMINGHAM: It is all in the national interest.



STEFANOVIC: I understand that. Look, it is very, very difficult what is going on

at the moment and I think we are being led really well. Thank you so much for

that. Appreciate it.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363







Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











