

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS BREAKFAST  MONDAY, 19 OCTOBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Victorian restrictions; New Zealand travel bubble; Sitting week; Senate  Estimates; Labor; Geelong Cats.

MICHAEL ROWLAND, HOST: Now, events in Victoria look set to dominate Federal  Parliament that returns today in Canberra. Deputy Opposition Leader and Victorian MP  Richard Marles joins us now. Richard, good morning to you.

RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Good  morning, Michael, how are you?

ROWLAND: Good. So, you’re a Victorian, let's start there. The Andrews Government is  under pressure this morning from business groups, epidemiologists, to move much quicker  in reopening businesses, for instance. What's your view on that?

MARLES: I think the Andrews Government has to keep taking the medical advice that it  has up to now and I think the rest of us need to respect that. On 30th of July, there were  723 cases in Melbourne, in Victoria. On that same day, there was something like 846 in  Britain. Yesterday, there were two in Victoria. Yesterday in Britain, there were more than  15,000. The measures that the Andrews Government have put in place have been working  and we need to respect that, and they've been following rigorously the medical advice that  they've been given, and I think it's really important that they see this through.

ROWLAND: OK, there's a claim and counterclaim continuing this morning over those New  Zealanders that have travelled to Victoria, to WA and to Tasmania. In terms of Victoria, the  Federal Government insists that the Victorian Government has said it's always been okay  for Kiwis to come to Melbourne despite Victoria not being a signatory to the travel bubble.

MARLES: But I don't think that was the terms of the basis on which New Zealanders were  coming to Australia, nor how the Federal Government allowed this to occur. My  understanding is that those who came to Australia were coming here to New South Wales  and the Northern Territory. I don’t understand how Border Force doesn't make that then a  restriction in terms of the basis on which those New Zealanders are in Australia, and it’s  then a matter for Border Force and the Federal Government to maintain that. But once  again, what we see here is the Federal Government when times get tough, just wash their

hands of any responsibility. They have got responsibility in this respect and they should be  taking it and I can well understand how Daniel Andrews, faced with all of the other issues  that he's had in terms of managing the outbreak in Victoria, the last thing that he’s wanting  to think about is how he then manages international visitors as well who come here under  an arrangement that he was not a party to.

ROWLAND: So more New Zealanders I've been told will be arriving today, possibly  intending to fly not just to Melbourne but to other parts of the country. What needs to  happen this morning to try to solve this situation?

MARLES: Well, the travel bubble’s with New South Wales and the Northern Territory and  the Federal Government needs to make that clear and step in and it's for them to explain  how they are going to ensure that New Zealanders coming to Australia on those terms  comply with those terms. That's a federal responsibility. And it beggars belief that once  again, the Federal Government seeks to avoid responsibility in this manner. It's out there  asserting that it has no responsibility in relation to internal borders and I find that an  absolutely astounding position for the Federal Government to take. The Federal  Government needs to assert its power and its authority here, because it is responsible.

ROWLAND: OK, Federal Parliament is back this week. What do you see as the key issues  emerging?

MARLES: Well, I think it's going to be an important fortnight. Of course, it's Senate  Estimates and we will be asking a whole lot of questions about matters in the Budget, as  well as how the Government has been carrying out its business up until now. Given how  infrequently Parliament sat, by virtue of COVID-19, it’s a really important Senate Estimates  fortnight. The Federal Budget, of course, is also going to be a matter of debate - a topic in  the Parliament as well, and we'll be making it clear that this was an opportunity missed.  That the Government spent $100 billion on a night. It's racked up 1 trillion dollars’ worth of  debt and there is very little to show for that. So I think that it is now the moment going  through until whenever we face an election, a year or 18 months from now, to make clear  that this is a time to come up with vision for Australia's future and we just don't get any of  that from our Government.

ROWLAND: Nine News last night had a story on polling in two Sydney seats that showed  a pretty steep fall in the Labor Party's primary vote and support for what the Government is  doing on the Budget. How worried is the Labor Party about that sort of polling?

MARLES: I'm not concerned about polling. Polling comes and goes, and I think after the  last Federal Election, we kind of live in a post-polling world, to be honest. So we’re not  going to take much notice of that, our job is to be making sure that we hold the  Government to account. That we make it clear to the Australian people that the budget was  a lost opportunity, but more than that, that we are explaining to the Australian people we  do have an alternative vision - one which does have economic reform at its centre and you  look at the measures that is we announced in relation to what we would do in respect to  childcare. This is groundbreaking reform and it speaks to the vision of Anthony Albanese  and what an Albanese Labor Government would look like, and we'll be very focused on  explaining that in the Parliament and to the Australian people.

ROWLAND: And as a mad Cats fan, as I know you are, all the best for Saturday.

MARLES: Thank you. I’m still in a state of euphoric shock really after Saturday night. So



for all of that, I don't think that this is going to be my most productive week in Parliament.  I've let my leader know that his Deputy may be a little distracted during the course of this  week.

ROWLAND: Fair enough. Richard Marles at Parliament House in Canberra, thank you so  much.

MARLES: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363









