

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA  THURSDAY, 8 OCTOBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Federal Budget; Budget in Reply.

TOM CONNELL, HOST: Let's return to our focus on the Budget, of course,  we're expecting Labor to have support to provide support for the so called  Omnibus Bill on a whole range of measures to get the economy going again,  joining me live here in the studio Deputy Labor Leader, Richard Marles. Thanks  very much for your time.

RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR  PARTY: Good to be here, Tom. Good to be here in person.

CONNELL: Indeed, indeed. So, $51.4 billion in measures set to be passed by  Labor, these include business incentives, income tax cuts, does this mean you  fully support all the measures in this bill?

MARLES: Well, I think what it means is that from day one, through the  pandemic, we've sought to be constructive, we've sought to allow the  Government to govern, we’ve made  our criticisms along the way, but we  haven't stood in the way of the Government doing what it needs to do in the  middle of a pandemic. In respect of the tax cuts specifically, obviously, we've  been calling for the bringing forward of stage two tax cuts for more than a year  now, so our position on that has actually been clear for a long time. We'll go  through and apply the appropriate scrutiny to this given how much money is  being spent, but, you know, we want to continue being the constructive  Opposition we've been in this moment of time, because I think that's what the  Australian people want.

CONNELL: So, the wage subsidy scheme is something that is getting some  attention from the Unions. They believe it could be rorted, business could

replace older workers, perhaps one older worker with subsidised younger  labour. Is that a concern you share?

MARLES: Well, I think it's definitely a concern that this Budget is doing nothing  for people over the age of 35, who find themselves having lost their job as a  result of the Coronavirus. So yes, it's older workers in their 40s and 50s. But  we're talking about people are 36. You know, this is actually working families  who have been put in a position now, it’s a million people, the better part of a  million people who are getting some form of assistance now who will not be  able to benefit from this wage subsidy, and they're being left behind.

CONNELL: And those people more broadly in a moment. But that particular  concern, the Treasurer has said, well, the safeguards are that you would have  to increase headcount overall and payroll. Is that enough?

MARLES: Well, I think this is the Government's measure, and the Government  have got to make clear to the Australian people that what they are putting  forward in respect of this scheme, but in respect of all the measures that  they've got in the Budget, that it is safe from being rorted.

CONNELL: But what do you think from what you've seen?

MARLES: We've seen it for a few days, Tom. I mean, they’ve been working on  this for months and it is - and it is a matter for the Government to make sure  that there is integrity against rorting in respect of all the measures that they're  putting forward.

CONNELL: So, you support that one, but you're, you're seemingly reserving  the right to say later, it got rorted, that wasn't a good policy.

MARLES: We’re absolutely saying that in three days, you're unable to do all  the scrutiny here. We are absolutely saying we'll let the Government govern,  that's what needs to happen during a pandemic, but it is the Government who's  governing, not us. Like it's not us who's been working on this over the last few  months. And it is for the Government to explain what integrity measures it has  in place, and we will absolutely criticise, if that's not there.

CONNELL: The explanation in terms of this particular scheme targeting under  35’s and it's only a small part of the Budget, a lot of the other measures are for  anyone of any age from Scott Morrison is that we can't have this lost generation  that young people have seen themselves out of work disproportionately during  COVID-19. So, is it fair enough and a good idea to have at least a policy target  at getting them back into work specifically?

MARLES: Well, it's piecemeal is the answer to that question. I mean, there are

12 people looking for every job right now. So how - whether this does the trick  in terms of assisting young people is a question that we'll have to see whether  it's answered. But I think the overall impression that people have of this  measure and the Budget generally is that it's piecemeal. But it's not just young  people who are affected by the Coronavirus. And what really concerns us is  that if you're over 35, I think for women, the Budget is presenting very little  indeed and it's almost as though that's just a bit too hard for this Government.

CONNELL: But there are a lot of measures that apply to anyone, right, any  single element of helping out business with the various tax incentives. There's  nothing specific by gender nor age, the same for the income tax cuts. So when  you say there's nothing there for those other groups, well all the other  measures apply to everyone, this is about helping out a cohort that seemingly  at the moment have been left behind more than others.

MARLES: Tom, what the government would assert and reasonably, is that  since the pandemic struck, probably the single most important measure they  put in place was Jobkeeper. Now, they did that after Labor called for a wage  subsidy. A wage subsidy was always going to be central to getting this country  through an economic shock, which saw a whole lot of jobs removed from the  economy. This is the wage subsidy going forward. And it only applies to people  under the age of 35. So you can talk about other measures in the Budget-

CONNELL: Well, just on that-

MARLES: But Tom, this is the critical - the critical measure and it is not  applying to a huge swathe of our population. And so, yes, people in their 40s  and 50s, people who are older, but people in their late 30s, this comes right  down to the age of 35. You're missing out, and this government is not doing  anything for you. And I think the other point here, particularly in respect of  women, I mean, this budget is doing very little indeed, nothing really in respect  of childcare.

CONNELL: Okay and I want to get to that in a moment. But there is already a  scheme in place called Restart, that applies to Australians over the age of 50, a  $10,000 grant for businesses that hire them.

MARLES: And the number of people who have accessed that is very small  indeed.

CONNELL: Perhaps that's a spruiking issue, is it?

MARLES: Well, whatever it is, it's a scheme, which is only applying to a very  small number of people. We’re talking about a major economic shock, we're  talking about a huge swathe of people at that age and younger, right through

the economy that lost their jobs as a result of the coronavirus. And their  principal job wage subsidy measure is only applying to people under the age of  35. Sure, young people-

CONNELL: 35 to 50, they’re the people best placed generally, they are the  most employable people, are they not?

MARLES: Well, I think if what we're saying here is that if you're working in  aviation, and you're between the age of 35 and 50, and somehow you're meant  to go out and find a job, when it's clear that the planes aren’t flying right now, I  think it says-

CONNELL: Broadly speaking, 35 to 50 would be the most employable cohort,  would they not be?

MARLES: We've got a situation where working families are being provided very  little in this budget. So let's think about childcare. The average age for having  your first child is 31. You're 36 when that child goes to primary school, so you  hit the age of 35, on average, you are still needing childcare, so a woman in  that circumstance, who's lost their job, who's now not getting anything in  respect of childcare, and they now know that in terms of any kind of wage  subsidy, that will be applied to their employment in the future, it's not happening  either. And so this is a budget which is leaving, leaving huge swathes of people  behind. And the point here is this, Tom, a trillion dollars in debt. For that amount  of spending, I mean, they have sloshed money around everywhere. for that  amount of spending, we've still got such huge numbers of people being left  behind and what is there to show for it?

CONNELL: So a couple of brief issues. But childcare. Is this going to be a big  headline grabbing initiative tonight?

MARLES: Well, you'll need to wait and see tonight.

CONNELL: You can give me that much.

MARLES: You'll need to wait and see. I'm not going to pre-empt Anthony's  speech.

CONNELL: Will this have families talking about at the dinner table tomorrow  night.

MARLES: Look, Anthony is very much looking forward to the opportunity of  making the speech tonight. I think we're all looking forward to that and I'm not  about to pre-empt it.



CONNELL: Okay. And just finally. We're going to hear Scott Morrison asking  Labor to support nominating Finance Minister, outgoing minister Mathias  Cormann, to become the next Secretary General of the OECD. Will Labor  support that?

MARLES: Yeah, look, Tom, I've literally just heard that about a minute before I  came into to be interviewed by you. So I don't want to pre-empt our processes  in in respect of that. But I mean, I guess what I would say is, is you know, we're  going to be adults.

CONNELL: So what does that mean?

MARLES: Well it means we're going to approach this in a sensible manner.

CONNELL: Okay. Would he be a good person for the role? Would he be well  qualified?

MARLES: Look, Mathias Cormann-

CONNELL: Longest serving Finance Minister of all time.

MARLES:  I think we've all made the point in respect of Mathias Cormann,  when he announced that he was leaving this Parliament that he has served in -  in this Parliament and throughout his career with distinction, there's no question  of that.

CONNELL: And you wouldn't play tit for tat for Kevin Rudd's failure to get the  vote in-

MARLES: We were making the observation when Kevin was seeking office  within the UN, that you know, there was a significant degree of pettiness that  was shown by the government at that point in time.

CONNELL: And you won’t do the same?

MARLES: Well, I'm just saying we're going to be adult and sensible about it.

CONNELL: Richard Marles, thanks for your time.

MARLES: Thanks, Tom.

ENDS  MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363









