

TERRI BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT AND WATER  MEMBER FOR GRIFFITH



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW   PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  THURSDAY, 3 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: Government shut down of debate on Tony Abbott 2.0  environmental law changes; Queensland borders; Recession.

TERRI BUTLER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT AND  WATER: [inaudible] ...it also affects jobs and it affects investment. It's really  important that this be scrutinized properly. But instead, the government just  rushed it through the house.

JOURNALIST: Could I, sorry, if I'm coming in late on this. Would Labor have  supported the amendments to the EPBC Act that were being performed.

BUTLER: So Zali Stegall had given us some amendments, we were inclined to  support those amendments, they were we thought sensible amendments. Our  preference was to vote against the entire bill, which we were going to do. But  those amendments, you know, were reasonable amendments. They were  important issues in terms of what the national standards would be about if they  were made, what would happen with it would trigger. But we wanted to oppose  this bill, which we did. We oppose the bill in the House, but we also wanted it to  be debated properly. And there were so many people who wanted to get the  chance to make a contribution on this bill, not on their private behalf but on  behalf of the electors who send them to the parliament to represent their  interests. To just gag that debate, to prevent people from having their say I  think is a real disgrace.

This isn't minor legislation. This is significant legislation that affects what  happens to our natural environment, what happens with jobs and what happens  with investment.

JOURNALIST: No doubt significant legislation, but probably I'm sure you agree  subordinate to dealing with the health crisis and the COVID crisis. Can you see

that perhaps the government's got its attention focussed there and doesn't want  necessarily to engage in these other issues?

BUTLER: Well all of these issues are so connected. We are in an  environmental crisis and a jobs crisis and a health crisis. And the government is  failing on all of those counts.

The fact is, this law, this incredibly important law is one of many things that the  government is trying to rush through, under the cover of the pandemic. Now is  the time for more scrutiny when people's attention is rightfully captured by the  serious health crisis and the serious economic crisis. Now is a time for more  scrutiny. Now is not the time for us to be putting up with the government  rushing things through in the dead of night in a situation where there's not that  attention focused on them.

Because we still have to live with the decisions that this government makes  years and decades into the future and this decision is terrible for the  environment and it's terrible for jobs and investment. And I might say, we're in  the first recession for three decades, this is some legislation that will have an  impact on jobs and investment because it goes to what major projects are  approved and what developments are approved.

So in a recession, we absolutely have to be very careful about any changes  made to the environment law. And I don't trust the government. This is the  government that cut 40% of the funding from the environment department.  Then we had a terrible Audit Office report saying delays in decision making  blow out by 510%, 79% of decisions being affected by error or non compliant.  Financial year 2018-19, 95% of key decisions were made late. This is the sort  of thing we're talking about with this government. They can't be trusted to make  the right decisions. They can't be trusted on resourcing and they certainly  shouldn't be allowed to rush this sort of thing through the parliament without  scrutiny.

JOURNALIST: There was a pretty short debate on the  higher education bill as  well. Are you prepared to accuse the government of using COVID as an excuse  to rush things through without proper scrutiny?

BUTLER: What the government has been doing all week has been shutting  down debate. The government is allergic to scrutiny. Scott Morrison hates  scrutiny, hates accountability. You see it. You see it on his face. He resents  being asked questions, whether they're questions about COVID, whether  they're questions about why he doesn't have a plan in relation to the jobs crisis,  whether they're questions about what his government is doing to fix the crisis in  aged care. He resents the scrutiny. He resents questions and what his  government has done this week to shut down debate.





On the day that the national accounts were released, we tried to move a motion  to debate the fact that this country is in recession for the first time in almost 30  years. That was shut down. They have shut down bills, they have shut down  motions, they have gagged debated at every possible opportunity and it is a  disgrace. And the people of Australia expect, particularly during a time of crisis,  they expect the parliament to be operating to protect their rights, their liberties  and their interests and when you shut down debate that's the cost of that.

JOURNALIST: Could I switch gears and ask for your views as a Queenslander  on the border restrictions and the so called hotspot definition that we're  apparently going to get at national cabinet? What should that definition be in  your view and as a Queenslander when do you think the border should be at  least partially reopened?

BUTLER: Well, I'm not going weigh into the border debate because I'm not the  Chief Medical Officer for Queensland and I'm not a member of the Queensland  Government. I really encourage all of the states to do the right thing to make  sure they're listening to the medical advice. I think most Queenslanders would  say, and that's certainly what they say to me, that Annastacia Palaszczuk and  her government are doing a good job of keeping Queenslanders safe. That's  really important and I will leave it to the Premier to make her own comments in  relation to the borders. Thank you. Have a great night.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT:   RICHARD ALCORN  0438 804 563





