





THE HON KEITH PITT MP

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia  Member for Hinkler

THE HON BEN MORTON MP  Assistant Minister to the Prime Minister and Cabinet  Member for Tangney

MEDIA RELEASE

Thursday 10 December 2020



PRODUCTIVITY COMMISSION BACKS PLANS TO CUT RESOURCES RED TAPE

The Australian Government welcomed the Productivity Commission’s final report on  Resources Sector Regulation that makes a number of recommendations to improve approval  processes by removing duplication and cutting red and green tape.

Commissioned as part of the Coalition Government’s National Resources Statement, the  study and its findings aim to ensure that Australia continues to have efficient regulatory  settings for the nationally significant resources sector.

The study makes 47 findings and 11 recommendations to reduce regulatory duplication and  streamline approval processes to ensure the sector maintains its international reputation as  a leading destination for investment.

Resources, Water and Northern Australia Minister Keith Pitt said the Productivity  Commission report backed the Government’s plans to streamline environmental approvals,  and to oppose state-based moratoria on resources developments.

“The Australian Government remains committed to cutting red tape and to removing  unnecessary bureaucratic barriers that impede developments and damage investor  confidence in Australia’s resources sector,” Minister Pitt said.

“As Australia recovers from the COVID-19 pandemic, it is critical that we encourage  investment and development in the sector, which has continued to underpin our economy  throughout the pandemic.”

“The resources sector remains a pillar of the Australian economy, accounting for more than  half of Australia’s total exports, employing around 250,000 Australians and supporting more  than 1 million other jobs across the country.”

Minister Pitt said while Australia was a top ranking country for resources investment,  greater certainty was important to unlock new growth and job creation.



“Now more than ever, as Australia is recovering from the COVID-19 downturn, it is  important to make sure our regulatory frameworks are fit for purpose,” Minister Pitt said.

“The Productivity Commission has delivered a fresh look at ways to unlock our resources  potential and improve investor confidence, including predictability and certainty of  decisions in relation to scope 3 emissions, getting rid of state-based bans and moratoria on  gas developments, and removing duplication in regulatory processes.

“I look forward to working with states and territories to address recommendations and  improve outcomes for industry and communities - consistent with this report, the review of  Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act and my commitment to  continuous improvement.”

Assistant Minister to the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Ben Morton, welcomed the report’s  findings about the need to provide clear guidance of expectations to regulators, reduce  Commonwealth-state duplication and inconsistencies and to ensure regulatory reform  encourages investment and builds community trust in regulatory frameworks.

“The report’s findings align with a Government Budget initiative to lift regulator  performance, capability and culture by the creation of function within the Department of  the Prime Minister and Cabinet to work across all Commonwealth departments to identify,  share and embed regulator best practice,” Assistant Minister Morton said.

The full Productivity Commission Report on Resources Sector Regulation can be found here.



ENDS

Media contacts:  Matt Dunstan 0411 535 072

