Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health

The Hon. Christian Porter MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Industrial Relations  Federal Member for Pearce



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

3 August 2020



Government launches new headspace satellite in Northam

Young people in Northam and surrounding communities will now have greater access to  mental health support, with the opening of a new headspace satellite service this week.

The Government committed to establish a new headspace service in Northam in the electorate  of Pearce, as part of a $111.3 million plan to establish 30 new headspace services announced  in the 2019-20 Budget.

The opening of the new site delivers on that commitment and will provide vital mental health  support to young people in the region.

Minister for Health, Greg Hunt, said the new centre will provide a significant increase in  support for young people living in the local area.

“There are more pressures on young people today than ever before and the establishment of  this headspace is so important in providing needed services in Pearce,” Minister Hunt said.

“I am committed to ensuring young Australians can get information, advice, counselling or  treatment, when and where they need it.”

Member for Pearce, Christian Porter, welcomed the announcement by Greg Hunt.

“I want our young people in Pearce to know they are not alone on their journey,” Mr Porter  said.

“headspace is here to deliver quality frontline support and ensure the best possible care for  people who are at risk.

“We know intervention at the earliest possible stage is important to reduce the duration and  impact of mental illness, so I encourage young people in our community to reach out for the  help they need.”

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



The headspace program aims to improve access for young people aged 12 to 25 years who  have, or are at risk of, mental illness.

One in four people aged 16 to 24 experiences some form of mental illness every year, and  three-quarters of all mental illness manifests in people under the age of 25.

headspace offers early intervention services across four key areas - mental health, related  physical health, social and vocational support, and alcohol and other drug use. The services  are co-designed with young people to ensure they are relevant, accessible and highly  effective.

headspace works closely with young people at a crucial time in their lives to help get them  back on track, and strengthen their ability to manage their mental health in the future.

The new headspace, located at 98 Fitzgerald St E, Northam, has been commissioned by the  Country Western Australia Primary Health Network to meet the needs of young people in the  Pearce electorate.

This service will ensure young Australians can get information, advice, counselling and  treatment, when and where they need it.

The Morrison Government continues to demonstrate its firm commitment to the mental health  and wellbeing of all Australians, providing a record investment in mental health services and  support of an estimated $5.2 billion this year alone.

Recognising the unprecedented challenge posed by the Coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic,  the Government has provided $8 billion for the COVID-19 National Health Plan, including an  additional $500 million for preventative mental health services, suicide prevention and mental  health care via telehealth.

ENDS

