

JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC BRISBANE DRIVE

MONDAY, 30 NOVEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: New JobKeeper numbers; This week’s National Accounts;

Government waste; Qantas Job Losses; China Dispute.



STEVE AUSTIN, HOST: Jim Chalmers is the ALP Shadow Treasury

spokesperson and the member for Rankin. Jim Chalmers are the JobKeeper

numbers today a success or a failure, as far as Federal Labor is concerned?



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER:Well it's partly a success Steve and

we welcome that but it's also entirely unsurprising as a function of at least three

things: First of all, a lot of the restrictions have come off in the economy and so its

unsurprising to the extent that when the economy opens back up as we knew it

would and some businesses are doing better as we knew that they would. That's a

good thing, that's what we welcome. But also there's tighter eligibility rules for

businesses so inevitably there will be fewer of them which qualify. Thirdly, some

businesses unfortunately have hit the fence in the last few months and so they're

obviously not eligible either so it is partly a good story, and we welcome that but it's

also a function of those three things and as you said a moment ago there's 1.5

million workers on JobKeeper. That's still a massive number and they're still relying

very heavily on it and a lot of businesses are relying on it too. For those 1.5 million

Australian workers the recent cuts to JobKeeper will sting a bit.



AUSTIN: So the adjustment, or the fall, has outperformed predictions in the federal

budget. Surely that's a feather in the cap of the Treasurer Josh Frydenberg?



CHALMERS: It's a good thing if fewer people need government support, I'm not

pretending otherwise, but we need to appreciate as I just said that part of that's the

opening of restrictions which is not Josh Frydenberg's doing. Part of it is tighter

eligibility criteria which is neither here nor there when it comes to the Treasurer.

Thirdly some businesses have failed in the interim and so I know that he will be in

a rush as he typically is to say that it is his genius. But I think it's more of a mixed

bag than that. I also want to say Steve and I think we've spoken frequently enough

that I hope you get this sense from me that when we are tracking a little bit ahead

of where we might have been expected I will say so. I want the economy to come

good as quickly as possible because it's about people's jobs and their capacity to

provide for their loved ones. So as the economy recovers, and it's starting to

recover now, we're certainly prepared to welcome that but also to point to what's

actually causing these numbers that were released overnight.



AUSTIN: Well what's causing it probably is the fact that we've pumped billions into

the Australian economy, there's so much money floating around that it would be

shocking if it didn't improve.



CHALMERS: It is partly that, we've got a trillion dollars in debt and we want to

have something to show for it, our fear is that we won't have enough to show for it.

One of the reasons for that is there's been a fair bit of waste as well. A lot of your

listeners would have seen that the Government's been paying for a private plane

for an ex-minister to fly around Europe, they'd know that some of these JobKeeper

payments have gone to executive bonuses so taxpayers have been funding

executive bonuses, they would have seen the $1.2 billion Robodebt settlement that

you and I have discussed before. And so it's hard to argue that from their trillion

dollars of debt that they've got bang for buck right across the board. But where

they've been able to, with our support, step in and provide a wage subsidy and

that's been helpful then obviously we welcome that.



AUSTIN: I don't think the Mathias Cormann private jet thing is entirely fair, it's

because I remember Kevin Rudd spent a lot of Australian taxpayers money trying

to get Australia a seat at the Security Council including lobbying African nations

and all sorts of things. So my assumption is that both sides think it's good that

Australia be on these international bodies that heavily affect Australian treaties and

agreements so is it being entirely fair by criticising the Government for making a jet

available to Mathias Cormann?



CHALMERS: Well the two jobs aren't comparable -



AUSTIN: The Security Council is a pretty big deal.



CHALMERS: We weren't on it -



AUSTIN: I know but you tried hard and you spent taxpayer money trying to get

there.



CHALMERS: No we got on, we weren't on it, and we got on it as a consequence

of those efforts. We're already in the OECD.



AUSTIN: Okay so hopefully Mathias Cormann will get on the OECD.



CHALMERS: We’ve tried to be constructive about it and we said it would be a

good thing for an Australian to head the OECD but when we said that there was no

mention of using a RAAF jet to fly him around Europe at the same time when the

Government says we couldn't possibly use RAAF jets to fly home stranded

Australians. I think we are well within our rights to point out the absurdity of the

Government saying that jet is not available for people to get home, including

vulnerable people, at the same time as it's flying Mathias around Europe doing

lobbying that could be done in other ways. I think that's totally reasonable and I

suspect the Australian people share our view on this.



AUSTIN: Jim Chalmers is the federal member for Rankin, he's the shadow

Treasury spokesperson, he has been detailing what he sees as government waste.

The National Accounts are released this Wednesday. What do you think will be

revealed?



CHALMERS: What we expect and what most economists expect on Wednesday is

we'll see in the quarterly GDP number, the economic growth number, for the

September quarter, there will be a relatively strong rebound. But as all of those

economists know and many of your listeners would know that's partly a function of

coming off such a low base. We've been in the deepest recession in almost a

century and the quarterly figure reflects a change from the quarter before so it's

from a really low base so we expect it to be a big number. But what that won't

capture and what that won't make up for is all of the loss ground from most of this

year in the economy, it won't undo some of the lasting damage done in the jobs

market in particular. So our view is obviously we want to see the economy recover

strongly. But the best indication of that is how people are actually faring in the

economy, how they're faring in the labour market, whether they can provide for

their loved ones, not just one quarterly GDP figure which comes off a low base.



AUSTIN: Does GDP really matter? A lot of people question if GDP is a useful

measure of anything these days?



CHALMERS: I think it's useful but not in isolation, I've given speeches about this in

the past where I've said let's not abandon some of the traditional ways that we

measure the economy but why don't we get better with all the opportunities

afforded to us by big data and the like, why don't we work out what really matters

to us and measure that so that we've got a sort of a broader view of what we care

about the economy. How inclusive that growth is, how sustainable that economic

growth is, how broad it is and whether more people get a slice of the action. All of

those sorts of things I think are really important. The GDP number matters but

what I'm saying is it's not the only thing that matters and this number that we'll get

on Wednesday, it will look like a strong number but it won't make up for the

damage that's been done over the last six or nine months.



AUSTIN: How much is that damage reflected in the announcement by Qantas

today that they're going to outsource 2,000 groundstaff jobs, many of them here in

Brisbane? These are the sort of the people who are currently employed by Qantas

but I'm assuming that they won't be, they'll have to either reapply for their jobs, or

will simply be sacked but they've only made the announcement today but I know

you're aware of.



CHALMERS: I'm aware of it, I've been aware of it for some time. I actually went

and sat with a lot of these ground crew workers and at that little Coffee Club just at

the entrance to Brisbane Airport a few weeks ago -



AUSTIN: That little service centre?



CHALMERS: Yeah I went and sat there and heard their concerns and their

concerns are legitimate. They were asked to make a bid for their own jobs and

some of them have been doing those jobs for decades. They explained to me the

kind of family feel of that workforce and how disappointed they were that they had

to bid for their jobs having done it with such pride and such unity for so long, when

I sat with them and their TWU representatives. Today's a really sad day. They saw

it coming. They knew that the bidding for their own work was not going to end well.

That's what we see today and I just think it's terribly disappointing.



AUSTIN: How can they be forced legally to bid to the jobs they already hold?

How's that legal?



CHALMERS: I'm sure that Qantas had the legal avenues covered off I just don't

think it's right.



AUSTIN: Will you be telling the head of Qantas Alan Joyce that?



CHALMERS: Well we've all been saying in one way or another, we've been saying

it very publicly for some time now. A number of my colleagues and I have been

saying it, and you think about it more broadly there's been a lot of assistance to the

company from the taxpayer in the last year, we recognise they're under pressure

given what's going on with COVID and we've thought it's appropriate for the

taxpayer to lend a hand with JobKeeper and the like. But there's a broader issue

here -



AUSTIN: How they repay the Australian people?



CHALMERS: Indeed but there's a broader issue. Aviation is one of those sectors

which has been really kicked in the guts by COVID-19, we recognise that. One of

the real absences here, whether it's Qantas, whether it's the workers that a

company called dnata who've been excluded from JobKeeper, whether it's what

happened with Virgin Airlines, there is no encompassing federal government plan

for aviation. In that context, a lot of workers in aviation, not just these 2,000 as

important as they are, but really right across the board are very worried about the

future. I don't think the Government's given them any confidence that there's some

kind of plan to get out of what's happening right now.



AUSTIN: So what's the alternative for Qantas if they didn't do this what are their

alternative be?



CHALMERS: As I understand that they've been thinking about this for some time.

The alternative is clearly to maintain their workforce. The workforce has been

willing to be responsible and reasonable when it comes to shifts.  I've spoken to

some of these guys directly about this, many of them had only been working a shift

every once in a while recognising the difficulties on the company, they're prepared

to do what they could to maintain their team, maintain their employment but these

are very dark and disappointing days ahead for them unfortunately,



AUSTIN: Jim Chalmers is my guest. He's the federal ALP shadow Treasury

spokesperson, before I let you go I just want to ask you a couple of questions

about China. First of all, what's Labor's position on the Chinese Foreign Ministry

spokesperson sending out what would normally be regarded as a troll tweet, a

manipulated photographs showing an Australian soldier with a knife to the throat of

an Afghan child holding a lamb.



CHALMERS: It was disgraceful. It was appalling, inflammatory, deeply offensive,

gratuitous and it was really deeply inappropriate and we support the comments

that the Prime Minister made earlier on today about how inappropriate disgraceful

it was. My leader Anthony Albanese popped up in the parliament to say that he

agrees. It was entirely beyond the pale.



AUSTIN: What's Labor's position on the federal government's handling of some of

the diplomatic relationship issues and trade issues that we currently have with

China?



CHALMERS: Well I think we understand why so many Australian exporters and

employers are deeply anxious about what's happening to their markets. Wine is

just the latest commodity which has been impacted by the difficulties in the

relationship.



AUSTIN: We're not the only ones that have difficulties though, the United States

has them, Canada has them and New Zealand has them.



CHALMERS: Ideally the Government would find a way to address these

challenges via the usual diplomatic channels. Unfortunately for whatever reason

we don't have a government or Prime Minister or a Trade Minister who is able to

access those usual diplomatic channel  We haven't heard a plan for how they

intend to clean up this mess and for as long as it goes on a lot of those Australian

producers who are heavily reliant on Chinese markets are in for a very difficult

time.



AUSTIN: When the Chinese counterparts won't pick up the telephone to even

speak with diplomats, there's not much the Australian government can do other

than wait is there?



CHALMERS: Well they don't seem to have any plan though. Waiting is not really a

plan I don't think. If there's a better way to go about it let's hear it. As it stands right

now, I speak to a lot of these companies around Australia who are very anxious

about their workforce because we do rely heavily on that market and the

relationship is in bad nick at the moment. That is self-evident. There's no use

pretending otherwise. But we've got a government which now recognises the

challenge but doesn't seem to have yet told us a compelling story about how to fix

it. Let's hear that, if it's a good plan then we'll support it.





AUSTIN: Jim Chalmers thanks for time.



CHALMERS: Thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: NATHAN JOHNSTON 0488 176 452





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











