RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  MELBOURNE  WEDNESDAY, 19 AUGUST 2020

SUBJECTS: The Prime Minister blaming everyone else for his failures in aged  care; Teddy Sheean; Victoria Cross; China’s anti-dumping investigation into  Australian wine; vaccine; Victoria dealing with the coronavirus.

RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: We  have a crisis in aged care in Victoria right now. As of today, there are 2,024 active  cases related to aged care in this state. And in the last 24 hours there have been  another 13 deaths that have been recorded relating to aged care facilities in Victoria.  Now this morning, of enormous concern we hear the Prime Minister seeking to avoid  responsibility on behalf of the Commonwealth for aged care. This is astounding. We  have a Prime Minister who in this moment of crisis is looking to point the finger  everywhere else and to shift blame away from himself. Now I'm not interested in playing  a blame game, but what we absolutely need to see and what we call on the Prime  Minister to do today, is to take responsibility for a sector which is clearly the  responsibility of the Commonwealth Government. It is his job to look after the aged care  sector in this State and across this nation. And for all those who are working in that  sector and who are doing so under the most extraordinary circumstances, for all the  residents who are in the sector, for all those who have loved ones in the sector, we call  on the Prime Minister to stop looking everywhere else and to start taking responsibility  for the crisis which is unfolding in aged care today.

Now before COVID even came to this country, it was clear that the aged care sector  was the sector that was most vulnerable to COVID-19. That was absolutely clear. And  what we saw play out in Newmarch earlier in the year was a vivid example of that on  our shores. But rather than learning the lessons from you Newmarch, what we saw the  Government engage in was self-congratulation and hubris- and that is not my words,  that's the words of the Government's own Royal Commission into Aged Care. Now that  Royal Commission has also made clear is that what we desperately need to see in this  country from the Commonwealth Government is a nationally coordinated plan for the  aged care sector to respond to the threat of the coronavirus. We absolutely hope that  we do not see anything like the breakout that's occurred in Victoria play out anywhere

else in the nation. But was is also clear is that as long as this disease exists in Australia  that remains a possibility. Which is why it is so important that there is a nationally  coordinated plan. We also need to see the release of the report into the Newmarch  affair and that needs to be made publicly available immediately, so that we can learn  the lessons from that and apply them to what's happening in Victoria now. But most of  all, we need our Prime Minister and our Commonwealth Government to take  responsibility for the sector which is theirs. We are not going to have a sense of  confidence that this issue is going to be resolved unless there is a Government, the  Government that is responsible, out there willing to take responsibility for this issue and  to deal with it by coming up with a national plan immediately.

Questions?

JOURNALIST: Last week the Victoria Cross was awarded posthumously, nearly 75  years after the event. Under what circumstances do you believe should a Victoria Cross  be withdrawn?

MARLES: Well the Victoria Cross being awarded to Teddy Sheean was, I think, a  fantastic decision. It was one that was recommended by the independent umpire. And  that all the evidence around Teddy Sheean being considered by that tribunal also  speaks to the campaign and the efforts that were put in place by so many in the State of  Tasmania. And I think this is a moment to be focused on his achievements, his bravery,  his courage and the rightful recognition of that by the awarding of a Victoria Cross.  Victoria Crosses are rare awards. They speak to acts of bravery. And ultimately what  they do is recognise those acts of bravery. Bravery where people have been indifferent  in their own lives, put their own lives at complete risk in order to save the lives of others.  That's what Teddy Sheean did, that's what a Victoria Cross is for and it's been  appropriately awarded in his case.

JOURNALIST: Do you think China has a case against Australia with this wine dumping  investigation or do you think it is a part of a broader political play?

MARLES: I think the news in relation to this is deeply concerning. It's very important  that the Commonwealth Government refutes the allegations in relation to wine dumping  that has been put forward by China. And it's really important that this trade with China  be protected. We need to hear from the Federal Government about what its plan now is  to make sure that wine sales to China are protected and that our trade with China  continues. We've seen concerning developments in relation to our trade which  ultimately is costing the jobs of thousands of Australians. And it's critical that we actually  have an answer from the Government about what is going on here. Now, of course  Australia needs to be able to speak to its national interests without fear or favour and  with courage, and particularly in circumstances where at times that differs from Chinese  action. We always need to be doing that and we need to be speaking to our values. But

it's completely possible to do all of that and maintain a trading relationship with China,  and that's what's happened in the past. And it's absolutely essential that the  Government now explain what its plan is to make sure that wine sales to China are  secured into the future.

JOURNALIST: Mr Marles, Jonathan Kearsley from Nine News. If I can just ask you, the  Prime Minister is, as I look at my screen, is about to make the announcement about a  vaccine possibly being made available, when and if there is a vaccine, being made  available in Australia. Should the Australian Government look at trying to assist Pacific  Island nations with the vaccine as well? Should we be trying to assist with funding  programs for them too?

MARLES: Well firstly in relation to the announcement by the Government; actually the  Government has been slow out of the blocks in terms of dealings with AstraZeneca in  relation to vaccines and in terms of negotiating Australia's place in the vaccine  landscape across all the vaccines that are being developed in the world right now,  because it's not just a matter of this one vaccine. But Chris Bowen will be speaking  more about that later. But Australia obviously should be doing its part in relation to our  Pacific family, you know for a long time I’ve been making clear that Australia needs to  be the natural partner of choice for nations in the Pacific. And the coronavirus  represents a significant a threat for the people of the Pacific as it does for us. And so, I  think it's very important that we are thinking about the Pacific in terms of their access to  a vaccine as we also go about negotiating our own position, Australia's own position in  relation to the vaccine going forward.

JOURNALIST: Sorry Mr Marles, so should we be paying for a vaccine for Pacific Island  nations?

MARLES: Well I think what's important is that we're doing everything we can to make  sure that the vaccine is available to the countries of the Pacific and that we are  providing all the support that we can to those countries. We need to be the natural  partner of choice for the countries of the Pacific. And right now, the question of the  coronavirus is at the forefront of their minds and we are in a unique position to support  the countries of the Pacific and that's what we should be doing.

JOURNALIST: Mr Marles, Victoria has around half of the contact tracers on the phone  compared to New South Wales. What sort of blight do you think that is on the system  given the comparison in cases is 30 times greater in Victoria? Has Daniel Andrews  again failed to inform the public of what is going wrong in Victoria?

MARLES: Well I actually think Daniel Andrews has been doing a remarkable job,  standing up each and every day which he'll be doing again today to explain where the  crisis is at in Victoria and what steps the government is taking in relation to dealing with

that. Now mistakes have been made and Daniel Andrews has been the first person to  make that clear. And he put in place a judicial inquiry into the hotel quarantining  immediately, without fear or favour again and accepting the results of that. And he's  been incredibly open in relation to all the issues that face Victoria, both good and bad, in  terms of his own Government's performance, so that this problem can be dealt with and  responsibility can be taken. And I think that's what Daniel Andrews is doing and a very  difficult circumstance to try and make sure that our state can move through this. The  question of contact tracing is obviously central to how we manage the coronavirus  across the nation and obviously here in Victoria. And it's a matter I'm sure that Daniel  Andrews will deal with. But what we see in Daniel Andrews is a leader who's actually  prepared to stand up and take responsibility for what's going on and put in place actions  which see us move past this issue.

JOURNALIST: By not being transparent about contact tracing numbers, the numbers of  the people on the phones, is that a mistake?

MARLES: Well again I'll let Daniel Andrews speak for his own Government. Again, I  make the point though that Daniel Andrews has been very quick in putting in place  inquiries into the way the coronavirus has been handled in this state and he has done  that without fear or favour. And he's also fronted the cameras every single day and  taken responsibility for what's going on in this state, and that does give people I think a  sense of confidence that there is a Government which is trying to actually handle what  is happening here. And if you compare that to aged care, it is a stark difference because  there is a crisis in aged care which is the responsibility of the Commonwealth  Government. And right now we've got a Prime Minister who does everything he can  including on this very morning to avoid that responsibility.

JOURNALIST: So what is- I mean you mentioned a plan earlier the government has  said before it has a plan… inaudible…it's clear that there have been issues with that  plan…inaudible… What should states be doing now to look at the aged care crisis in  Victoria and prevent it getting into those aged care facilities? How do you stop this thing  spreading amongst the people who are most vulnerable and susceptible to this virus?

MARLES: Well firstly, that is the question that needs to be asked of Scott Morrison right  now and it's the answers to that question that Scott Morrison should be giving on this  day. And that is precisely what his own Royal Commission is saying he needs to do; put  in place a nationally coordinated plan to deal with the preparedness of the aged care  sector for the threat of the coronavirus. And that goes to the question of infection  control, it goes to the question of making sure that there are enough staff and enough  staff who are appropriately trained to be in place at the right time. It needs to go to the  question of communicating with residents in aged care but their families as well but the  facilities themselves as well, so the programs that are meant to be in place for example,  which prevent or should prevent people working in more than one aged care centre that

they are actually able to be implemented. All of these matters should be in a nationally  coordinated plan, articulated by the Commonwealth Government. And what we need is  a Prime Minister who starts by accepting responsibility for the sector, for the crisis that  is within it and actually comes up with a plan to deal with it. And that's exactly what we  need to be hearing from our Prime Minister immediately.

Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363

