

ANDREW LEIGH MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR TREASURY  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR CHARITIES  MEMBER FOR FENNER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2SM WITH MARCUS PAUL IN THE MORNING  TUESDAY, 3 NOVEMBER 2020

SUBJECT: Commonwealth Integrity Commission.

MARCUS PAUL, HOST: Andrew Leigh is the Shadow Assistant Minister for  Treasury. He's on the program. Andrew, good morning.

ANDREW LEIGH, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR TREASURY AND  CHARITIES: Good morning, Marcus.

PAUL: You've campaigned long and hard for a federal ICAC. Are you at all  surprised by the fact that this is a kind of watered down ICAC, if you like?

LEIGH: This is more a cover up commission than a corruption commission,  Marcus. I mean, you've been on the case as much as anyone and I think the  government is only acting because of the strong public pressure that has been  on your program and from Labor, from independents like Helen Haines. What’s  been delivered is just like Mike Carlton said - a corruption commission which  can't initiate its own hearings, which doesn't have the power to sit in public,  which wouldn't have the power to look back through so many of the scandals  that have emerged under the Morrison Government.

PAUL: Yeah, the Attorney General Christian Porter detailed the CIC - the  Commonwealth Integrity Commission, we'll call it CIC. He's detailed the  framework yesterday, calling it complicated because it would capture the  conduct of more than 150,000 public servants and many thousands more  people employed in the government sector. The CIC would have quote ‘greater  investigatory powers than a royal commission’, Mr Porter said. Is that right?

LEIGH: Well, it'll have substantially less powers in some cases. So for

example, royal commissions can investigate matters that don't reach the  standard of criminal conduct. This integrity commission wouldn't be able to do  that, for example, and I think there would be many instances in which we would  expect public servants to be held to a higher standard than simply not  committing crimes. The model that's being put forward is nowhere near as  powerful, for example, as the one that independent Helen Haines brought  forward. Labor has been calling for a much more powerful integrity commission  since the start of 2018, and the government's known about these criticisms,  Marcus.  When its original proposal was first raised a couple of years ago,  these criticisms were mentioned. And they seem to have done absolutely  nothing to address them.

PAUL: Alright. Well, I mean, the CIC would include the power to tap phones,  carry out search warrants, compel witnesses to testify at hearings and force  people to surrender documents and other evidence. The government was  handed an exposure draft - as you said - by Helen Haines. At the same time,  the Prime Minister defended any delay by invoking the COVID pandemic,  saying it was complex legislation and it required detailed consultation. Well, I  mean, he summed it in Parliament, ‘I was not going to have one public servant  diverted from the task of focusing on our whole of government approach  dealing with this pandemic’. Alright, well, we've done very well with the  pandemic - it's now time to shift focus not entirely away from dealing with  COVID-19, but to get this important piece of legislation passed. But I mean, if  it's a toothless lap dog, what’s the point?

LEIGH: It's interesting, isn't it, Marcus? The pandemic didn't seem to stop Scott  Morrison spending a week up in Queensland campaigning for Deb  Frecklington’s  state election campaign, but it's been his go to dog-ate-my-homework excuse for not going ahead with the Commonwealth Integrity  Commission. They don’t seem to have done much work over the past year.  This model is similar to the model that they were talking about a year ago. The  government’s simply been sitting on their draft bill, prompted into action only  now because of so much discussion around the Leppington triangle, around  sports rorts, around regional rorts, the stacking of the Administrative Appeals  Tribunal, the stacking of the Australia Post board by Liberal Party mates. There  are more scandals than you can poke an Auditor General at, and that's why  they've brought forward this model, which is frankly inadequate and needs to  be strengthened.

PAUL: Well yesterday, just two weeks after saying he couldn't divert public  servants to the task, the Attorney General said the process is now underway,  but it would be out for public consultation until February. So that means it could  be mid 2021 or later before the CIC actually comes into force.

LEIGH: They’re kicking the can as far down the road as they can, desperately  trying to avoid any integrity commission unless they have to have one, opting  for that quiet little lapdog. They don’t want an integrity commission, because  they know exactly what it would do. It would go after the sort of misconduct  we've seen from the Morrison Government - the regional grants going 90 per  cent to coalition electorates, the sports rorts being sorted out on color-coded  spreadsheets with political pork barrelling rather than focusing on the most  needy clubs. And these are people who are missing out at a time when we're  facing a global pandemic and a recession. This is no time to be wasting public  money. It's absolutely vital that we have the integrity commission. It's also vital  that we boost the funding for the Auditor General, whose funding has been cut  by a fifth over the course of the coalition government.

PAUL: Yeah. So for those who know ICAC - I mean, there were really this year  some incredible scenes in the Independent Commission Against Corruption in  New South Wales, where we had a premier basically reveal some, you know,  very personal aspects of her life. And we know where that's all led to, but the  CIC will not hold public hearings for politicians, unlike Gladys Berejiklian’s  appearance at the ICAC in New South Wales. I mean, a separate public sector  branch of the CIC will focus on public sector, intelligence agency and ADF  employees, the staff and federal judicial officers, and some higher education  providers and research bodies. But of most interest to many will be the CIC's  power to investigate parliamentarians and their staff. But if we're looking for,  you know, the Prime Minister or a Federal Minister to be publicly held  accountable on television screens inside a room like we saw the Premier at  ICAC, that's just not going to happen, is it?

LEIGH: That’s right. As my colleague Mike Dreyfus has pointed out, when you  hold public hearings, you carry out one of the core functions of an integrity  commission, which is to build public confidence in government and in  administration. David Ipp, the late Commissioner of ICAC in New South Wales,  talked about the importance of public hearings in encouraging other witnesses  to come forward. They serve a vital part of the work of an integrity commission.  It does seem pretty strange to me, Marcus, that the Prime Minister was happy  to castigate Christine Holgate for her role over the Cartier watches very publicly  in Parliament, but now wants the integrity issues of his own government to be  scrutinised privately behind closed doors.

PAUL: Well, it's a little hypocritical, isn't it?

LEIGH: It’s extraordinary.

PAUL: All right, then. Good to have you on the program, as always, Andrew.



LEIGH: Likewise, Marcus. Thank you.

PAUL: Talk soon. There he is, the Shadow Assistant Minister for Treasury,  Andrew Leigh.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHANIE ANDERSON 0431 344 056





