





SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Finance  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Leader of the Government in the Senate

Senator for South Australia

TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Interview on ABC Radio , Mornings, with David Bevan.     Topics:  New Finance Minister portfolio, Supercars, Trans-Tasman Travel  30/10/20  10:18AM

David Bevan: In the car, on his way to be sworn-in as the country’s new Finance Minister is South  Australian Senator, Simon Birmingham. Good morning and congratulations, Simon Birmingham.

Simon Birmingham: Good morning, David, and listeners. Thank you very much

David Bevan: Is this the pinnacle of your career?

Simon Birmingham: Well, it’s taking on the Finance Ministry and the leadership of the Government and  Senate. It’s an enormous responsibility, particularly at this time of a great world-wide challenge where we see  the biggest global economic downturn since The Great Depression. So, it’s a somewhat daunting task, but as  I say, it’s a huge responsibility and the real focus is on making sure that we create the jobs and the economic  growth to get us back to where we were pre-COVID. And that’s going to be a long, hard slog, but we are very  determined to do it and we’ve got plans to do so.

David Bevan: What exactly does a Finance Minister do? Because you’re not the Treasurer, you’re the  Finance Minister. What’s your job description?

Simon Birmingham: It’s a very close partnership with the Treasurer and the Finance Minister, in many  ways, is responsible for the internal finances across government, while the Treasurer has lead responsibility  for the economy and economic management. But the two of those things go very much hand-in-glove  together, so Josh and I will be working very closely, together with the Prime Minister, on the overall economic  strategy for the nation. But the Finance Minister then has particular responsibilities there about the oversight  of the government departments spending programs, a number of the governments business enterprises,  those types of things.

David Bevan: So when our listeners look at the front page of The Australian today and it says Closing the  Gap, $35 billion funding short on checks, what it's saying is that the Productivity Commission has looked at  billions of dollars that's been spent on indigenous programs which it says have actually returned very little to  the people it needs to help. Is that the sort of thing that you would look at and think we need to get our head  around this? I need to be involved here?

Simon Birmingham: Those sorts of issues that go to the quality of government spending as well as the  quantity of government spending are absolutely crucial, and I think most fair minded listeners would know that  in an area like that on indigenous support programs over the years in terms of closing the gap - in educational  attainment, in health outcomes, in all of those different areas - that enormous efforts are made by  governments. Some things work quite well, we have managed to increase the level of Year 12 completion  rates for indigenous Australians and improve those educational outcomes. But some things just don't go fast  enough, or frankly don't work. And governments do need to be big enough to acknowledge when things don't  work and change course and change programs because there's never a clear silver bullet to many of these  complex issues, we have to acknowledge that it's about continually working with taxpayers’ dollars. And as  Finance Minister I'm very, very conscious there are always taxpayer dollars or debt that we are managing, and  so we have to manage it as carefully as possible.





David Bevan: Simon Birmingham, when you and I first met I was a humble reporter and employee of the  ABC, and not much has changed. You were a humble staffer for Jane Hall, the Tourism Minister - you have  now gone on to bigger and better things. But way back then, one of the problems facing Joan Hall as Tourism  Minister, your boss was to fill the gap left by the Formula One Grand Prix. Today we learn, all of these years  later, South Australia is back in that same position because we've lost the Supercars.

Simon Birmingham: Look, I woke up and saw that news this morning on the front page of The Tiser, and I  think there'll be many fans of Supercars who might be a tad disappointed there. But also, I caught the tail end  of an interview with Ian Horne's Hotels Association earlier and heard Ian explaining how, even from their  perspective, the economic value and benefit had noticeably declined in recent years. And the Supercars are  taxpayer subsidised event - we were just talking about governments needing to be A, careful with taxpayer’s  money and B, be big enough and brave enough to say when something's no longer working - and it looks like  Steven Marshall has done that here. It won't be a universally popular decision, but if the cost of this event to  the taxpayers was such that you couldn't really justify compared to the economic return to the state, then  that's a wise and sensible decision. But, yes, I'm sure Steven will be looking, and I'm sure the Tourism  Minister is for at least the next couple of months too, and I'm sure Steven will be looking at how the state  builds on the other tourism assets it's got, particularly the other festivals and events to replace that that loss of  the Supercars.

David Bevan: Well, that's the lesson here, isn't it? He's got to do a Dean Brown and Joan Hall - he just can't  say, oh, sorry, we've lost this. They came up with the Tour Down Under, they came up with the Supercars -  you've got to fill this gap.

Simon Birmingham: Well, it is something that the state has to, has to look at. Now, the post-COVID world  is going to be a challenging one, all the forecasts are that travel and tourism aren't going to return to what they  used to look like, if at all - certainly not for a couple of years. So I think it's wise to take careful steps right now  around what it is that the state invests in, where it puts its tourism and events dollars to get the maximum,  maximum result. And what we really want to make sure there is that where you are investing, you're getting  visitors who come, who stay, who spend, and you have to really assess in terms of these events that they're  the returns you're getting. You're not just being put on for, shall we say, the, you know, the entertainment  value of South Australia. That's important but when it's- when the taxpayer is being asked to fund it they’re  being put on to generate a return that is about jobs and incomes to South Australians as well.

David Bevan: You're about to be sworn in as Finance Minister, before you do that, though - New Zealand.  Do you think South Australians will be able to fly to New Zealand before Christmas?

Simon Birmingham: I'm pretty optimistic there. I really hope that we do see that movement, that Jacinda  Ardern has just won a significant election victory, and I congratulate her there. Her government hasn't- has yet  to be sworn in again, so they're still in the caretaker period - we expect that will probably happen next week,  the New Zealand High Commissioner was telling me earlier this week. I've been in touch with my New  Zealand counterpart this week and I'm speaking to him again today. And I'll keep encouraging them to  reciprocate now that we are open to Kiwis - we'd like them to be open to Aussies, and then we can get a true  tourism flow happening between the two countries. That, again, will be really important to save the jobs in  airports, airlines, hire car companies, hotels - all of those sectors that rely on people taking proper trips, and  they're the ones that are feeling the real pain still of COVID in terms of not being able to get back to normal  business.

David Bevan: So it all comes down to Jacinda Ardern? Australia wants it. South Australia wants it. It comes  down to New Zealand. They're the only people blocking this from happening at the moment?

Simon Birmingham: The ball is in the Kiwis court and we hope that they- hope they pick it up and run with  it on this occasion.

David Bevan: Simon Birmingham, congratulations again and thanks for your time.

Simon Birmingham: My pleasure, David, thank you.



Media Contacts  Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644



Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.

