afp.gov.au/news-media/media-releases/malaysian-man-faces-perth-court-over-meth-found-handbags

Malaysian man faces Perth court over meth found in  handbags

Friday, 21 August 2020, Publish time: 5:51pm   This is a joint Australian Federal Police and Australian Border Force media  release.

Photos available via Hightail.

A 26-year-old Malaysian national is due to appear before the Perth Magistrates Court  today (Friday, 21 August) after authorities allegedly linked him to the seizure of 52.5  grams of methamphetamine concealed in handbags sent from Malaysia.

The illicit drugs were found during an examination by the Australian Border Force  (ABF) at an air cargo depot in Perth on 13 August 2020. An X-ray of the parcel  revealed anomalies and an ABF drug detector dog subsequently gave a positive  reaction.

The consignment included four handbags containing small sachets labelled 'silica  desiccant', a product normally used to absorb moisture and prevent mould. It will be  alleged further examination of the sachets revealed a white crystal substance, which  returned a presumptive positive test for methamphetamine.

The matter was referred to the Australian Federal Police (AFP), who replaced the  methamphetamine with an inert substance and conducted a controlled delivery of the  handbags.

The AFP arrested the man - a 26-year-old Malaysian national who is in Australia  unlawfully - shortly after his receipt of the delivery and executed a search warrant on  his premises in the Perth suburb of Morley. During the search, officers found several  other similar handbags and other items that were seized for evidentiary purposes.

The man was charged with two counts of importing a marketable quantity of a border  controlled drug contrary to section 307.2 (1) of the Criminal Code Act 1995 (Cth). He  was later refused bail and faces a potential maximum penalty of 25 years'  imprisonment if convicted.

AFP Detective Acting Inspector Peter Brindal said that, in a week that has seen the  largest ever cocaine seizure by Australian authorities, this investigation was an  important reminder that no amount of illicit drugs is acceptable in our community.

"Police know better than most the heartache and unrepairable damage that illicit  drugs cause families and communities across Australia," Detective Acting Inspector  Brindal said.

"When one hit is enough to set someone down a dark and self-destructive road, we  cannot underestimate the positive impact of this operation.

"It is another example of AFP and ABF officers standing shoulder to shoulder in the  fight to keep illicit drugs off our streets and out of our homes in WA and across the  country."

ABF Regional Commander for WA, James Copeman, said screening of air cargo  consignments had been significantly ramped up this year in response to increased  volumes due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

"Criminals who think it'll now be easier to smuggle illicit drugs across the border in air  cargo parcels are kidding themselves," Commander Copeman said.

"With the vastly reduced number of international air travellers coming through our  airports we have surged officers into the air cargo and international mail streams to  accommodate higher volumes of online purchases in 2020.

"ABF officers are well aware of the many creative ways criminals will use to attempt to  smuggle illicit and prohibited goods into Australia.

"This outcome again demonstrates the highly effective collaborative manner in which  the ABF and AFP work together to protect the community from harmful substances like  meth."

For free and confidential advice about alcohol and other drug treatment  services, call the National Alcohol and Other Drug Hotline on 1800 250 015.

Media enquiries:

AFP National Media: (02) 5126 9297

ABF Media: (02) 6264 2244





































































