

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES  MEMBER FOR HUNTER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SUNRISE  MONDAY, 16 MARCH 2020

SUBJECT: Coronavirus.

DAVID KOCH, HOST: Well, schools remain open. There are tough new restrictions for our  borders. All international arrivals into Australia now need to self-isolate for 14 days.

NATALIE BARR, HOST: Now there's also a ban on cruise ships from foreign ports  entering this country for at least 30 days. But is it enough to keep our country safe? Let's  bring in Nationals MP, Barnaby Joyce, and Shadow Resources Minister, Joel Fitzgibbon.  Good morning to you, both. Barnaby, I just heard earlier from this infectious diseases  expert that we should be taking more drastic measures. And then we've just heard from the  Minister; is the government taking things seriously enough? What do you think?

BARNABY JOYCE, MEMBER FOR NEW ENGLAND: Well, I think it is and everyone's  learning as I go along. I mean, it's quite obvious, we're trying to work this out on the  statistical model, a parametric model, which basically says this: the less people contact the  less it spreads. You got two choices, Nat. You can have a graph that goes like this, or  graph that goes like that. But a graph like goes like this means that we have real pressure  on the hospital system, we just don't have the beds to be able to manage those, that small  group who gets very sick. And therefore we've got to try and keep the graph with a low  trajectory. A low trajectory has the same number of people as the high one, it just that it  happens over a longer period of time. So, we do have the capacity to manage that. Now  with kids, I suppose there is the school and home. Also with children, I don't pretend to  profess to be a doctor in any way, or form - I did the statistics as an accountant though.  Now with children, not one child has died throughout the world under the age of nine - well,  that was the latest information I got. So, the risk factor with children is less. And I suppose  they do have a point that if the children stay at home, then other people have to stay at  home with them. And we need to have the nurses in the hospitals and the doctors in the  hospitals and, therefore, we have to try and make logical decisions all the way through this.

KOCH: Joel is the Opposition on board with this?

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: Yeah, I think so, Kochie. Chris Bowen has  been out there speaking publicly on a regular basis. And he's been receiving regular  updates from the Chief Medical Officer and others. I've never felt so much on the sidelines,  Kochie, that's the truth of it. I mean, the Prime Minister and the Cabinet will be getting



competing advice. You saw examples of that on your program just earlier this morning.  And someone's going to make the call. And the truth is Barnaby and I, unfortunately, from  our perspective, aren't in the centre of the action, we're not getting the advice, and it's a  difficult one for us to call. But, I tend to agree with Barnaby, I tend to agree with the Prime  Minister. The problem, I think, is that it will be inevitable that schools will close. I suspect at  the moment, it's the best place for our children to be. And Barnaby makes the point. You  know, how do the parents go to school - go to work if the kids aren't in school. So, this is a  very difficult question. I think. I think the key point, Dan Tehan made, is that we need to  properly resource our schools and give the principals and teachers the information and  resources they need to both lead, educate and ensure that the spread is not increased.

KOCH: Yeah.

BARR: Yeah. Barnaby, what information are you getting as far as how many Australians  are going to get this?

JOYCE: Well, my brother, you know, it's fortunate my brother's a doctor, and he looks after  my parents who are aged and they're the people I really worried about because they're the  most vulnerable. More so, my cousin is the director of ICU, Brisbane, PA. So, I'd have to  have a yarn to him. My brother's really clear about it. Surfaces, you have to de-sanitise  them. If you've got any sign of a cough, a fever, a runny nose, then stay away, you know,  and obviously, try to limit your contact as adults who don't have to be looked after at home.  If there's the capacity to work from home, then that's what you should do. And this is why I  think a more radical plan, the Parliament as a model citizen, has got to look at the ways  they minimise the capacity for them to be an example of the of the vector. Now, I'll tell you  why. I walk around as a local member, I shake people's hands - hello, how are you? They  come up and talk. Now, we got to stop doing that. But I'm always talking to people,  hundreds of people whilst I'm away. Then I get on a plane - or I don't, I drive down - get  on a plane, I fly to Canberra spread it around the plane. Then in Canberra, I meet Joel, I  meet everybody else, and if I've got it, I spread it around the Parliament. Then everybody  jumps on a plane and goes back to every corner of Australia. Now, we've got to think about  that in our own regard and say how do we limit that from happening? Because not only  shouldn't we not do it, we should be an example of not doing it.

KOCH: It's a really good point. All right, Gents, thank you for that. Appreciate your time.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641







