

T h e  H o n . D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T



Wednesday 30th December 2020

Minister Littleproud IV 3AW



TONY JONES: Now the situation with the farmers, I want to come back to this because- look,  when I say it's getting desperate, it is getting desperate to the point where they need another  26,000 workers within weeks to save fruit from going to waste. Look, there's obviously frustration.  Not enough though is being done by the State and Federal Governments to solve the issue; that's  the allegation. Joining us on the line now is David Littleproud, the Federal Minister for Agriculture.  Good morning.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Good morning. Thanks for having me.

TONY JONES: Yeah. Well, thanks for coming on. Is the situation as dire as that?

DAVID LITTLEPORUD: It is. And in fact, particularly as we get towards the end of our season  Victoria comes online probably last, because it's a little cooler down there than might be in my part  of the world in Queensland where we will be going through the season. But there is going to be a  shortage, and that's why it's nothing new - we've known about this since March. That's why we  extended the visas of the working holiday maker, which is the backpacker, the Pacific and  Seasonal Workers back in March to say if you worked in agriculture, an essential service, then we  will allow you to stay for further a 12 months. Then in August, when we got a better lens on  COVID-19, we were able to reopen the Seasonal Pacific Worker programs to bring new holders of  those visas. And we found 22,000 pre-vetted, work-ready men and women from 10 Pacific nations  to come in. We are ready to stamp the visas…

TONY JONES: Okay. Sorry, can I just- Sorry, I just- Sorry, I'm not being rude by cutting in but we  did have a caller earlier saying that Fijians in particular were very, very good at this work. So were  they part of this 10 Pacific island rim, if you like, that were able to come back in?

DAVID LITTLEPORUD:   They are. And some of them came in at different times. Got to understand, just because we turn up  and say: we want you, they're a sovereign nation and their governments didn't all necessarily sign  off exactly at the same time. But they did, they have now all signed off - the ten Pacific nations. So  they are eligible to come in.

But under the Constitution, the quarantine and public health arrangements for public health belong  to the states, and the states understood that. And now it really relies on the quarantine  arrangements of the chief health officer in each particular state, allows them to come in too. And  each states done it a little bit different. So the Northern Territory, who in fact started bringing in  mango pickers in November- sorry, September I should say - were bringing them in through  Howard Springs. And so then Queensland has also now allowed them to come in, but instead of  quarantining in a motel or at a facility, they actually have been allowed to quarantine on farm. Now,  each state…

TONY JONES: So what about the Victorians?

Page 2

Transcript



T R A N S C R I P T





DAVID LITTLEPORUD: Well, that arrangement still hasn't been decided, and that's arrangement  the Chief Health Officer in Victoria will have to make a decision on, and they reaffirmed that at  National Cabinet in November. And in fact, the Victorian Premier acknowledged that and  understood the urgency of this, and acknowledged the fact that they would have to make their own  quarantine arrangements.

TONY JONES: Okay, well, if that was acknowledged at Federal level in November, and it's nearly  the end of December now, it would suggest that someone's dragging the chain here?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, it is. And the Federal Government is ready to stamp the visas. But  we do not own the quarantine arrangements. Those are sovereign decisions that each state has  made. And as I've just articulated, some states have done it in different ways to each other. And in  Victoria, you were previously putting them through motels, but those arrangements of what I would  do for these workers hasn't been, hasn't been decided by the Victorian Government or the Chief  Health Officer.

TONY JONES: So, if they got their act together and started making a decision on this, assuming  they haven't already and you indicated they haven't, this could help alleviate. I mean, you're not  going to get 26,000 workers here, but it could help alleviate the problem somewhat, could it not?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Totally. We're ready to stamp the visas, and that's been articulated- that  was the arrangement from the start, and then it was reaffirmed again after we opened up the  programs, reopen the programs in August. It was reaffirmed again by all the chief ministers from  around the country at National Cabinet that they would take ownership of this, the quarantine  arrangements, because public health and the Constitution belongs to them, which we respect -  that's their sovereignty. We will stamp the visas.

We've gone and found 22,000. We've brought in around 15, 1600 subsequent, so there's only  about 20, 21,000 over there at the moment that we would be able to bring in if the states were  prepared to bring them in and quarantine them, we would stamp the visas. We've found them for  them, they're ready to go.

TONY JONES: Twenty-one thousand coming into Australia - that's an awful lot of people?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: You've got to understand that normally we work through- there's about  160,000 working holidaymakers a year and about 30 per cent of those work in agriculture. And end  of- during COVID there was about nearly eight to 9000 that were here, and when COVID hit that  was probably towards the end of our, our picking season. So, those sort of numbers aren't  significant really in the terms of- in the scheme of actual agricultural requirements...

TONY JONES: No, but in COVID times they would be, wouldn't they?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: They is- it is and that's why we were, we were quick to reopen that Pacific  and Seasonal Worker program as soon as we could, as soon as we got confidence around being  able to bring out of- bring in people out of those 10 nations. I think you'll also appreciate that all  these jobs are market tested first, so Australian's get first crack at these jobs. But if they've not- if  they're not taken by Australians, then obviously farms don't have the luxury to sit around and wait  for someone turn up. When their crops ready they've got to get from the paddock to your plate.

TONY JONES: Okay, so let's assume - and based on the evidence we're hearing at the moment -  the Australians aren't exactly rushing to the gates of the farm saying give us work. There is a  quarantine issue for these people coming from the Pacific nations. So what happens? I mean, what  is the outcome here? Is it just going to be loads and loads of wasted fruit?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, there is. And farmers will be making commercial decisions in the  coming weeks - some already have. And even in my home state of Queensland have made

Page 3

Transcript



T R A N S C R I P T



commercial decisions about ploughing in crops, others will let them drop and rot. If they can't get  them off, off the paddock to your plate then they're not going to expend any more money on  growing the crop. So those are the tough commercial decisions that farmers are having to make.

And this is the frustration that they've got, is that this isn't a new problem. This is something that  was identified in March and why we continued to try and make sure that all avenues were made  open - not just Australians taking jobs, but foreign workers from Pacific nations in particular that we  could take comfort with and get in so long as the states had, had comfort around quarantine  arrangements. And some states have done that.

And while I talk about Queensland, they haven't done that in large volumes. But then the Northern  Territory, the smallest jurisdiction, in fact did and they used Howard Springs quite, quite extensively  to bring new workers, and in fact are using them now. Some of their workers go out during the day  and come back into Howard Springs in the evening.

TONY JONES: Yeah. Okay. And I guess one final one, just quickly - what should we brace for in  terms of prices at the supermarket and the like?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, ABARES believes you should be looking to expect to see around 15  to 25 per cent. But it's not just consumers who are going to hurt out of this. I think we've just got to  acknowledge that it's also the farmers. This is lost income after years of drought. This is a, this is  just taking the legs out from under them again.

And, so I acknowledge that consumers in capital cities are going to pay the price, there's going to  be an increase in the price. But this is a livelihood for many of our fellow Australians who put their  heart and soul into this, that they're going to lose it because we haven't been able to get the  quarantine arrangements by the states done up quick enough to get people in to help support  them.

TONY JONES: Yeah. All right. Well, it's a sad old state of affairs, not least for the farmers, as you  say. So, Minister, thanks for your time this morning.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks for, thanks for having me.

TONY JONES: Thank you, David Littleproud joining us there - the Federal Minister for Agriculture.

Media contact  0455 448 985





