









SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate  Senator for South Australia

THE HON KAREN ANDREWS MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology  Member for McPherson



MEDIA RELEASE



4 September 2020

Second round of public consultations launched on   Geographical Indications

The Morrison Government is seeking the views of Australian producers, businesses and  consumers on a possible future Geographical Indications framework, as negotiations progress with  the European Union (EU) to secure an ambitious and comprehensive free trade agreement.

Federal Trade Minister Simon Birmingham said the second round of public consultations, which  starts today, would give industry a three-month opportunity to provide input on how a future  Geographical Indications (GIs) framework could work.

“These consultations do not give any commitment on GIs but will ensure that any future framework,  should one be required, is informed by Australian farmers and businesses,” Minister Birmingham  said.

“We have made it clear to the EU we will make no commitment on GIs until later in the negotiations  and only if the overall deal is in our interests, including by delivering commercially significant new  market access for our agricultural products.”

“While securing a free trade agreement with the EU presents significant new market access for  Australian exporters, we will only do this deal if it is in Australia’s overall best interests.

“Australians can be assured we’ll drive a hard bargain to not only reduce tariffs and increase or  eliminate quotas, but to grow our services sector and improve investment flows with the EU.

“Seeking better and new opportunities in a large, stable market such as the EU is more important  than ever as we recover from the COVID-19 pandemic, and will give our farmers and businesses  more export options around the world.”

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said it is important the voices of  Australian businesses and industry are heard.

“I want to ensure that if the outcome of negotiations warrants any changes to how we currently  protect GIs, these are developed in a way that best serves the interests of Aussie businesses and  consumers,” Minister Andrews said.





“We need to be more committed than ever to making sure Australian businesses can thrive and  grow and we want to hear from them through this consultation.”

To date Australia and the EU have undergone seven rounds of negotiations with the next to be  held in mid-September.

Business and industry are invited to engage with the consultation process by the 30  November  2020, and can find out more by visiting: https://consultation.ipaustralia.gov.au/policy/geographical-indications.

Media Contacts  Benn Ayre: +614 28 342 325 (Birmingham)  Keegan Buzza: +61 47 697 846 (Andrews)

Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.

