

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES

MEMBER FOR HUNTER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC NEWCASTLE

TUESDAY, 18 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Hunter Valley coal slow-down; Environmentalists feeling

vindicated by easing coal demand; Gas prices and the need for new

supply; Hunter Valley economy.



PAUL TURTON, HOST: Well, the latest monthly statistics published by the

International Energy Agency found that in OECD countries - which include

Australia, of course - electricity generation from coal fell a massive 21.6% in

March, compared to the same period 12 months prior. So how are we

supposed to cope with such variations in demand? And on top of this is news

today that BHP confirmed it was looking at options to sell its Mount Arthur mine

near Muswellbrook. The company apparently intends to concentrate their coal

portfolio on coking coals. They see greater upside for quality premiums as

steelmakers seek to improve blast furnace utilisation, the company said -

whatever that means. Anyway, Peabody Energy has announced it will scale

back underground mining at their Wambo mine complex near Warkworth, and

the news doesn't get any better for the Hunter coal industry. It's already being

smashed by a COVID-19-induced fall in demand. And those production

cutbacks and workforce stand downs are likely to increase. The member for

Hunter, Joel Fitzgibbon, joins us now to discuss the implications of all of this.

G’day Joel, how are you going?



JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: I’m going well, thanks Paul.



TURTON: There's plenty to talk about. It’s a challenging time.



FITZGIBBON: It is a challenging time for all of us - no one is untouched by

COVID-19; no business is untouched, no individual is untouched and of course

many families have been very, very much touched with the loss of loved ones.

So we just can't get through this thing quickly enough.



TURTON: Okay, so what are the implications then in for coal in the Hunter

region, do you think? What are the primary challenges?



FITZGIBBON: I do believe the coal industry has a long term future. I believe

demand in our Asian markets for both metallurgical and thermal coal will be

strong for many decades to come, probably longer for metallurgical coal than

for thermal. But particularly developing countries, China and India will continue

to have a great hunger for our coal for a long time to come. What’s happening

right now of course is that the industry is now suffering from a slowdown in

those Asian economies, therefore a massive reduction in demand. And that's

forcing them of course to wind-back their production and I fear we are now just

getting a small taste of what it would be like in the Hunter Valley, without our

coal mining industry.



Turton: Joel is there the risk that the mining companies are using this

opportunity, because initially we were thinking months: we didn't know how long

this this thing would take, and then we thought okay we'll, we'll put a line

through 2021. But now it's kind of looking that it could go well beyond that. Is

the temptation there for the boardrooms of these mining companies now to start

running a line through some areas, of input costs. Is there - you know - the

opportunity for them now to look at greater automation, to look at changes in

shifts, to change in, you know, changing salary structures for their employees?

How wide might their investigation of their opportunities be during this quieter

time, do you reckon?



FITZGIBBON: In all my conversations with the companies at senior levels, and

with the union and other experts in this regard, my view is that they are all

taking a long term view of coal, they all agree with me that demand will recover

and then remain strong for some time to come. If you have a look at the

investment pipeline for coal mining and associated infrastructure in the Hunter

Valley, it's very strong. In other words, they're putting their money where their

mouths are, having taken that view of the world. So I think beyond the COVID-19 crisis, things will be fine. But, you know, how long demand is depressed in

those Asian markets, we do not know. And therefore, how many companies will

have to wind-back production, by how much, obviously we don't know either.



TURTON: Joel, Mt Arthur is a massive mine - BHP’s had a fabulous years.

They’ve just announced $9.1 billion in profit, but they’ve made the call to get out

of thermal coal. Is that sending a message?



FITZGIBBON: I don’t believe so. I've watched their commentary very closely.

It's about thermal coal - or coal generally. I think it's about 3% of their portfolio.

It's a very large and very diverse company. And there are lots of projects, which

compete very strongly for their capital - their investment capital within the

company. They’ve made the point that a mine like Mt Arthur could probably

compete better with a less-diverse company. I've no doubt that Mt Arthur will be

picked up by another player, who knows which? Possibly a company like

Yancoal which is, after Glencore, the second-biggest miner in the Hunter

Valley. But there are other suitors, I know, showing an interest. It's a very

valuable mine, resource-rich, valuable assets there underground. And I’ve no

doubt it will be picked up.



TURTON: We’ve seen Peabody announce today that they'll be scaling-back

underground mining at Wambo, next to - near Warkworth there. That's a

concern but you've already alluded to the fact that you expect that there'll be a

number of these production cut back announcements to come?



FITZGIBBON: Yes, well if demand, obviously, remains suppressed in those

Asian markets for some time to come, then more companies might have to take

more tough decisions. What we need to do is hope that the recovery, the

economic recovery, comes sooner rather than later. But that applies equally to

almost every industry we could have a discussion about. I just appeal to the

companies to hang on as long as they can, to do the right thing by their

employees, and I'll pray that we can hang on long enough to, you know, wait for

that demand to grow strong again.



TURTON: We mentioned, of course, that BHP had a fabulous year. Is there an

obligation do you think, on the coal companies, to absorb a lot of the pain that's

anticipated?



FITZGIBBON: Of course I believe that their greatest asset is their employees,

their workforce. And I expect them to put them first and foremost, but I also

accept that a company can’t hang on forever, taking losses. You can't keep

producing coal and stockpiling it when there is nowhere for it to go. So

employees first, please, I say to them. But I'm a realist as well and again it's

why we all have to pray that we get through this thing sooner rather than later.



TURTON: Joel you’ve taken the unusual step of calling-out anti-coal activists.

You made a pre-emptive strike in many ways against those that you say might

attempt to capitalise on the industry's current challenges and pain. Do you think

in in raising environmental arguments at this time, those who believe we should

be transitioning quicker to renewables, they are being opportunistic?



FITZGIBBON: I do grow angry, Paul, when I see people almost rejoicing at the

current pain of the coal mining industry, and those who work in it. You know

they see it as a vindication of what I've been saying for a long time and that is

that the coal mining sector has no future. No - wrong. It’s facing a pandemic like

just about every other industry, including those in the services sector and that

pandemic is hitting it hard. It is no indication that the industry doesn't have a

bright future. And again, I only say to them: I fear that you are about to get a

taste of what the Hunter region would be like without the coal mining industry,

employing about 14,000 people directly, but up to 75,000 indirectly. In my

electorate more elected in places like Muswellbrook and Singleton, every

business right down to the local coffee shop is directly impacted by the coal

mining industry. So we should be all banding together in the hope of getting the

coal mining industry through this, not looking for some form of vindication and

rejoicing that, you know, they were right and the coal mining industry has a

limited life ahead.



TURTON: What about gas, given your portfolio I'm sure you've been keeping a

close eye on this. The ACCC, of course is investigating whether natural gas,

and the on-sellers, were gilding the lily a little bit, propping up profits with high

domestic prices for gas, I guess. What's your take on that?



FITZGIBBON: Well Paul, I'm one of about five people in Australia that have

actually read the ACCC report. And the important thing it said is that if we don't

get more gas out of the ground and get more linkage in our gas pipelines, and

more competition in the oil and gas pipeline network, then we're going to be

short on gas and prices are going to rise. That's why we need to get the

Narrabri project up and running. It’s why we do need this gas pipeline from

Queensland, where there's an abundance of gas, down into New South Wales.

It also made the point that there is still a spread - a gap - between LNG export

prices and our local price, and the ACC wasn't able to secure a reasonable

explanation for that. And the producers of the gas do owe them an explanation,

and we support securing one and making sure that Australians are getting gas

at least as good a good a price as our Asian customers.



TURTON: There's been some talk about taking gas out of houses and isolating

it for the specific use of industry. Is that something you support?



FITZGIBBON: I’ve not heard that, Paul. I'm not even sure what that means. But

I do know that when you talk about gas, we're not just talking about electricity

generation. That’s about a third of what we do with gas. We're also using it in

our own households of course, for our hot plates and our heaters. Industry itself

is using it for heating and electricity generation, but importantly about 30% of it

goes as an ingredient into so many of the things that we manufacture: fertilisers

for our farmers, our plastics et cetera. The list is a long one. So, we desperately

need gas and of course gas is a transitional fuel to a cleaner economy. Now,

those coal-fired generators will age, they will close down and we will make this

inevitable shift to renewables. But we can't get there overnight, and we will

need gas to provide that synchronous baseload power during that transition

period, and the Hunter is so well-placed. I'm hoping to get - to secure a couple

of gas-fired generators here in the Hunter Valley, and that would be a great

thing for our region.



TURTON: And just finally Joel, should there be federal government intervention



with an industry-specific package for coal mining here?



FITZGIBBON: I’ve been talking to ministers, about the challenge the industry is

facing, and I'll be talking about the industry to industry about how they believe

government could assist. But they're not calling for that at this point in time and

I'll continue to have those conversations. Certainly, if they believe there is

something government can do to help, I'll be pushing that very hard in

Canberra.



TURTON: Joel Fitzgibbon, nice to talk to you. Thanks for coming on.



FITZGIBBON: A pleasure , Paul.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













