Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health

Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Public Service and Cabinet

Professor Brendan Murphy  Australian Government Chief Medical Officer

JOINT STATEMENT

2 March 2020

Update on COVID-19 in Australia - Community Transmission

Australia has seen its first community transmission of COVID-19. Bringing the total of  confirmed cases to 33.

This case underlines the fact that Australia is not immune from COVID-19. COVID-19  represents a significant risk to Australia - and we continue to manage that risk based on the  best and latest medical advice.

Our approach continues to be both highly precautionary and proactive. Our COVID-19 Plan,  which Prime Minister Morrison activated last week, puts Australia ahead of the curve in  dealing with this virus - as we have been from day one.

In light of the international situation, more cases of COVID-19 are highly likely to emerge in  Australia.

Anyone who has symptoms of a virus should practise social distancing, especially if they  have recently travelled overseas.

We will continue upgrade our travel advice and remind people that:

 if they are returning from mainland China or Iran they should self-isolate for 14 days;  and    if they are returning from Italy or South Korea, and they work as a healthcare worker  or as a residential aged care worker, they should not attend their workplace for 14

days.



The best defence for COVID-19 remains good hand hygiene, cough and sneeze etiquette, and  to isolate when unwell.

The message for Australians is that it is perfectly safe to go about their daily business and do  exactly what they would normally do.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.

It is important to reiterate that the great majority - more than 80 per cent - of people  diagnosed with COVID-19 have a mild illness, so mild that the symptoms are often barely  noticed.

If you do get symptoms, such as fever and cough, and are a returned traveller or potential  contact with someone who may have COVID-19, please isolate yourself and seek medical  advice. This is how we can best reduce the spread.

-END-

