THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP  MINISTER FOR POPULATION, CITIES AND URBAN  INFRASTRUCTURE

THE HON BEN MORTON MP  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR TANGNEY  ASSISTANT MINISTER TO THE PRIME MINISTER  AND CABINET

THE HON MARK MCGOWAN MLA  PREMIER OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA

THE HON RITA SAFFIOTI MLA  WA MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT

MEDIA RELEASE

Error! Unknown document property name.20

Ranford Road Station piling on Thornlie-Cockburn Link milestones

Construction continues on the METRONET Thornlie-Cockburn Link, with a 120 tonne piling rig  recently moved into the Ranford Road Station site and almost 500 workers currently employed  across all project work sites.

The piling rig is forming the foundations for the new Ranford Road bridge, drilling 156, 18- metre deep holes, which will be filled with concrete to form the foundation superstructure.

The new bridge will have six general traffic lanes, two bus lanes and a shared path on each  side.

Construction of temporary retaining walls in the rail corridor has started, as well as installation  and commissioning of the project’s temporary main cable route.

Premier Mark McGowan said his government was getting on and building the transport  infrastructure needed for tomorrow.

“The Thornlie-Cockburn Link was one of our key election commitments and it’s fantastic to see  construction steaming ahead,” Mr McGowan said.

“This will be Perth’s first east-west train link and will make a huge difference for people looking  to travel across our southern suburbs.

“This year we have nine METRONET projects under construction, with several more in  procurement, creating thousands of local jobs and opportunities for local businesses.

“As construction continues, we thank everyone for their patience as there will be disruption.”

Federal Minister for Population, Cities and Urban Infrastructure Alan Tudge said the Morrison  Government’s multi-billion dollar investment into METRONET was helping transform Perth’s  public transport network.

“All along we said that METRONET would re-shape Perth and we are seeing that happen  before our eyes,” Mr Tudge said.

“Our targeted infrastructure means jobs for hard-working West Australians and a massive  boost for the WA economy right now.”

WA Transport Minister Rita Saffioti said the McGowan Government was looking to the future  as well as shoring up WA’s immediate economic recovery.

No publication date : received by Parl Library  on 04/12/2020



“We’re supporting thousands of local jobs and training opportunities across Western Australia  through our METRONET and transport infrastructure projects,” Ms Saffioti said.

“We recently launched a new training course called ‘Infrastructure Ready’ which gives  jobseekers the opportunity to learn on the job skills on some of our major projects, including  METRONET.

“I heard so many personal stories from people who had lost their jobs due to COVID and were  now re-training - I’m so pleased we could provide these opportunities on our major projects.”

Federal Member for Tangney Ben Morton said the southern suburbs were set to boom over  coming years and the Thornlie-Cockburn Link was an important future investment.

“The Thornlie-Cockburn Link will help ease congestion and get people from A to B quickly and  safely,” Mr Morton said.

“Projects like this are all about creating connected communities, with opportunities for transit- oriented development and new, diverse housing options planned to supply a projected  population boom in the eastern suburbs.”

The 14.5km of new passenger rail from Thornlie to Cockburn Central stations (with an  additional 3km to be built between Thornlie and Beckenham stations) will serve the current and  future growth occurring between the Mandurah and Armadale lines and address gaps in public  transport in these communities, as well as providing a direct link to Optus Stadium for  Mandurah Line passengers.

Major construction is due to be completed in 2022 with the first trains expected to run on the  Thornlie-Cockburn Link in 2023.

[ENDS]

Media Contact:  Mr McGowan - Lannie Le-Patterson 0419 698 504  Mr Tudge - Michael Bennett 0434 782 923  Ms Saffioti - Caitlin Goddard 0437 234 249



No publication date : received by Parl Library  on 04/12/2020

