

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health



MEDIA RELEASE



8 November 2020



Our thanks to the staff of the National Incident Centre after a year of  continuous operation

For the first time in its history, Australia’s National Incident Centre (NIC) has been activated  continuously for more than one year, working across Government to respond to  unprecedented health emergencies faced by Australia and the world.

The NIC was activated in November 2019 in response to a measles outbreak in Samoa, and  continued to act during the 2019-20 bushfires, the Whakaari Island volcano eruption and,  most recently, the COVID-19 pandemic.

From December 2019 and into January 2020, the NIC was concurrently managing three  different situations, also for the first time ever.

I want to thank all of the extraordinarily talented, dedicated and hardworking staff of the  National Incident Centre over the past year. Led by the Department of Health, the staff have  been drawn from across Government, including the ADF.

Their work around the clock allowed Australia to maintain an air bridge for critical and scarce  global supplies of PPE and test kits at a time of international shortage. The NIC has literally  been the Operations Headquarters for Australia’s national response to the pandemic.

Never has the National Incident Centre been more important, and its worth is shown in the  Medical Journal of Australia’s paper, which attributes the saving of 16,000 lives to the  comprehensive and early nature of Australia’s response.

The staff of the NIC have embodied the concept of real and profound public service. We are  fortunate to have had such a well-prepared and well-drilled centre as the NIC in place before  the pandemic. We are even more fortunate to have such an extraordinarily capable and  dedicated team to help save lives and protect lives across Australia.

As the Department of Health’s emergency operations centre, the NIC coordinates Australia's  health emergency response to national and international incidents. It is also the primary means  of communication between the World Health Organization and Australia for public health  events, including the COVID-19 pandemic.



Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.

A significant accomplishment was distributing millions of masks and other personal  protective equipment (PPE) from the National Medical Stockpile in response to the bushfires  and COVID-19 to states and territories, aged care facilities, disability service providers and  Primary Health Networks.

As part of the COVID-19 response, key staff from a range of agencies across the APS were  seconded to help operate the NIC. At its peak, the NIC engaged more than 200 employees,  including liaison officers from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Australian  Border Force and the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet. Surge staff have included  epidemiologists and analysts from the Department of Defence, the Department of Agriculture,  Water and the Environment and the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare.

The NIC has also engaged in public information, community awareness and communications.  The Australian Government has the strongest commitment to informing the community about  the latest health advice and developments. This includes a national campaign, website, fact  sheets, media liaison and social media.

The NIC was first formally activated for the SARS outbreak of 2003. It has since been  activated for a range of emergencies including the Indian Ocean tsunami in 2004, the Bali  bombings of 2005, the H1N1 Pandemic in 2009, the Victorian bushfires of 2009, and the  Christchurch earthquake of 2011.

I thank the hardworking public servants in the NIC, which will remain activated for as long as  this national health emergency demands.

ENDS





