

















Page 1 of 2

MEDIA RELEASE

13 September 2020

One giant leap for Premier, one small step for Regional Victoria

The slight easing of regional Victorian restrictions highlights Victorian Premier Daniel

Andrews’ inability to govern for all Victoria, not just Melbourne, Nationals Senate

Leader and Senator for Victoria Bridget McKenzie says.

“While I welcome the premier’s belated acknowledgement regional Victoria is

different to greater Metropolitan Melbourne it is incredibly disappointing regional

COVID-19 free communities remain restricted because of his one-size-fits-all

mentality,” Senator McKenzie said.

“The business support package announced today is a positive step forward but

Wodonga is not Werribee or Waurn Ponds and the best way to support small

businesses and local jobs is to fully open up COVID-19 free local economies based

on Local Government Area.

“The latest Sensis Business Index says one in eight small to medium businesses are

not expected to reopen after this pandemic which has seen hundreds of thousands

of Victorians lose work.

“If Mr Andrews instead chose the commonsense approach of rolling back restrictions

based on Local Government Areas, using his own guidelines, there’d be more than

35 Local Government Areas across rural and regional Victoria already open for

business.

“The premier promised regional Victorian businesses would take another step

forward in coming days and I call on him to honour that.





Page 2 of 2

“It has been COVID-19 free rural and regional Australians who have borne the brunt

of city-centric political agendas. They have done the right thing and just want to get

on with life.

“It is un-Australian that state and territory leaders continue to put their own political

agendas ahead of the national interest.”

Senator McKenzie reiterated her call for a national COVID-19 hotspot definition to

end oppressive border and movement restrictions.

“It is imperative National Cabinet comes to the table and endorses a national

COVID-19 hotspot definition,” Senator McKenzie said.

“It is very hard to kick a goal when you can’t see the goal posts, a national hotspot

definition would give Australia a clear target to aim for as we all work together to get

through this tragic pandemic.”

“For months I have been calling on state and territory leaders to deal with isolated

outbreaks swiftly, securely and in isolation and it is definitions like these that would

allow this to happen.

“I urge National Cabinet to show leadership for the good of all Australians.”



ends



Media contact:   Senator McKenzie: John Chanter | john.chanter@aph.gov.au | 02 6024 2560 | 0437 750 390

