

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  SYDNEY  WEDNESDAY, 22 JANUARY 2020

SUBJECTS: Coronavirus; Out-of-pocket Health Costs; Bridget McKenzie’s Sports  Rorts.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH:  Thanks for coming out. A few  issues that I need to cover this morning. Firstly of course the Coronavirus and the actions  taken by the Chief Medical Officer. The Labor Party fully supports the actions taken by the  Chief Medical Officer. Now this is a serious issue but of course our response must be  careful and must be measured.

I'm receiving a further briefing from the Chief Medical Officer this afternoon which I  appreciate and the Labor Party will give its full support to any further actions that are  deemed necessary by the Government and the Chief Medical Officer to manage this issue.  Australians I think can have confidence in the Chief Medical Officer in the professional  judgments he reaches and I take confidence in the fact that of course he's working with his  State and Territory colleagues as well as his colleagues in the World Health Organization  and other international bodies.

Secondly of course today we are seeing confirmation that out-of-pocket medical costs are  the highest everywhere in Australia that they have ever been on Scott Morrison's watch.  Higher than ever on record in every single Federal electorate. Out-of-pocket costs are a  serious issue and they are damaging the daily budgets of families right across Australia  and this Government has no plan and no clue.

Finally the ongoing saga of Bridget McKenzie and Sports Rorts. This gets worse every  day. Today we see the revelation that Bridget McKenzie gave a grant to a club of which  she was a member and which she has refused to declare her membership of publicly. That  is just not on. And there is no excuse, no feeble weasel words that she and the  Government can employ to say that's okay.

We saw a train wreck interview this morning by the Health Minister who was thanked for  his “behind the scenes work” in this Sports Rorts saga. The Prime Minister might think he  can arrogantly and smugly smirk this crisis away but it is not going away. The only way of  dealing with this scandal is for Bridget McKenzie to resign. If she won't resign, to be  sacked. Briget McKenzie must go. This is a weeping sore for the Morrison Government  and Scott Morrison seems to think you can just arrogantly shrug it off like he shrugs off



everything else. Well, this isn't going away. The Labor Party will continue to pursue this.

The Australian people don't want it to go away. The Australian people know that this stinks  to high heaven. The Australian people know that this is a rort and a con and Scott Morrison  is up to his neck in it. Perhaps that's the reason why he won't sack her? Is that the reason,  because his office was involved in this scandal from the beginning and he knows that if  she’s sacked she'll tell the truth about that. I saw a backbench Liberal MP Tim Wilson say  it's a matter for the National Party. Well no it's not a matter for the National Party. Ethical  standards are a matter for the Prime Minister of the day and this Prime Minister has none if  he lets this Minister survive. This Prime Minister has no standards if he lets this Minister  carry on in this job and this Prime Minister is guilty of the con and the rort as equally as his  Minister if he lets her survive.

Thanks for coming out today.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512





