

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW   CHANNEL 10 THE SUNDAY PROJECT  SUNDAY, 15 MARCH 2020

SUBJECTS: Address to the nation on coronavirus, coronavirus, health and  economic impacts of coronavirus.

LISA WILKINSON, HOST: The Federal Opposition says that more needs to be done to  support Australians who will struggle financially as the country grapples to contain  coronavirus. Shortly, Opposition Leader, Anthony Albanese, will address the nation for his  response to the COVID-19 pandemic and he joins us now. Anthony, a big development  today following on from New Zealand PM Jacinda Ardern's announcement yesterday. Our  Prime Minister has said that as of midnight tonight, all people into Australia will be ordered  to self-isolate. Do you agree with that decision?

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: I do agree  with that decision. I think it's a sensible precaution to take. And what it means is that  people will have to self-isolate for 14 days when they return from overseas, or when they  visit from overseas. And that's a sensible move. The Government needs to respond with a  package of support, in my view, for the airlines. This will have an extraordinary impact. I  spoke to the major airlines today. We're talking about a more than 50 per cent decline in  domestic activity. But the decline internationally is more than 80 per cent. And the airlines  have put together a request from the Government. And I think the Government should  consider that favourably.

PETER VAN ONSELEN, HOST: There's a lot of talk about a wartime style cabinet, the  idea of it to try and take politics out of this to some extent. War-time cabinets involved the  Opposition. Are you and the Opposition part of whatever this thing is?

ALBANESE: No, we're not. We haven't been invited to participate. I think that's  unfortunate. The fact is what we're seeing essentially is COAG phone hook-ups of the  Prime Minister and the Premiers and state leaders once a week. That's a good thing that  that's happening. But I would have thought that it would have been positive if the Prime  Minister had reached out.

VAN ONSELEN: Is there at a dialogue going on behind the scenes between you and the  Prime Minister around the back-room level?

ALBANESE: Well, I wrote to the Prime Minister on Friday.





VAN ONSELEN: I mean more phone conversations and a genuine exchange of ideas and  thoughts?

ALBANESE: No, unfortunately, at this point, not really. But we've been supportive. And  I've said we'll be constructive wherever possible. We will provide support for any  measures, whether they be the health measures. Primarily this is a health emergency  which then has economic implications.

TOMMY LITTLE, HOST: Albo, I don't mean this to sound too rude, but if you can't get the  ear of the Prime Minister at the moment, then why are you doing an address to the nation?

ALBANESE: We're doing a response which is in accordance with precedent that has  occurred in the past. The Prime Minister made a statement on Thursday. I'll be putting  forward our view which is a constructive statement that I'll be making to the nation tonight.

LITTLE: But your view is one thing. What is the point?

ALBANESE: Well, the fact is that we have a say in these matters. The Prime Minister is  not all-powerful and that's why we've raised issues like the impact on casual workers, on  sole traders, the need to respond there. We've raised the need for certainty. My concern  here is that the public aren't getting clear information.

SUSIE YOUSSEF, HOST: Albo, you've just mentioned this. The casual workforce, they're  basically facing economic disaster. You say you've got ideas. We want to know what do  you think we should be doing to protect them?

ALBANESE: The very clear principle should be that no worker should be in a position  whereby they have to choose whether to go to work or to have pay their rent, put food on  the table for their families. That's the situation many of them are in. You've got to remove  that economic incentive to work when people shouldn't be attending work. A number of  companies have done the right thing here. Woolworths, Coles, Target have all said they'll  pay their casual employees. We've got to have, I think, Government support during this  difficult time and recognise that in the long run, if we don't do that, the costs to Government  will be more because the health costs will be more.

WILKINSON: Anthony Albanese, we will have to leave it there. Thanks for joining us.

ALBANESE: Thanks very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053









