

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS - AFTERNOON AGENDA

MONDAY, 21 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Jobseeker; Jobkeeper; Lack of national leadership; Newspoll



KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: Lets go live now to the Deputy Labor Leader and

Shadow Defence Minister, Richard Marles. Let’s start with the Budget

preparations and Jobseeker, it is going to be reduced. We know the Jobseeker

rate, that supplement is going to be halved. You've been saying for some time it

should be higher. Would you like to see that supplement basically made

permanent?



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Well it's

about making sure that the transition from where we're at now, to a place of

normality reflects the reality of what's going on. I mean the reality is that life is

still very tough. It's taking a lot to get the economy back on track. If you've been

living through what has played out in Victoria, you know that there's a lot of

businesses there that remain in a very difficult situation. I mean if you're an

aviation worker there's not a lot of work in that industry right now. So there does

need to be a transition, we all acknowledge that, but the process of removing

and transitioning out of relief has to be one which is calibrated to what's actually

going on out there. We don't think that the current time frame and its speed is

realistic.



GILBERT: In terms of Jobseeker though, the former Newstart, you've said for a

long time, Labor, that it's too low, that people can’t live on $40 a day. This

supplement is being halved at the end of the week. Should that remain on a

permanent basis, is that enough?



MARLES: Well you're right, look what we've said in relation to Jobseeker, the

former Newstart allowance, is that it’s not enough. Again, what we need to be

hearing from, in respect of the Government, is in the process of transitioning in

relation to Jobseeker and going to a point where we get back to the normal

Newstart, what will that new normal be. Is it going to be a rate which is higher

than what Newstart was before COVID struck, because the reality was that it

was nowhere near enough for people to survive. And so one of the outcomes

seems to me in respect of what's happened in relation to the Coronavirus is

that when it's all said and done, Newstart at the end of this needs to be in a

more liveable state, than it was when it started.



GILBERT: It has an economic impact of course, we've seen the Business Council

of Australia Jennifer Westacott makes the point regularly. Chris Richardson

from Deloitte Access Economics, others say it's got that stimulus effect, so it's

more than the equity question involved there.



MARLES: Totally, it’s about putting money into the hands of those who need it

the most, inevitably they spend it. Because they're not in a position to save and

so it will have a big economic impact by doing that and one of things that we

also understand is that when you're giving money to people who have more

money at their disposal, that tends to get saved. So it would be a very positive

economic impact associated with this. But at the end of the day, the

fundamental point is this.  Newstart was not enough. It was not enough before

the coronavirus struck, as we transition back to whatever becomes the new

normal, that fact has to be recognised.



GILBERT: On the Jobkeeper wage subsidy, Labor's saying the Government's

moving too quickly, that we're still in the eye of the economic storm in terms of

the recession. But if the economy does bounce back more effectively, more

robustly than you think, like we've seen with those unemployment numbers last

week. Does that undermine your argument?



MARLES: Well, it is as I was saying at the start, there needs to be a sense of

realism about the pace at which relief is removed. And right now if you are in

Victoria, as an example you are going through a very difficult period and there's

a whole lot of businesses there, which are not in a position to operate normally.

If you're an aviation worker, if you work in the tourism sector, I was speaking to

a travel agent in my electorate last week, I mean if you think about what is their

business right now, so how does it work for them to get to the other side. And

that is ultimately the point here.  If you take the example of travel agents, there

will be business for travel agents in the future no doubt, we will get back to a

place of normality and people will want to book their business trips and their

holidays. But what we need to do is make sure that those businesses, a lot of

which are small businesses are able to get past this and that they’re there on

the other side, and if the relief is removed too quickly well that won't happen,

you’re going to see a whole lot of businesses go by the wayside.



GILBERT: Eleven cases in the last 24 hours in Victoria, that's encouraging,

should the Premier be moving more quickly to pursue this road map out of

lockdown?



MARLES: I think we've got to be really clear about taking the best medical advice

we’ve got here, I mean the numbers are, as you say very encouraging. And

what that says to us actually is that the medical advice that has been informing

the road map up until this moment in time has been working, the strategy is

working. But as I've said in many interviews, and I think with you as well Kieran

over the last few months, we want to be pretty conservative in terms of how we

move out of the process of restrictions, because we only ever want to have to

do that once. Sadly, we've had to do that more than once already in Victoria,

the consequences of moving out too fast are now plain for all to see. And so,

we've just got to see this through, and we do have good medical advice feeding

in here and we need to be listening to it. And one thing about the road map,

whether you like it or not, is that it has actually very clearly marked out the

points of which easing, restrictions ease, and right now we're on target to meet

those deadlines so people can see a lot at the end of the tunnel, we've just got

to see this through.



GILBERT: Is part of it though, because of doubts about the Victorian Health

Department's testing rates and contact tracing regime that it's still not up to it?



MARLES: No, I think it's about being clear that if you've got any mystery cases,

as they describe them, you know unidentified cases that come in being

determined as positive, as long as those exist, what they say is that the virus is

out there in the community, and as long as the virus is out there it can spread. I

mean you can even have quite low numbers as we saw earlier this year, but

you know, it doesn't take many in the right circumstances or perhaps the wrong

circumstances depending on how you see it, for the numbers to grow really

quickly. And we need to be moving very carefully here, we have got this thing

back under a degree of control but we are not out of it yet in Victoria, we just

need to be taking the best medical advice and ultimately seeing this through.



GILBERT: Premier Berejiklian of New South Wales, had a crack at some of her

state counterparts, obviously not Victoria It's a totally different situation, but

some of the other states for overstepping the mark when it comes to border

closures and not acting in the national interest, taking the GST revenue but not

acting as part of the Federation in the national interest, do you think she's right?



MARLES: Well what I want to understand in the midst of all of this is where is the

Prime Minister? How is it that in these moments the Prime Minister manages to

duck for cover, and this is somehow something which is not to do with him. I

mean what the state of affairs is with our internal borders is absolutely, fairly

and squarely a question for the Commonwealth Government and the Prime

Minister and is actually a test of his leadership. If the national cabinet is to have

any meaning at all, then you would think that it has meaning around being able

to work out an agreed strategy in relation to our internal borders, but instead

what we've got is a Prime Minister who sees really the national cabinet as an

opportunity to take the credit when the Premiers agree and to run for cover

when there is a dispute. He's relegated himself on all of these issues as being

our nation’s heckler in chief and as a result we don't have any leadership from

him at all which is bringing along the states in a co-operative way around an

agreed strategy in relation to borders.



GILBERT: You're not criticising Mark McGowan, Annastacia Palaszczuk, the

Labor state leaders. Is this opportunistic from you because you know it's

politically popular in those states but you know their policies have overdone it?



MARLES: In the absence of there being an agreed national strategy and in the

absence of there being leadership on the part of our Prime Minister, I don't

blame Premier’s for doing what they do. And so, I am not going to judge Mark

McGowan or Annastacia Palaszczuk for the positions that they have taken. But

being a national leader is actually about- and running a national cabinet, if it

means anything is about asserting a position, trying to establish control and

then bringing along the people who are part of that Cabinet with you. But our

Prime Minister is incapable of bringing anyone along with him. He doesn’t seek

to. When there is controversy, he runs for the hills and becomes the heckler in

chief. And so long as you've got a Prime Minister who is taking pot shots at

state premiers in the way the Prime Minister does, it doesn't surprise me that

there is an inability on his part, on the Commonwealth Government's part to be

able to get an agreed process or pathway in relation to internal borders. But this

is an absence and a total failure of leadership on the part of Scott Morrison.



GILBERT: Finally on the Newspoll; the primary vote for Labor, 34 per cent. You

haven't budged it since the last election, that must be a worry.



MARLES: Oh look, as long as I have been doing interviews, I have been asked

questions about Newspoll and I have not commented. I think we, in some ways

live in a post opinion poll world after the last election. I will let others give

commentary on what it says. I'd make one observation and that is that

obviously there is a very significant, external event going on which is unlike any

other that we have lived through and that is influencing everything in our lives

and it is changing day by day and so whatever the environment is now, it's

going to be very different come the next election. But ultimately, I will leave it to

you and your colleagues, Kieran, to give the commentary on opinion polls.

From our point of view, we want to make sure that we are working on being

ready to put up an alternative vision for our country at the next election and

that’s what you can see Labor doing.



GILBERT: Deputy Labor Leader Richard Marles, thanks we'll talk to you soon.





MARLES: Thanks, Kieran.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











