

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY

DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

PRESS CONFERENCE

SYDNEY

SUNDAY, 13 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Australian Border Restrictions, Stranded Australians and

caps on international arrivals; missing Australians off Japanese coast.



KRISTINA KENEALLY, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE AND

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS:  Peter Dutton’s double standard

was on full display today. Peter Dutton has spent the best part of the week

pretending that he cares about a family in grief separated by the Queensland-New South Wales border. But why doesn't Peter Dutton care about the families

who are suffering because they're separated by the border that he's in control

of - our international borders. Let me tell you about Astrid Magenau. Astrid

promised her dying father that she would be by his side in Germany when he

succumbed to stage four melanoma ravaging his brain and his abdomen. But it

was a promise that Astrid will live the rest of her life knowing that she failed to

keep it.



She couldn't honour that promise to her dying father because of the blanket

travel bans the Australian Government put in place. They robbed her of the final

opportunity to say goodbye. And making matters worse, right now, Astrid’s

father's funeral is being delayed because Peter Dutton’s department, the

Australian Border Force, will not give her the permission that she needs to

travel.



Let me tell you about Grant Cooper.



Grant Cooper got a phone call telling him that his brother Burnie had fallen

gravely ill and was in a coma in New Zealand. What should have been a

straightforward trip across the Tasman to say goodbye became a journey of

frustration and utter despair.



Grant couldn't get permission from Peter Dutton’s Australian Border Force to go

and say goodbye to his dying brother.



Grant was actually so frustrated with the application process that that he sent

five or six emails to Minister Dutton directly and they were ignored. Grant said

to Peter Dutton: ‘the damage you've done to me is irreparable. It can never be

repaired. It is something I will never forget’.



What doesn't Peter Dutton care about is families like Astrid’s and Grant’s.  Why

doesn't he care about their grief over their dying relatives? At our international

borders, Peter Dutton has two sets of rules in place. At our international border.

Peter Dutton has two sets of rules in place: special privilege for business

people and mates like Tony Abbott, but a harsh set of measures for Australians

in grief like Astrid and Grant. Tony Abbott got an express pass out of the

country when he was offered a job with the United Kingdom government.

Sydney businessmen, Jost Stollmann got approval from the Australian Border

Force to go to Greece and pick up his new yacht.



But Astrid Magenau never got to say goodbye to her dying father. Grant Cooper

never got to hold his brother's hand as he left this earth. A chance for a

goodbye hug or kiss - a moment shared in the last moments of life were denied

to these Australian families, because Peter Dutton just has these two sets of

rules: one for his special mates and harsh measures for the rest of us.



While we're at it, Peter Dutton should be doing something about the 25 000

Australians who are currently stranded overseas. They want to come home in

the middle of a global pandemic and they cannot. They cannot because Scott

Morrison announced a cap on international arrivals nine weeks ago. They are

getting price-gouged by airlines. They are unable to come into their home

country because the Australian Government isn't letting them in. Now, I have to

say, if I were the Minister for Home Affairs today, my number one job would be

ensuring that Australian citizens who are stranded overseas and a deadly

pandemic would be able to come home to their home country. And particularly

in this circumstance, where it's Peter Dutton’s Government, that have the cap

on international arrivals in place. It is his own government that are denying

these people this opportunity.



Let me tell you, about a family stuck in Vancouver. Claire and Andrew Burles,

with their one year old son Chester, they're from Alan Tudge’s electorate in

Victoria. They're stranded there in Vancouver because of COVID-19. They've

lost their jobs. They've had to give up the lease on their house and they're

running out of money. When they contacted the Australian High Commission

because they couldn't get home, they couldn't get on a flight, they were blocked

by the international cap on arrivals. You know what advice they were given by

the Australian High Commission? They were given a list of homeless shelters.

A list of homeless shelters.  They have a one year old child. Is this what we are

coming to Australia -  that we leave Australians behind? We leave them

stranded overseas. We leave them to the mercy of other countries’ charity and

welfare systems. These are our brothers and sisters, our sons and daughters,

our grandchildren. Are we are just going to leave them behind in the middle of a

global pandemic? Come on Peter Dutton. He said today on Insiders that he

would double the cap on international rivals if he could. Well he can!. He is the

Minister for Home Affairs. I have news for you Minister Dutton. You are in

charge of international borders. You are in charge of quarantine arrangements.

That's what the Constitution says. Do your job! Go to the so-called National

Cabinet that the Prime Minister has put together and do your job. You brought

people home from Wuhan, you brought people home from the Diamond

Princess and you put them in federal quarantine facilities. Why aren't you doing

it now?



If Peter Dutton wants to keep playing at being the Opposition Leader in

Queensland, he can go ahead and do it. He can go ahead and try and

challenge Deb Frecklington for the job. But if he's going to stay Minister for

Home Affairs, then he should do his job. He should start today. He should stop

leaving stranded Australians behind. He should stop separating Australians

from their dying loved ones and he should ensure that there is a plan in place to

get the stranded Australians home. Happy to take any questions.



JOURNALIST: Australia is accepting 4000 international arrivals each week.

How many should Australia be accepting?



KENEALLY: Well, first of all, we are not accepting 4000 international arrivals a

week. We haven't been meeting that capacity and there are several numbers at

play here. One, there is the weekly cap of 4000. Two, there are only four

airports that are right now taking international flights and they have individual

caps on them. And three, then there are individual caps on airplanes - only 30

passengers per plane. Now, it is within the wit of the Commonwealth

Government to figure out how to get these 25 000 stranded Australians home.

We have 13 airports in Australia that can take international passengers, why

aren't we using any of them? Canberra,  which is an airport that is closed one

day a week now, why not reopen that and use some of the hotels in Canberra

for quarantine facilities? Darwin, where we have a federally run quarantine

facility that's not being used currently. The Gold Coast, which certainly has

capacity both in terms of the airport, as well as hotels to manage quarantine

arrivals. It is within the capacity of the Commonwealth Government, which

control our international borders and quarantine to figure this out. Is the Minister

a Minister or a mouse? Is he going to do his job or not?



JOURNALIST: The number of arrivals is capped because of the states as well.

Are you talking to Labor state premiers to try to convince them to lift caps?



KENEALLY: We have a Federal Government, that under the constitution is

responsible for international borders. They are responsible for quarantine under

the Constitution. They have already done this during the pandemic. They've

brought people home and quarantined them. I missed the memo where we

decided to hand over quarantine and border responsibilities to state

governments. But that's what this Federal Government does, doesn't it? It just

points fingers at everyone else. It's always someone else to blame. They take

no responsibility and they duck and they weave. When we have stranded

Australians overseas, who are desperate to come home, who are at risk of

homelessness, who are risk of illness, who are separated from their loved ones

back here in Australia - that's not a state government's job to sort out. It's the

Federal Government's job to sort out.



JOURNALIST: Have you had any conversations though with state Labor

premiers about that?



KENEALLY: This is a responsibility of the Commonwealth Government. As

Shadow Minister for Home Affairs. my focus is on what Commonwealth

Governments do. As the Minister for Home Affairs, Peter Dutton should be

doing his job. We have seen him all week in a partisan play attacking Anastasia

Palaszczuk.  Not a peep out of him about what's going on in Liberal states that

have exactly the same border closure policies as Queensland. Haven't heard

him criticise Steven Marshall. Haven't heard him criticise Peter Goodwin in

Tasmania. Peter Dutton should stop playing partisan state politics. We don't

have time for this. We're in the middle of a global pandemic. He should be

doing his job. And his number one job right now as Minister for Home Affairs

should developing a plan to get these stranded Australians home. 25,000

Australians around the globe in places like the United Kingdom, India, Lebanon

and the Philippines. Lebanon for heaven's sakes! The Commonwealth has

already given $5 million to Lebanon, they've already recognised the

humanitarian disaster, but they're leaving Australians behind in that country. It

is within the wit of the Commonwealth Government to resolve this. Send some

charter planes out - we’ve got two grounded international airlines. Use the

federal quarantine facilities that we have in place. The Prime Minister convened

a so-called National Cabinet - go there with a plan. None of this is happening

under Scott Morrison and Peter Dutton.



JOURNALIST: On that note about where they should quarantine - the

Government should take more control - should the Commonwealth take control

of the quarantine arrangements for international arrivals?



KENEALLY: Well, quarantine is a Federal Government responsibility. Let me

say this again. quarantine is a Federal Government responsibility. The

international borders are a Federal Government responsibility. We have a

Prime Minister who's got a plaque to himself in his office, a trophy of boats

saying ‘I stopped these’. Soon he's going to have to have a photo array of all

the 25 000 stranded Australians up in his office saying ‘I stopped these people

as well.’ Come on - these are our fellow Australians. Right now there are

families separated by this international hard border closure and by the cap on

international arrivals. They've been price gouged by airlines. And when they

call on their Federal Government for help, as it says in the front of their

passport,  that they are entitled to do, what do they get told? Go to a charity to

get some food. Go check out the homeless shelters in Vancouver. We can’t

help you. Come on. Isn't there any more Australian of a value than don't leave

your mates behind?



JOURNALIST: Do you think Christmas Island should be used for quarantine

arrivals?



KENEALLY: Christmas Island has already been used for quarantine arrivals.

It's already been used in this global pandemic. The Commonwealth have used

their facilities on Christmas Island. They have used their facilities in the

Northern Territory. I'd also point out there's a lot of empty hotels around

Australia. The Commonwealth have the capacity here. The Commonwealth

should have the leadership here. But as like so many things with this Prime

Minister, he's big on an announcement -  announced a National Cabinet but it's

falling apart and it's not working. He's always there for the headline - he’s

rarely there for the follow through.



JOURNALIST: Brett from SBS - thank you. Just on the international cap - that

was put in place because the states identified what they can comfortably cope

with. Isn't the bigger issue here the fact that the testing and tracing capabilities

of the states is limiting international arrivals, not the will of the Federal

Government?



KENEALLY: Not at all. When it comes to testing and tracing, first of all just

listen to Greg Hunt - ‘we lead the world’. I’ll leave him to explain that. But

secondly, what would really help is if we had a tracing app that worked. The

COVIDsafe app does not work. Let's just call a spade a shovel here. I mean,

the NSW Opal Card does a better job at tracing Coronavirus cases than the

COVIDsafe app. But, where we have capacity, and we do in places like

Canberra, Darwin and on the Gold Coast, where we have the capacity with

both airports and hotels. And surely if this Commonwealth Government

stumped up some resources, ADF support perhaps could assist. They are

responsible for borders. They are responsible for quarantine and they should

put a plan in place to ensure that Australians are not stranded overseas

homeless and without a valid visa in some of these countries who are also

subject to a raging coronavirus infection rates. They should get these people

home and they should be doing it now.



JOURNALIST: In terms of the legal standing of those Australians? Do you

believe that they're being denied their birthright and their constitutional right to

return home to Australia? And does that expose the Federal Government

legally?



KENEALLY: Well, this is something legal scholars are currently discussing. But

the right of a citizen is the right to return to your home country. And the only

thing that is stopping people from being able to return to their home country,

Australia, right now is this cap on international arrivals. Scott Morrison

announced it. It was a decision of his National Cabinet. Now, there is a problem

here and it's up to Scott Morrison and his Home Affairs Minister Peter Dutton to

fix it.



JOURNALIST: And just one final question, thanks for your patience. There's



still two Australians missing at sea off the Japanese coast. The families have

been pleading with the Government to help and they haven't really been given

a clear indication from the Government as to even if that search is continuing.

What's your message to the Federal Government? And are they doing enough

to support those families?



KENEALLY: This is incredibly distressing story. Two Australians, it would

appear, are lost at sea off the coast of Japan. The Australian Government has

within it the resources and the expertise to not only be engaged but to lead

these types of search and rescue missions. The Australian Government should

be doing more. The Australian Government should be actively engaged with

the government of Japan in helping lead the search for these missing

Australians and the Australian Government should be doing everything it can to

support the families of these missing Australians during this time.



All right, thanks, everyone.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JESSE NORTHFIELD 0407 099 468







