CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

PRESS CONFERENCE

SYDNEY

WEDNESDAY, 19 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: COVID-19 vaccine; aged care.



CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Well this morning in

multiple media interviews the Prime Minister told the Australian people his

Government signed a deal with the pharmaceutical company AstraZeneca for

supply of the vaccine being developed by AstraZeneca at Oxford University to

Australians. If that was true, I'd be here today warmly welcoming it.



We've called for the Government to sign advance supply agreements not only with

AstraZeneca, but with other vaccines under development as well to ensure that

Australians have the best chance to get access to the vaccine as soon as it's ready

to roll. The fact of the matter is, the Prime Minister this morning wasn't telling the

truth. Today AstraZeneca has said there is no agreement that has been signed.

AstraZeneca has said the letter of intent ‘does not go to any detail about the costs

or numbers or anything until we have an idea of what the manufacturing capacity is

- that's a critical piece of the puzzle’. They have gone on to say, ‘there is a letter of

intent which is a good first step, a critical next step is to determine manufacturing

capacity’.



Now, it is not clear despite the Prime Minister's spin and rhetoric that we have the

manufacturing capacity in Australia to produce the AstraZeneca vaccine. CSL has

some vaccine production capacity, but they can't produce every type of vaccine

and as AstraZeneca has made clear today, they are very unsure as to whether

CSL can produce this vaccine and CSL have themselves said they are

concentrating on the University of Queensland vaccine. So this is a Prime Minister

who has completely jumped the gun on his announcement, but he hasn't jumped

the gun on the substance. The Government is way behind on substance. The

Government says it's not yet time to sign agreements with AstraZeneca. But other

countries have. US has, UK has, Japan has, India has, Brazil has, South Korea

has, China has, Argentina has and Mexico has. But Australia has not.



When the Prime Minister says Australians will have first access to this vaccine he

is simply not telling the truth. Other governments have acted. The first such

agreement was signed in mid-May. His Government has not acted and no amount

of spin today will change that fact. The Government was ready to go with a meme.

They just don't have an agreement. Reminds me of the bushfires when they were

ready to go with an ad, a TV ad by the Liberal Party, but they were completely

mismanaging the bushfire crisis. They're all about the priority of spin, and not

about substance. Now I stress if the Government had signed an agreement that we

had called for, I'd be here today saying we welcome it. It's later than we would

have liked, but we welcome it. But I can't welcome an agreement, which simply

does not exist. If the Prime Minister had been honest and just said we have signed

a letter of intent. There's a long way to go. There's still ongoing discussions and

negotiations, but we're not there yet. I think Australians would have accepted that.

But to spin about it, dishonestly is utterly unacceptable. It's just not right in the

middle of this pandemic, for the Government to engage in such spin. They don't

have an agreement, and they should be honest about it.



The other matter I want to comment on is the Prime Minister's comments today on

aged care, which I saw on television, the ABC and in other places. I was

particularly disappointed to see the Prime Minister walk away from his

responsibility, his personal responsibility as the head of the Commonwealth

Government for aged care. He said we regulate aged care but there's a public

health pandemic, then they are the things that are managed from Victoria - trying

to shift responsibility for aged care on the Victorian Government. Now the Victorian

Government, has got a lot on its plate and one of its responsibilities is not aged

care. Aged care is the entire responsibility - wholly of the Commonwealth. The

COVID action plan which the Prime Minister waved around in February in

Parliament, says and I quote, 'the Australian Government will also be responsible

for residential aged care facilities, working with other healthcare providers to set

standards to promote safety and security of people in aged care and other

institutional settings and establishing and maintaining infection control guidelines,

health care safety and quality standards'. It's not what I said it's what he said, he

said it. And he's now trying to walk away from it. And we have seen tragedy after

tragedy in aged care, all Australians have seen just the most unthinkable things.

And our thoughts are with everybody in the aged sector, and with everybody with

relatives in aged care facilities. But those Australians who are in aged care or have

relatives in aged care are entitled to be very angry that the Prime Minister is

walking away from his responsibility. The Royal Commission has been told there

was no Federal Government aged care plan. Scott Morrison denies that. Well, I

look forward to the Government giving evidence to the Royal Commission to tell

the Royal Commission they are wrong. We know that St Basil's told the aged care

regulator that they had a positive case - the aged care regulator did not pass it on

to the rest of the Government and the Federal Department of Health I'm sure

inadvertently misled parliament in their evidence to that effect. We saw the

problems on Four Corners this week. We know that the Federal Government has

dropped the ball on aged care. And again, if Scott Morrison was just honest about

it, could just take responsibility for it I think Australians would give him some credit,

but he's just incapable of doing so.



Happy to take any questions.



JOURNALIST: How have you come to conclusion that we don't have an

agreement with AstraZeneca -



BOWEN: Because AstraZeneca says there's no agreement. I mean, AstraZeneca,

who the Prime Minister has quoted saying ‘we have a deal with AstraZeneca’ says

there is no deal. I mean, it's pretty straightforward. There either is a deal or their

isn't. Scott Morrison says he's got an agreement with AstraZeneca. AstraZeneca

says no, we have no deal. I mean, I quoted you before. They say 'we have a letter

of intent, which does not go into any detail about costs or numbers or anything until

we have an idea of what the manufacturing capacity is' that's what AstraZeneca

says. Not my words. That's their words. There is no deal. Now I hope there is a

deal. I hope that Prime Minister lifts his game, gets an agreement, implements it.

And then at least if the AstraZeneca vaccine is the one which comes to fruition,

Australians will have access. But he should also be negotiating with other

companies as other countries around the world have done. The United States has

got six agreements, United Kingdom's got give, Japan's got three, other countries

are managing their risk, ensuring that their citizens will have access to the best

chance vaccines in development. The Morrison Government simply isn't doing

that.



JOURNALIST: Do you still maintain that the Government isn't doing enough to get

us a vaccine? (inaudible) They have also dedicated more than $60 million for at

home research as well.



BOWEN: No they haven't, I'm sorry, that's not true. The only research investment

by the Federal Government is in the University of Queensland vaccine which is $5

million. That is the fact. The Queensland Government's investing $10 million in that

vaccine the Australian Government is investing $5 million. That is the sum total of

the Federal Government investment in COVID vaccines under development in

Australia, the total. $5 million.



JOURNALIST: How much more do you think the Government should invest?



BOWEN: Well, the Government should be actually entering into advanced supply

agreements not saying they have, but doing it. They should be entering into them

with AstraZeneca and with the other vaccines, not all of them I accept but at least

some more so that Australians have the best chance of getting access to the

vaccine. We don't know which vaccine will work. It might be the AstraZeneca one,

it's got a good chance. It might be the University of Queensland one, it might be

one of the others, one of the other 160 under development. To start with the

Government put all their eggs in the University of Queensland basket. They said

that's what we're investing in. Now, we said hang on, you don't want to be putting

all your eggs in that basket you should be spreading investment. Then they said

last week, we need help from manufacturers. We need manufacturers to tell us

whether they can manufacture the vaccine in Australia. That was last week. This

week today the Prime Minister is now say we will manufacture in Australia. I mean

what happened to the process last week? Scott Morrison is making it up as he

goes, feeling the political pressure, because he hasn't signed an agreement. I tell

you what, the way to deal with the political pressure for not signing agreement is

not to pretend you have when you haven't. It is to actually sign one.



JOURNALIST (inaudible)



BOWEN: I would look forward to a constructive discussion with the Government

about how it would best be rolled out, what legislative, you know, mechanisms they

would use, and we would play a constructive role. But we're not there yet.



JOURNALIST: But Scott Morrison has spoken about this this morning, to say

when it comes in he would like it to be mandatory, does Labor also?



BOWEN: He's getting way ahead of himself. He has no vaccine. No agreement

has been signed, no deal entered into, no access secured. I think before we get to

that conversation, about how it will be rolled out. Let's actually get access to a

vaccine, that will be the most important first step.



JOURNALIST: (inaudible) are you concerned given that that is how the outbreak

in Victoria started?



BOWEN: Of course, I'm concerned as a Sydneysider. Of course, I am concerned,

and I think every Sydneysider would be concerned. I'm sure the State

Government's concerned. I'm not going to politicise this, the State Government in

New South Wales happens to be of a different political persuasion to me. They're

doing their best and difficult circumstance to manage hotel quarantine. New South

Wales and Victoria have taken the lion's share of the responsibility when it comes

to hotel quarantine because most people fly into Sydney and Melbourne. Other

states have done a good job too. But Sydney and Melbourne, Victoria and New

South Wales are taking the burden, the major share and the burden in quarantine.

I accept that that's happened very quickly, that staffing issues have had to be

sorted out very quickly. The Premier has said that there will be a thorough

investigation as to how this happened, what the implications are, and I'll accept

that on face value. And I'm sure that we all wait the results of that thorough

investigation. And we hope, beyond hope that that security guard hasn't spread it.



JOURNALIST: You spoke about how you were disappointed with Scott Morrison's

comments this morning. Can you speak specifically about how disappointing it is in

terms of what happened at Epping Gardens when there was some confusion

between the Government and that aged care centre (inaudible)?





BOWEN: Look the Epping Gardens case is horrific. As is St Basil's as was

Newmarch House. We could go through. There was a very compelling article in the

Saturday Paper on Saturday, as it always is, by Rick Morton which went through

the dysfunction in the relationship between the Commonwealth aged care regulator

and state and territory bodies and the and the aged care providers themselves. It

simply isn't good enough. And as I said, we're Australia in 2020. I mean, surely we

can look after the elderly who've contributed so much to our country and don't ask

for much but just to be safe in their retirement facilities in their aged care facilities.

We aren't doing that as a country. Two thirds of our deaths from COVID-19 have

been in aged care facilities. It's a very clear Commonwealth responsibility.

Nobody's expecting miracles. But we are expecting honesty. And we are expecting

competence. And Scott Morrison in relation to aged care isn't giving us honesty or

competence.



Thanks very much.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512

