









SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate  Senator for South Australia



MEDIA RELEASE

6 August 2020

Australia and Singapore sign digital trade agreement

Australia and Singapore have today signed a landmark Digital Economy Agreement (DEA) to  further enhance digital trade opportunities for businesses and consumers in both our nations.

Federal Trade Minister Simon Birmingham, who signed the Agreement with Singapore’s Minister  for Trade and Industry Chan Chun Sing in a virtual signing ceremony, said it would help to expand  the scope of our economic engagement with our largest two-way trading partner in South-East  Asia.

“Technology and digitisation continue to transform the way Australian businesses trade and  interact with customers in key export markets including Singapore,” Minister Birmingham said.

“As we begin the economic recovery from COVID-19, this Agreement will reduce barriers and  boost opportunities for Australian businesses to reach more customers and further tap into the  Singaporean market.

“Singapore’s economy is dynamic, innovative and sophisticated and this will help to make it easier  for Australian businesses to connect with the rising number of Singaporean businesses and  consumers now engaged in cross-border digital trade.

“The Agreement will deliver practical improvements to lower costs and make it easier for exporters  to do business, including in areas of personal data protection, e-invoicing, paperless customs  procedures, and electronic certification for agricultural exports.

“These are some of the most ambitious digital trade rules Australia has ever negotiated, and this  Agreement will serve as benchmark for other digital trade rule negotiations within our region.

“The Agreement builds on Australia and Singapore’s leading roles in negotiating new international  rules on e-commerce in the World Trade Organization to better facilitate the growing volumes of  digital trade across the globe.”

The DEA upgrades the Singapore-Australia Free Trade Agreement (SAFTA) through a new Digital  Economy chapter. It will now undergo Australian treaty-making processes, including tabling in  Parliament and consideration by the Joint Standing Committee on Treaties, prior to entry into force.

The full text of the DEA and a summary of its key features are available at: Australia-Singapore  Digital Economy Agreement.

Media Contacts  Benn Ayre: +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs: +61 417 097 644









Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.











