













SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Finance  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Leader of the Government in the Senate

Senator for South Australia



MEDIA RELEASE

1 December 2020

Travel agents COVID-19 payment



The Morrison Government will provide a one-off payment to assist travel agents in recognition that  many continue to work hard processing consumer refunds, whilst unable to trade due to the  COVID-19 pandemic.

Federal Tourism Minister Simon Birmingham said most travel agents face the unique circumstance  of having to refund existing bookings at the same time as they manage their operating models in  the face of ongoing uncertainty about international travel.

“This one off payment recognises that travel agents are operating in an exceptional set of  circumstances where most are having to refund last year’s income while continuing to work with no  additional income,” Minister Birmingham said.

“Providing further assistance to travel agents in the current environment will help keep them afloat  at a time when they are continuing to hold travel credits for consumers who have previously  cancelled travel.

“This one off payment is in addition to our significant economic support for the tourism and travel  industry during the COVID-19 pandemic which continues to assist hundreds of thousands of  tourism businesses across Australia.”

Australian Federation of Travel Agents Chief Executive Officer Darren Rudd welcomed the  Morrison Government’s assistance payments for travel agents.

“We are delighted that the Morrison Government has acknowledged the unique and challenging  circumstances that Travel Agents have been confronted with,” Mr Rudd said.

“This package will help to ensure the sectors sustainability to assist Australian travellers with the  new world of COVIDSafe travel.”

Under the $128 million scheme, eligible travel agents with a turnover of between $50,000 and $20  million a year will be able to apply for the one off payment.

Payments will be scaled, with a minimum payment of $1500 for a business with a turnover of $50  000 up to a maximum payment of $100,000 for a business with a turnover of $20 million.

Media Contacts  Benn Ayre: +61 428 342 325  Julia Ebbs: +61 417 097 644

Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.



