

TONY BURKE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ARTS  MANAGER OF OPPOSITION BUSINESS  MEMBER FOR WATSON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS WITH KIERAN GILBERT  WEDNESDAY, 25 MARCH 2020

SUBJECT: Coronavirus crisis, wage subsidies, Government’s decision to  shut down parliament.

KIERAN GILBERT: We cross now to Shadow Industrial Relations Minister and  Manager of Opposition Business in the House of Reps. Mr. Burke, you've said  that the government should look at the wage-type guarantees that we've seen  in the UK and elsewhere. What do you say to their argument that it's easier to  do it with the system they've got rather than try and reinvent the wheel? That's  the reason Treasury is telling them stick with the system you've got and try and  support business that way through the BAS payments and so on.

TONY BURKE: Well the thing with what they're doing at the moment is they're  not supporting wages at all. Businesses get paid the same amount whether  they keep their staff on or not. So when the payments come through in the next  quarter to business, businesses will be paid based on how many people they  used to employ. A business that has sacked all its staff will get the same  payment from the government as a business that has kept its staff on. Now  that's not an incentive at all. And even if they did make these payments  conditional, what the government is doing is providing effectively - if it were  conditional - would still only amount to 20 percent of the wages bill. In the UK  it's 80 per cent of the wages bill. So I don't mind which mechanism the  Government wants to use. I don't mind which existing channel, whether it's the  tax office or which methods they want to use, but what it has to be is a system  where business is paid to keep people in work. Where it's conditional and it's  enough of a support that business can afford to keep people on. If you're a  business and all of a sudden you've lost your income, and the government says  oh well, we'll pay the same whether you keep your workers on or not, or even if  it was made conditional the government says for a median wage will pay 20 per

cent - no business going through this crisis is going to be able to keep people  on. And what's the outcome of that Kieran? Think of all the times you've heard  Scott Morrison claim that one of his values was that the best form of welfare is  a job. The moment he's been put to the test, we are watching the greatest  transfer of people from work to welfare in our lifetime. And if he wants to say ‘oh  well you know it's better to use existing channels they could they can handle it’  - look at the Centrelink queues because that's a direct result of the government  doing it this way.

GILBERT: I do want to talk to more about that Centrelink scenario. This  tragedy we're seeing with so many people, they are heartbreaking the images  we've seen over this week, no doubt about it. But we'll get to that in a moment  because I just want to explore the critique of the government's approach here  because the Treasury documents that they have issued with this economic  statement suggest for monthly activity statement lodges the additional  payments are delivered as an automatic credit. On the monthly statement for  quarterly activity statement lodges the businesses receive the payments, the  scheduled payments as that as they go. Are you saying basically that they will  receive those payments regardless of whether or not there is tax withheld in  those statements?

BURKE: No no no. It's based on previous employment. So if you're on  quarterly payments in that way, then the money that you get in the next quarter  will be based on your wages bill in the previous quarter. For the second  payment it will be based on the on the current quarter. But it's always based on  how many people you used to employ. There is no point where the government  checks ‘Do you still have those people in work?’ No point. Now if you did that  that'd only fix a portion of the problem. Because you then have arguably the  bigger problem which is all they're doing in terms of support is how much  taxis withheld. Now if you're a median wage earner that's 20 percent. In the UK  the subsidy is 80 percent. Now businesses want to keep people on because  this isn't like other sorts of downturns. This is a not a downturn because of  weakness in confidence. There were weaknesses in the economy, but what  business is facing right now is a decision of government that you must close  your doors. We want those businesses at the end of this to be able to open  their doors again and still have their workforce with them. The way New  Zealand's doing it, the way the UK is doing it, means that workers will continue  to be paid via their employer. The relationship with the employer won't go away  and in a few months’ time, when we're on the other side of this, that's going to  make the world of difference to people's lives. Don't forget in other recessions  or depressions you end up with some people who lose their jobs never  returning to the workforce. What the UK is doing, what's happening throughout  much of Europe, what's happening in New Zealand means that throughout this  crisis as many people as possible will keep their relationship with their  employer. That will make a world of difference on the other side.



GILBERT: But to get the full subsidy, it seems from this Treasury advice, to get  that full $100,000 dollar wage subsidy, they don't get it in one fell swoop. They  don't get it in one quarter or one month, it's phased in. So for the second  quarter or the second period that they seek to get this wages boost they still  need to have people on their books don't they? I mean it's not like no one's  going to get the $100,000 by sacking someone after their first payment, it's just  that's not the way this is designed is it? Is that your understanding of how it  works?  BURKE: Each time you get the payment from the government you get it based  on how many people you used to employ.

GILBERT: So no one is going to get the $100,000 If they sack people?

BURKE: That will affect the second payment, that will affect the second  payment. I hear what you're saying there. That's right, they won't. They'll only  get the first half of it. But right now, at the moment, that's what employers are  facing. Employers are facing right now, what decisions am I going to make  when my income is collapsing? And if the best the government is offering is for  an employee on median wages a 20 percent support, and from the employer's  perspective you'll only miss out on the second quarter's payment if you sack all  your staff now, you'll still get the first payment - then no wonder we're seeing  the Centrelink queues that we're seeing. This is a crisis like we haven't seen  before and you need to be willing to be flexible and to say what's the objective?  If the objective is to keep people in work and to keep people's relationship with  the employer, then every Centrelink queue you see says the government is  doing this the wrong way.

GILBERT: But you know the hospitality industry well and obviously so many of  those businesses have gone under overnight, basically. They’ve had to at least  shut their doors, and so many casual workers in that environment, a huge  percentage of our workforce. Was it inevitable given the social lockdowns we've  seen, this pandemic is not something that you or I have seen in our lifetime, it's  horrendous. Is this social economic dislocation inevitable given the enormity of  what the government's having to grapple with?

BURKE: The fact that there will be huge dislocation, yes. But the fact that we  are seeing it on such a scale? No. Because the government has decided that  they would rather have people receive the money from Centrelink then receive  the money from their employer. That has been an active decision of  government that is different to the decisions of New Zealand, and different to  the decisions in UK and other countries. This is not sort of an accidental  implication. This is how Scott Morrison and Josh Frydenberg have designed it.  They designed it that you shift from being paid by your employer, to being paid  by Centrelink. That's why we're seeing those queues. It creates a problem for

employers and creates a problem for employees. You have to look at the  goodwill that's out there trying to find a way through this. To see what the  Australian Hotels Association and the United Workers Union did with the  industrial commission yesterday. Where for full timers, they'll be able during this  time to significantly cut how many shifts they've got but to keep them on the  books. Businesses understand how important it is to keep people on the books.  They want this to work. The union movement is being flexible. They want this to  work. The government is looking at this through a political prism. Scott  Morrison, every chance he gets says look at the global financial crisis. I'll tell  you one thing we didn't see during the global financial crisis: that's the  Centrelink queues you're looking at right now. Right now. These are decisions  Scott Morrison has made. Labor argued in the Parliament, the union movement  is arguing and businesses arguing more loudly and loudly every day to do this a  different way.

GILBERT: The parliament has now risen until August. Is there any way that  you can see - as Manager of Opposition Business, if you can put that hat on for  us - that you can see Parliament sitting without having to actually come to  Canberra. Can you have a virtual sitting if legislation needs to be passed or so  on?

BURKE: The government saying we won't sit until August is frankly ridiculous.  It's ridiculous and it's offensive, and it sends a message to every Australian that  we see no need to update the law or to hold the government accountable while  Australians are going through the biggest crisis of their lives. It is an absurd,  arrogant decision from the government. And can I tell you they are going to  need to revisit it. What went through on Monday, we supported that because it  was urgent but they have not got that project right. And what you're seeing  around the country with closed doors and Centrelink queues, the crisis we’re  seeing, tells you that they need to come back. The sooner they do it the sooner  we get back to that parliament to fix these challenges, then the fewer  Australians are going to be thrown out of the workforce.

GILBERT: Can you do it though while self-isolating?

BURKE: Well right at the moment all we need - because there was a standing  order change that we made - so that all we need is a quorum, which is 31  members, and we're going to be able to sit. That's all we need. Now it is almost  impossible with the current isolation rules to imagine that we won't be able to  get 31 people to Canberra. Now if we ended up with a situation where we did  have to go to some sort of “break glass” other option the flexibility is there we  put that through the Parliament. But I've got to tell you at this stage we don't  expect that we'll need to use that. What we need to do and what we can do is  meet in the normal way. We only need 31 people there, and we need to do it  soon because the government has not yet got gotten this right. And once



people lose their jobs during the crisis - at the other end of this it is much harder  for them and much harder for the businesses that employ them.

GILBERT: Mr Burke I appreciate your time as always, thanks.

BURKE: Great to talk to you Kieran.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ADAM GARTRELL 0427 008 525









