



The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

MEDIA STATEMENT

Sunday 8 November 2020

STATEMENT ON US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION

On behalf of the Australian Government, I congratulate President-elect Joe Biden on his election as the  46th President of the United States and wish him every success for his term in office.

The President-elect has been a great friend of Australia over many years, including when he visited  Australia in 2016.

The Australia-US Alliance is enduring and built on shared democratic values such as the international  rule of law, respect for human rights and equality, freedom of religion and belief, freedom of expression  and diversity of opinion.

Our partnership goes back more than a century. Next year, our countries will celebrate 70 years since  the signing of the ANZUS Treaty — the foundation of our security alliance.

Today, the world faces many challenges, including managing the COVID-19 pandemic, on both a health  and economic front, ensuring a free and open Indo-Pacific region, and peace and stability.

American leadership is indispensable to meeting these challenges and upholding the rules, norms and  standards of our international community.

We also look forward to working with President-elect Biden and his Administration to continue to fight  the COVID-19 global pandemic and recession, to develop a vaccine, drive a global economic recovery,  and develop new technologies to reduce global emissions as we practically confront the challenge of  climate change. We welcome the President-elect’s commitment to multilateral institutions and  strengthening democracies.

I also extend my congratulations to Kamala Harris on her election as Vice President of the United States.

On behalf of the Australian Government I also acknowledge and thank President Donald J. Trump, Vice  President Mike Pence, and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo for their contribution to the Australia-US  relationship. Australia has enjoyed a strong working relationship with the current administration, one  that has seen the strength of our alliance continue to grow and deepen.

We will continue to work closely with President Trump and his administration in the transition period  between now and 20 January.

ENDS

