MATT THISTLETHWAITE MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR THE REPUBLIC

MEMBER FOR KINGSFORD SMITH





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS

MONDAY, 24 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Aged care failures; Branch stacking in the Liberal Party; Victoria.



CHRIS KENNY, HOST: Joining me now from Canberra is Labor’s Matt Thistlethwaite, thanks

for joining us Matt. First up, this apology from Scott Morrison is that what Labor were after? Are

you happy with that?



MATT THISTLETHWAITE, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES:

Well we welcome the apology, late as it is Chris, but if you're the family who has a loved one in

an aged care facility throughout Australia I think you want more than an apology, you want a

plan, you want to plan to fix some of the problems that have been identified in aged care by

this Covid crisis and that are being identified through the Royal Commission. They're problems

that relate to the quality of care, the problems that relate to the skills and the qualifications of

the staff. I mean the Liberals changed the laws to ensure that nursing homes don't have to

have nurses anymore. I know if I had a loved one in an aged care facility that got sick, you'd

want to know that the best quality care is available and the best trained staff are on hand.

There's issues with the conditions and the overworked nature of people that work in the

industry. Australians want a plan to deal with some of these issues that have been around for

some time.



KENNY: Well Scott Morrison says there has been a plan and I've been updating it, I've

certainly been critical on this program because we've been talking about the need to focus on

aged care since February, long before problems in Australia, I can't believe that State, Federal

and private authorities haven't done more in this area. Are you happy they're trying to catch up

now? We've got the royal commission of course which is exposing problems, but there's a lot

of focus on actually changing rules, changing responses, getting more adequate plans in place

especially in Victoria but around the rest of the nation too.



THISTLETHWAITE: Firstly, good on you for concentrating on it, it's been a huge issue and it's

something as a local Member we get a lot of correspondence and complaints from constituents

about. It's not only the in facility care, it's providing packages for people in the local

communities to ensure that they can get care when they need it for people coming to their

homes. But in terms of what's going on in the facilities, as you're aware this has been

happening for some time and they relate to the issues I mentioned earlier about quality of care,

the pay and conditions of workers, it's about ensuring you know that Australians get access to

the best care possible. These are people that have worked all their lives, given all for our

country and we think that they deserve the best that Government can provide through a

scheme that makes sure that the providers are up to scratch and that people get the best

quality care. So good on you for concentrating on it, Chris.



KENNY: Well I've got to give you a free kick on what's happening with the Liberal Party branch

stacking in Victoria, we saw what the Labor Party was doing in Victoria earlier this year the

same journalists from the same organisation has exposed some pretty ugly stuff on the Liberal

side. The key here is whether paid political staffers should be doing party political work, it’s a

bit naive to think that they wouldn't, isn't it?



THISTLETHWAITE: Look Chris, I think that Australians have had a gut full of this sort of stuff,

particularly during the crisis at the moment where plenty of Australians are out of work. All this

sort of stuff looks pretty self-indulgent and I think Australians are sick of it. What the

Government needs to do is act quickly. When this happened in the Labor Party, Anthony

Albanese, Dan Andrews, acted quickly, they sacked the Minister, they launched an inquiry

straight away, then there was a couple of other Ministers that went in the wake of that. I think

Scott Morrison needs to show some leadership and do a similar thing. We've called for Michael

Sukkar to be stood down, I think at the very least while this investigation is going on into

whether or not his office was using a taxpayer funded staffer for branch stacking, he should at

least stand down so that there can be a clear inquiry and Australians can have confidence that

we're focusing on the issues that matter to them about their jobs and getting through this

Coronavirus crisis.





KENNY: You've literally only got 20 seconds, but can you tell me whether you support or are

worried about Daniel Andrews extending emergency powers for another 12 months?



THISTLETHWAITE: Look I think Daniel Andrews is doing the right thing, it's obviously based

on the advice of medical experts down there and the key thing here Chris in what he's

announced is that it will be reviewed every four weeks, so they'll be parliamentary scrutiny, it'll

have to be reviewed and updated every four weeks and it's about ensuring that the state has

the wherewithal to get on top of this virus, to get the numbers down and get us quicker to

opening up again.



KENNY: Sorry, we get the gist, thanks very much Matt Thistlethwaite, appreciate your time.



THISTLETHWAITE: Chris, thanks mate.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: BEN LEESON 0404 648 275

