JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES

MEMBER FOR HUNTER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2CC

WEDNESDAY, 5 AUGUST 2020



SUBJECTS: Morrison Government missed own deadline to create workforce

strategy for the agriculture sector; the Labor Party is a broad church.



STEPHEN CENATIEMPO, HOST: One bloke that is ruffling some feathers in government

at the moment is the Member for Hunter and Shadow Minister for Agricultural and

Resources, Joel Fitzgibbon. He is our regular Wednesday political guest. Joel, do I need to

reach out to some of my old contacts in the Liberal Party and see if we can get you a

guernsey on the other team?



JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: Good on you, Stephen. Can I first say that

it is 14 degrees in Muswellbrook, and minus two degrees in Canberra. So, I'm thinking of

you down there. Imagine how much warmer it could have been in Canberra if you'd had

227 politicians up on the hill. We would have warmed the place up a bit for you.



CENATIEMPO: Well, that's happening at the end of the month. I do want to talk about the

factional ructions in the Labor Party in a moment. But firstly, you've been critical of the

Morison government. They missed their own deadline to create a job strategy for the

agriculture sector. It was supposed to happen by July of this year. Can we give them a little

bit of leniency because of what's going on with the Coronavirus, or should they have had

this in the bag way before that?



FITZGIBBON: Not me, Stephen. Not on this occasion. This has been a growing problem

over a number of years. In fact, in the seven years I've been in the agricultural portfolio, in

my experience, workforce shortage has been the number one issue. So, such has come

upon us because of COVID-19, it's been a problem for a long, long time. And of course, it's

been massively exacerbated by COVID-19 as we lose so much of that overseas workforce.

So, Scott Morrison prior to COVID-19 started to finally recognise this 12 months ago -

almost to the day - and said: look, I'm going to do something about this. We're going to

develop a Workforce Strategy - another committee, another pamphlet, another discussion,

and 12 months on, we've heard nothing, and it's just not good enough. We have a crisis in

the horticulture sector in particular, but really right across the agriculture sector. And now

we're going to be playing some very, very desperate catch up.



CENATIEMPO: Joel, you and I have discussed this before, I think the last time was over

the so-called backpacker tax at the time, and I understand that we desperately need an

overseas workforce, particularly when it comes to fruit picking and the like. But why is it

that nobody, you know - and I lay this at your feet as the Opposition spokesman as much

as I do at the Minister's feet - why is there never a strategy to get unemployed Australians

into those jobs?



FITZGIBBON: Well, the first point I'd make to that Stephen is that the last thing growers

and producers want are people on their farm who don't want to be there. And so this

becomes a cultural problem and something we all have to take some form of responsibility

for. We need to change that culture and we need to be developing young people who are

prepared to go out willingly and happily to do this work. And of course, that starts at a very

early age and becomes part of the discussion about our education system. But it is what it

is. You can't force them to go and the farmers don't want them to go. Forcing them would

be administrative nightmare and very, very difficult. We do have to change the culture. But

we do have to come up with some smart ideas to deal with the problem in the shorter term.



CENATIEMPO: Yeah, I 100 per cent agree with you and I and I think you're right. I mean,

this has been a problem for a long time. And you know, and as I say, you know, I'll give the

government a bit of a pass missing the July deadline, but you're right, this is something you

should have been addressing years and years ago. And look, I don't know what the answer

is myself, but you'd like to say that culture change wouldn't you?



FITZGIBBON: Yeah you would. And can I quickly say this: just like fuel security, food

security, some of the other issues I've discussed with you, this will get us thinking about

the architecture of our agriculture sector because for a long, long time we've been very

heavily dependent on overseas labour. And we have to ask ourselves, will that ever be

available to us again in the form that it has in the past? And if the answer to that is no, we

need to think about the architecture of the agriculture sector.



CENATIEMPO: Yeah, no two ways about that. Now, a few years ago, you and I were both

presented with commemorative Newcastle Knights jerseys in hi-vis colors to support the

miners, because your electorate is very much a mining area. You've come under fire

recently for sticking up for your own constituents, but from within your own faction. Now

you were complaining about the Greens infiltrating Labor, but there is even talk that there's

a far left group within the right faction.



FITZGIBBON: Well, those reports aren't quite accurate, but it is true that the Labor Party is

the biggest political party in the country. And therefore it has a very diverse membership.

And therefore people with different views and ideas. And look, I don't think there's anything

wrong with members of the party, including members of parliament, publicly airing and

having a contest of ideas in all areas of public policy. I think that makes for a vibrant party

and a healthy party. And I think it's a good thing.



CENATIEMPO: Why is it that some of your colleagues are reluctant to embrace that

attitude and rather look at it is? Because, I mean, the Labor Party has often had a fixation

with rats and breaking ranks. But surely your first responsibility is to the people of Hunter

as opposed to the party?



FITZGIBBON: I think understandably people see unity as being important for a mass

political party, like the Labor Party - a party of government, a party that people hope to see

in government from time to time. But on the other side of that equation, of course, it's pretty

difficult to expect a Labor Party member seeking or representing a seat in Central

Queensland to have the exactly the same views of the world than as a person representing

inner city Melbourne or Sydney. So, we are a broad church and I believe in this 21st

century, we do need to allow people to express the views of their local electorates. We are

all creatures in part, I hope, of where we come from. And if we're going to be effective

representatives, we need to be able to express the views of our local communities.



CENATIEMPO: Anthony Albanese's seat of Grayndler is very, very much, I won't say

under threat from the Greens, but it's one of those seats those often lambasted as a basket



weaving seat. Does that make his positions as party leader more difficult?



FITZGIBBON: Again, Anthony Albanese, like the rest of us, is in large part a function of

the place from which he comes in. In Albo's case, that's a busy inner city seat. But he's a

very pragmatic and open minded person and he's very smart on the policy front. And he

knows that as a political leader, he needs to bring the majority of the country with him. And

he also understands, therefore, that to do so you have to be able to give expression to the

views of people right across the country. And I think he's pretty effective at doing that. And

that's what makes him a good leader.



CENATIEMPO: Joel will catch up again next week.



FITZGIBBON: A pleasure Stephen.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641



