Media inquiries: Aaron Langmaid 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania









Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck  Minister for Aged Care and Senior Australians  Minister for Youth and Sport



19 March 2020



Fact sheet for senior Australians to stop the spread and save lives

A comprehensive fact sheet is now available for senior Australians as the campaign to stop  the spread of COVID-19 continues.

Minister for Aged Care and Senior Australians Richard Colbeck said the online guide was a  one-stop-shop at a time when clear advice has never been more important.

“Senior Australians and their loved ones must have access to updated information to ensure  they can protect themselves, whether they’re living at home, with family or in care,” Minister  Colbeck said.

“We know the risk of serious illness from COVID-19 increases with age.

“Unfortunately, the highest rate of fatalities is among older people, particularly those with a  weakened immune system.”

Compiled in conjunction with the Federal Government and the older Australians peak body  Council on the Ageing (COTA) Australia, the fact sheet offers a clear understanding and  advice on topics including self-isolation, testing, hygiene and visitation.

COTA chief executive Ian Yates said it was another important tool in the raft of measures  aimed at supporting senior and vulnerable Australians with accurate information.

“There are things we can all do to keep ourselves safe while still going about our life, and for  protecting the health and wellbeing of those who matter to us most,” Mr Yates said.

Minister Colbeck said the fact sheet underlined the important measures that would change the  way families and friends interact.

“This is an extraordinary health challenge and we need to be doing everything we can to stop  the spread of COVID-19 and save lives,” Minister Colbeck said.

“We all need to play our part and work together to protect older Australians.”

The fact sheet is available here. For more information visit www.health.gov.au

