

The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au

5 April 2020





AUSTRALIAN SEAFARERS GET EXTENSION FOR CERTIFICATE  RENEWALS DURING COVID-19 PANDEMIC

The Australian Maritime Safety Authority (AMSA) is providing Australian seafarers impacted by  COVID-19 with an automatic six-month extension on their qualifications.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the extension was one of the many measures the Federal Government was taking to  support the Australian commercial maritime industry.

“The National Cabinet has made it clear - the Australian commercial maritime industry provides an  essential service by ensuring the movement of critical goods and supplies continues throughout this  challenging time,” Mr McCormack said.

“Everything we are doing as a Government is about saving lives and saving livelihoods and we know  how important Australia’s maritime industry is to both.

“The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted some of the systems in place for seafarers to revalidate their  qualifications and this extension offers a common-sense solution.”

The certification regime ensures that seafarers are qualified to operate commercial vessels enabling  them to continue carrying out their essential work.

AMSA CEO Mick Kinley said AMSA was committed to supporting the Australian commercial vessel  industry.

“We already have a number of existing exemptions that might assist operators who find themselves  unable to comply with the National Law due to COVID-19, including a temporary crewing permit and  suspension of a certificate of survey to name just a few.

“AMSA can also issue specific exemptions to help operators and crew continue to operate in  exceptional circumstances.”

More information on what AMSA is doing to support the maritime industry during COVID-19 is  available online at https://www.amsa.gov.au/news-community/campaigns/advice-maritime-industry-covid-19.

Ends.

Media: Mr McCormack - Dean Shachar 0418 202 860

