

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES  MEMBER FOR HUNTER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SUNRISE  MONDAY, 6 APRIL 2020

SUBJECTS: JobKeeper Package; Social Distancing

NATALIE BARR, HOST:  The pressure is on the government to expand its  JobKeeper package. Parliament will debate the bill on Wednesday. The PM  faces increasing calls to extend the $130 billion package subsidy to more  casual workers. It's also been revealed council workers and visa holders aren't  eligible. The Federal Government is urging Labor not to stand in the way of  passing the support measures. For more, we're joined by Nationals MP,  Barnaby Joyce and Shadow Agriculture Minister, Joel Fitzgibbon. Barnaby, let's  start with you. The Minister says the time pressure to approve the payments  means the outcome won't be perfect. But when this package is already so  huge, why not just include those who were missing out? I think they say they're  talking about 1.1 million of these workers.

BARNABY JOYCE, MEMBER FOR NEW ENGLAND: Well, first of all, we are  expanding those who are getting it - you'd see that on the front page of the  Sydney Morning Herald. Secondly, it's $130 billion. We do have to pay this  money back at some stage. You will always have requests, and I know for  instance chefs who have come overseas and are working in outback  roadhouses, people want to make sure they try and keep them there. They  don't want them leaving. Once the Coronavirus peak is over, we're going to  need them back in a job as quickly as possible for those places to make  money. But you're always going to get requests, it'll never stop. But also, you  have to realise that after this is over, we have half trillion dollars worth of debt.  This debt sits on top. It's got to be paid back. It's got to be financed. So, you  have to be diligent and you can't just fulfill every requirement, the nation will put  itself in a very bad position if it does that.

DAVID KOCH, HOST: Yeah. Good to see charities have been included

overnight as well. Joel, will the Opposition be standing in the way of this  package?

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: No, of course not, Kochie. We  called for the package. It's a good package and the Government has made the  point it has been done in a hurry, and there will be anomalies and  inconsistencies, and there will be people who miss out. And we're providing the  Government with an opportunity to work with it to fix those problems. Barnaby  mentioned money; it's clearly not about money. I mean, the Government is  spending literally hundreds of billions of dollars to keep the economy a float and  to keep people in work. So, what we're saying is, yeah, we're up for supporting  this package, there are problems, and if it can be fixed on Wednesday, we are  absolutely up for fixing those problems.

KOCH: What problems?

FITZGIBBON: Well, anomalies in casuals, for example, where you might have  one casual worker who's been working for four days a week, but only for the  last 10 months, but you have another casual worker that's been working for the  same employer for three years, but only working one day a week for three  years but receiving the full $1,500 dollars. Now, that's a that's a problem. And it  means a lot of people are going to miss out and we're up for fixing the problem.

BARR: Yeah. Barnaby, that'll be ironed out today. Do you think this will be in  place for longer than six months? What do you see the time limit on it?

JOYCE: Well, I hope not. And there will be, as there always is, changes to  Wednesday when they'll be voting for this. In the end, Natalie, we do have to,  as I said, we do have to pay this back. And when Joel says it is not about  money, unfortunately mate, it is about money that's because it's someone  else's money.

FITZGIBBON: No Barnaby.

JOYCE: This money comes from overseas; it does have to be repaid. And if  you say it's not about money, it's just a foolish statement. Because ultimately,  it'll be about money because people's taxes in the future will have to go up to  pay for this. And there are a lot of people who say we should do everything  that's diligent. We should do everything that's prudent, but we can't do  everything because that means we just put ourselves in a dire economic  position. After the coronavirus has passed, you know, we've got to keep our  head screwed on.

KOCH: Yep





FITZGIBBON: No Barnaby. The Government is spending about $300 billion  and the Government hasn't claimed it's about money. It's said itself it's about  anomalies being created by the rush to the gate. And what we are saying, of  course, is that we're prepared to work with the Government to fix that. We're  not talking about doubling the spending. We are talking about sensible  measures that addresses these anomalies.

JOYCE: I'd be very surprised if the Treasurer doesn't say it's about money. I'd  be very surprised if any of your listeners don't say it's about money, when we  have to put up taxes on a whole range of things to cover this. We've got to do  what is right, do what is diligent, but not do everything because ultimately, the  Government doesn't have the money. Only the listeners out there on the other  side of the glass have money. They're the ones who ultimately pay for this.  We've got to keep our head screwed on.

KOCH: But we've put a lot of money into the Government over the last few  years. Government debt is relatively low compared with the rest of the world.  One of the few countries that has basically a balanced budget. So, we're in  good shape going into it. And Joel, social distancing is proving a problem with  crowds in Sydney, and on the Gold Coast. What's the solution here?

FITZGIBBON: Well, I mentioned Newcastle beach last Monday morning and  apparently it's all happening down there again this morning. So, we have an  ongoing problem and I suspect that local government is going to have to be  used to block some of these areas off so people, sadly, simply can't frequent  these popular early morning walking spots and the cafes around them. Now,  that's harsh, but we're going through tough times. We're doing lots of other very  harsh things and I think it's a real problem and it needs to be addressed.

KOCH: Particularly this Easter. Alright, Gents. Have a good week. Thank you  for that.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641







