TRANSCRIPT

Monday, 19 October 2020

Minister for Education Dan Tehan interview with Luke Grant, 2GB Overnight

SUBJECTS: Year 12 exams, COVID-19 and Victoria

Luke Grant: I received a media release yesterday from the Prime Minister and the Federal  Minister for Education Dan Tehan. Amongst other things, they said starting this week Year  12 students across Australia will begin their final examinations, and he says in a rather  pointed and I think personal point that is important and shouldn’t be lost here, like every Year  12 student before you, this marks the end of your formal school education. After this, they  say, you may decide to study for a university degree, learn a trade, study a vocational  qualification, say, up-skill with a microcredential - I’m not sure what that is, I’ll get the  Minister to tell me in a minute - start a business, or get a job. But, the point is that the  examinations won’t define you. You’ve got a long life ahead and there’s lots of people that  have excelled at this time of year, and gone on and done well. And, there are lots of people  who haven’t excelled at this time of year, and gone on and done well. And, I suspect that’s  the message behind all of this. The Federal Minister for Education, as I said, Dan Tehan, is  on the line. Minister, thank you for your time.

Dan Tehan: Pleasure.

Grant: And, it is exactly that, Dan, isn’t it? Alright, we do our best here for the period of  weeks that the exams take place, but beyond that, life has a lot, a lot to offer. And, it does  often unfold in mysterious ways.

Tehan: Absolutely, it does. They’ll be numerous pathways that our Year 12 students will take  to, ultimately, end up in the jobs that they do. And, while it’s really important that they try  their best through this examination period, they also have to understand that the friends that  they’ve made, and also the resilience they’ve learnt throughout this year, will stand them in  really good stead for the, for the life ahead.

Grant: Very difficult year, the, particularly the states that have been in perpetual lockdown.  And, I don’t know how they, the students, have been able to manage that. What sort of  assistance has been offered by Government? We have heard, Dan, haven’t we, that mental  health has been a real challenge for many.

Tehan: That’s right. There’s been extra assistance which has been offered at both the  federal level and state and territory level to support students throughout this year, and that  will continue to be provided for the many, especially those students in Victoria, and, in  particular, Melbourne. It’s been a very trying time. But, that resilience and that dealing with  that hardship, I think, ultimately, in the end, will set them up well for life. And, if they can step  back, once they’re through this year, my hope is that they’ll say, well, if I can deal with what  life has thrown at me this year, that’s going to mean that I can deal with most things that life  will throw at me for the years to come, and it might actually be one of those things which,  hopefully, will help and assist over coming years.

Grant: Yeah. And, that is, and I fully accept that that’s the glass half full perspective. There  will be those, weren’t there - it just is that we’re not all the same - that’ll be at the point of  almost flying coming into all of this, and this has really knocked them around, their ability just  to focus. Again, their mental health. And, I do, I do worry there might be those who have  come through this perhaps not feeling so well, and mightn’t perform as they would otherwise  have performed.

Tehan: That’s right, there will be, and, look, you have to remember, for those students, and  for any of them listening tonight, there are special consideration that’s given that if you are  struggling. And, remember to get help or assistance if you feel you need it, and Beyond Blue  and headspace and others can provide you with help and support in that regard. And, just  remember that we are able to provide special consideration in cases where it has become  too much and you are struggling. So, we can take all that into account, as well.

Grant: Fantastic. And, it is quite an achievement, let’s be honest, given the dangers of the  pandemic, to actually come through the year, and still have, you know, things like the HSC.

Tehan: Absolutely. Looking, if you look at what’s happened around the rest of the world, it’s  an absolute credit to our education system for what we’ve been able to achieve. You take  the Northern Territory, for instance, they’ve only missed one week of face-to-face teaching  there, in South Australia I think it’s two weeks, Western Australia not too different. So, you  know, there has been remarkable achievement right across every state and territory, and  even in Victoria, the way teachers have gone about providing that online teaching, rather  than that face-to-face teaching. They’ve stepped up, and it’s been incredibly difficult for  them, but they’ve managed to be able to do that, as well. So, right across the board,  principals, teachers, students and parents have really done a remarkable job dealing with  what this pandemic has thrown at us.

Grant: Alright. Let’s get to how you dealt with the final exam. How did you go?

Tehan: Well, what I did, I grew up on a farm and I went to boarding school, and, so, in  preparation for my final exams, I went back to the family farm and studied as hard as I  possibly could. I was a good, average student. I was not brilliant. I did reasonably well, but I  was, I sort of matured a bit later in life. At university was where I started to perform a lot  better than what I did at school. But, look, I also had very different pathways in my life. I  worked in agriculture, I sold ice cream, I became a diplomat, and if you had of told me 35  years ago when I headed back to the farm to study for my Year 12 exams that I would be  Australia’s Education Minister, I would have said, you’ve got to be joking. I seriously would  have said, you’ve got to be joking. So, you do not know how life is going to turn out for you.

Grant: No, you are absolutely right. What did you make of the loosening of restrictions?  Obviously, you’re an MP from Victoria. What did you make of what the Premier announced  yesterday? Will that ease things there for many people who have felt, you know, particularly  restricted and under pressure? I know you’re in regional Victoria, but what did you make of it  all?

Tehan: Look, I think business is the one that’s really been left out, and I think more could  have been done for business. We, we’ve really got to make sure that we’re looking after  businesses and their ability to employ people, and really focusing on jobs. So, I think, that’s  a bit where I still think there’s some work to be done. And, I still think there’s not a lot of logic

to what they’re doing around schooling. I would have had, I think, all students back at school  beginning tomorrow. And, I think, the fact that we’ve still got 8, 9’s and 10’s not going to  school, and they’ll have to wait another week, I think is disappointing, as well. I would have  liked to have seen all students back for the start of term four in Victoria, and the fact that  there are still some years that aren’t back, I just think lacks logic.

Grant: Yeah, okay. Federal Education Minister and the Member for Wannon Dan Tehan,  thank you very much for your time. Good to talk.

Tehan: Pleasure.

