U N O F F I C I A L





The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

The Hon. Mark McGowan MLA  Premier of Western Australia



The Hon. Stuart Robert MP  Minister for the National Disability Insurance Scheme  Minister for Government Services

The Hon. David Littleproud MP  Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

Wednesday 16 September 2020

PANDEMIC LEAVE DISASTER PAYMENT FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA

The Australian Government has extended Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment arrangements to include  Western Australia following agreement with the Western Australian Government.

The $1,500 Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment is now available to Western Australian workers who  cannot earn an income because they must self-isolate, quarantine or care for someone with COVID-19.

The Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment is already available in Victoria and Tasmania.

If an individual is instructed by WA Health to stay home from work, and does not have access to income  such as paid leave or other Commonwealth Government payments, they may be eligible for the  payment. They may also be eligible if they’re the parent or guardian of a child aged 16 or under who is a  close contact or has tested positive for COVID-19 or they are caring for someone with COVID-19.

In line with arrangements with other states, Western Australian workers will not be eligible for the  payment if they are receiving income, earnings or salary maintenance from work, receiving JobKeeper  Payment or other forms of Australian or Western Australian Government income support. People can  claim the payment again if their self-isolation, quarantine or caring period is longer than 14 days.

To date, more than $13.3 million in Pandemic Leave Disaster Payments has been paid for some 9,000  granted claims since 6 August.

The fastest and easiest way to make a claim is over the phone by calling Services Australia on 180 22 66.

More information is available at http://www.servicesaustralia.gov.au/disaster.

Media contacts:

Prime Minister’s Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  Premier’s Office: Lannie Le-Patterson, 0419 698 504  Minister Robert’s Office: James Larsson, 0427 100 431  Minister Littleproud’s Office: Brett Chant, 0477 744 614  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

