Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.







The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health

Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for the Public Service and Cabinet

Kempton Cowan   Joondalup Health Campus CEO

Dr Andrew Miller   WA AMA President

Mark Olson

Secretary of the Australian Nursing Federation WA

JOINT MEDIA STATEMENT

30 March 2020



Humanitarian agreement - Joondalup Health Campus

The Australian Government, with the cooperation of the West Australian Government and the  private Joondalup Health Campus, have concluded a humanitarian agreement to provide care  for the 29 passengers from the Artania Cruise ship who have tested positive for COVID-19.

Federal Minister for Health, Greg Hunt said, “This humanitarian hospital care will be  provided in one of the state’s premier facilities, which is fully prepared for and is already  treating COVID-19 patients.”

“We thank the outstanding staff and team at Joondalup Health Campus and the state  government for their assistance in this humanitarian operation.”

Joondalup Health Campus CEO, Kempton Cowan said, “It was important that the private  sector could assist these patients at this critical time.”

“Our 145 bed private hospital facility co-located on Joondalup Health campus is well  prepared and standing ready for these patients,” Mr Cowan said.

“Our teams are ready with the appropriate training and strict infection controls and safety  protocols in place.”

“I am very pleased that Joondalup can assist on the front line in the fight against COVID-19.”

“I also want to thank the Australian Medical Association (AMA) who have committed their  doctors, both in the public and private system, to being part of an integrated safe response to

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



the treatment of patients with COVID-19. I particularly thank AMA President Dr Andrew  Miller for his cooperation.”

Dr Andrew Miller, President of the West Australian AMA welcomed and supported the  immediate transfer of the Cruise Ship passengers under federal responsibility to Joondalup  Health Campus.

“Joondalup Health Campus which we know is an appropriate facility, staffed by properly  prepared personnel, who can safely handle these patients,” Dr Miller said.

“We welcome the solution which recognises that the safety and welfare, of both patients and  front line healthcare workers, is paramount.”

“We will work with all levels of government, to help Australia respond as effectively, and as  safely as possible, to this terrible virus.”

Australian Nursing Federation of WA State Secretary, Mark Olson said, “It’s a collective  fight against the coronavirus.”

“Everybody in the health industry, private and public, needs to work together and that’s  exactly what’s happened here,” Mr Olson said.

“It’s not always easy but it’s evident that everyone is working towards the common goal of  stopping the spread of this virus and the devastation that it causes.”

-ENDS-











