

CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RN BREAKFAST

THURSDAY, 26 MARCH 2020



SUBJECTS: Coronavirus.



FRAN KELLY, HOST: Chris Bowen, welcome back to Breakfast.



CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Good to be with you Fran

although not in these circumstances.



KELLY:  No indeed. Victoria, New South Wales want to go straight to stage three

lockdowns is that Labor's position? Confine everybody to their homes, apart

from essential workers without further delay?



BOWEN: We certainly think that stronger measures are necessary and we

certainly think that they are urgent. And also Fran, clearer measures, frankly,

the measures announced by the Prime Minister the night before last were

confusing. And I know the Government has got a message to people that they

must follow the rules and of course we support that message but the rules must

be clear and easily understood and they are currently not. The fact of the

matter is Fran, we have to be honest with people, what's been put in place so

far is not working. We need to do more. We're currently on a trajectory where

we're doubling the number of cases every three days. That is not a trajectory

we can afford to stay on, and any measures put in place, take days if not weeks

to have effect and so the earlier it's done the better. So hence we have

supported every single measure that the Government's put in place, but we do

say much more needs to be done. And it needs to be much clearer, much more

concise, much more easily understood by Australians trying to do the right

thing.



KELLY: Isn't the message now clear though? Do you accept that? I mean, as the

Prime Minister said basically stay inside and if you are outside keep your

distance. I mean that's really the two things if we do that that will make a huge

difference.



BOWEN: Absolutely. Well, frankly, Fran, the more people who stay at home, the

fewer people will die. That's got to be the message. Now we've got a very

complicated set of rules about you know funerals and weddings and

hairdressers and beauticians. The message has to be simpler that's what we

say, make the rules simple.



KELLY: Would you say no weddings, no funerals?



BOWEN: No, more restrictions we support, and we support them being much

clearer. Here's what's at stake here, Fran. We're on a trajectory, without being,

we're very careful in our comments here, we’ve been very constructive, and we

are very careful not to be alarmist but we also have to be honest, I was a little

surprised yesterday to hear the Minister, say to you, rather, if I might say

abruptly, shut you down. When you suggested there were there was modelling

to suggest that ICU units would be under pressure and severe pressure and

coming. There is such modelling. I mean Raina Macintyre the Professor from

the University of New South Wales who has modelling showing ICU beds will

be under the pressure by 7 - 10 April, we just have to be honest with people

that unless we take more severe efforts, earlier, our hospital system, our ICU

system will come under pressure. As Dan Andrews said yesterday, you can't

queue outside an ICU. Now we recognise the efforts that the federal and state

governments have made collectively to improve ICU capacity, it's been good,

but unless we slow the spread of this virus, it won’t be good enough.



KELLY: Okay, let's be clear here then under your idea of a lock down what would

a stage three lock down look like? What parts of the economy would be

exempt?



BOWEN: What we've done is give the Government bipartisan support to do

more so that they know if they do more they will have full support -



KELLY: The Prime Minister said very clearly just 24 hours ago, the country faces

twin crises health and economic and we can see that writ large with the, with

the pressure on the ICU you have just been talking about and the queues

outside, Centrelink. He said both of them can be “equally deadly”, both in terms

of the lives of Australians and their livelihoods.



BOWEN: Let me be very clear. The best plan for our economy is to beat the

spread of this disease. No stimulus, no support packages, no policies and the

economic plan can be as effective as that. Now of course -



KELLY: There's a cost to that if you don't scale it up if you're not locked down in

stages, the cost will be more sudden there will be another million people thrown

on the dole queue. With the hardship and mental anguish that brings.



BOWEN: Fran we're talking about the lives of our fellow Australians. There is no

such thing as an overreaction. Without being too dramatic about it that is what

is at stake here but the point is also, it happens to be the case in our strong

view that good health policy is good economic policy in the longer run. Yes, of

course, there are there are people who will be affected in the shorter term, but

in the longer term, the sooner we get through this crisis, the sooner we can

return to some degree of normalcy the better for our economy as well as for our

society. And that takes tougher decisions early. We know from overseas, we're

not the first to be dealing with this, other countries have left these things too

late. Let us learn the lessons that they have paid the price for by doing more,

earlier, doing it in a coherent fashion, signaling as we've said consistently,

signaling to the Australian people what's next, giving a clear framework. Giving

every support, to your point about people losing their jobs and their business,

giving every support, giving more support -



KELLY: More money, we should be spending your money on this?



BOWEN: Yes absolutely, earlier and clearer. To businesses, and to individuals.

To people who want to keep their job and to employers who want to keep their

staff, and currently just can't.



KELLY: There's a lot to get through but I mean the Prime Minister and the Health

Minister again reiterated they are following advice of the health experts the

advice of the Chief Medical Officer, Brendan Murphy. Are you saying that

advice from those health experts, is not correct?



BOWEN: No, what I'm saying is that this is a crisis which needs political

leadership. of course, they should accept the advice of the AHPPC and then

that should be a baseline for further action, ie. That should be the minimum

action. Yes, of course we respect those doctors. There are thousands of

doctors across the country saying, ‘for goodness sake do more’ I talked to

hundreds of them over this crisis, and there is a range of - the Government

commissioned the Group of eEght universities to give advice they said ‘go

early, go hard and go smart’, that advice hasn't been followed either.



KELLY: It was a very difficult time for the country and it is true that the country

wants and needs their political leaders working together on this, not, you know,

not nitpicking not political point scoring. Is there a danger in Labor criticising the

Government like this at this moment?



BOWEN: What we've done, is given support to every single thing they have

done including some that were controversial at the time, you know, which might

not be controversial now. I remember you know getting huge feedback from

people saying you're giving the Government too much support when they

opened the Christmas Island facility for quarantining, we supported that

because we recognised the complexities we recognised it was fast moving, we

recognised they didn’t have many choices. We've supported every single thing

they've done, and will continue to do so. But, Fran. It's very important. This is a

crucial point here to your valid question. As the Opposition, we have a

responsibility. A responsibility to call out what can and should be done better,

as well as supporting the Government in the efforts they are taking. We would

be, we could not live with ourselves, if the other side of this we looked back and

said, ‘if we called for more, more might have happened, more should have

happened’. We're not going to do that, we'll continue to take that approach

we've been very responsible. We passed the stimulus package earlier this

week that we don't entirely agree with, but we recognise that had to go through

it quickly. Unlike the United States Congress which, you know, bickered about it

for days. We were in and out of there in a matter of hours, because that's the

right thing to do, even though under the normal circumstances, we would have

opposed some of those measures, because we simply don't agree with them.



KELLY: Okay, we've only got a couple of minutes to the news. National Cabinet

last night expanded the criteria for testing for COVID-19. All health and aged

care workers who present symptoms will now be tested. There'll be a focus on

people with symptoms in local hotspots, in aged care homes, has the

Government gone far enough now, do you welcome this?



BOWEN: Of course I welcome any expansion but again it's a similar point, and

I've been again, fully acknowledging that Australia has done better than other

countries in testing and much better than some. But this is vital, we can't afford

that to be the benchmark, that to be the baseline. The objective of government

policy and again. I do not for one second underestimate the challenges here,

but the objective of government policy must be to have every Australian who

presents with symptoms, tested. Not every Australian who wants to be tested,

not every Australian who feels like it, but a GP who is satisfied that they have

COVID-19 symptoms wherever they are, needs to be tested that must be the

objective. The Government says the majority of our cases are linked to

overseas. We wouldn't know Fran, with respect, because we're not testing

people with symptoms who have no links to overseas or no link to a known

case. Until and unless we can expand that our testing regime won't be as good

as it could be, again, I acknowledge the efforts that have been made, but we

need to have an objective to do better.



KELLY: Alright and just finally and briefly, we have only got a minute. The cruise

ships have been a blight during this crisis. There are at least eight now

anchored off Sydney with thousands of crew members and passengers on

board. It's unclear whether the virus is on board. What should happen to all

these people? Should they be brought on shore? Should they be put in

quarantine? Where?





BOWEN: Every single step should be.. This has been a disaster Fran. Ten per

cent of the cases in New South Wales are off the Ruby Princess. Ten per cent

of the cases. This is a thorough breakdown. I'm not interested in whether it's

the Commonwealth's fault or New South Wales' fault. This has been a thorough

breakdown, ultimately the Commonwealth Government has power and is

responsible, and should have been all over this. Ten per cent of the cases in

New South Wales off one cruise ship. It can't go on.



KELLY: We're almost at the news, should these people be brought off these

ships and put into quarantine?



BOWEN: I understand the Premier of New South Wales has put in place

measures. They won't be off boarded until appropriate measures and testing be

put in place and of course that's sensible.



KELLY: Chris Bowen thank you very much for joining us.



BOWEN: Good on you Fran.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIZ FITCH 0424 512 512





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.







