



SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women

THE HON ALEX HAWKE MP  Assistant Defence Minister  Minister for International Development and the Pacific

MEDIA RELEASE

AUSTRALIA SUPPORTING PACIFIC WORKERS

Under new visa measures announced by the Australian Government today, Pacific workers who  are in Australia under the Pacific Labour Scheme (PLS) and Seasonal Worker Programme  (SWP) whose visas are due to expire will be able to remain in Australia for up to 12 months.  This will enable them to support themselves and continue to make a critical contribution to  Australia’s agriculture sector and food security.

The welfare of Pacific workers in Australia is a priority for the Australian Government. We are  working with employers to ensure Pacific workers are supported through the COVID-19 crisis,  particularly those workers who are currently unable to return home.

The announcement of the new measures by Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for  Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development, the Hon Michael McCormack MP, Acting  Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs, the Hon Alan  Tudge MP, and Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management, the Hon David  Littleproud MP, recognises the special role Pacific and Timorese workers play in Australia’s  agriculture sector.

Pacific and Timorese workers are highly valued by agricultural employers who have made it  clear they want Pacific workers to be able to remain here and continue working. Many of these  workers have been coming to Australia for a number of years and have strong connections to  Australian farming communities. Current travel restrictions and the cessation of commercial  flights have left some workers unable to return home, while also stopping new cohorts of Pacific  workers from travelling to Australia.

The flow of remittances back to Pacific communities’ makes an important contribution to their  ability to withstand the economic impacts of COVID-19.

The Government is providing Pacific workers with the latest health advice and guidance on  navigating COVID-19 restrictions and providing other forms of support including pastoral care  and information in Pacific languages on issues such as social distancing. All Pacific Islander  and Timorese workers have appropriate health insurance and will be cared for in the event they  become unwell.



We want to assure our Pacific neighbours that Australia stands with them during this crisis and  we are doing all we can to support Pacific workers in Australia.

Media Contacts  David Wroe (Minister Payne): +61 429 531 143  Melanie Ruiz (Minister Payne): +61 427 888 392  Wade Laube (Minister Hawke): 0409 193 057

