



The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

MEDIA STATEMENT

Friday 30 October 2020

MINISTRY AND CABINET ARRANGEMENTS

Today, I am pleased to confirm Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham has been sworn in as the Minister  for Finance by the Governor-General, His Excellency General the Hon David Hurley AC DSC.

Senator Birmingham’s appointment follows Senator the Hon Mathias Cormann’s resignation today.

In his new role, Senator Birmingham will assist the Treasurer the Hon Josh Frydenberg MP, in leading  Australia’s economy through the COVID recovery.

As previously announced, he will also assume the role of the Leader of the Government in the Senate.  Minister for Employment Skills, Small and Family Business, Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash becomes  Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate.

Following these changes to the Ministry, I am also announcing changes to Cabinet committee  membership and process.

Minister for Home Affairs the Hon Peter Dutton MP and the Minister for Education the Hon Dan Tehan  MP will join the Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister, Treasurer, Minister for Health and Minister for  Social Services in the Expenditure Review Committee.

A new Policy Implementation Committee of Cabinet is being established alongside the Expenditure  Review Committee and National Security Committee. It will track implementation of government  initiatives across all portfolios to ensure they are delivering the outcomes for Australians, as established  in their policy approval by Cabinet.

The Committee will be chaired by the Prime Minister and the Deputy Chair will be the Deputy Prime  Minister.

It will include the Treasurer, Minister for Finance, Minister for Health, Minister for Government Services,  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology and will report directly to Cabinet.

I am also pleased to announce that Mr Chris Browne will shortly commence as Cabinet Secretary.

Mr Browne will bring broad experience to the role, having advised Ministers for Finance, Defence and  Social Services.

ENDS

Media Contacts:  Prime Minister’s office: 02 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

Press Office of the Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Prime Minister, Canberra

