

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  TODAY SHOW  SUNDAY, 6 SEPTEMBER 2020

SUBJECT/S: Protests; Victoria’s roadmap; Aged Care

REBECCA MADDERN, HOST: For more on this, we're joined by Federal  Deputy Opposition Leader Richard Marles. Richard, are these people  stupid, crazy or have Victorians just had enough?

RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR  PARTY: I think everyone in Victoria is doing it tough but these people are  stupid. No question about it, Bec. They're selfish. Deeply selfish. I  mean, everyone is feeling the frustration of what we're experiencing in Victoria  at the moment but just imagine if you're someone who works in an aged care  centre. Every day you're risking your life to go in and help elderly Victorians  and you're watching these turkeys go out and do what they're doing. It’s  completely ridiculous. Imagine being a resident in aged care. Those of us who  have loved ones in aged care. You look at this stuff, the way in which it  distracts police resources, but the complete selfishness of it. I find it breath-taking to be honest. We can all understand the difficulty of it but we are doing  our best in this state to get past this terrible virus and no-one who went out  and protested yesterday is going to save a single life from coronavirus.

MADDERN: Richard I  was on my one-hour exercise walk yesterday around  the botanical gardens and I came across this protest. There was- and I have  been to many protests in my time as a reporter for the last 20 years in this  town- there was an unprecedented amount of police. Was it over the top?

MARLES: Well, I mean, I think it would have been better if the protests hadn't  happened and police weren't required to be there for this protest. I mean,  exactly what numbers were put in place in relation to a protest is an operational

decision obviously that the police make. But I think everyone would agree, it  would have been better if there had been no protests and the police were  able to do the normal jobs that they're paid to do. But at the end of the day  everyone gets what's going on in Victoria at the moment. It is tough, it is really  tough. And people are going to be hanging out for what Daniel Andrews has to  say but yesterday doesn't help. It doesn't make the virus go away. It is still there  and ultimately we've got to get past the virus and get to a position where we are  able to reopen Victoria again, where we are able to reintegrate it with the rest of  the country but no-one who made the decision to go out yesterday has helped  us one step down that path.

MADDERN: Yeah, I agree with you on that. I want to move on to Victoria's road  map out of this due to be released in a couple of hours from now.  Your constituents in regional Victoria may actually be the only ones that are  semi somewhat happy out of this announcement today. Are you expecting  regional Victoria restrictions to be eased a lot more than inner-city Melbourne? I  mean they're in stage three at the moment, do you expect them to go straight  to stage two or indeed more freedom than that because cases  have dramatically reduced in Geelong, Corio, your seat.

MARLES: Let's see what Daniel Andrews has to say at lunchtime. You're right,  it is a lot better in Geelong now than it is in Melbourne and I have lots of friends  and family in Melbourne so I have some sense of what people are experiencing  there and it is certainly a lot more difficult than we've got here now, even under  stage three in Geelong and the rest of regional Victoria. I think we all want  to see the state open up. We all want to get to a point where businesses are  able to open and we can get the economy going again and importantly we can  reintegrate Victoria with the rest of the country. We can't do that until we get  past the virus and I think the point that we just need to remember is cases have  been around 70, I think yesterday was 76, something of that number. That is  a great achievement relative to a few weeks ago where we had a day past 700  but we also need to remember in New South Wales yesterday, there was less  than seven. So there's still a way to go and I think we've just all got to buckle up  and wait and see what Daniel Andrews has to say and do what we can to get  past this.

MADDERN: Richard, we can't do that until the problem is fixed in aged care.  Are you confident that this situation is being rectified? Because that is the main  source of outbreaks at the moment. It is no point everybody around Victoria  doing their bit until that problem is solved.

MARLES: I completely agree with that, Bec. The answer to your question is,  no, I'm not confident. Partly why I'm not confident is because you don't solve a  problem unless someone takes responsibility for it. And I think there have been



things that have gone wrong in Victoria and whatever you say about  Daniel Andrews he's fronted the media every day for the last 65 days and he's  certainly accepted responsibility and he has acknowledged where problems  have occurred but aged care is the responsibility of the Federal Government,  fair and square. That's not in question, it is the responsibility of the Federal  Government. Each and every day what we see from them is a complete  avoidance of responsibility. I mean, it is almost as if they say that Victoria's got  its own problems so what happens in aged care in Victoria doesn't really count  in terms of federal responsibility. That's completely wrong. We need the  Federal Government to step up here.

MADDERN: Richard, sorry to interrupt but it is happening in Victoria so the  State Government can't say, "not our problem."

MARLES: The point here is that the Federal Government has responsibility for  functions of government in Victoria as well. Turns out we are part of Australia.  And aged care is one of those areas where they have responsibility. And it's  really important that they actually step up and accept that. Whatever Victorians  say or don't say, those who regulate aged care is the Federal Government.  Those who fund aged care are the Federal Government. Those who  are responsible for infection control in aged care is the Federal Government.  That's where the power lies. They've actually got to step up and say what's  been going wrong in aged care in Victoria, cause that's their job. Right now  we're not seeing them do that.

MADDERN: Okay, it certainly has turned into a political hot potato I dare say.  We have to leave it there this morning. Thank you for your time this morning,  Richard Marles.

MARLES: Thanks, Bec.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363









