f ~)

AGED CARE GUILD











490 Northbourne Avenue Dickson ACT 2602  6189 2270

info@agedcareguild.com.au

i.,.';Ii agedcareguild.com.au

Tuesday 6 October 2020

MEDIA RELEASE:

Missed opportunity for aged care to be part of Australia's economic recovery

Tonight's Federal Budget records the Government's previously announced COVID-19  commitments to aged care but adds very little in the way of reform for the future.

While the Government has acknowledged it will outline its plan for reform in May 2021,  following the release of the final report from the Royal Commission into Aged Care Quality  and Safety, the Aged Care Guild's Acting CEO, Nicholas Brown views tonight's Budget as a  missed opportunity.

"This Budget is particularly important to senior Australians and the aged care industry in  laying the foundations for the sector's path to recovery, and the reform it desperately needs,"  said Mr Brown.

"First and foremost, aged care needs to be about supporting senior Australians. However, it  can and should be an important part of rebuilding Australia's economy, particularly when it  comes to the workforce and employing and retaining much-needed staff.

"We greatly support and echo Minister Colbeck's words of thanks to the frontline aged care  workers. There is no question they are the greatest asset we have in protecting and caring  for senior Australians in aged care homes. An investment in workers is an investment in  care," he said.

The Aged Care Guild welcomes the announcement of key items, including important funding  for the sector led Aged Care Workforce Industry Council to implement the A Matter of Care  recommendations. The Council plays an important role in ensuring the recommendations  are applied to ensure aged care workers and senior Australians gain maximum benefits.

The Government's announcement of dementia support as core business for aged care is a  significant addition to this year's Budget, as well as the additional 23,000 home care  packages that will be welcomed by senior Australians who choose to receive support in their  homes.

Noting the recently announced aged care COVlD-19 supports will run out in early 2021, the  sector will require appropriate bridging support to provide relief until the expected reform in  May 2021, as promised by the Government.

One-off sugar hits will not be enough to ensure the sustainability of the industry and the care  senior Australians need and deserve. COVlD-19 and the Royal Commission into Aged Care

t ~)

AGED CARE GUILD











490 Northbourne Avenue Dickson ACT 2602  (02) 6189 2270

info@agedcareguild.com.au

wvw.agedcareguiId.com.au

Safety and Quality have only further highlighted the urgent need for a long-term plan for

aged care, to ensure the need for emergency relief measures are consigned to the past.

The aged care sector is committed to the necessary reform, but we cannot do it alone. Long-term change requires long-term commitment. This means taking lessons learnt from the  Royal Commission and COVID-19 to develop a long-term and consumer-centred plan for  reform, to ensure senior Australians receive the quality of care they need and deserve.

The Aged Care Guild and its members look forward to continuing to work with Government  on the path to reform.

With appropriate investment from Government, aged care could be an integral part of  Australia's post COVID-19 economic recovery. Aged care funding is an investment in the  entire community, not just for those Australians accessing aged care services.

About the Aged Care Guild:  The Aged Care Guild (the Guild) is an association formed by growth minded and forward thinking private  residential aged care providers committed to the future of aged care in Australia.

Our members provide care across more than 300 residential aged care services, to over 30,000 senior  Australians with the support of more than 40,000 workers.

