JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES

MEMBER FOR HUNTER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS CHRIS KENNY

WEDNESDAY, 16 SEPTEMBER 2020



SUBJECTS: Government Gas Plan; Labor emissions policy.



CHRIS KENNY, HOST: Let's head up to Cessnock in the Hunter Valley of New South

Wales and catch up with Labor's Resources spokesperson, Joel Fitzgibbon. Thanks for

joining us again Joel. You would have been a drummer in your day, wouldn't you?



JOEL FITZGIBBON, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES:

Chris, I'm smiling because I was just thinking that I spend every day just beating the drum

of common sense.



KENNY: [laughs] Well you have beaten the drum of common sense within the Labor Party

on energy policy and climate policy. We'll come to that in a moment, but just before I do,

this idea of the Aussies stranded overseas. They want to come back. I think there's a unity

ticket on that. Your leader, Anthony Albanese, saying it’s the federal government's

responsibility - get some planes out there, and bring them back. The real issue here is the

states. Shouldn't Anthony Albanese and people like yourself be getting on to Annastacia

Palaszczuk, to Mark McGowan in the West, getting onto the Labor premiers and ensuring

that they do lift the quotas and allow more Australians to come back?



FITZGIBBON: Anthony Albanese is representing a very strong community view, Chris. I

have them in my electorate, Chris, I'm sure every member of parliament, every Senator

has representations almost daily about these 23,000 Australians stranded overseas, and

there’s some pretty heart-wrenching cases, there. So obviously this is predominantly a

Commonwealth responsibility. I understand those caps aren’t even being met, so that’s not

the real problem. The real problem is really getting them here. People can’t get flights, they

getting bumped off flights, or they can get them but they’re very, very expensive. So I think

Albo’s doing the right thing, putting pressure on the Government to do more to help these

people.



KENNY: Yeah, no, I think as I say, good on him for raising the issue and pushing it, but we

obviously need the states to handle more people in quarantine. There’s signs that's

happening. Of course the real problem here is Victoria. After Sydney, Melbourne is - would

normally be the second largest entry point, but it's all having to be shut down there,

because of Daniel Andrews’ stuff ups of quarantine.



FITZGIBBON: The airport capacity is there, not only is Albo doing the right thing raising it,

but if you saw Michael McCormack finally stand up on it today - the Deputy Prime Minister

- that was because of pressure Albo has been putting on the Government and I reckon

there's 23,000 families around the country tonight thanking Anthony Albanese for doing so.



KENNY: Now I can’t give you the date. Joel Fitzgibbon, but it was either early last year or

early this year or late last year, but on this very program that you talked about how a 2030

emissions reduction target was kind of redundant for the Labor Party, and you ought to sort

of skip that and just look to a longer term policy. It looks like you're going to have your way

with this draft platform has been leaked.



FITZGIBBON: Well certainly in this COVID period, Chris, all of our attention, all of our

focus, all of our thinking has to be on just about one thing only, and that is the economy.

We might inherit, if we form Government, a very ugly economy, and how we might revive

that economy: keep people in jobs, create new jobs and allow people to pay their

mortgages. That has to be our focus. We set the net zero emission target. That's a good

thing. We have plenty of time to think about how we might there. I’ve said many times the

task will become easier as more and more technology comes into play. But at the moment

it’s about jobs, jobs and jobs.



KENNY: Yeah, the thing is though that seems to be an admission that higher reductions -

emissions reductions targets are an economic burden yet in the lead up to elections in the

past Labor has been telling us ‘Oh no, it doesn't cost anything to reduce emissions,’ more,

in fact, it delivers all these wonderful green jobs.



FITZGIBBON: Well, there is no doubt in my mind, Chris, that trying to rush ahead of the

rest of the world and being too ambitious on climate change will have a negative impact on

the economy, not a positive impact. Now slowly, and assuredly, and with the proper

planning, and with the right ambitions, and the right timeline, then it can be, of course, a

net positive for the economy and we must ensure that it is a net benefit for the economy.

But at the moment, we need to focus on jobs and job security.



KENNY: Now, does that mean that you support what Scott Morrison has announced

regarding a gas-fired power station in your bailiwick?



FITZGIBBON: I'm claiming credit for it, Chris. I've been talking about it for three years.

Scott Morrison has been busy running political games with respect to Liddell power station

in my electorate. All that time he spent bullying and arguing that Liddell should, or could

be, extended was wasted. He should have been spending that time on a gas plan, on gas-fired generation, on battery storage, on pumped hydro. But no, he played the game and

he's still perpetuating that game by saying: I will only build a gas-fired power station if, in

seven or eight months’ time, AGL doesn't capitulate and build and extend Liddell. Well, he

knows that Liddell will never be extended. She's 50 years old and out of puff. He shouldn't

be waiting, he should be committing to building a gas-fired generator in Kurri Kurri now,

and of course he should be doing all possible to facilitate AGL's plans to build a gas-fired

generator in the Hunter. We want and deserve two gas-fired generators in the Hunter. We

want to remain the powerhouse of NSW and we can do so with gas and pumped hydro,

and with storage.



KENNY: Now, so you're obviously very pro-gas, that makes a lot of sense. It wasn't very

long ago, maybe two or three years ago only that those on the green left, on the hard

green left, were pro-gas. They saw this as the transition fuel to a full renewable economy.

But now they seem to be hardening their position. They see no role for gas. They're

opposing this and they're also opposing the push to open up other gas reserves and keep

it here for domestic consumption, rather than export it all. Do you think those policies, too,

are worthwhile for the government? We do need more gas developed in this country?



FITZGIBBON: And now, Chris, they want to pull out our heaters and our hot plates...





KENNY: Exactly



FITZGIBBON: ... in our in our homes. It's just ridiculous. Look, the thing people forget

about gas is that about 37 per cent of gas consumption in this country doesn't go to

electricity generation. In fact, a little bit more goes to industry, manufacturing in particular,

to be used either as a heat source, or as a feedstock into the manufacturing process.

Ammonium nitrate, which we rely upon for the coal mining industry is made out of gas.

Fertiliser our farmers use is made out of gas. Plastics, petrochemicals, you name it, there

are plenty of them. So we need gas. We need gas, Chris. We need it for manufacturing

and for jobs. And we need it to firm our electricity system as the older coal-fired generators

withdraw. The best way to get more renewables into the electricity sector is to get more

gas-fired firming power into the electricity sector. You can also do it with pumped hydro,

and with battery storage, but the quickest way, and the quickest way to create jobs, is to do

it through gas-fired generation.



KENNY: But you quite rightly mock those who want to get rid of our gas cooktops. That's

the campaign run by the Labor Environmental Action Network - LEAN, your colleagues.



FITZGIBBON: Well, I make no apologies for those comments, Chris.



KENNY: Good on you. Thanks for joining us, Joel.



FITZGIBBON: My great pleasure.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: MARK ABERNETHY 0438 986 641



