







The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology  Federal Member for McPherson

The Hon Peter Dutton MP  Minister for Home Affairs  Federal Member for Dickson

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

BUILDING CYBER SECURITY SKILLS IN AUSSIE BUSINESSES

4 February 2021

The Morrison Government is getting more Aussies into jobs and lifting the nation’s  cyber security capability, with a $26.5 million program opening today.

The Cyber Security Skills Partnership Innovation Fund will provide grants of between  $250,000 and $3 million to improve the quality and availability of cyber security  professionals through training.

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said the funding  would help build cyber security career pathways as Australia continues its comeback  from COVID-19.

“The Cyber Security Skills Partnership Innovation Fund will support partnerships  between industry, education providers and governments to build the next generation  of cyber security experts,” Minister Andrews said.

“Cyber security is essential to our digital economy and needs to be strong in all  areas, particularly in small and medium enterprises which comprise 98 per cent of all  Australian businesses.

“This fund builds on our commitment to keep Australians secure online, and to  support building industry capability.”

Minister for Home Affairs Peter Dutton said growing Australia’s cyber skills is an  important deliverable under the Government’s Cyber Security Strategy 2020.

“Having more people trained in cyber security will build on the other measures  funded as part of our $1.67 billion Strategy to keep Australians safe online and





protect against cyber attacks from malicious actors including cyber criminals,” said  Mr Dutton.

The Cyber Security Skills Partnership Innovation Fund is part of the $50 million  Cyber Security National Workforce Growth Program, a key element of Australia’s  Cyber Security Strategy 2020.

Eligible activities may include: developing and delivering specialist cyber security  courses for professionals, retraining programs, professional development,  apprenticeships, establishing new internships, cadetships, work experience and staff  exchanges and establishing cyber labs and training facilities.

Applicants must submit a joint application, with one lead organisation which is the  main driver of the project and is eligible to apply, and at least one other project  partner.

It is estimated $13 million will be available for Round One of the grants program,  which closes on11 March 2021. The second round of funding is expected to be  launched late this year.

More information is available at https://business.gov.au/grants-and-programs/cyber-security-skills-partnership-innovation-fund



Media Contacts:

Minister Andrews: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846 / Jen Jennings 0435 121 347

Minister Dutton: Nicole Chant 0419 850 222 / Merryn Royle 0409 272 971

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

