

MARK DREYFUS   SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL   SHADOW MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM   MEMBER FOR ISAACS    

E&OE TRANSCRIPT   RADIO INTERVIEW   ABC RADIO NATIONAL BREAKFAST   FRIDAY, 12 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Commonwealth anti-corruption commission; Judicial  Complaints Commission; Crown Casino.

GERALDINE DOOGUE: The Federal Government's long awaited Commonwealth  integrity commission will be one small step closer later today with the deadline for  feedback on the proposed laws wrapping up. If it goes ahead the Government's  planned $147 million CIC would have the power to investigate corruption and  criminal conduct across law enforcement agencies and the public sector. But the  proposed body has been widely criticised by Labor as lacking the teeth to make  the difference. The Opposition Shadow Attorney-General is Mark Dreyfus and he  joins me now. Welcome to RN Breakfast.

MARK DREYFUS, SHADOW ATTORNEY-GENERAL: Good morning  Geraldine, good to be with you.

DOOGUE: What are your essential concerns about the model put forward by the  Government?

DREYFUS: Our concerns are that what's proposed by this government is a weak,  secretive and compromised commission. It won't be able to hold its own inquiries,  it could only act on referrals, it wouldn't be able to hold public hearings and, as  presently proposed by Mr. Morrison and Mr. Porter, it wouldn't be able to  investigate any corrupt conduct that occurred before the commission was  established.   Australians want a lot better than this. They want a strong anti-corruption commission. I want to see honesty in government returned. Instead,  we've all we've heard from this government is Sports Rorts, dodgy land deals,  handing out jobs to their mates. And just on that over 70 former Liberal politicians,  failed Liberal candidates, Liberal donors and Liberal mates have been appointed to  the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. It just goes on and on.



DOOGUE: And there's also, as I was reading last night, the Government has  to refer, does it not, potential cases to the commission? Nobody else can refer  cases to the commission?

DREYFUS: And that's a key point. It would not be able to initiate its own inquiries.  It would have to wait for referrals from the government and what chance of that  from Mr. Morrison?

DOOGUE: Because it can become a major public discussion as well, that's the  failsafe here.

DREYFUS: We've had major public discussion after major public discussion and  all we get is Mr. Morrison brushing things away. No minister is ever held  accountable. Nothing is ever fully investigated. Sports Rorts - which happily a  parliamentary committee is still trying to get to the bottom of, that's coming back  today - but the involvement of Mr. Morrison, the involvement of his office in those  disgraceful Sports Rorts, using hundreds of millions of dollars of public money as if  it were a Liberal Party slush fund, we've never got to the bottom of that Geraldine. I  fear that if this anti-corruption commission, as currently proposed by Mr.  Porter, were established it wouldn't be able to look back into the past. And what  chance Mr Morrison of referring his own misconduct over Sports Rorts to an  integrity commission? I'd rate that chance at zero

DOOGUE: Is it better than nothing though?

DREYFUS: Of course it's better to have an anti-corruption commission than no  anti-corruption commission. But I think that the Commonwealth of Australia has got  the advantage of seeing the eight anti-corruption commissions that have now been  established in every state and territory. We can pick out the best of each of those  state and territory commissions and make sure that the Commonwealth  commission, when it's established, is the best in the country, the strongest in the  country, the most independent in the country. Instead, what we've got from Mr  Morrison and Mr Porter is, as all of the commentators have said, it's a weak,  secretive and compromised commission that won't do the job it's set up to do.

DOOGUE: Now the Government's proposal means most hearings would be held in  private. Does the Government have a point in keeping hearings of such a powerful  body out of the public eye? There is a risk, is there not, and various legal  commentators have said that often people get mentioned, collaterally, and they  end up in court, as it were, when they're not even the main target of inquiry. Is  there an argument that this becomes a form of star chamber?

DREYFUS: It's far more important that the Commission be able to sit in public. The  late David Ipp, a very fine Australian lawyer who headed the New South Wales

Independent Commission Against Corruption, explained to me before he died how  important public hearings are. They encourage other people to come forward. They  bring out information that would not otherwise be brought out and they reassure  the public. They build confidence in our systems of government if you have public  hearings and people can see that justice is being done, that an inquiry is taking  place.

DOOGUE: They can become theatre though can't they? Very much  become theatre?

DREYFUS: I fully accept that Geraldine. Of course there's a risk to reputation, but I  am confident that you can make rules, you can give appropriate powers and  discretions to the commissioners, that they will be able to protect the reputations of  innocent people who are merely assisting a commission with its inquiries. We can  all point to examples but the same could be said of open justice in open courts. We  have a system of open justice in Australia and, of course, you can sometimes get a  bit of smear associated with appearing as a witness. But judges and courts are  more than able to deal with that and I am confident that we can design a  commission that will be able to hold hearings in public. It won't do all of its work in  public. It couldn't. But we must have that power given to the commission.

DOOGUE: Would you care to say which model of the eight you mentioned, you  know, what's a key feature or is there one that you favour over others?

DREYFUS: An absolute no, I'm not going to pick out any one of the eight state and  territory commissions. I'm going to say, of them, that each of them have excellent  features and we should range across all of the examples and pick out the best. But  it's already clear that the model that Mr Porter and Mr Morrison are putting forward  is woefully inadequate. We need it to be able to start its own inquiries. We need it  to be able to hold hearings in public. We need it to be able to investigate corrupt  conduct that occurred before its establishment. That's one of the most ludicrous  aspects of Mr Porter and Mr Morrison's proposal. They're saying it'll start on day  one when the commission is established and it doesn't matter about the Sports  Rorts or the dodgy land deals or all of the sleaze that we've seen from Mr  Morrison. None of that will be able to be investigated and frankly that's an  outrageous suggestion.

DOOGUE: The feedback on the proposed model closes today. What changes do  you think the Government is likely to make?

DREYFUS: I have no idea because Mr Porter and Mr Morrison announced their  commitment to an anti-corruption commission well over two years ago. They, in a  very meandering way, got to the point of, finally, after much public pressure  publishing a draft bill and asking for submissions. The draft bill took account of  none of the criticisms that have been expressed about their proposal. No timetable

has been set, and I'm very fearful that it will be just like the long list of  announcements that Mr Porter and Mr Morrison have made, saying that they're  going to undertake some reform or another, and then nothing happens. I'm calling  on Mr Porter to give us a timetable. When are you going to introduce a bill to the  Parliament? That's what Australians need to know. They need to have a bill in the  Parliament so that we can see what they're proposing - and up until now we've  thought a weak and secretive and inadequate commission - or whether they're  going to accept the public criticisms that have been made and proceed to set up a  real, strong, independent and powerful anti-corruption commission, which is what  Australia needs.

DOOGUE: Because he says he's been a bit busy, Mr Porter, about a range of  things particularly prompted by COVID to do with privacy and so on and so forth.  But he did make a big announcement this week proposing a federal judicial  commission with the power to investigate allegations of corruption and misconduct  among judges. I mean this is tricky, because putting an independent body that can  preside over the independence of judges might have its challenges. How do you  see that?

DREYFUS: I've said ever since we had the findings against former High Court  Judge Dyson Heydon and the flood of disclosures of abuse and harassment that  accompanied that, that we need to have a formal complaints body to deal with  misconduct claims against sitting judges. The current processes for dealing with  complaints about federal judges are, well, cumbersome is the right term because  the only option is moving in both Houses of Parliament to remove the judge from  office. We've got examples now in New South Wales and Victoria of judicial  commissions which work and it's long past time that the Commonwealth get on  with establishing an independent judicial commission. But again, I'm fearful, we've  seen announcements from Mr Porter before.

DOOGUE: He says it's got to wait until after the CIC legislation goes ahead.

DREYFUS: Why, I would ask? And I just point out the last time we saw a front  page exclusive on the front page of the Australian with Mr Porter announcing  something was back in 2019 when he announced that he was going to establish a  scheme for better protection of public service whistleblowers in Australia and bring  in reforms. We've seen not one jot of that reform.

DOOGUE: Well, in fact under clause 70 of that proposed bill whistleblowers would  risk prosecution wouldn't they for making an unwarranted allegation?

DREYFUS: Yes, that's one of the concerns that's been expressed about the anti-corruption commission. I'm just making the point that we've seen many  announcements from Mr Morrison, many announcements from Mr Porter, and it's  very rare for this government to actually follow through on their announcements. I

seriously doubt that the Attorney-General will do anything at all about a judicial  commission, I would welcome it if he did.

DOOGUE: On another matter the Government is also pushing forward, according  to the Minister, the Attorney-General, with legislation to merge the Family Court  and the Federal Circuit Court, which has been an ongoing discussion for several  years. Very vexed in some minds. Why is Labor so opposed to that idea?

DREYFUS: We're opposed to it because this is not the reform that is needed to  deal with crippling delays that are occurring in the Family Court and the Federal  Circuit Court where it can take up to three years for people to get their family  disputes resolved. It's been absolutely clear for years and years that there needs  to be more resources, there need to be more registrars, there need to be more  judges. Some reforms can take place and are being undertaken by the court - and  I'd congratulate the court for doing this - which is meshing the rules of the Federal  Circuit Court and the Family Court of Australia. But all of the people that have  worked in the Family Court - former judges, current family lawyers, families that  have had to go through the system - none of them are calling for an abolition of the  Family Court as we know it. This Government set up a very large Law Reform  Commission inquiry which reported, now, some two years ago. It's the largest ever  review of the Family Court, of the Family Law Act and it did not recommend what  the Government is still pressing forward with. It's very disappointing to see the  Government ignoring all the advice that it's had. It's not explained how abolishing  the Family Court in its present form is going to produce any of the outcomes that  are needed. As I say, it's a question of more resources and that's the thing that the  Government should be focusing on for first.

DOOGUE: And look finally Mr Dreyfus, just this week the independent review of  Crown Resorts in New South Wales issued that scathing report into the company -  and we've just had further resignations this morning, and probably more - saying it  wasn't fit to hold a casino license. Among a raft of recommendations by the former  Supreme Court judge was the establishment of an independent casino commission  to regulate the gaming sector, such as works for instance in a place like Singapore,  which seems to be doing it very well. Do you support that?

DREYFUS: I think clearly it's an industry which has got special problems. The risk  of money laundering in particular is absolutely there with casinos. So that's  something, that suggestion that Patricia Bergin has made, is something that should  certainly be looked at. I've been very focused on the way in which the Morrison  Government hasn't assisted state-based casino regulators to prevent money  laundering despite being warned by AUSTRAC, the Commonwealth agency, that  there were serious problems back in 2017, but they didn't do anything then. The  Morrison Government failed to share with state regulators what was known to the  Commonwealth Government about the risks of money laundering. And if what it



takes is setting up a specialised casino regulator, I think that should certainly be  looked at.

DOOGUE: Thank you very much indeed for joining us.

DREYFUS: Thanks very much Geraldine.

ENDS   MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHEN SPENCER 0423 596 573



