

JULIAN HILL MP

MEMBER FOR BRUCE

DEPUTY CHAIR JOINT COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

MONDAY, 15 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Visa madness; fly-out fly-in visa rule needs to change; Minister’s third

announcement on visa changes but no delivery; Liberals are bad economic

managers; JobSeeker and JobKeeper cuts.



JULIAN HILL, Deputy Chair Joint Committee on Public Accounts and Audit: On

Saturday, Immigration Minister Alex Hawke made the same announcement for the third

time.



After months of forcing the parents and partners of Australian citizens, to fly overseas and

back again just to get their visa granted.



In a panicked Saturday announcement ahead of a debate in Parliament this morning on my

Private Member’s Bill the Minister announced for the third time that at some point, in a

month or two, he would get around to making the change - and change this ridiculous rule.



The ‘fly out-fly in’ rule forces thousands of people to get on a plane, leave the safety of

Australia, fly somewhere else and fly back again wasting a precious quarantine place just

so their visa can be granted.



In November, the then  Minister Alan Tudge caved in after months of saying he wouldn’t

change the rule, and said ‘OK OK I’ll change the rule for the partners of Australians’.



Then the parents of Australians - who paid $50,000 each or more for their visa, waiting for

years - spoke up and said ‘Hang on a minute, if they are going to change it for the partners,

why not for us, the parents, we are elderly’.



People are literally terrified of dying of COVID if they are forced to go overseas and fly back

again.



Unbelievably, the Minister at that point said “Hmmmmm, no. Parents aren’t immediate

family members, I am only changing it for partners.” And so, people spoke up for two

months, shared their stories, on every TV network and media outlet, and eventually in late

January ahead of Parliament coming back the new Minsiter caved in and said ‘ Alirght, I will

change it for parents, at some point, in the next few months.’



Ahead of the debate today the Minister made a re-reannouncement. A re-reannouncement.

Instead of action he said, yet again, he will get around to changing it.



It is a bit like if I was coming out here and I said: ‘I’m going to do a doorstop, I’ll be back

again’



*The Member for Bruce shuffles off to the side, out of camera shot*



And then we go away, and then I come back and say: ‘At some point, in the next few

weeks, I am going to be out here to do this doorstop, and do my job’.



*The Member for Bruce again shuffles off to the side, out of camera shot*



And then we come back again, and I’d say: ‘I’ll tell you what, maybe, at the end of February

and late March, I will be back here to do this doorstop’



*The Member for Bruce again shuffles off to the side, out of camera shot*



I mean this is ridiculous.



We have families across Australia who are desperate, desperate to have these visas

granted.



The Minister could fix this with a stroke of his pen.



Let’s be very clear on the impacts. Until these visas are granted people have no work

rights. So for 6 months, 12 months goodness knows how long, families have been suffering

with one partner or parent no able to work and contribute to the economy. They can’t buy a

house -  they can’t get a mortage, they can’t buy property. They can’t get the HomeOwner

Grants without their visa.



They have been forced in many cases to be forced to pay tens of thousands of dollars in

international student fees for their children until they get their visa.



They have been forced to pay more visa  fees to the government. It is like a money making

scam.



Health checks, character checks, more visitor visa fees. There is no excuse.



Now, I have a Private Member’s Bill in the parliament this morning that would fix this mess.

The Government could vote for that, waive it through. All it does is say that the Minister can

grant any visa onshore or offshore during the pandemic.



Even if the Minister made the changes he has promised - if he did them this week - it still

doesn’t fix the problem, because there are still over 30 other visa categories other than the

partners and parents who would still be forced to fly overseas.



I spoke to an emergency doctor. This is a guy who treats people with COVID. He is

outraged that he is being told by the Government that in the next couple of weeks he has

got to leave Australia, go somewhere else and come back again. All because he is apply

for a 461 permanent resident New Zealand visa.



And so I call on the Government to just do the right thing. I say to the Minister, ‘Just do your

job. No more re-reannouncements. You can vote for the Private Member’s Bill in the

Parliament this morning’.



JOURNALIST: Why do you think the Government has been so reluctant and dragged their

feet, every step of the way  on this issue? What’s happening here?



HILL: Well, you’ve got two choices. Conspiracy theory or stuff up.

Conspiracy theory that people say is that they just want to make money and keep collecting

visa fees from people.



Or, they are just out of touch, and don’t understand the real impacts on families that these

delays are causing. Literally, one couple, one parents couple spent $67,000 flying

overseas, business class flights, they had to quarantine overseas, and then come back and

waste two quarantine places.



Or, It is just sheer incompetence. I mean Minister Alan Tudge said for months it wasn’t a

problem. And then it is only negative media pressure with this mob, it’s not common sense

that they cave in on. So eventually he caved in. I mean for his incompetence - stuffing up

this, stuffing up RoboDebt, $92 million dollars of failed visa privatisation - he got promoted

to be the Education Minister.



JOURNALIST: What about the proposal out there today to streamline JobSeeker into one

payment. What do you think of that?



HILL: Oh look, that’s media speculation, the Government will make its announcements. I’m

worried about people in my electorate who are going to be left with  no support when Job

Keeper ends and JobSeeker gets cut in the next few weeks. I am also worried about

secotrs that  have no chance of recovery until there is a vaccine and until the borders are

open. Sectors like tourism and travel,  or international education - the biggest single export

sector in the state of Victoria, and the fourth biggest before the pandemic in the whole of

Australia. These sort of sectors rely on the movement of people and need ongoing and

additional support. The Government needs to actually front up to that. Not be out on the

doors this morning like the Treasurer is this morning saying “Oh look, it’s all tickety boo,

they’ve never had it so good”. It’s not. There are people who need ongoing support and the

Government neds to understand that and really should be doing more.



JOURNALIST: Labor’s going to make it’s mind up soon on whether to keep some tax

concessions like negative gearing, do you think removing negative gearing needs to

happen?



HILL: Look, we will make our announcements about negative gearing and economic policy

in time for the election. People will have a clear view of what we are offering, and the

choice they will have to make. But, Labor is ready to fight an election at any time. The

Prime Minister is playing ducks and drakes: will it be this year? Will it be next year? Labor is

ready to fight at any time, and people will have a clear choice.



JOURNALIST: How about the economic recovery? How does Labor think that is going?

There are less businesses relying on JobKeeper today? Are we heading in the right

direction?



HILL: Australia was in a weak economic position before the pandemic. The Government

doesn’t like to talk about this. It is part of their branding and propaganda. ‘Ahhhh the

Liberals, great economic managers. We might be nasty and mean and cruel and fight with

each other all the time, but don’t worry we manage the economy”. It is just not true.



If you actually look at the data and the statistics indicating how Australia has gone after 7

years of Liberal Government - they are now in their eighth year - the story is not pretty of

the Government. It is a damning indictment.



Wage growth. Wages were lower in 2019 then they were in 2013 after 6 years of this

Government. In real terms, wages were lower.



Economic productivity was in negative territory, after 6 years of this Government.





Housing. Australia had the third most unaffordable housing market in the OECD. These are

not made up statistics, these are the reliable OECD comparisons.



The Government might want Australians to forget the fact that Australia has been going

backwards under the Liberals, but the facts speak for themselves.



I welcome any improvement in the economy. I want to see people back into work, of course

we do. But it is not all roses out there, especially not in my electorate. The Government

really needs to face up to the fact that they need to do more for people who are about to be

kicked off JobKeeper, pushed onto a lower rate of JobSeeker and are simply unable to

survive.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: CAM GREEN 0406 507 727













