



SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Finance  Leader of the Government in the Senate  Senator for South Australia



TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Interview on The Today Show with Karl Stefanovic.        Topics:  WA COVID outbreak; economic comeback; COVID-19 vaccine rollout;    02/02/2021  07:15AM

Karl Stefanovic: For more on WA's COVID outbreak, let's bring in Minister for Finance Simon

Birmingham, who joins us now in Canberra. Minister, thanks for your time this morning. What happened in

the WA hotel quarantine outbreak, do you know? I mean, 11 hours seems to be an awful long time.



Simon Birmingham: Look Karl, these really are questions for the WA government to respond to. We

obviously expect that all states and territories will share information in a timely manner, in a transparent

manner. And it's very important to everybody being able to make informed decisions as to how they

respond to COVID. And it's an expectation, I'm sure, that our chief medical officers will discuss amongst

themselves during their daily meetings as they do.



Karl Stefanovic: The whole point is that the whole thing should be more transparent and probably more

expeditiously. Right?



Simon Birmingham: Look, we have we have a very high standard in Australia. Let's not forget the fact

that, you know, in Australia we're talking about one case and one circumstance and how we handle that.

And whereas elsewhere around the world, they're dealing with so many thousands of cases and tragically

of deaths. So our systems have held up pretty well here. But in each and every one of these cases, there

are lessons to be learnt and no doubt there will be out of this one too.



Karl Stefanovic: So you're not banging on Mark McGowan's door saying, what happened?



Simon Birmingham: Well, we expect that the chief health officers will get to the bottom of exactly what

happened, if there were failures in relation to the timeliness or the transparency and how information was

communicated. And then we've got to make sure that all states and territories understand their

responsibilities to one another as much as to the nation or to the people in that regard, so that everybody

knows how best they can keep Australians safe and continue to successfully manage COVID as well as

we have today.



Karl Stefanovic: I think Mark McGowan has done a great job. Do you think he's made all the right

decisions here?



Simon Birmingham: Look, I'll let again the health advice guide us all through this. Thankfully, every

Australian state and territory has got COVID firmly under control. Australia's got it firmly under control.

And we're the envy of much of the rest of the world for the fact that we don't have huge cases, we don't

have large numbers of deaths, we don't have overflowing hospitals, and we don't have an economy that's

been completely destroyed by it. Instead, we have that economic strength coming back. And Australians,

by and large, living relatively normal lives across most of the country. Obviously, a tough few days in

Perth.



Karl Stefanovic: How can you get rid of JobKeeper when we seem to be going two steps forward, four

steps back every couple of months?



Simon Birmingham: Well, I don't think that's the case, Karl, if you look at the recovery in terms of-



Karl Stefanovic: You don't think lockdowns is going back four steps?



Simon Birmingham: I think what we're seeing short, sharp actions being taken. If you look overall across

the Australian economy, we've got jobs that continue to come back and we've got confidence in

consumers and businesses. That is that is high. We've got stored savings to a very significant sum. All of

these things actually help to make sure that we can have confidence moving forward, that businesses

and households have scope to continue to invest and continue to get people back into jobs with more

than 90 per cent of the jobs that were lost or stood down at the start of the pandemic now, having been

recovered.



Karl Stefanovic: Vaccinations will play a fairly significant role, I'm sure. How can you say with any

certainty we will get the vaccinations we need when we have supply issues overseas and the biggest

vaccine, AstraZeneca, hasn't been approved yet here?



Simon Birmingham: You're right, there are global challenges to the supply of vaccines, but I can say two

things of particular importance to Australians. One is we've contracted 140 million doses of three different

types of vaccines. And the fourth, a lot of doses contracted is across a suite of different products through

the Kovács facility. So we've got a range of different options. But also, most crucially, around 50 million of

those will be manufactured here in Australia at the CSL plant. So what we've done is, is make sure that

Australia is well prepared and to be able to make and deliver vaccines, but also that we have a suite of

options available. Well, yes, you're right. Many countries are facing challenges. Australia, we're in the

fortunate position, not having widespread COVID having it under control means that unlike those who've

rushed regulatory approvals, we put it through the normal regulatory approval. And unlike those who are

feeling the pressure of delivery systems at present, and we've been able to plan effectively in terms of

those delivery.



Karl Stefanovic: So simple question, when will the first jab go in an arm here in Australia?



Simon Birmingham: Plans remain on track, so the late February, early March timelines that the

Government has been talking about remain the timelines that we're working to. And we have confidence

in, as I say, all of the systems we've put in place. We're investing $1.9 billion dollars as part of the vaccine

distribution strategy, because it's not just about buying the vaccines, it's about getting them spread, stage

one across hospitals and into those highly vulnerable cohorts, then the further stages as we work

ultimately to the entire Australian population.



Karl Stefanovic: This morning, you are guaranteeing those vaccinations will start in late February, early

March?



Simon Birmingham: Everything remains on track, as far as I'm advised.



Karl Stefanovic: Ok, and by October, now anyone who wants one will have one?



Simon Birmingham: These are our ambitions and in Australia, we'd rather be here than anywhere else

in the world when it comes to the management of COVID. I'm confident that we will be able to deliver the

highest standard in the world in terms of the way vaccines are rolled out.



Karl Stefanovic: It sounds like you're starting to water down some of those promises.



Simon Birmingham: Not at all, mate. We are working to all of those deadlines, all of those timelines. It's

a complex global environment they're in. There's a big battle for vaccines, but Australia is well placed to

deliver, just as we have in keeping people safe and secure through the pandemic.



Karl Stefanovic: Are you sure you're not watering down those promises?



Simon Birmingham: Dead sure, mate.



Karl Stefanovic: OK, thanks for your time, Simon. Appreciate it, as always.



[ENDS]



Media Contacts

Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325

Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644





Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.



