Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





The Hon Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health and Aged Care

MEDIA RELEASE



26 February 2021



$100 million for major advances in medical research technology

The Morrison Government is investing $100 million into the development of new  technologies to improve diagnosis and treatment of stroke, epilepsy and lung disease,  including COVID-19.

The funding will be split across three research projects led by senior researchers at the  University of Melbourne, the Australian Lung Health Initiative, and Florey Institute of  Neuroscience and Mental Health.

The five year funding is being provided under Stage Two of the Frontier Health and Medical  Research Initiative, an unprecedented program which allows researcher collaborations to  explore the most bold and exciting ideas that could have a dramatic, global impact on health  care.

The successful projects were chosen from 10 applicants, which each received up to $1.5  million in funding to develop ground-breaking ideas into research plans. The research plans  were then assessed by an independent committee of Australian and international experts.

The selected projects are:

 The Stroke Golden Hour project to develop lightweight brain scanners that can be  carried in ambulances. This will allow ambulance officers to provide rapid diagnosis  and treatment to stroke victims, saving lives and reducing disability.

 The Australian Epilepsy Project, which is providing a platform of artificial  intelligence based expertise and clinical decision support. The platform will ensure all  epileptics receive best practice care from their first seizure, and will also develop a  data base for continuously improving precision medicine.

 4D Functional Diagnosis, a new frontier in lung health for children that will deliver  revolutionary lung scanners that are safe, rapid, and easy to use. The scanners will  allow functional analysis of lung health and can be immediately applied to managing  COVID-19, establishing Australia at the forefront of lung science, and kick-starting a  high-value, high-tech industry.



These projects have the potential to transform outcomes for people living with these diseases,  generate massive economic benefits and create thousands of jobs.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



All projects that have so far received funding through Frontiers have remarkable promise. Our  Government is extremely impressed by the calibre of all the projects and their potential to  assist people with many serious health issues, while also growing our innovation economy.

The Government has allocated a total of $570 million to the program, over ten years from  2019-20.

Project Recipient Funding (GST excl)

The Stroke Golden Hour: delivering  urgent stroke care to Australians

Professor Geoffrey Donnan and  Professor Stephen Davis

University of Melbourne  Australian  Stroke Alliance

$40,167,052



4D Functional Diagnosis: A new  frontier in lung health for children



Professor Andreas Fouras

Australian Lung Health Initiative

$28,867,540

Australian Epilepsy Project

Professor Graeme Jackson

Florey Institute of Neuroscience and  Mental Health

$30,080,129

Total  $99,114,721



-Ends-

