



TRANSCRIPT  Senator James Paterson

Chair, Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security  Liberal Senator for Victoria



Wednesday 10 March 2021

Sky News: First Edition

Subjects: The Quad, PJCIS hearings: AFP Powers, Foreign Interference at  universities

Peter Stefanovic: Well, joining me live out of Canberra now, Liberal Senator James  Paterson. Senator, good to see you. Thanks for your time. Dan Tehan says it's it's not  about China. But I'll tell you what, it's the one common theme that all of those four  countries have is they've all got beef with China.

Senator James Paterson: Peter, it's an extremely positive development that the Quad is  being upgraded in this way and in such an early time in the new Biden administration. It  was an initiative that really got off the ground under the Trump administration at the foreign  minister level. But for it to be so quickly elevated to the leader level shows there is a  degree of bipartisanship in Washington when it comes to Indo-Pacific security issues and  it's immensely encouraging and important for Australia. Dan Tehan is, of course, right it's  not about any one country, but it is about the security and stability of the Pacific and I'd be  lying to you and your viewers if I didn't acknowledge that activities of the Chinese  Communist Party, in particular in the South China Sea, have undermined security and  stability in the Indo-Pacific. And that's of great concern to our fellow like-minded liberal  democracies and other countries in the region.

Stefanovic: But the reason why I mean, it's been elevated so quickly, Senator, does that  suggest that there's a degree of urgency here?

Paterson: Well it suggests there's lots of areas for cooperation with like-minded countries  when it comes to maritime security, to cybersecurity and critical infrastructure, to Covid-19  to climate change. There's a whole range of issues that we'll be cooperating with because  we see the world in a very similar way to countries like Japan, India and, of course, the  United States, our principal treaty ally.

Stefanovic: Is it inflammatory? For China, I mean.

Paterson: I don't think there's anything inflammatory about like minded countries working  together to uphold the rules based order. And in doing so will be upholding the interests of  all all the region and all of our neighbours. It'll be very welcome news for our partners and

friends in countries like Indonesia and the Philippines and Malaysia and in the Pacific  because they welcome our engagement in the region and they welcome us helping to  uphold the architecture of the region, which supports the peace and prosperity and stability  for all countries.

Stefanovic: You've got your first day today, Senator, as chair of the Parliamentary Joint  Committee on Intelligence and Security. A bit of a tongue twister, that one. But you've got  your hearings that begin on right wing extremism today. You've got foreign interference  tomorrow at universities. Just on the on the first front about right wing extremism. Where  do you think we are at at that point?

Paterson: Actually, Peter the inquiry today is into some new powers for the AFP, seeking  three new types of warrant to effectively disrupt online criminal activity and criminal  network activity from everything from child sex offenders to terrorism. But you're right, we  will soon be commencing an enquiry into extremism and radicalism. And this is in  recognition of the fact that ASIO and other agencies have warned us that although Islamist  extremism and terrorism remains the principal security and safety threat for Australians,  there has been a growing and worrying rise in right wing, far right extremism and it is  taking up an increasing amount of their time and resources, and they are very concerned  about it. And so it is timely that the principal security committee of the Parliament reviews  whether our laws and policies are sufficient to combat that threat.

Stefanovic: So today's committee hearing is then, like you said there, about more powers  or giving police and security agencies more powers.

Paterson: That's right. So the AFP is seeking, along with the criminal intelligence  organisation, is seeking three new types of warrants: a data disruption warrant and  network activity warrant and an account takeover warrant. And each of those are designed  to allow the AFP to get into the systems of criminal networks operating in Australia and  disrupt and dismantle them, to prevent them from engaging in crime, to collect intelligence  on those criminal organisations and to bolster their cases by collecting more evidence to  use against these individuals. Now, we'll be hearing today from agencies about the  necessity of these new powers and from some civil society groups like the Carly Ryan  Foundation and the Uniting Church who strongly support the powers. We'll also be hearing  from groups like the Law Council of Australia and the Human Rights Law Centre who have  some concerns about the civil liberties implications of these new powers. And it's up to the  committee to weigh that up and make recommendations for the parliament.



Stefanovic: And just tomorrow. Just finally, Senator, foreign interference tomorrow. And  that's about universities. And that's all about China, too, right?

Paterson: Well, there's been a number of high profile incidents at Australian universities  over the last few years which have alarmed not just me, not just the government, but  parties and members of parliament across the entire political spectrum, when you have  issues like Drew Pavlou's victimisation as a student at the University of Queensland for his  activism on Chinese human rights or Elaine Pearson an academic at the University of New  South Wales who had her work censored criticising China on human rights. It is clear that  some universities are not managing these risks appropriately and sufficiently, and this  inquiry will be looking for both good practice from universities that we can celebrate and  encourage the rest of the sector to follow, but also examples of poor and inadequate  practices that really need a light shone upon them so they can be addressed.

Stefanovic: Senator, good luck with that and talk to you soon.

ENDS

