



MARK BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING

MEMBER FOR HINDMARSH





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

TUESDAY, 2 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Vaccine rollout; Scott Morrison refusing to censure Craig Kelly; net zero

emissions by 2050.



MARK BUTLER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING: Thanks for coming out

this morning. Can I say at the beginning, it’s another difficult day for the Western Australian

community particularly and all of our thoughts are with them today. We haven't yet received a

briefing from the Premier, obviously about where this is up to in Perth because of the three

hour time difference. We are looking forward to further details and remain confident that a

strong response, like in other jurisdictions where outbreaks of disease occurred, will lead to a

very good result. It reinforces the importance of communities listening to the best possible

public health advice, the advice of state and Commonwealth chief medical officers, vaccine

specialists, immunologists, and the like.



Yesterday, I outlined the scale of the challenge for a successful vaccine rollout not just for

Australia, but for the whole world. We're going to need to roll out somewhere between 50 and

60 million vaccines between now and the end of October, combining the COVID vaccine

challenge with the flu vaccine that is going to need to be administered at some point in the lead

into winter as well.



I also outlined yesterday a number of questions that remain to be answered by  the

government to assure the community that we're on track to meet this awesome challenge. We

need to have some further information about when vaccine supplies will arrive in Australia and

in what quantities. We need more information about the online booking service that is being

prepared by the government - the only way in which Australians will be able to book an

appointment to receive the COVID vaccine. Not just information for patients, but information for

GPs, for aged care facilities, and the like.



We also need some more information about how negotiations are progressing between the

government and other medicine companies to diversify the supply of vaccines. Companies

locked Moderna with a very successful mRNA vaccine that has a very high efficacy rate; by

Johnson and Johnson and many others. These questions remain unanswered. They are

important questions for the community to have confidence.



We also saw polling research out today, both the Newspoll and the Essential poll, that remind

us of the challenge in making sure that as many Australians as possible are willing to take up

this voluntary vaccine. The Newspoll, for example, showed that only 75 per cent of Australians

so far, are intending to take up the vaccine. And that rate is lower among some groups, for

example, women between 36 and 45 years of age.



We've supported the government's information campaign. We think it's an important use of

taxpayer money to make sure that Australians understand how important it is that everyone

takes up the opportunity to take on this vaccine for their own health, but also for the health of

people around them, and the broader Australian community.



That is why it is so utterly irresponsible that the Prime Minister again yesterday refused to

condemn Craig Kelly's consistent, relentless campaign to undermine the nation's COVID

response. He is undermining the advice of our public health experts, including the chief

medical officers and to undermine the vaccine campaign. Craig Kelly is a dangerous menace

and a threat to the nation's COVID response. It's beyond time the Prime Minister developed

the backbone to pull him into line. When the Prime Minister was asked that question at the

Press Club yesterday he said “Craig Kelly is not my doctor,” a glib response that reminded us

of the Prime Minister claiming “he doesn’t hold a hose mate”. Instead of pulling him into line he

actually gave him a pat on the back and said Craig Kelly was doing “a good job.”



The Prime Minister talked a lot last year about Team Australia. If Team Australia means

anything it means making sure that MPs who have the utter privilege of working in this place,

having a social media platform as Craig Kelly and others have, back the advice of our public

health experts. This is not some abstract matter. The health, the economic well-being of our

nation depends on one voice and that voice is respecting public health advice. It's time the

Prime Minister backed in that voice.



JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Anthony Albanese said this morning that leadership requires tough

decisions. Do you think Scott Morrison should step into his preselection and have him

removed?



BUTLER: I think the Prime Minister should outline what steps he is going to take to stop Craig

Kelly's relentless campaign of undermining the nation's COVID-19 response. At the very least

he's got to condemn it. You can't pat Craig Kelly on the back yesterday saying he's doing a

good job as the Member for Hughes when he spends most of his time, Craig Kelly that is,

undermining the advice of our public health experts. He has accused the Chief Medical Officer

of crimes against humanity. He said that mask wearing was child abuse. Every step of the

way, as we've been trying to build this response, trying to put Australians in the best position

possible to get through this pandemic, we've had someone receiving taxpayer funds as a

government MP, sitting in the government's party room, undermining that response. The Prime

Minister needs to take action.



JOURNALIST: Every time someone talks about Craig Kelly it elevates his popularity, his

notoriety in Australia. Searches for his name always surge after attacks from Labor, for

example. Are you concerned that that platform actually has the followers that he has, they

don't go away even if he is no longer an MP and that you're fuelling this cult around him? What

could be done to actually address the followers that he already has and would have regardless

of what the Prime Minister did?



BUTLER: The top office in the land needs to call him out. Yes, I am worried about those

issues. I'm obviously worried about those issues but I don't think the right response is silence

in the face of an elected member of parliament, who sits in the government's party room,

accusing the Chief Medical Officer of crimes against humanity, of accusing mask wearing

advocates of child abuse. At some point the Prime Minister needs to act. Of course, I'm

concerned about the amplification. I don't do this lightly. Anthony Albanese doesn't say this

lightly. But this fellow has a social media reach, through Facebook, that's vastly greater than

the Department of Health's Facebook. At some point, the Prime Minister needs to act. He's

using taxpayer funds in his salary, he is using electorate office resources to do this, at some

point this has to be addressed by the Prime Minister’s Office.



JOURNALIST: Isn't it already amplified though? What do you now make of Craig Kelly’s

relationship with Pete Evans?



BUTLER: That’s right. Instead of taking advice from the Chief Medical Officer, Craig Kelly

wants us to take advice from Pete Evans. This really has reached peak stupid. At what point is

the Prime Minister going to stop patting this fellow on the back and pull him into line? This is

serious. We are at a point now, when we're trying to build a vaccine campaign, the likes of

which we've never seen before and we have an elected member of parliament in the

government's party room actively seeking to undermine it.



JOURNALIST: There are reports this morning that Western Australian health officials took 11

hours to notify the Commonwealth that there had been community transmission. Do you have

faith in Western Australia sort of quarantine programme and health system?



BUTLER: We're going to receive another report from the Premier and health authorities this

morning Perth time, I imagine, about how that's progressing. What I want, what the Labor Party

has urged right through this crisis, is for governments and the community to follow the public

health advice. At the moment, there is a crisis underway in Western Australia involving a very

substantial lockdown. The priority must be for the community to follow the public health advice

over the course of this week.



JOURNALIST: Mr Butler, you have colleagues from Western Australia who might not have got

on a plane on Sunday had that 11 hours not been wasted in the notification process. Do you

think that it's good enough that there was that delay?



BUTLER: As has been the case, through all of these instances, we've seen it in most states in

the country over the last several months, we will learn lessons from our response to all of

these issues. But the priority at the moment is to follow the best health advice and to make

sure we get through this lockdown period - we are able to contract trace as much as possible

for people who might have been exposed to the virus in Western Australia and we get through

this as quickly as possible. Sure there will be time, and as I understand it, the Western

Australian government has initiated an inquiry into how this was able to happen. We should let

that inquiry take place. We should support the Western Australian community through this

lockdown. And no doubt we'll learn lessons as we have in other states.



JOURNALIST: On a single point of entry for booking COVID jab appointments. What are your

key concerns around the platform like that? Is it potentially something that could be useful to

younger people, but not older what's your concern?



BUTLER: Well, I think there are a range of concerns that when there is this single entry point

there is the capacity for failure. And we've seen that unfortunately, in a number of other

instances with this government, mainly managing big IT systems. The COVIDsafe app has

been a failure, the census online was a failure, for a range of other instances as well. So we

need confidence as soon as possible. And we're already in February, the Prime Minister has

committed to 4 million vaccinations by the end of March, perhaps leading into April, we still

don't even know how people are going to book to get a vaccination. We don't know when the

vaccines are going to arrive in Australia, how long batch testing will take. Doctors don't know

how they will be able to arrange for patients to come and see them. I mean if your GP is not

one of the 2000 or so that have expressed interest in rolling out the vaccines, patients don't

know how they'll be connected to a GP who will be able to roll out the vaccine. This information

should all have been readily available much sooner than it is. So a range of questions are

being asked not just by Labor, but by patients groups, by medical groups, and the sooner we

have those answers, the sooner there will be the community confidence with this vaccine

programme, which is utterly critical for the nation, will roll out.



JOURNALIST: So what do you make of the Prime Minister's comments yesterday regarding

net zero by 2050?



BUTLER: Well, I think the Prime Minister again squibbed the opportunity to do what business

communities and state governments and individual businesses have been crying out for him to

do. It just doesn’t make sense. This is an extraordinary opportunity. In his first major speech of

the year, after Joe Biden has been elected in America, he will be committing to net zero

emissions by 2050, only in the last few months so did China, Japan, South Korea. This was a

great opportunity for him to do what all business groups, the Farmers Federation, all state

governments have been urging him to do and make a commitment. Instead, he just chose

another word to squib it, said it was his preference. Until we get a commitment businesses

have said they won't have the confidence to invest in the sorts of long term investments we

need to get on that pathway.



JOURNALIST: Do you think the Labor Party should commit to a midterm target?



BUTLER: Anthony Albanese has answered that question many times. That's not my portfolio

anymore. I will refer you to Anthony's answers and I refer you to Chris Bowen who is the

Shadow Minister for this. I'm sure they’ll continue to answer those questions.



JOURNALIST: We know that John Skerritt from the TGA has spent time emailing back and

forth with Craig Kelly and other health officials have also, I guess, taken time out of their

incredibly busy jobs on the COVID response to deal with him. Is he actively getting in the way

of the country's response to the pandemic and the vaccine rollout by taking up their time with

this misinformation?



BUTLER: Absolutely, the TGA has so much work to do to ensure that this is a successful

rollout. Not a second of their time should be spent dealing with this rubbish that Craig Kelly

continues to put out. More rubbish he put out yesterday about Pete Evans yesterday. Craig

Kelly tells us that he has a lot of communication with the Prime Minister's Office and the Health

Minister’s office again, they shouldn't be wasting time with this rubbish as well.



Craig Kelly is a dangerous menace. He is a threat to the COVID response to the nation, the

Prime Minister should pull him into line and get him out of the way.



JOURNALIST: We've seen the Biden Administration give a $303 million deal to Australian

company Ellume  for rapid testing kits to the US. Is this the sort of technology we could be

looking at, given it is an Australian company?



BUTLER: Well, we congratulate any Australian company that's able to win a lucrative contract

like that. It shows the quality of our innovation and quality of our scientists and researchers -

so a big congratulations to them. Obviously, the US is grappling with a scale of challenge that

is fundamentally different to the challenge we have here in Australia, we're lucky enough to

have here in Australia. At some point in time it may well be that our authorities say that that's

the sort of testing arrangement that we need to consider as well. We're not at that point in time,



I don't think yet. But if we get to that point, it's great to see that an Australian business is

sweeping the world with their technology.



JOURNALIST: At airports though?



BUTLER: That's a matter for expert advice. And when the advice of our public health

authorities gets to that point we'll obviously look at that. Thanks everyone.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LUCY CARUSO 0408 803 428



