SHARING COVID-19 VACCINES WITH OUR  NEIGHBOURS

Australia is committed to supporting our region to respond to COVID-19.  We will soon start sharing doses of our Australian  manufactured AstraZeneca vaccine with our neighbours.

We will support our partners to vaccinate quickly their highest-risk populations at a  time when the international supply of vaccines is constrained.

Initially, Australia will share at least 10,000 AstraZeneca COVID-19 doses per week  and will scale up as required. These are doses manufactured in Australia. Our  region’s health security and economic recovery is intertwined with our own.

We will continue to support the Government of Papua New Guinea in its immediate  response to its outbreak, helping to vaccinate front-line healthcare and other  essential workers. Australia recently delivered 8,480 vaccine  doses, medical personnel and supplies. Supporting Timor-Leste is also a priority due  to a sharp increase in community transmission.

COVID-19 vaccine doses will initially be made available to our friends in Papua New  Guinea and Timor-Leste, which are facing significant COVID-19 outbreaks. Doses  will also be made available in coming weeks for Fiji, Solomon Islands and  Vanuatu. We are also working to procure vaccines though the global market for our  neighbours in the wider Pacific and Southeast Asia.

Our vaccine support initiative, alongside ongoing public health measures, will  help neighbouring countries protect their populations and restart their economies.  There are multiple pathways to full vaccine coverage and we will support our  partners’ vaccine choices, in line with stringent regulatory authorities approvals.

We are working closely with the World Health Organization and UNICEF on regional  preparedness to receive, store and administer vaccines. The timing and quantity of

No publication date: received by Parl Library on the 11/04/2021

SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women

THE HON GREG HUNT MP  Minister for Health and Aged Care

SENATOR THE HON ZED SESELJA  Minister for International Development and the Pacific

doses provided by Australia will be aligned with health service readiness to store and  administer doses safely. All vaccines under our initiative have been  through stringent regulatory authority checks.

This vaccine support for our neighbours is part of Australia’s $623.2 million  vaccine initiative for the Pacific and Southeast Asia, including our $100 million  Quad Vaccine Partnership.  It supplements our $80 million contribution to the  multilateral COVAX Facility Advance Market Commitment for developing countries,  which aims to provide vaccine coverage for up to 20% of the populations of 92  developing countries by the end of 2021.

Media contacts  David Wroe (Minister Payne): 0429 531 143  Melanie Ruiz (Minister Payne): 0427 888 392  Cassandra Choake (Minister Seselja): 0427 839 164

No publication date: received by Parl Library on the 12/04/2021

