



The Hon Ken Wyatt AM MP

Minister for Indigenous Australians  Member for Hasluck

MEDIA RELEASE

9 January 2021

HAVE YOUR SAY ON INDIGENOUS VOICE PROPOSALS

Minister for Indigenous Australians, the Hon Ken Wyatt AM, MP, has today launched the  second stage of the Indigenous Voice co-design process, inviting all Australians to provide  their feedback and comments on the proposals.

Consultation will run over the next four months, with many ways for people to have their say.

“Today marks a significant milestone in the very important process to consult on a Voice for  Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people,” Minister Wyatt said.

“Over the last 12 months, more than 52 members across three co-design groups have  worked through options for what the Indigenous Voice might look like and how it might  operate.

“Together with group members, we are now seeking feedback so they can refine their final  recommendations to Government. All Australians are invited to have their say and further  shape the proposals.

“I want to ensure the voices of all 800,000 Indigenous Australians can be heard. The more  people that provide their feedback, the greater chance we have to refine the best possible  options and set up structures that enjoy long-term success.”

The proposals presented to Government for an Indigenous voice will provide a mechanism  for Indigenous Australians in communities around the country to have a direct say on  matters to improve their lives.

Co-Chairs of the Indigenous Voice Senior Advisory Group, Professor Dr Marcia Langton AO  and Professor Tom Calma AO said it’s important that all Australians be given the opportunity  to engage in the process.

“These proposals are not finished. Now it’s time for everyone to consider them and provide  comment so that we can put a well consulted final proposal to Government. Your feedback  will help us make sure the final proposal is one that can work for all Australians,” Professor  Langton said.

“There’s lots of ways to engage in the process over the coming months. We’ll deliver  consultations flexibly, adapting to COVID-19 restrictions as needed to ensure safe  discussions are held across the country. The Interim Report to the Australian Government, a  discussion paper and other resources are now available online, and community  consultations will be held this year,” Professor Calma said.



Minister Wyatt said that the Government is delivering on its election commitment to co-design options for an Indigenous Voice and improve local and regional decision-making.

“The Government has not reached any conclusions around the options presented in the  report and is conscious that the consultation period is an important component of the  process.

“The Government is particularly interested in ensuring that any Voice structure in its final  form leads to a greater say for Indigenous Australians on matters that affect them and real  changes on the ground. It will also ensure there is a shared responsibility for dealing with  these matters - not only with jurisdictions but with Indigenous Australians as well.”

You can provide feedback and find out more about consultations at https://voice.niaa.gov.au.

The Indigenous Voice Co-design Process Interim Report and other resources to support  people in responding are also available on the website.

Media contact: Luke Nayna, Senior Media Adviser, 0438 231 687

Authorised by Ken Wyatt AM, MP, Member for Hasluck.

