

CATHERINE KING MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT AND REGIONAL  DEVELOPMENT  MEMBER FOR BALLARAT



2021 INFRASTRUCTURE PRIORITY LIST

Labor welcomes the release of Infrastructure Australia’s 2021 Priority List.

Infrastructure Australia is Australia’s pre-eminent infrastructure advisor, designed  by a Labor government to take infrastructure investment out of the day-to-day  political cycle and develop long term priorities.

With COVID-19 reshaping Australians’ lives and driving a record increase in  regional migration, the importance of listening to expert advice has never been  more important.

Unfortunately, Infrastructure Australia has been continually sidelined and  undermined by a Morrison Government more interested in the political benefits of  infrastructure spending than making investments that grow Australia’s economy  and increase productivity.

Just last December the Morrison Government further cut Infrastructure Australia  out of the decision making process by increasing the threshold where the  independent body evaluates project proposals from $100m to $250m.

If there’s one thing the Morrison Government hates, it is scrutiny.

The Morrison Government’s politically guided approach has been a resounding  failure. Instead of methodically investing in Australia’s infrastructure needs, Scott  Morrison has over-promised and under-delivered on transport infrastructure by an  average of $1.2 billion every year and left important, priority projects like High  Speed Rail to gather dust.

While High Speed Rail won’t be completed anytime soon, the time to begin route  planning and land acquisitions is now.

That is what Infrastructure Australia says, it is time for the Prime Minister to pay  attention.





The Morrison Government should be guided in its infrastructure investments by  this list, it would deliver a far better outcome for Australia than funnelling more  money into sport rorts, dodgy Western Sydney Airport land deals, undeliverable  commuter car parks, politically chosen roundabouts and countless other scandals.



FRIDAY, 26 FEBRUARY 2021

MEDIA CONTACT: NICK BEAVER 0419 709 266



