

JIM CHALMERS MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR RANKIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AFTERNOON AGENDA  MONDAY, 8 MARCH 2021

SUBJECT: International Women’s Day; Closing the gender pay gap; Morrison  Government’s JobKeeper cuts; Treasurer arriving empty-handed in Cairns.

KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: Today I caught up with the Shadow Treasurer, Jim  Chalmers, from the Cairns Marina, where he's been visiting and discussing the  issue of JobKeeper support. I began by asking him what Labor's plan to name and  shame companies that underplay women is all about.

JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER:Kieran, it's all about recognising that  the gender pay gap in this country is still unacceptably large, and whether it's  ensuring that bigger companies report that pay gap, whether it's getting rid of  secrecy clauses, whether it's showing leadership in the Commonwealth Public  Service, whether it's empowering the Fair Work Commission to do more to boost  the earnings of Australian women, all of these things are really important initiatives  when it comes to closing that gender pay gap, which has bedevilled our country for  too long now, even before COVID-19.

But I think on International Women's Day, it's also important to recognise that the  impacts of the pandemic themselves have not been felt equally. If you look at that  important piece of work by the Grattan Institute released today, it showed that  Australian women lost more jobs, did more unpaid work, and received less  government support. I think across all of these areas, you can see the challenge  that we have ahead of us to give Australian women the opportunities that they  need and deserve in a country like ours.

GILBERT: The Grattan report suggests that the government needs to provide  more funding to services sectors like childcare, aged care and so on, because of  the female dominant workforce, but it's more than just the money isn't it? It's about  the structural changes as well, to ensure that the workers actually get any extra  dollars?



CHALMERS: Absolutely, Kieran. And we've said for some time now, and it's a  tribute, I think, to Amanda Rishworth and Anthony Albanese, who made the  announcement that we would invest more substantially in childcare, but not just  that, some of the other issues that we've just talked about, some of the  transparency issues, some of the Industrial Relations issues, are absolutely  crucial. There's not just one area or another that needs attention, and not just on  International Women's Day, but indeed every day, if we are to close that gender  pay gap, invest in the care economy, in particular, and make sure that Australian  women aren't left behind as we recover from this worst recession in almost 100  years.

GILBERT: We're seeing this cultural shift at the moment, more than a 'me too'  moment it seems. In terms of the gender equality of pay, there are suggestions  that investors will increasingly look to companies that make gender inclusion and  equity a priority. Do you think that's a fair assessment?

CHALMERS: Absolutely, Kieran. And I welcome that. I think right across the  board, what investors are looking for is not just a return on the bottom line, but  recognising that in many instances the investments or the companies that they are  looking at, whether it's gender pay, whether it's issues around cleaner and cheaper  energy, whether it's about environmental responsibility, whether it's training and  opportunities provided to their workforce, there are a broader set of considerations  here. And it's important, I think, that investors do that. It's a good thing that that has  been a development in recent times and long may it continue.

GILBERT: Now, you're in North Queensland, a hugely dependent economy on  tourism and international tourism. The Treasurer says the post-JobKeeper support  will be provided within days. What do you make of the idea of interest free loans to  businesses that already are receiving JobKeeper as the next step of support?

CHALMERS: We'll be constructive about anything that the government  announces. Obviously, any support for the struggling workers and small  businesses here in Cairns and the surrounding region is welcomed. But in my view  it's no substitute for a responsible and temporary extension of the JobKeeper  payment.

If you look behind me, Kieran, at this marina. Usually, in normal times, this marina  is empty, all the boats are out on the reef, taking international visitors. Normally,  there's 3,5000 international visitors per day in this time of year here in Cairns.  Something like $5 million a day into the local economy. And because the  international borders are closed and a lot of businesses and workers are still  struggling here, we've called on Josh Frydenberg to extend JobKeeper in a  temporary and responsible way to recognise that those parts of Australia which  aren't recovering as quickly as we like, the areas that are reliant on the opening of

the national border, they're still struggling.

Now, unfortunately, Josh Frydenberg has raised the expectations of this town. He's  come here and given a big speech about how good he is and he's told them all  about what's happening here, but he doesn't seem to understand that what they  need here is a helping hand, instead he has given them a slap in the face. He's  come here with no plans for Cairns. He's come here empty-handed. And a lot of  the small businesses, and particularly tourism operators, that I've spoken to today  are very angry about that.

GILBERT: So, interest free loans in the short-term, at least post-March and post-JobKeeper, won't be good enough?

CHALMERS: Well, they'll be no substitute for an extension of JobKeeper. I mean,  JobKeeper is playing a really important role in this town. In lots of ways, this town  is on JobKeeper life support and Josh Frydenberg will be pulling the plug before  the end of this month. And when you think about the role that JobKeeper is playing  in the economy, I think there's no substitute for continuing that.

If there are other ideas that he wants to propose, whether it's concessional loans,  whether it’s other kinds of support like the Queensland Government has provided  with the voucher scheme, obviously we'll be constructive about that. Obviously, we  want federal government support to flow into this town, it desperately needs it, but  there's no substitute for extending JobKeeper.

GILBERT: Just finally, I know you've got to get to the airport yourself, but the  government's prospect of providing direct grants, basically to airlines, tied to flights  that are running and seats that are being offered, Would that be something that  makes sense to you in terms of another sector that's absolutely copping it?

CHALMERS: Again, we'll have a look at that, but there's a lot of scepticism here in  Cairns today, Kieran, that if the government makes an announcement about grant  programs or some other kinds of assistance, they'll make the big announcement  but there's scepticism that that support will actually reach the small businesses and  workers of this town. So, we'll have a look at it, but unfortunately the government's  got form when it comes to making their announcements about grant programs, and  then not getting the money out the door. And we'd be worried about that happening  again.

Again, Kieran, there's no substitute for that extension for JobKeeper. Nobody's  saying it should go on forever, but it should be tailored to what's actually going on,  on the ground and in local communities like this one. If we want the national  economy to recover strongly, then towns like Cairns, and regional economies like  those throughout Queensland, need to be a bigger part of the story. I'm not sure  that Scott Morrison or Josh Frydenberg actually understand that.





GILBERT: And crucial that the aviation sector remains healthy to get people into  those places too, surely?

CHALMERS: Absolutely, Kieran. And we've been saying all along there needs to  be a national plan for aviation. The reality is that those international flights won't be  coming back anytime soon. So, a lot of these businesses will be experiencing  some pain for some time. It's not their fault that the international border is closed,  we don't want to see those businesses hit the fence. We don't want to see them  lose their workers, or their experience, or their skills, because if we hollow out a  town like Cairns, it'll find it harder to get back on its feet when the international  borders do reopen.

So, there's a lot at stake here. The Treasurer had an opportunity to come here  today to announce an extension of JobKeeper, or some of these other issues that  you've been talking about. Instead, he came empty-handed. And that's why a lot of  people here are quite angry at the Morison Government today. They just don't  seem to understand what's happening here and what the consequences are for the  government continuing to leave people in the lurch and leave them behind.

GILBERT: No doubt one of the most beautiful parts of Queensland, and the  country. Jim Chalmers joining us from the Cairns Marina, very much appreciated,  thank you.

CHALMERS: Thank you, Kieran.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: BRETT MASON 0419 239 811





