

BILL SHORTEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE SCHEME

MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

TODAY SHOW

TUESDAY, 9 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Concerns re: hotel quarantine; calls to relocate returned travellers from

cities; AstraZeneca vaccine safety; COVID support for heavily impacted sectors;

Bernardo’s charity award.



LEILA MCKINNON, HOST: There's fresh concern this morning over Melbourne's hotel

quarantine system, leading experts warning the programme is not fit to contain that highly

infectious new variant of COVID-19. So, what are the options now for containing the virus?

Let's discuss with the Shadow Minister for Government Services, Bill Shorten, who's in

Melbourne, and also Triple M's Gus Worland. Bill, let's go to you first.



BILL SHORTEN, MEMBER FOR MARIBYRNONG: Hi.



MCKINNON: These hotel quarantine breaches, they're a huge concern. Do we hope the

vaccine just puts an end to this kind of quarantine, or do we need to build a purpose-fit

quarantine areas out of towns and cities?



SHORTEN: Spot on, Leila. I think it's both. I think the vaccines are the longer-term solution,

but in the meantime, I don't think the problem's just Melbourne's. I think it's the challenge of

having people in the middle of our cities. I do believe that we need to look at the location of

where we quarantine people. Back in the old days, we used to quarantine people away from

our cities. So, I think that's, as Annastacia Palaszczuk, the Queensland premier, said, I think

that's got to be on the table. Better facilities.



MCKINNON: Gus, what's your take on that?



GUS WORLAND, TRIPLE M: Yeah no, I suppose it's a little silly of us to think that we could

just do it in the cities, it would all be okay and we wouldn't have a problem. In fact, this whole

COVID, we thought, every time we think we've nailed it, something else pops up, doesn't it -

another strain or some other drama. And of course, when you're dealing with humans, that's

exactly what's going to happen. But how long is it going to take us to build these sort of

places? How much expense will go into it as well, all these things need to come into play. But

I've got a feeling we're going to be living with it for a long time. So like Bill said, everything

should be on the table.



MCKINNON: Right. And while our Government is standing by its support for the AstraZeneca

COVID vaccine due to be given to millions of Australians, that's despite growing concern

internationally it's not effective. South Africa's even pulled it off the table completely. Bill, what

do you think? Do you have confidence in the AstraZeneca vaccine?



SHORTEN: Well, based on what the medical experts are saying, the AstraZeneca vaccine

should be part of the answer. I have said earlier on this show, in previous weeks, that it's a

shame that we didn't tie up contracts with five or six of the vaccines rather than just three. But

let's get it right. I can see that we want to make sure the rollout happens properly. I think

Australians just want to go back to normal, but we can't go back to normal till we get the

vaccine. So, it's fundamental. In the meantime, though Leila, I worry about all the people still

doing it hard and the travel industry and live events. So, until the vaccine’s sorted, I think we

need to keep some JobKeeper programs in to help people.



MCKINNON: Yeah. What are you proposing?



SHORTEN: Well, in terms of that, I think that for our tourism travel agents and the like, they

should be getting more support and I think that we should keep JobKeeper there. The other

thing is the live events industry -



MCKINNON: As a loan there? I'm sorry to interrupt, Bill, as a loan, like a HECS-style loan, or

just a continuing hand out?



SHORTEN: No, I would actually keep something like JobKeeper. It has been successful. But

the argument that all of a sudden, we hit a cliff on March 31st and hey presto, click your heels

and everything's back to normal, I think someone's having a lend of the sectors that are doing

it hard. So, our travel agents who look after us when we go on holiday, our live events industry

who entertain us and the conferences we go to. I think that March 31, there's no vaccine sorted

then. So, we should keep JobKeeper going until we get back to normal.



MCKINNON: All right. So, Gus, let's talk a little bit more about the vaccination program. All this

questioning of the situation doesn't help, does it, because people are wary of vaccines

generally. What do you think?



WORLAND: Yeah look, absolutely jabbing something into your body. You know, that's a huge

thing for a lot of people. But I'd like to say one thing to you guys this morning is that my mother

in law got the first part of it done in the UK on Saturday. And the difference in her when we

spoke to her on FaceTime sort of an hour or so afterwards was incredible. She's a lady in her

70’s. The hope that she had in her eyes and her voice was immense. And Bill and I have

spoken many times over the last year about the hope that's required just to get us through

mentally, through all these dramas that we've had since COVID came around. And it was just

such a boost to see her and her neighbours and everyone around her that had that

vaccination. So I think we would undermine the importance of just getting our own mental

fitness right, by having hope and having something that we're looking forward to that might get

us back to some sort of normal.



MCKINNON: And it's a sign of the times. The charity Barnardo’s is scrapping its Mother of the

Year award, because it no longer reflects all types of families. Bill, do you support this or are

you perhaps a little sad there's no longer a special award for mums? Should we congratulate

parents?



SHORTEN: Barnardo's does a good job. But having said that, I think they need to go back to

the drawing board on this. I wouldn't cancel a mother's award. I'd like to give one to every

mother in Australia, frankly. You know, I get we have blended families and I'm in a blended



family, families come in all shapes and sizes. But rather than scrap it for mothers, just create

another award. For goodness sake. Our mums do a tremendous job and I think they need to

rethink this approach.



MCKINNON: What's your take Gus?



WORLAND: Yeah, I couldn't agree more. Mums deserve an absolute medal putting up with

the husbands let alone the kids and everything else that goes along. So, yeah no, we should

add to it rather than take away.



SHORTEN: Let's nominate your missus, Gus. I agree with you.



WORLAND: She deserves it.



MCKINNON: And I think we all should have a medal presentation every evening once the kids

get to bed. I feel like I am getting a medal if they go to sleep. Bill, Gus, thank you very much.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM HOULIHAN 0438 366 400



