

JIM CHALMERS MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR RANKIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC GOULBURN-MURRAY   THURSDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECT: Coalition’s cuts to JobKeeper risk 18,479 workers and 6,003 businesses in  the Goulburn-Murray region.

SANDRA MOON, HOST: We were speaking yesterday about this so-called ‘rebasing’ -  another new term for us to get our heads around - of the JobSeeker payment, but now  JobKeeper is in the spotlight as well. It’s due to near its end at the end of next month, in fact  the end of March. And we did speak on this programme with some musicians, you know that  there was an open letter that musicians had sent, asking for JobKeeper to be extended beyond  March. And the live music industry, including lots of different venues and musicians that you  would have known, signed that as well. But it is set to be cut by the 28th of March. And so new  figures suggest that 6,003 businesses and 18,479 workers across our local electorates of  Nicholls, Indi and Farrer will lose access to this JobKeeper scheme. Now the federal Shadow  Treasurer, Jim Chalmers, is with you now. Good morning.

JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: Good morning, Sandra. Thanks for having me on  the programme.

MOON: Well. thank you for coming on and having a chat with us. I mean, these figures are  pretty substantial?

CHALMERS: They're massive figures. You think about those 6,000 businesses in the Murray-Goulburn region, almost 19,000 workers, who are facing a pretty uncertain future when the  Morison Government cuts JobKeeper next month. You mentioned the arts and entertainment  industry is obviously really concerned, the tourism sector as well. I've been following closely  the work of Murray Regional Tourism. For example, they did a survey about the impact of  COVID and the various restrictions, including the international border closures, on what's  happening here. I think it's really clear that while some parts of the economy are recovering,  many parts of the economy are still struggling. And that has implications for workers and small  businesses in the Murray-Goulburn region and right throughout Australia. And so what we've  said to the government is, don't be in such a rush to cut JobKeeper. There are so many  thousands of workers in regional communities relying on this, and small businesses, so let’s  tailor the economic support to the economic conditions and recognise that some parts of the  economy aren't yet ready to move on from JobKeeper.

MOON: I noticed this morning, in some articles, already suggestions for even different styles of

how JobKeeper could potentially continue on, things like a HECS-style government loan for  businesses. Are those even options or does JobKeeper, as it stands, need to stay?

CHALMERS: Obviously, we'd look constructively at any other proposals that people put  forward. In speaking with various businesses and groups around Australia, we've been  listening to some of those suggestions. But the overwhelming feedback that we get is that  there's no substitute for JobKeeper. JobKeeper has been doing a good job maintaining a link  between workers and their employers and supporting small businesses, particularly in  communities like yours. And so there's no substitute for that.

Now the government says that we don't have a blank cheque to continue JobKeeper or to  continue to support workers and small businesses, but the budget is absolutely riddled with all  kinds of rorts. And so what we would say is, we would be much better off, and communities  would be better off if the government wasn't wasting money on taxpayer funded executive  bonuses, or sports rorts, and all the rest of it. Instead, they could be directing money to  genuinely help communities and workers and small businesses which genuinely need it,  including in the Murray-Goulburn region. I've been in Far North Queensland and right around  Australia talking to people about this. There is a case to extend JobKeeper. If the government  wants to come forward with some other ideas, then let's hear them, and we'll be constructive  about it. But most people are sceptical that whatever the government replaces JobKeeper with  will be enough.

MOON: How long can it be extended though? The experience that we've had in the past, and  obviously with JobSeeker as well,  how long can JobKeeper keep going?

CHALMERS: Well, first of all, we do need to recognise that the JobKeeper payment, nobody  has ever suggested that it go on forever, that it's a permanent feature of the budget. We all  recognise that. But we want the government to recognise that if it's important to support jobs  and small businesses at one point in the recovery, it's important to tailor that economic support  to what's actually going on in the economy. And they need to listen to Murray Regional  Tourism. They need to listen to the other groups which are saying, hey we know that parts of  the economy are coming back, that's a good thing, and we welcome that too, but we need to  acknowledge that many people are still struggling. There is a case for a temporary extension of  JobKeeper for those who are still doing it tough. That's not an unreasonable ask, for the  government to act here.

MOON: And we know as well, we've seen some, some research, if you like, coming out from  the Australian Tax Office that says that the number of workers on JobKeeper has been  dropping in recent months. I mean, does that go part way to explaining the reasoning for  wrapping this up at the end of March?

CHALMERS: Well, two things about that, Sandra. It's a really important point. First of all,  obviously people are coming off JobKeeper as the economy recovers, as the Victorian  economy in particular reopens. As we emerge from recession it is inevitable, and expected,  and unsurprising that there'll be fewer people on JobKeeper, as we go through the recovery.  That's a good thing. That's how the thing is designed. But the second point is to recognise  there are still a million Australians relying on JobKeeper payments and the Treasury says that  something like 100,000 of them are expected to lose their job when Morrison and Frydenberg  cut JobKeeper next month. And so we need to realise that the government is in too much of a  hurry to declare victory over this recession and its aftermath, while people are still struggling.  We want them to acknowledge, whether it's in the Murray-Goulburn region or elsewhere



around Australia, that people are still doing it tough. The government needs to recognise that.  And support people and their jobs. So that our tourism sector, our arts and entertainment  sector, and other important parts of our economy aren’t so hollowed out now that they can't  bounce back when things improve.

MOON: Considering though, federal Shadow Treasurer, Jim Chalmers, that we know that after  speaking about JobSeeker yesterday, there was a doubling down, if you like, by the federal  government, saying no, there will not be a change to this, we are continuing with our rebasing  of the payment. How likely is it that that we will see a move from the government in terms of  JobKeeper?

CHALMERS: I’m a bit worried that they won't move on it, Sandra. I think they've more or less  dug in on it and I think that's disappointing. If you think about those 6,003 businesses in your  part of Australia, think about those 18,500 workers who are relying on it, they’re very anxious  because the future is really uncertain. It’s not too much for us to ask the federal Liberal and  National government in Canberra to recognise their plight, to support them - not permanently  with JobKeeper - but until they can get back on their feet in sufficient numbers. That's all we're  asking here, that's not unreasonable. It would be good if the government listened and acted.  I’m worried that they won't.

MOON: Jim Chalmers, thanks for your time.

CHALMERS: Thank you, Sandra, I appreciate it.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: BRETT MASON 0419 239 811



