

JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE

MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN





FEDERAL GOVERNMENT MUST SHOW LEADERSHIP ON SEASONAL

WORKFORCE



I take on the role of shadow agriculture minister at a crucial moment for Australian agriculture.

The opportunities are great but there are also challenges.



With borders closed for much of 2020 due to COVID-19, many Australians learned that we

have a highly secure food supply.



The Australian agriculture industry can be rightly proud of ensuring quality produce was kept

on the shelves of supermarkets even with the unfortunate advent of panic buying.



But there was also a downside to these border closures.



There have been significant labour shortages, which has sadly resulted in some crops being

left to rot on farms fruit, vegies, cherries and berries that farmers have worked tirelessly to

produce.



We know the seasonal worker program is a responsibility of the Federal Government, as is

quarantine.



It is disappointing there has been a lack of leadership at the commonwealth level given the

impact this agriculture workforce shortage has had on farms.





The value of crops lost has been estimated to be more than $40m. This is completely

unacceptable and national leadership needs to happen now.



I am also concerned about the impact of trade restrictions on exporters.



The Federal Government must do more to work with exporters to help build relationships and

secure markets that many jobs in regional Australia depend on.



This is not just about finding a market to take our produce but also ensuring the world-class

produce Australia exports continues to attract a premium price.



It has been so heartening over my first days in this role to hear from farmers about bumper

crops over the past months after facing the harsh impact of drought over many years.



But sadly, there are still some who are doing it tough. We must continue to offer support to

those who need it.



We should also be doing everything we can now to introduce more sustainable farming

practices to help mitigate the future risks of a changing climate.



I see a strong role for the federal government to work with farmers and the agriculture industry

to help solve these issues and address the many challenges.



This opinion piece was first published in the Weekly Times on Wednesday, 10 February

2021.



MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119



