MEDIA RELEASE   VACCINE ROLLOUT

Greens call for Government to diversify vaccines contracts and strategise for

herd immunity

The Greens say that the Government must continue to expand and diversify Australia’s

vaccine portfolio immediately in light of the varying rates of effectiveness of vaccines

against new strains.

“We cannot rely on AstraZeneca as our only contingency plan - we need to have a

diverse portfolio to rapidly pivot to deal with new strains, including securing deals with

Moderna and more Pfizer doses", Greens spokesperson on Health Senator Rachel

Siewert said.

“We need to ramp up CSL’s capacity to start locally producing Novavax at the same

time as AstraZeneca given the promising Phase 3 Trial data.

“The Government should immediately invest in developing Australia’s capacity to locally

manufacture vaccines and medicines that use mRNA technology. We need a publicly

owned manufacturing capacity, mRNA technology is likely to revolutionise vaccine and

drug development and Australia could be at the forefront of this.

“This should be started immediately as it will take some time to establish local

manufacturing. Our local manufacturer CSL is not currently equipped to produce

vaccines that use mRNA technology.

Date received: 3 February 2021



“A successful vaccine rollout will rely on strong leadership from the Federal

Government and good faith and cooperation between the States and Territories.



“I am very concerned that if the bickering which is occurring between the State and

Feds on quarantine arrangements continues to happen when the vaccine rollout

commences Australians will not be served well.



“We need a public health response, not point scoring. No one wants to see the Prime

Minister and Premiers bickering.



“Quarantine is a Federal responsibility, as is the vaccine rollout.



“Far too much of the official expert advice and consideration has been enveloped in

secrecy, not least of which have been the decisions around vaccines.



“There needs to be more transparency about how decisions on masks, quarantine and

vaccines are being made.



“It is essential that Australia continue to support COVAX and our neighbours in the

pacific region must have timely and adequate access to Covid-19 vaccines.



"Australia should commit to increasing its funding to the COVAX AMC to at least the

level of Canada (an additional $135.2m USD). This could also include calling on big

pharma to temporarily waive intellectual property rights on Covid-19 vaccines to

facilitate universal access.”





Media Contact  Lucy Cowcher-Guthrie: 0418 401 180



