

THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP

MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND YOUTH







18 March 2021



Australian graduates rated highly, but more focus on student experience needed

New data shows Australian universities are producing graduates with the skills and  qualifications that employers need, but that more work needs to be done to improve the  experience of students.

Minister for Education and Youth Alan Tudge said the 2020 Employer Satisfaction Survey  showed overall employer satisfaction remained high.

“Employer satisfaction was almost 85 per cent, with particularly strong results for graduates in  engineering, agriculture, health, education and IT - all areas that we have focussed on in our  Job-ready Graduates package,” Minister Tudge said.

“Students studying in these are now paying less for their degree and are likely to top the list  when it comes to impressing Australian employers.”

The 2020 Student Experience Survey has also been released today and shows a significant  drop in the overall rating of Australian universities by students.

“The results are of course impacted by COVID-19, but we can and should be doing better,”  Minister Tudge said.

“I want all universities to focus on their main purpose: educating Australians and giving them the  skills and qualifications that will get them into a job.

“Some of our universities have lost that focus and it’s time to return to core business.

“While the results were not unexpected, universities must ensure that as classes resume for  2021, they are focussed on giving local students the best possible education and learning  experience.

“I am pleased that the “Student Support” category has remained at record high levels, which  shows most universities responded well during the pandemic to ensure they were giving  students additional support.”

Results from both the 2020 Employer Satisfaction Survey and the 2020 Student Experience  Survey can be found on the QILT website www.qilt.edu.au.

Media contact: Steve Kidner - 0466 385 097

[ends]



