The Hon Darren Chester MP Minister for Veterans’ Affairs Minister for Defence Personnel

MEDIA RELEASE

NAVY AND ARMY MARK 120 YEARS OF SERVICE

TODAY the Royal Australian Navy and the Australian Army mark 120 years of service to the country, with personnel and veterans around the country commemorating all they have achieved.

Minister for Defence Personnel Darren Chester congratulated the two Services on this significant milestone and acknowledged the almost two million Australians who had served throughout history, many of who were in the Navy or Army.

“Since 1901, the men and women of the Navy and Army have served with distinction, through war and peace, and more recently as part of major domestic operations,” Mr Chester said.

“In the past year, Navy and Army have faced new and unexpected challenges as part of the Australian Government’s responses to bushfires, a global pandemic and other humanitarian and disaster relief operations.

“They have been the reassuring faces in our communities, whether it was helping with coronavirus testing checkpoints or evacuating families from bushfire ravaged areas, and while a lot has changed over the last 120 years, the dedication, skills and willingness of our men and women in uniform to help has never wavered.

“Today is also an important day to thank all those families who have supported our personnel throughout history, and those that continue to support them today.

“Happy birthday to the Navy and Army, and to the personnel who have and still do wear those uniforms with pride, thank you for your service.”

The Royal Australian Navy and Australian Army formed on 1 March 1901, through the amalgamation of the Australian colonial forces following Federation. At the time, they were known as the Commonwealth Naval Forces and Commonwealth Military Forces. Their current titles were officially granted in 1911 and 1980 respectively.

This year also marks an important milestone for the Royal Australian Air Force, which will be celebrating its 100th birthday on 31 March 2021.

For more information about the Royal Australian Navy: www.navy.gov.au  For more information about the Australian Army: www.army.gov.au

Imagery

No publication date : received by Parl Library  on 01/03/2021

Imagery of birthday celebrations will be released throughout the day at: https://images.defence.gov.au/s20210328

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACTS:

Rachel Tharratt or Cedric Szigeti: 02 6277 7820 Defence Media: media@defence.gov.au

Office of the Hon Darren Chester, Canberra ACT.

No publication date : received by Parl Library  on 01/03/2021

