



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

Senator the Hon Jonathon Duniam  Assistant Minister for Forestry and Fisheries   Assistant Minister for Industry Development  Senator for Tasmania



Cr Bec Enders  Mayor, Huon Valley Council



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au

15 January 2021



$4.8 MILLION INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADE TO COPE WITH  FLOODING

Tasmanian businesses and residents will benefit from new infrastructure upgrades that will mitigate  flooding along the main street of Huonville.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the Australian Government invested $1.6 million to protect Huonville businesses and  residents, including the Pine Lane Retirement Village.

“This project will help Huonville cope with one-in-100-year flooding and has boosted the local economy  by supporting 80 ongoing jobs for the local community,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“This is further delivery for Tasmania and yet another example of the Australian Government investing in  local jobs and laying the foundations for economic recovery following COVID-19.”

Assistant Minister for Industry Development Jonno Duniam said the upgraded Huonville drainage system  would stimulate even more investment into Tasmania.

“This important project will support regional development by preventing the flooding issues associated  with the run-off in the Huonville Main Drain catchment. It will reduce the costs of closures and damage  during heavy rainfall, giving more certainty to business owners,” Assistant Minister Duniam said.

“The project will unlock the huge growth potential of the Huon region and it will give businesses the  confidence they need to invest in the community. Already it has enabled the development of new  residential building lots with a new 71-block development that will be available in the next six months.”

Huon Valley Mayor Bec Enders says the project provides a high level of flood protection for generations of  residents and businesses into the future.

“This is one of the largest capital works projects that Huon Valley Council has undertaken to date,”  Cr Enders said.

“The new one-kilometre-long stormwater pipeline diverts flows from the existing main drain into an  adjacent catchment, allowing the town’s stormwater system to handle additional flows during high rain  events, with no increased impact on flooding downstream.”

This project was jointly funded, with the Australian Government providing $1,614,758 and Huon Valley  Council contributing $3,185,242.

Ends.

Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Jo Williamson 0418 475 668 | Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Senator Duniam - Carla Howarth 0499 037 732  Cr Enders - Georgia Jordan (03) 6264 0314



