







The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology  Federal Member for McPherson

MEDIA RELEASE

$30M GRANTS PROGRAM TO SUPPORT LOCAL MANUFACTURING

11 March 2021

The Morrison Government is supporting Australia’s manufacturers to turn their good  ideas into world-beating realities that create more local jobs, with a new $30 million  fund.

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said the  Commercialisation Fund will foster projects that bring industry and researchers  together to commercialise new manufacturing products and processes.

“Making science and technology work for industry is one of the central pillars of our  Government’s $1.5 billion Modern Manufacturing Strategy and this fund is just one of  the ways we’re delivering on that,” Minister Andrews said.

“The Morrison Government is positioning Australia’s manufacturing industry at the  cutting edge of innovation and this fund will help bring together the best of research  and manufacturing capability to generate commercial outcomes.

“We know that by making our manufacturers more competitive and helping them to  take on the world, we will create jobs for Australians - both for the COVID-19  recovery and for generations to come.”

Consistent with all programs under the Modern Manufacturing Strategy, this fund will  support projects within the Government’s six National Manufacturing Priorities.

These priorities are: Medical Products, Food and Beverage, Resources Technology  and Critical Minerals Processing, Recycling and Clean Energy, Defence, and Space.

Commercialisation Fund grants will be between $100,000 and $1 million and must  be matched by industry. These smaller-sized grants will complement the larger  projects that will be supported through the $1.3 billion Modern Manufacturing  Initiative.





Projects must include collaboration with a research partner and a minimum of one  industry partner.

The fund will run over an 18-month period. The first round of funding, which opens  today, will provide $20 million while a subsequent round will deliver the remaining  $10 million.

The fund will be managed and administered by the Advanced Manufacturing Growth  Centre (AMGC), in collaboration with the five other Industry Growth Centres  AustCyber, Food Innovation Australia Ltd (FIAL), MTPConnect, METS Ignited and  National Energy Resources Australia (NERA), and the CSIRO.

For more information and to apply for a grant go to  https://www.amgc.org.au/projects/

Media Contact: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846 / Jen Jennings 0435 121 347

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

