

BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR SCIENCE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS

MEMBER FOR GORTON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

MELBOURNE

WEDNESDAY, 13 JANUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: ABS Job Vacancy data; Michael McCormack; Superannuation;

AstraZeneca vaccine; State border closures; Craig Kelly.



BRENDAN O’CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT: Well, thanks

very much for coming. I just wanted to respond to the ABS job vacancies data for

the November quarter of last year. Labor welcomes any improvement of

vacancies. It's a sign that there's some improvement to the economy and any new

job, any additional job, is welcomed by Labor. However, there are still important

things that we need to reflect upon.



Firstly, we have a very strong view that if you cut JobKeeper at the end of March,

as is promised by the Prime Minister, we will see businesses falter, businesses

possibly hit the wall, and jobs lost as a result.



We are concerned that the government does not have sufficient fiscal investment

in the labour market to replace JobKeeper. It's clear that JobMaker is not sufficient

to replace JobKeeper in the economy. And for that reason, Labor continues to say

to the government that given there are real issues about potential restrictions on

our economy, we do need to ensure that we do not leave people behind, we don't

leave businesses behind, we don't leave workers behind. And for that reason, we

call on the government to reassess its position in terms of cutting JobKeeper, and

indeed slashing JobSeeker as they have already done.



On that note, given the many insulting and ignorant comments by the acting Prime

Minister this week, among them was the insulting attack on job seekers by

attacking them suggesting that all they want to do is watch Netflix and Stan. Well

the reality is for every vacancy in the labour market, for every job vacancy in the

labour market, there are six applicants. So even if everyone's looking for work, five

out of six applicants are unlikely to receive employment in the current situation.



So it is not acceptable for the acting Prime Minister to attack job seekers who are

genuinely looking for work, suggesting they are not. That's the typical approach we

expect from this government. And we've asked the acting Prime Minister to desist

from insulting Australians who were thrown out of work through no fault of their

own, are looking for work, and yet all they have from the government is insults.

And I think the government should stop and desist in acting that way and attacking

job seekers in that manner.



It's also, I think, important to note the deliberations that the government's making in

relation to superannuation. Now it's clear that Scott Morrison went to the last

election promising an increase to universal super. He now seems to want to walk

away from his election commitment, thereby dishonouring his promise to the

Australian people, that there'll be an increase to super.



Now, some people think it may be reasonable to have a voluntary opt in approach

to super. Well Labor's view is that is not acceptable. That is completely contrary to

the election promise that Scott Morrison made. And therefore he would be

breaching that and dishonouring that commitment and therefore it is not

acceptable.



Further to that a voluntary opt in arrangement will mean that the universal scheme

that was established under a Labor government will actually be damaged

economically. It will actually mean that there will be people missing out at the end

of their working life. At retirement they'll have far less retirement savings as a

result. And we've watched the government plunder the universal super accounts of

workers by encouraging them to take out money not for exceptional reasons, not

for urgent reasons, but actually for almost any reason at all.



That has been said that many, many workers will find themselves very much short

of retirement savings at the end of their working life and that's an absolute shame.

But the government has used the pandemic as an excuse to attack the universal

super scheme. And this idea of voluntary opt in approach would also undermine

universal super as we know it. I say this to Scott Morrison you just make sure you

honour your commitments to the Australian people with respect to super. And so

that's, I think, a very important point.



I’m happy to take questions.



JOURNALIST: Do share concerns that the AstraZeneca vaccine won’t be effective

enough to achieve herd immunity?



O’CONNOR: Well, I think we are concerned that we have sufficient vaccinations

and sufficient vaccines to protect the Australian people. Right from the beginning,

Labor has called upon the government to enter into contracts as early as possible

in order to have up to five or six options available to us.



Now, it’s true to say comparable countries were entering into arrangements with

pharmaceutical companies as early as March last year. And yet our first agreement

was as late as September. And we do have, it seems to me, and it seems to Labor,

we do seem to have put too many eggs in one basket. AstraZeneca, ultimately, its

effectiveness, its efficacy and effectiveness will be determined by the TGA. And of

course, in the end, we'll listen to the medical experts in relation to these matters.

But it's certainly the case that there are some signs that this is not the certainly not

the optimal vaccine. And we need also to see what else we can do.



Now at the moment, the government says we're at the front of the queue, that's

utterly untrue. We have a commitment to getting 10 million doses of Pfizer. The

fact that you need two doses means that that's only 20 per cent of the Australian

population who would be covered under that current contract. And so for that

reason, as Chris Bowen has said, as the Labor leader has said from the beginning,

we need to have more options available for the TGA to affirm their efficacy so that

we can roll out the vaccine as soon as possible.



So ultimately, it's not for politicians to decide the efficacy of a particular vaccine.

But there are some concerning signs. And that's why we do need as many options

available to us as quickly as possible. Otherwise, we're going to be left behind.

We're not at the front of the queue, we seem to be at the back of the queue when it

comes to getting a vaccine that will respond to this global pandemic.



JOURNALIST: I’ve just got another matter here, what do you make of the

government's move to block a Chinese bid for construction company ProBuild?



O’CONNOR: Look, that's a decision that's been made by the Treasurer. We

haven't been briefed on that particular matter. We accept that there may well be

some issues that we would need to obviously be briefed upon. So at the moment,

we'll take the government on its word that there's a there's an issue. But we would

want, if an invitation hasn't been extended yet, we would want a briefing, a full

briefing from the government about the reasons the Treasurer has decided not to

allow that matter to proceed.



There's a mechanism in place for good reason. It's okay to invoke national

security. But there needs to be some transparency. And certainly there needs to be

some bipartisanship insofar as Labor being briefed on these matters so we

understand why the decision was made to not allow that commercial contract, a

commercial decision of an investment to proceed.



Any other questions?



JOURNALIST: When it comes to businesses you say that they need more support

with JobKeeper, isn’t one of the main impediments to businesses, especially in

tourism and hospitality at the moment, the fact that state borders keep closing?

Why don’t you press the state premiers to relax some of those restrictions or not

go so hard when it comes to shutting borders?



O’CONNOR: Well, I think the reason why Australia is probably one of the best

countries in responding to the pandemic is that hard decisions have been made by

state premiers. Liberal premiers and Labor premiers have made decisions in order

to make sure that we suppress the virus so that we can open the economy.



If you look around the world, and look at the worst cases in Europe, in the United

Kingdom, in the United States, you can certainly look at look at the dreadful

situation they find themselves in and realise the main reason for that is they did not

restrict movement. They did not maintain social distancing, they did not put in

place sufficient protect protections to stop the spread of the virus.



So Labor applauds state premiers taking the medical advice that has led to us

being one of the very few countries that's managed to maintain a very low level of

virus across the across the land. So I don't think it's fair to say that the state should

be told to remain open or remove restrictions if that’s not the advice.



It's those countries who have chosen not to accept the medical advice find

themselves in a terrible situation where their economies are shrinking, and they

have thousands upon thousands of dead citizens. That is not the approach and

anyone who suggests it's better for us to open up and see how we go, then frankly

they're not taking the medical advice provided to those state colleagues.



Any further questions?



JOURNALIST: Can I just ask you a question about Craig Kelly. Neither Michael

McCormack nor Greg Hunt have directly criticised his Facebook posts about covid-19. What action do you think the federal government should take in relation to his

comments?



O’CONNOR: Well, the first thing the Prime Minister should do is to talk to Craig

Kelly and tell him to desist spreading misinformation, spreading lies about the

pandemic. He has been effectively disseminating conspiracy theories,

disseminating misinformation about particular drugs contrary to medical advice. He

is not a doctor, he is not an expert and his misinformation could lead to terrible

health outcomes for fellow Australians.



So the Prime Minister doesn't get to hide behind freedom of speech to say it's okay

for one of his government MPs to spread lies about a global pandemic. And that's

not just with respect to the global pandemic, Craig Kelly should be sacked as chair

of the law enforcement committee of Parliament because he has also spread

misinformation. He told lies about the attempted insurrection, and the riots that



occurred on Capitol Hill in the United States that led to the death of at least five

people including a police officer.



His misinformation there shows he has no respect for Law and Order. The fact that

he hasn't extended any sympathy to the family of the police officer or others that

were killed on that day shows he has an absolute disregard for Law and Order.

And for that reason, Scott Morrison should show some ticker and sack his good

friend Craig Kelly who effectively is spreading lies about the pandemic and

spreading lies about what happened in Washington some days ago.



But it's not just Craig Kelly, you've seen the acting Prime Minister effectively

making comments that will upset I would contend the incoming administration in

the United States. He has made one bad comment after the other and he's also

been defending Craig Kelly, and for that matter, George Christensen.



So there are government MPs that are spreading lies and there's been no rebuke

by the health minister, the Prime Minister, or by any member of the cabinet of this

government. And that speaks volumes for the inability of Scott Morrison to control

these dishonest and dishonourable MPs.



Any further questions? Thanks very much.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KYLIE JENSEN 0402 298 728





