

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

MEMBER FOR HUNTER

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2GB WITH DEBORAH KNIGHT   FRIDAY, 26 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECT: Vaccine Rollout; Australia’s Reduction in Emissions;  Hydrogen-powered Cars; Sexual Assault/harassment Culture; AFP  Commissioner’s Letter to MPs; Labor’s Sexual Harassment Policy;  Weekend Australian Article on Joel Fitzgibbon.

DEBORAH KNIGHT, HOST: I hope you'll forgive him for that, Angus. It is a slip  of the keyboard more than anything else. Fellas, thank you for joining us. It has  been a really confronting time for our politicians over the past few weeks in the  wake of the Brittany Higgins alleged rape. Many hitting home from Canberra  describing it as intense, leaving many in a state of shock. Lots to discuss with  you both, Angus Taylor, of course, our Energy Minister and Labor's Member for  Hunter, Joel Fitzgibbon. I want to kick it off, though, with the vaccine rollout  because the Prime Minister has just been asked questions on this. And Angus,  we cannot afford to get a foot wrong. But one in four people are saying they're  unsure about getting the jab as it is, they're anxious enough and the rollout of it  into the aged care homes, it's been less than ideal. It's been a stuff up, hasn't  it?

ANGUS TAYLOR, MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND EMISSIONS REDUCTION:  Well, there was an error. There's no question it was unacceptable. We've taken  action against the medical practitioner, we've taken action against Health Care  Australia. The good news is, Deb, of course, the case you're referring to, those  residents are absolutely okay. And that's obviously enormously important. But I  think Australians can have confidence that this, is this is a way through to get  ourselves back up on our feet, it's safe, and...

KNIGHT: ... Will you get the schedule back on track for the rollout in aged care  homes, because it's well behind?

TAYLOR: Absolutely. Absolutely right. That is absolutely right. And this is an  important thing for us to participate in. And I certainly will when my  demographic comes up.

KNIGHT: Yeah. Well, you and I both will be in there. Definitely. And Joel, there  have been questions about the federal's government service delivery to the  states and suggestions that the state should be given responsibility for this in  aged care homes. But the Commonwealth, not exactly renowned for the service  on either side of politics, stuff ups in the past - think pink bats, the building the  education revolution, major dramas with both.

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: And Deb, I'll avoid jumping on  the government and taking political opportunity. It's very disappointing. And  adding to the gravity of the situation is that it impacts on older Australians who  we know as a result of the Royal Commission which is about to be delivered to  the government today, have had a tough enough a time over the last five or six  years. But look, I know what it's like when you're relying on contractors in the  private sector, I was around for the building the education revolution, the skills  programs, et cetera, and you have limited control over the performance of the  contractors. But that doesn't take away the fact that the government has  engaged these contractors. I hope it chose carefully. But it's the government's  error. I think the key thing is now that they fix it, fix it quickly and we can work  together to build, or rebuild public confidence in the vaccine rollout.

KNIGHT: Yeah, because we just cannot afford to have any more stuff ups. That  is for sure. On the climate front, good news for you, Angus, Australia's  emissions are well down. Down by 4.4 percent in the 12 months to September,  the lowest level in more than 25 years.

TAYLOR: That's right, 19 per cent down on our baseline year of 2005. In the  electricity market, it's fallen by 5.6 per cent. And look, a big part of that is  household solar. Many of your listeners will have solar on their roofs, one in  four Australians now and continuing to increase.

KNIGHT: And the fact that there were fewer cars and basically no flights  because of the pandemic too.

TAYLOR: Yeah, but we know the underlying structural trend is down. And yes,  it is true. It is good news that cars are getting back on the road and farmers are  actually restocking in agriculture. We want that to happen, absolutely, no  question about that. But the trend is in the right direction. And the deployment  of technology, and this is the point I keep making, sensible technology going  onto people's rooms and elsewhere, energy efficiency initiatives people are  taking in their small businesses is really having an impact. We don't need taxes  to do this. We need sensible technology to do it.

KNIGHT: And will you take up the suggestion from Infrastructure Australia  saying we need more large scale wind, solar and hydro projects to secure our  future energy needs?

TAYLOR: Well, renewables are going in at a record rate, as Joel knows...

KNIGHT: ... They say we need more.

TAYLOR: Well, you know what, it was the equivalent of four major coal-fired  power stations last year. We have got the highest rate of solar, household solar  on household roofs. We are world beating on this front. Our challenge is to  make sure we keep our electricity prices down we keep the lights on as these  reductions in emissions continue to go on.

KNIGHT: And Joel, how was that hydrogen-powered car that you drove this  week because you tweeted about that, this new Hyundai model?

FITZGIBBON: It was great, Deb. I mean hydrogen cars are just electric cars,  really. They're no different than the, say the Tesla. The difference is that in a  Tesla a battery is driving the electric motor and in the hydrogen, oh sorry, the  batteries powering motor and in a hydrogen vehicle, hydrogen, a fuel cell is  powering the same electric motor. So it drives just like an electric car, they have  got plenty of grunt and they're beautiful to drive. But just on the greenhouse gas  emissions question, I'll go negative and positive here. Yes, Covid has achieved  more in carbon reductions than Angus has in one year, than Angus has in six  years. But on the positive side, Angus is correct. We do need to talk about our  achievements. Emissions have fallen 19 per cent since their peak in 2007,  much of that on the former Labor government's watch. But Australians are  taking to rooftop solar, for example, like ducks to water in the last two years.  We've put enough solar into the system, which is the equivalent of about six  Liddell power stations. So, we need to talk about our achievements, rather than  constantly saying we're not doing enough. Sure, we could do better, and I'm  sure we will, but we've got to get that balance right in our language. And we've  got to press back against these people who won't be happy until we're doing so  much we're starting to cost ourselves traditional jobs in our economy.

KNIGHT: Alright, I want to talk about the issue that has dominated politics and  broader society and increasingly so with more victims in schools coming  forward, alleging rape, sexual assault and harassment and Angus, the AFP  Commissioner Reece Kershaw, wrote to the Prime Minister this week at his  request to remind all MPs of their obligations when they're made aware of  potentially criminal conduct. Do we really need the AFP Commissioner to write  this sort of stuff down as a reminder? Surely it's common sense.

TAYLOR: Well, it's important to be clear, and as he pointed out, it's subject to  privacy conditions.

KNIGHT: But you can still let the Prime Minister know, or let the police know  without revealing the identity of the individuals involved. You can do it without  revealing privacy issues.

TAYLOR: That's exactly right. I'm agreeing with you, Deb, but you have to  manage that. But yes, no, this is the right thing to do. And look, it's important  that all Australians understand that that is an appropriate process. So I think it

was right that it'd be - look, this is a difficult issue in workplaces, any workplace  and it's completely unacceptable that we're seeing at least allegations of this  behaviour in the parliament workspace and we have to make sure that people  are very clear about the right action to take and that they take that and that's  exactly what the AFP Commissioner rightly has pointed out.

KNIGHT: Now, you told me last week that you and I know many of your  colleagues and on both sides of politics, all sides of politics, have done sitting  down with their own staff to discuss these issues. You said that you told them  that they should always feel safe in your office and feel safe to tell your other  colleagues or yourself if something untoward or worse occurs. But I did get a lot  of text coming through from people saying well, that's the crux of the issue that  many people don't feel safe. And sometimes it could be the Minister himself or  herself who might be the perpetrator here. And I think the case of Craig Kelly's  staff member Frank Zumbo is a case in point here. serious allegations of sexual  harassment against him by young female staffers, one of them speaking out  saying she was repeatedly told she wouldn't get a job anywhere else, made  you feel she was nothing without that office. That's the problem here, isn't it, no  independent body that they can turn to?

TAYLOR: Well, it is crucially important that they feel that they can go to  someone within the office and report, or go outside to the AFP, as appropriate.  And this the whole point that the commissioner is making. That, that's the right  action to take, and I thoroughly endorse it, Deb.

KNIGHT: Alright. Now Joel, Labor is grappling with this issue too, of course,  and we've got other women coming forward with allegations of sexual assault  within Parliament and the ALP has devised this new party policy for handling  workplace bullying and sexual harassment being put to the ALP National  Executive today. Is it true that Labor staffers are not happy about this saying  they weren't properly consulted?

FITZGIBBON: I honestly don't know, Deb. But I suspect I'm about to find out.  But there are two key challenges here. One is the culture that allows, still, some  men to think they can behave badly against women and that is okay. And the  second is this culture of cover up which we've seen play out and it's been  explained in question time this week, the idea that women are fearful of  reporting, because that may cost them their jobs. Now, that also has to very  much change and we do have a process which allows women to come forward  without fear or been it impacting upon their careers, and I hope when it's all  done and dusted, that's what Labor's code of contact will allow them to do.

KNIGHT: And I hope that this incident is a tipping point for everyone, not just in  Parliament, but across the board. Now, I want to end on this, Joel. You've been  moonlighting as a model. How about this, I've seen some of this photoshoot.  How about that? In the Weekend Australian. You look pretty sharp. Did you get  your hair done specially, you know, work out a bit in the lead up?

FITZGIBBON: You're very kind, Deb. But in fact, I had to take off my golf cap  for that photograph so there you go. I was lucky that it wasn't...

KNIGHT: ... Lucky the hair wasn't messed up. Didn't have hat hair. Well it's  good to see you out there, you know, out and proud, and Angus, the Australian  has named Joel 'the hunter' in the caption in the photo. If you were the editor,  this is my question to you Angus Taylor, what would you have called Joel?

TAYLOR: Well Deb, I have to say I wasn't expecting to wake up to Joel's golf  photoshoot this morning, but I did. But he did look pretty good, didn't he?

KNIGHT: He did.

TAYLOR: And I gotta say, Albo would only dream of getting that many pages in  the Australian but you know, the hunter is coming after Albo. I think that's a  pretty good name. I don't think the hunter misses, and he certainly didn't miss  Mark Butler. The only other name I could come up with that came close was  The Dark Knight, the Newcastle Knights supporter, the Dark Knight. But he  doesn't miss and watch out Albo.

KNIGHT: Oh righto. Right of reply, Joel, what would you have as a headline  caption for the photoshoot that Angus might well be taking part in now that  you've done it.

FITZGIBBON: Well, first of all, Deb, it said 'Joel the hunter' but too often I feel  like the hunted. But yeah, it's a hard one with Angus. I have heard members of  the National Party describe him as Taylor the bailer. Every time they think  they're getting somewhere with him on some of their pet projects in energy  policy, he bails on them.

KNIGHT: Oh.

TAYLOR: Gee, I was being nice to you.

KNIGHT: I know, exactly.

FITZGIBBON: By the way team, I absolutely made that up.

KNIGHT: Well, at least you're honest and admit it, fellas.

FITZGIBBON: I don't want any members of the National Party saying I  misrepresented them. But, I'm sure they do have just as colourful a term for  him, Deb, I have no doubt about that.

KNIGHT: Yeah well, sources say, that's always a big one to fall back on.  Fellas, It's always good to talk. We'll chat again next week.

FITZGIBBON: My pleasure.





TAYLOR: Thanks team.



ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAVID BULLOCK 0405 408 871





Authorised by Joel Fitzgibbon, ALP, Cessnock, NSW.









