1





The Hon. Christian Porter MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Industrial Relations  Leader of the House



TRANSCRIPT

Interview - SKY with Tom Connell  Thursday, 11th February 2021



E&OE

Subject: Labor’s $20 billion tax on jobs

TOM CONNELL:  And the Industrial Relations Minister, Christian Porter, joins me now live. Minister, thanks  very much for your time. Let's just step through some of Labor's proposed changes. First of  all, they're calling for gig workers, talking about Uber Eats, Deliveroo and so on, that they  deserve a minimum wage. Do you agree?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, there are about a million independent contractors in Australia, which is about 8 to 9 per  cent of the total workforce. That percentage has been constant for about a decade. Gig workers  fall inside that category of independent contractors. They contract with employees and they  are not subject to minimum wage requirements. Now, whether or not there should be  improvements in some areas is something that's open for debate. Certainly, with respect to  delivery drivers, safety is a real issue, but that isn’t an issue that turns on how people are  remunerated. That's an issue that turns on making sure that existing laws are properly enforced  in that area. So, this is a complicated area of the Australian economy. Obviously, safety is an  issue. But what Anthony Albanese has proposed is a radical restructure of the way in which  people who are in non-permanent positions in the Australian economy get paid and  remunerated and what their benefits are, and he can't run away from that inside 24 hours after  delivering his speech. And what he's promised there comes at a massive cost to business in  Australia, which would manifest in a tax. Indeed, Anthony Albanese himself said, if you want  to know what he's going to do, look to the situation that has arisen in Victoria. In Victoria,  they're running a trial of paying sick leave to casual employees. That's being funded by the  taxpayer. And when it's broadened, it'll be funded by a levy, i.e. a tax on business. And when  you look at what Anthony Albanese proposed in his speech - although the version did change  between it being released to the media and actually delivered in Brisbane - but what he  promised was this: to develop portable entitlements for annual leave, sick leave and long  service leave for Australians in insecure work.

2



ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Okay. I'm going to delve right into portable entitlements, I will. I just wanted to address these  gig workers first of all. Yes, we've had contract workers in Australia for a long time, but there  has been a proliferation of this new type of worker, if you like, particularly with delivery  drivers. You said there's a debate here, but what's your view? Do they deserve a minimum  wage or not?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, I mean, these are very complicated questions which need consideration, economic  modelling. We need to understand what the costs would be to business, to the contractors, to  the consumer, whether or not businesses would survive any increase in wages. But again, these  are things that can be considered soberly and sensibly step by step with proper modelling.

TOM CONNELL:  Okay, but are you doing that? Again, these workers have been out there for a while. Are you  doing this modelling? Is this a project you think it's worth taking on or is this not something  that's happening at the moment in the government?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well I think the primary project, the primary project with respect to independent contractors,  and particularly that part of them that are in the gig economy, is the safety of delivery drivers,  and that is about making sure that existing health and safety laws are applied, enforced, policed.  And I would have thought that that's the single most urgent issue. One issue that the  Government is dealing with, which is also urgent, is ensuring that there's a consistent and  strong pathway for people in casual employment to become permanent, something that the  Labor Party agrees with in principle, but is going to vote against because it happens to be in a  Bill put before Parliament by the Government. So talking about Anthony Albanese…

TOM CONNELL:   So on safety…

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  …being on the side of workers when he won't vote for a proper path for casuals to convert to  permanent. He will vote against a criminal penalty for wage theft, and yet, gets up and tells  people that he's on the side of the workers. Well, he can say it, but it's simply not borne out by  his actions.

TOM CONNELL:  So on safety, you mentioned there in terms of that being a priority, doesn't it stand to reason -  I think we've had five delivery driver or delivery worker deaths in the past few months - but if  they are struggling to get even a minimum wage, they will take risks and are more likely to be  killed as a result?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, the occupational health and safety laws are responsibility of state governments, and they  must be absolutely enforced no matter the category of a person's employment. And the first  order of business here, as we have identified in the councils of state ministers that deal with  these matters, is to ensure that the laws are properly being applied and enforced.

TOM CONNELL:

3



Hmm. But again, the question I just put to you around, if someone's wage is quite low, if they  can take risks, maybe get through that orange or red light, whatever it might be, that's more  likely to have an impact on a worker's safety if they're struggling to earn a wage.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, where is the evidence that the major problem here is not that the laws are not being  adequately applied and enforced? There are very strong laws to protect the safety of employees  of all different types, irrespective of their type of employment and remuneration. And they are  the laws that should be the focus of when we're trying to ensure the safety of a whole range of  workers, whether they're in construction or whether they're in delivery services.

TOM CONNELL:  Alright. Let's talk about portable leave in this scheme. So Labor's explanation, I'll put to you,  is that it would only transfer existing rates. So if a worker, if they are entitled in a job to sick  leave, annual leave, long service leave, even if they're a permanent short-term worker -so on a  six-month contract - that would transfer from job to job. So it's not an extra entitlement. Is  there anything wrong with that principle?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  No, that's not what was in Anthony Albanese speech. It just is actually not what he said. This  is what he said, that they would develop portable entitlements for annual leave, sick leave and  long service leave for Australians in insecure work. Now, insecure work, as the union  movement has been arguing for a long time, is non-permanent work. So, casual employees,  contractors. There's 2.5 million casuals. There's a million contractors. Anthony Albanese went  out and pretended to be on the side of workers by making an unqualified, unrestrained,  unlimited global promise that if he were elected, he would apply annual leave, sick leave and  long service leave for Australians in insecure work. There are 3.5 million…

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  [Talks over] But did he mention in his speech that it was for casuals?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  …He made that promise…

TOM CONNELL:  … Did he mention in his speech specifically it was for casuals?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, he said this. He would develop portable entitlements for annual leave, sick leave and  long service leave for Australians in insecure work. The Labor Party, the union movement,  have been defining insecure work as independent contractors and casuals for many, many years  now in their arguments about the casualisation of the Australian economy. If casuals aren't  insecure work, what is it, Tom?

TOM CONNELL:  Well, could it be someone on a series of contracts, three, six months? It's permanent work in  terms of definition of entitlements, but it's not ongoing.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:

4



I'm absolutely certain- I'm absolutely certain that they'd be included in the definition of  insecure work, but they're not the only ones. You can't possibly tell me…

TOM CONNELL:  Okay. But-

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  …that what Anthony Albanese was trying to do last night was to appeal to the broadest number  of people by telling them that they would get more money in their pay and more entitlements  if a Labor government was elected. And the point that I make is that if you do what Anthony  Albanese said he would do, which is provide leave, annual leave, sick leave and long service  leave to Australians in insecure work, of which there are 3.5 million casuals, independent  contractors, that a cost attaches to doing that. And that cost is about $20 billion. Now, he said  look to Victoria if you want to see model the model for that cost… and that cost gets levied on  business in the form of a tax. And this isn't my speech, right? This is Albanese's speech. He's  had seven years in Opposition and two years as the leader to come up with a policy and he's  come up with it.

TOM CONNELL:   I understand that and we'll continue to ask them for detail on that Minister. Yeah. But what if  it were to apply to people …

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  But you're not asking them the detail, you're asking me the detail. You're asking me the detail…

TOM CONNELL:  Well, I'm asking you because you're on the program now. No, no, no. I'm asking what-

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  … of Anthony Albanese - yeah, sure. But it's not my policy, right?

TOM CONNELL:  I understand that. But what about if that same principle would apply to somebody with those  rights? So, you're just talking about portability of rights. Would that be something you could  accept?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  But that's not what Anthony Albanese said he was going to do if he got elected …

TOM CONNELL:  Well, he didn't actually say casuals though as you were quoting there. The word casuals wasn't  in there.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  He said Australians in insecure work, Tom. Are you seriously telling me that Australians in  insecure work does not include casual employees?

TOM CONNELL:  It could well, I just- again, it's not your policy, it's also not mine. I want to get to one other  quick topic …

5





ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Isn't it incumbent on the person who has a policy, which is a radical change to the way in which  Australians are remunerated in the industrial relations system? Don't they have some  responsibility to explain the parameters of their policy? The costs of their policy?

TOM CONNELL:  They do. And I'll be putting that - yeah. I've been bidding for both you and the Shadow Minister  this week. I'm sure we'll get a chance to talk to the Shadow and I do intend - I'm trying to get  that detail. So, I agree with you on that. Just your own policy …

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  We're all fascinated.

TOM CONNELL:  Okay. Yes, we are. Just your own policy, the better off overall test, this push to suspend it for  another two years or effectively be able to sideline it. It's getting a lot of negativity already  from the crossbench and it's distracting in terms of headlines. Labor's using it a lot. Is it time  to just ditch that part of it and try to get the rest of it through?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, that changes one small part of the bill. It's meant to extend an exceptional circumstances  provision that Labor put in the act previously, in Section 189 of the act, to take into account  the exceptional circumstances that some businesses have suffered because of COVID-19. It  certainly is featuring in the debate, a fair amount, I mean I don't disagree with you there. I'm  in the process of negotiating this week and that will continue with the crossbench, I'm not  pretending that it hasn't been raised by them. So, that will obviously feature in the negotiations.

TOM CONNELL:  Negatively by them?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  I would [indistinct]…

TOM CONNELL:   It's impossible to see it past them, isn't it?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Yeah, look, I mean, there's - with the crossbench, there's enormous enthusiasm for some parts  of the bill, less for others. That's the process that we go through with the crossbench on virtually  every bill that we want to see have secure passage through the Senate. So, you know, this is  something that we're discussing at the moment, not the only thing, but you're quite right. It is  something that's been discussed.

TOM CONNELL:  And just finally, you also want the Commission as part of your plan, the Fair Work  Commission, that is, to be able to consider overall benefits, including non-monetary benefits.  Now, McDonald's has said to that end, that should mean food. So, if staff score some fries or  a Big Mac on their break, that should factor in whether they're better off overall. Do you agree  with that?

6





ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  So, what we've proposed is that there should be some modifications to the Better Off Overall  Test. And they include things like considering at least the quantity or the nature of any non-monetary benefits. It's also not considering hypothetical scenarios that have derailed a whole  range of enterprise agreements. The reason why we want to see enterprise agreements  concluded faster and more efficiently and more effectively is that people who are on enterprise  agreements, on average, get paid considerably more than the same workers doing the same  work under awards. So, enterprise agreements mean better pay for more people if we can  conclude more of them. Now, in each individual circumstance, whether or not and to what  extent a non-monetary benefit is concluded is going to depend on the nature of the non-monetary benefit. But these would have to be substantial things.

TOM CONNELL:  Alright. Well we'll perhaps tell them to [indistinct]…

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  The increase in pay that you get on an enterprise agreement, right, is 69 per cent on average  higher than the pay that you get in the same area on an award. So, there is a massive advantage  to people being remunerated under enterprise agreements. We have a plan to see more of them,  to see them concluded more efficiently, more effectively.

TOM CONNELL:  Alright.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  That will ultimately lead to upward pressure in wages and job growth. And this is a clear plan.  What you had yesterday was a speech from Anthony Albanese where he promises the world,  doesn't tell people what the cost of that would be. The cost would be smashing businesses and  job growth.

TOM CONNELL:  Alright. Well, as I said, I do try to chase detail from both sides, but appreciate your time today,  Christian Porter.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Good luck. Okay. Cheers.

ENDS.







Authorised by Christian Porter, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra



