



SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women  Acting Minister for Defence



THE HON GREG HUNT MP  Minister for Health and Aged Care



STATEMENT ON VACCINATION

The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Minister for Women and Acting Defence Minister,  Senator the Hon Marise Payne, has become the second member of the Government  to receive a COVID-19 vaccine as part of a national programme that will offer jabs to  all Australians by October.

Minister Payne said she was pleased to be able to demonstrate her belief in the  scientific expertise that is producing safe and effective vaccines, which will be critical  to the global recovery from the pandemic.

“It was a privilege to be the second of three Coalition representatives to be  vaccinated as part of our confidence-building measures in the vaccination  programme,” Minister Payne said.

“It was also a privilege to join Peta Murphy MP in showing the confidence of women  leaders and representatives in the vaccination process this week.

“The timing of the vaccination will also help facilitate possible international travel in  the near future so we can continue to prosecute vital national interests with our  international partners.”

Health Minister the Hon Greg Hunt MP, who will become the third member of the  Government to receive a jab, said a small number of cross-parliamentary leaders  from the Government, Opposition and Greens had now been vaccinated to help with  public confidence in the program.

“We thank the Prime Minister, Opposition Leader, Leader of the Greens, Minister  Payne and the Member for Dunkley, Peta Murphy, for their help in putting their  shoulders to the cause,” Minister Hunt said.

The COVID-19 vaccination program began across Australia on Monday, with about 60,000  Pfizer/BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine doses being administered initially to priority populations.

Groups including quarantine and border workers, and aged care residents will be vaccinated  by April 2021.

All Australians will be offered a COVID-19 vaccine by the end of October 2021.

Australia’s Chief Medical Officer, Chief Nursing and Midwifery Officer and personnel from the  Australian Defence Force and Australian Border Force have also been vaccinated this week.

Media Contacts  David Wroe: +61 429 531 143 (Minister Payne)  Melanie Ruiz: +61 427 888 392 (Minister Payne)  James Perrin: +61 447 534 427 (Minister Hunt)

