

SENATOR MURRAY WATT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR NORTHERN AUSTRALIA

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DISASTER AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR QUEENSLAND RESOURCES

LABOR SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTEVIEW

990 4RO CENTRAL QUEENSLAND

THURSDAY, 18 MARCH 2021



SUBJECTS: Jobs in Central Queensland; Queensland hydrogen projects; nuclear

energy; vaccine rollout shambles; support for tourism; Pauline Hanson selling out

workers by voting with LNP on IR Bill.



AARON STEVENS, HOST: [Inaudible - new hydrogen project in Gladstone] And they're talking

about maybe having it up and running, if all goes to plan, by 2030 or at least having the plan

put in place by then. There's a lot of questions still about hydrogen, though, isn't there?



MURRAY WATT, QUEENSLAND LABOR SENATOR: Look, I think no one expects that we're

going to be producing hydrogen or running cars and trucks on it tomorrow but there's certainly

a lot of excitement about the potential for hydrogen to be providing new, clean fuel into the

future. And, I've met with companies myself who are seriously looking at investing in hydrogen

production. And what that means is jobs, jobs in Central Queensland.



So, I'm pretty excited about this opportunity and the State Government is clearly, really

aggressively pursuing these opportunities, which I think is terrific because I want to see Central

Queensland get those jobs.



You know, too often we've seen new technologies come along and other states or other

countries have picked them up and run with them and Australia has been left behind. So, I

want to make sure that Central Queensland is in the box seat when it comes to jobs in

hydrogen as it develops.



STEVENS: So why? Why hydrogen? Why is it the Great White Hope?



WATT: Well, I'm not a scientific expert, but the experts that I speak to tell me that Australia is

really well positioned to make hydrogen, because we've got, obviously, lots of access to water

being a sea bound country and water's an important ingredient in producing hydrogen. But

also, as we are getting more and more renewable power come online across regional

Queensland, that's another important ingredient to manufacture hydrogen as well.



From all of the options that people are looking at, as we move to cleaner fuels in the future,

hydrogen seems to be the one that is most efficient in powering vehicles and manufacturing

and also is clean and cheap to run. Of course, companies don't want to spend any more on

their energy costs than they have to. So if they can get a cheap, reliable, clean, renewable fuel

like hydrogen, then that offers the opportunities for them to bring down their energy costs.



And I think that's why it's so important, in Central Queensland in particular, that we take some

of these new renewable fuels seriously. Obviously, Central Queensland has been heavily

powered by coal over the last few decades, and that's been fantastic for job creation and

wealth production in Central Queensland. But as those fuels are changing over time, what we

want to make sure is that Central Queensland gets a slice of that action as well.



Wherever there are new jobs to be created, I want Central Queensland and regional

Queensland in general to be at the front of the queue. And that's why we've been calling on the

Government to take these kind of fuels seriously.



Unfortunately, what we tend to see from our LNP representatives from Central Queensland is

that they're very focused on coal. And we all know that we're going to keep exporting coal for a

long time to come, but they don't seem very interested in pursuing the new jobs that we can

create from some of these new fuels as well, and that's where we need to be putting some

effort into.



STEVENS: So I asked the question to the member for Flynn, Ken O'Dowd, a short time ago

and I'll ask you the same question. Is hydrogen the right way to go? Does that put nuclear on

the back foot?



WATT: I think it does. I mean, the big difference between hydrogen and nuclear is that - of

course, you know there are environmental issues associated with nuclear power as well, and

I'm yet to find a Federal LNP MP who wants to have a nuclear reactor in their own electorate.

Some of them are pretty happy for nuclear to happen, but they don't want it to happen in their

backyard.



STEVENS: Well, Ken O'Dowd and I have discussed this in the past and we'd be happy to have

one out here.



WATT: It's pretty rare to find someone who is prepared to do that and that's because of the

environmental risks that come with nuclear. You know, of course, it wasn't that long ago that

we saw the big explosion in Fukushima in Japan with all of the fallout that occurred there.



But beyond the environmental issues, again, if you talk to any of the scientists or any of the

companies that are looking at energy production, nuclear is by far a more expensive way to

produce energy, and it'll take a very long time to bring online.



I think that the difference with things like hydrogen, is that if we can get the technology working

properly, it offers the potential to create fuel at a very cheap cost.



I don't know about you, but I reckon most people in Central Queensland want to pay less for

their energy, rather than more. But that's why we should be looking at some of those options

that offer the chance to produce cheap energy and that's where hydrogen comes in over things

like nuclear.



STEVENS: Let's talk about the vaccine rollout. It's officially begun in Central Queensland. Any

concerns  considering some of the questions that are being asked, especially with the issues

that have been raised overseas with blood clots?



WATT: Look, probably my biggest concern to tell you the truth, is how slow the Government

has been with the rollout of this vaccine. It wasn't that long ago that Scott Morrison was

promising that we'd have four million Australians vaccinated by the end of March. Well, we're

only a week or two away and we've only actually hit 200,000 in Australia.



He's promised that we're going to have everyone in Australia fully vaccinated by October and

now they're walking away from that as well.



The online system that people are trying to use to book their vaccination, through their GP, is

just melting down and not working, which is probably going to put some of those targets in

further doubt. And the reason I think that matters is that all the way along, the Government has

been saying that getting the Australian population vaccinated is the key to our economy

recovering; it's the key to getting those tourists back; it's the key to opening up all sorts of other

businesses. And if we delay the rollout or if we undermine it by making people too worried

about it unnecessarily, then all that's going to do is delay the vaccination and delay the

economic recovery.



So, frankly, I think it's pretty irresponsible of people like Matt Canavan and Pauline Hanson to

be calling for a pause on the vaccine rollout, when our own drug regulator in Australia, which is

one of the best in the world, is telling people that it's safe to get this vaccine. I don't think it's

helpful to be confusing people and to be putting out information that's based on Dr Google

rather than actual doctors who are telling us it's safe to do so.



STEVENS: Well said. What do you think of Central Queensland missing out in the Federal

Government's half price flight plan?



WATT: Look, I thought that was pretty disappointing because I know that areas like the

Capricorn Coast have suffered a tourism downturn over the last few months. I think to be fair,

having spent a little bit of time in Cairns recently, I mean, their economy is completely cactus

because they're so reliant on international tourism. So, you know, while I love Central

Queensland, I'm also a Queenslander full stop. And what that means is that, I think that places

like Cairns have even a higher priority.



I think the real problem with what the Government is putting forward with this package is that

we still don't know whether there's going to be a cap on the number of half priced tickets that

are being offered. What that means, is that if they do start offering more locations, then that

comes at the expense of the locations that have already had it committed.



So, there's a lot of confusion around and I think probably beyond this half-price ticket thing, you

know, you would have seen yourself there's been a pretty poor response from the tourism

industry to it. Not many people think it's going to work. There's nothing in it for Central

Queensland, there's nowhere that Central Queenslanders can buy flights to go to.



STEVENS: That's right.



WATT: You know, that's one of the other big gaps, is that it's not just about Central

Queensland being a missing destination, but if you're a Queenslander who wants to go on

holiday somewhere in Queensland, then there's no options there.



STEVENS: We can't go to help Cairns, we want to support Queensland too, we can't go to

help Cairns.



You know, the other issue with this is the fact that, you know, as you said, with the no cap, we

don't know how the airlines are going to react and we don't know how people are going to

react because they're still too scared to travel because they don't know if they're going to end

up shut down.



WATT: Exactly. And that's where, you know, that comes back to that conversation we were

having about the vaccine. The sooner that we can get our population vaccinated in a safe

manner, then that makes it far less likely that borders will need to be closed at short notice. It

means the whole place can get going again.



So, we've always said all along, that you can't have a good economic response, whether that

be in tourism or other industries, without having a good health response. And where we're at

now, the most important part of that health response is getting people vaccinated.



STEVENS: You know what, though? We can solve this problem with border closures and

people concerned about whether they should be travelling around the country or not, just by

putting some sort of guidelines forth. The fact that we had one case and states were talking

about closing borders is ridiculous.



WATT: Look, I think there's no doubt that we need to come up with some sort of national

approach about how we're going to handle these kind of responses, so that travellers have

certainty, businesses have certainty. My understanding is that the States have, on a number of

occasions, tried to put forward some options to the Federal Government about how we can

come up with a truly national response. But so far, that hasn't come off. And that's where we

need the PM, he's the leader of our country, he needs to be able to bring the states together

and hammer out a solution that we can all live with.



STEVENS: Industrial relations bill, we're going to a vote?



WATT: Yeah, that's the main topic down here in Canberra today. It looks like we will be going

to a vote on this bill. And your listeners are probably aware, Labor has consistently opposed

these changes to workplace laws because basically what they mean is pay cuts and loss of

conditions for workers. You know, that's never a good thing, in my view - being a Labor

politician - to cut workers pay. But especially at the moment, when we need people to have

money in their pockets and we need people to feel secure about their jobs, this legislation that

the Government's trying to put through will do exactly the opposite.



It's going to increase casual jobs rather than permanent jobs, it's going to see employers being

able to cut people's pay and probably the worst part about it is it looks like One Nation and

Pauline Hanson are going to go along with it. They're in the media today saying that they've

cut a deal with the Government to back in these changes. They've got a few little minor

amendments, but nothing too much.



So, you know, it's just very disappointing that yet again, we see Pauline Hanson line up with

the LNP to back in changes that will hurt workers. She says she's for battlers, but every time

she comes down here to Canberra, she does exactly the opposite and votes with the Liberals.



STEVENS: It's the wrong time during the COVID recovery. We need time to get our breath.



WATT: Absolutely. I mean, a lot of people don't realise this but under this Government, who've

been in power for now nearly eight years, Australians’ wages are growing at the lowest rate

they ever have.



You know, there'd be lots of your listeners who've barely had a pay rise over the last five or six

years. And now, what these changes that the Government's bringing in, with Pauline Hanson's



support, means that bosses will be able to cut people's pay, will be able to keep them working

as casuals for longer rather than permanent. And all that does is stops people being confident

about their futures, stops them taking out loans, starting new businesses, spending money in

the local shops. And that just means that we don't get going again. You can't think of a worse

time to be bringing in these kind of changes.



STEVENS: So, when are you expecting it to be tabled?



WATT: Well, we're currently still debating the legislation and it's been going for most of the

week and we're sort of expecting it's probably going to come to a vote at some point today. It

could end up being a pretty late night down here because I think the Government's pretty keen

to get it through. So it's a bit of a watch this space at the moment. They still need one more

vote in the Senate to get them over the line. It looks like they've got Pauline Hanson and

Senator Roberts on board, but they still need one more vote and Labor's going to be fighting

very hard to try to stop them getting that vote. We don't want to see people lose and get a pay

cut.



STEVENS: I appreciate your time this morning. Thank you, we'll keep across that.



WATT: Good on you Aaron, good to talk to you.



STEVENS: Senator Murray Watt joining us this morning on 990 4RO.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JANE WEBSTER 0427 722 214



