JOSH WILSON MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT

MEMBER FOR FREMANTLE





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC NEWSRADIO WITH THOMAS ORITI

MONDAY, 1 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECT: WA COVID19 outbreak.



THOMAS ORITI, HOST: This hour around 80% of Western Australia's population have spent

their first of five nights in hard lockdown after the first case of local transmission of COVID-19

in 10 months. A security guard has tested positive after working in hotel quarantine, where

travellers with the British and South African variants of the virus was staying. Several states

and territories have ordered anyone who's been in the Perth metropolitan area over the past

week to isolate and get tested and that includes several federal politicians from Western

Australia, who were on board a flight from Perth to Canberra last night, when the WA

government announced the lockdown. Now, Josh Wilson is the federal MP for Fremantle, who

was on board the flight yesterday. He joins us now from isolation, of course, in the Canberra

hotel. Morning, Josh.



JOSH WILSON, MEMBER FOR FREMANTLE: Morning Thomas, How are you?



ORITI: Not too bad. Thanks for joining us. Can you tell me how this all unfolded? I imagine it

must have been a shock when you found out about the lockdown being implemented when

you were in the air.



WILSON: It was a strange set of circumstances, definitely odd to be flying across the continent

and feel like you're in a sort of state of limbo, not quite knowing what that means for you. But

it's a strange time and lots of Australians have experienced these kinds of circumstances

where things change, and you have to adjust your approach.



ORITI: Now we’ll turn to the situation involving logistics and your parliamentary duties in a

moment but there had been, just as a citizen of WA, I mean, there had been no local cases of

COVID-19 in the state for 10 months. And you know, life in the state had been pretty normal

for a while now. I mean, how do you think that Western Australians will be reacting now?



WILSON: Well, it's, as you say, it's gone very well in Western Australia, because the health

response that has been effective. And we've had some natural advantages, I suppose, by

virtue of our isolation. And life in Western Australia has continued on pretty normally through

most of the last 10 months. But we've known from what we've watched elsewhere in Australia,

and just because of the circumstances of the pandemic, that outbreaks like this, are likely to

occur. So, I think there's been some anticipation that it would happen eventually and we just

need to roll with it and take some encouragement from what we've seen in other parts of

Australia because people in other states have dealt with it and dealt with it well.



ORITI: Can I ask and, understanding that you're not an epidemiologist, but I mean leaks from

hotel quarantine. We're hearing about it a lot now. They've caused lockdowns in Victoria, New

South Wales, Queensland, now your home state. I mean, in your view, is it time for any

changes to be made to this system?



WILSON: Well, as you say, I'm not an expert. I think we need to keep following the advice of

health experts but we probably do need to learn as we go. I mean, the challenges, we still

have many stranded Australians who'd like to come home and they should be able to come

home. When people return to Australia, that's going to present a risk, and the nature of the

virus, and particularly the new variants, is that it's very, very hard to control. So, we need to do

everything we can to prevent outbreaks, but be ready to have these sorts of back-up

responses for when it when it occurs. And we have seen that can be effective. So, I know that

my fellow citizens in Western Australia will rise to that challenge as Australians have done

throughout this, we do it together, we do it with discipline and forbearance, and hopefully a bit

of good humour and a lot of common sense.



ORITI: Josh, first parliamentary setting week of the year of course, and there are a number of

MPs in the same situation as you. Do you have any indication as to how this will impact the

resumption of Parliament this week?



WILSON: No specific indication, we will all follow the health advice and so we are waiting this



morning to hear what that advice will be, obviously from an ACT health point of view first and

foremost, but we'll receive some advice from  the presiding officers as well in terms of what

that means for us and our staff.



ORITI: And in the meantime, are you confident that you'll be able to still complete your

ministerial duties from the hotel? When I say ministerial, in your shadow portfolio, your duties

as an MP.



WILSON: Well, as best I can. I mean Australians around the country have been dealing with

that. And, and frankly, in many cases, the things people have faced have been a lot more

difficult than what I'm currently facing. But I participated in committee hearings on Friday from

Western Australia by teleconference, that same set of committee hearings goes on today in

Australian Parliament House. I was hoping to attend in person but I won't be able to, hopefully I

can attend by teleconference and continue to work in that way. That's what we have to do, we

have to roll with these challenges.



ORITI: Okay, Josh, all the best this week then and thank you very much for joining us this

morning.



WILSON: Thanks, Thomas. No worries.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATHARINE LONGLEY 0419 092 979

