

JULIAN HILL MP  MEMBER FOR BRUCE

DEPUTY CHAIR JOINT COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT



ACTION, NOT RE-RE-ANNOUNCEMENTS, NEEDED FOR THOUSANDS OF AUSTRALIAN  VISA APPLICANTS

On Saturday, Immigration Minister Alex Hawke made the same announcement for the third  time.

After months of forcing the partners and parents of Australians to leave the country during the  COVID-19 pandemic just to get their visas granted, the Minister re-re-announced that he will  change the Government’s ridiculous migration rules in the coming weeks and months.

This is the third announcement the Minister has made on the issue, yet thousands of  Australians and their families are still waiting for the Morrison Government to actually do  something.

The latest announcement is still of no comfort for the countless other visa applicants who are  not captured by the announced changes and who are still required to leave Australia just to  have their visas granted.

Every day the Government maintains their ‘fly-out, fly-in’ rule for Australian visa applicants is  another day that they risk wasting quarantine places for the 40,000 stranded Australians who  the Prime Minister promised to get home before Christmas.

At the start of the pandemic, the Morrison Government promised ‘visa flexibility’.

But the Government’s arbitrary visa rules still require partner and parent visa applicants, and  over 30 other visa types who applied for their visas overseas but are currently in Australia, to  fly overseas and back again just so their visa can be issued.

The Government refused for months to make any changes, and has caved in to negative  media pressures by partner and parent visa applicants. Yet they have buried their head in the  sand for over 30 other visa sub-classes that will still be subject to the ‘fly-out, fly-in’ rule even if  the Minister eventually delivers on his announcements.

Today I will introduce a Private Member’s Bill which will end this madness once and for all.

During the pandemic, maintaining a ‘fly out, fly in’ rule for any visa class is madness.

People who are already in Australia should be able to have their visa granted regardless of  where they initially lodged their application and my Bill would give the Minister the power to  issue any visa onshore or offshore during the pandemic.





Labor has been lobbying the Government to make sensible amendments to the rules which,  during a pandemic, risk the health of the applicants, jeopardise the safety of the community  and unnecessarily take up precious quarantine spaces which should be preserved for  Australians wanting to return home.

It is well past the time the Morrison Government stopped announcing changes, exercised  some common sense and acted on their promises.

MONDAY, 15 FEBRUARY 2021  MEDIA CONTACT: CAM GREEN 0406 507 727





