SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs

Minister for Women

MEDIA RELEASE

DECLARATION AGAINST THE USE OF ARBITRARY  DETENTION IN STATE-TO-STATE RELATIONS

Australia is standing with more than 55 international partners against the practice of arbitrary  detention in state-to-state relations.

We are a strong advocate for promoting and protecting human rights. The right not to be  subjected to arbitrary arrest or detention is guaranteed in international law and states must  comply with their international human rights law obligations.

In a statement at the launch of the Declaration Against the Use of Arbitrary Detention in State- to-State Relations (Declaration), Australia makes clear it will continue to work with international  partners against the practice of arbitrary detention.

Upholding our commitment to international human rights is one of the most important measures  of the success of our societies. It is important we speak together and demonstrate our  commitment to the international rules, norms and institutions that support stability and  prosperity, underpin human rights and enable global cooperation.

Australia will hold countries to account for their international commitments and the obligation to  comply with international laws and practices.

We have consistently maintained that the COVID-19 pandemic should not be used as a pretext  for reducing or removing access to justice and consular assistance for people in detention.

Date received: 16 February 2021

Australia’s support for the Declaration builds on a joint statement on politically motivated  arbitrary detention delivered on behalf of 35 countries at the 45th session of the Human Rights  Council in October last year.



We welcome the broad, cross-regional support for this most important issue and commend  Canada’s leadership of this initiative.



Media Contact

David Wroe: +61 429 531 143

Melanie Ruiz: +61 427 888 392



Authorised by Senator the Hon Marise Payne, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Women,  Australia.



