

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY    DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE    SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS    SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP    SHADOW MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY  SENATOR FOR

NEW SOUTH WALES





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS FIRST EDITION  WEDNESDAY, 3 MARCH 2021

SUBJECTS: Sexual assault allegation against Cabinet Minister; Angus Campbell;  Stranded Australians; Scott Morrison ignoring Jane Halton’s national quarantine plan  recommendations; state borders.

PETER STEFANOVIC, HOST: Returning here to the studio now and joining us is Kristina  Keneally, the Shadow Minister for Home Affairs. Senator, good to see you. Thanks for joining  us this morning. I do want to ask you about the minister who is at the centre of these rape  allegations. The New South Wales Police yesterday basically closing the case because there's  not enough evidence to support that proceeding. He's going to out himself and defend himself  today. Is that the right move?

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE, SHADOW  MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: First of all, what a distressing five days this has been and  I'm particularly mindful of the woman, her friends and family, who will be both seeking to put  forward her allegation, but also the pain that they're going through.

You know, Pete, this circumstance, you're right, the police, the New South Wales Police have  made a determination they cannot gather enough admissible evidence to take a case to trial.  But that doesn't mean there isn't a case here to be answered for.

I accept that in a criminal investigation will not be able to proceed due to the lack of admissible  evidence. But that does not mean there isn't a case to answer for, in terms of whether or not  this minister is a fit and proper person to sit at the cabinet table.

And in terms of whether or not the Prime Minister, who is responsible for the cabinet, has done  enough to satisfy himself, his cabinet ministers and the Australian community that he has  confidence in this minister.

STEFANOVIC: Even though he has a right to defend himself today. Do you believe that he  should keep his portfolio?

KENEALLY: Well, let's see what the minister has to say, who he is, and what portfolio he

holds. Because I think those are all very relevant questions. But I'm also concerned when I  heard the Prime Minister, two days ago, say he had not read the allegations.

Now, how can the Prime Minister satisfy himself or his cabinet colleagues or the Australian  community that the minister's denials to him personally are valid and acceptable when the  Prime Minister himself hasn't even read the detailed and what I understand to be quite  shocking allegations?

STEFANOVIC: Do you think that he is taking a page out of Bill Shorten’s playbook here?

KENEALLY: Well, the analogy that's been made to Bill Shorten is incomplete. And that is  because in relation to the allegation made against Mr Shorten, there was a 10 month police  investigation, one in which Mr Shorten cooperated fully. And, only after that investigation by  the police had been allowed to run its full course, when they made a determination there was  not a case to be prosecuted, only then did Mr Shorten come forward and speak to the public.

What we have here is a police investigation that can't proceed, because the alleged victim has  died. And the police have determined they cannot gather enough admissible evidence.

But there has not been a full investigation into these allegations. They have not been  examined, as they need to be thoroughly and closely. And I think there are still very important  questions. We'll wait and see what the minister has to say today.

STEFANOVIC: Does Labor support, or will you be pushing for an independent inquiry?

KENEALLY: Well again, Pete, let's wait and see what the minister has to say, who the minister  is, and what the minister is responsible for. But it does stand that the fact is there has not been  a thorough investigation of these, what I understand to be quite serious and detailed  allegations.

STEFANOVIC: If you don't push for an independent inquiry, though, it's all over. Right?

KENEALLY: Well, what I understand from the friends of the woman is that she wanted two  things. She wanted peace in her own life, and she wanted justice to be done. And, you know, I  think - when it.  Either whether it's been the Brittany Higgins case of an alleged rape that  occurred in the Defence Minister's office, or in this situation, Labor will be strongly guided by  what we understand the victim's wishes today.

STEFANOVIC: Okay, just a couple of quick ones before we go these comments by Angus  Campbell today. They've been outlined in the Canberra Times. What do you make of them?

KENEALLY: Well, for your viewers who may or may not have seen them, I think what Angus  Campbell was seeking to do and addressing a group of young army officers is to give them -  particularly women to give them advice and to speak to how they might keep themselves safe.

The advice that Angus Campbell gave, particularly around that women should be alert to being  alone and attractive at night, I would invite him to reflect upon that it's clumsy language. I know  all organisations are struggling with culture, and these issues of sexual harassment and sexual  assault. You know, the Labor Party has just gone through our own process, developed our  own code-of-conduct and complaint process. I would invite Angus Campbell to reflect upon his  language and to think about how he might better communicate.



STEFANOVIC: Okay, and just finally on boarders, there's quite a few different aspects to this,  involving Victoria, involving WA, involving our national borders too. It looks as though  international travellers aren't going to be able to get home anytime soon, because that ban has  been extended that potentially leaves thousands of Australians overseas throughout the rest of  the year. Just first, quickly, your response to that?

KENEALLY: Yeah, I acknowledge that the Health Minister, Greg Hunt, is acting upon medical  advice and our international borders closure is an important part of managing the risk of  COVID outbreaks in Australia.

That being said, we are leaving some 40,000 of our fellow Australians stranded overseas.

These are people have been trying to come home since March, and the Prime Minister  promised they'd all be home by Christmas. They're not. And you know, we cannot continue to  have a circumstance where the Morison Government is leaving our fellow Australians behind  during a global pandemic.

If we had a national quarantine plan as Jane Holton recommended to Scott Morrison, we  would have seen the stranded Australians home, and, so I encourage the Morrison  government to get on with the Halton report and implementing those recommendations.

STEFANOVIC: But the states could increase their caps though?

KENEALLY: Yeah. Well, I missed the memo, or the decision, where we decided the  international boarder and quarantine was a state responsibility. I mean, I'm a former state  premier, let me tell you, it's clear in the constitution, quarantine is a federal responsibility.

If you want to bring a horse into Australia, it goes to a federal quarantine facility. But if you're  Australian who wants to come into Australia, Scott Morrison has washed his hands of you.

He says you're a state's problem. And quite frankly, it's because Scott Morrison doesn't want  the risk. Well, he is responsible. He's the national leader and he is responsible to ensure  Australians stranded overseas can come home.

STEFANOVIC: Finally, lastly, the Victorian Premier, he's extending state of emergency powers  to the rest of the year. It basically means there can be a lockdown at any time, and also Mark  McGowan - he's promising, not sure whether this is just something ahead of an election or not,  but basically the man the border  - to have Police at the border to stop drugs from coming in. I  mean, are you worried about the power these premiers are seeking to, to outline and keep?

KENEALLY: Well you know, when it comes to the lockdowns - some of your viewers may  know I live on the Northern Beaches and I lived through the 'red zone lock down'. And I'm quite  grateful that states have the ability to put in place lock downs, either localised or a state level  to manage outbreaks. I think it was - it's fundamental in stopping the spread of this highly  contagious disease.

But, I have to say when we look back at this crisis, we will have changed, of course, in many  ways. But one of the ways I reckon we will have changed is the role of the federal government  when it comes to state borders, has shrunk, they have disappeared.



And I do think the Commonwealth may well regret that they did not inject themselves more  forcefully into a discussion about how we manage state borders in Australia.

STEFANOVIC: Kristina Keneally, thanks for coming in.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LUCY BRADLOW 0427 280 390



