Media inquiries | Ainsley Koch | 0437327127  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania









Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck  Minister for Senior Australians and Aged Care Services  Minister for Sport



25 January 2021

Iconic AIS celebrates 40 years progressing sport

The Australian Institute of Sport (AIS) has marked a key milestone, celebrating its 40th anniversary this  week.

Minister for Sport, Richard Colbeck said the AIS remains a lynchpin in Australia’s sporting success and  its enhanced focus on athlete wellbeing, athlete pathways, coach development, innovation and  collaboration all remain legacies of the AIS today.

“The AIS revolutionised Australian sport 40 years ago and today it remains an important and iconic  symbol of Australia’s commitment to sport and the power of sport to inspire and unite our  communities,” Minister Colbeck said.

“We celebrate this milestone with the AIS and pay tribute to those who have positively contributed to  building Australian sport capability over many years.

Some of the biggest names in Australian sport are among the 8,858 athletes who have been AIS  scholarship holders over its successful history.

In an Olympic and Paralympic year, we also acknowledge the integral role the AIS is playing to support  our athletes in their preparation for the Tokyo Olympics.”

The AIS was launched by Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser in Canberra on 26 January 1981, comprising  approximately 150 scholarship athletes across eight different sports to become Australia’s first and  only official sporting institute.

AIS CEO Peter Conde said it has evolved to help lead the National Institute Network to positively  influence more Australian athletes than ever before.

“As we should expect, the AIS does things differently now. Races aren’t won by standing still. But the  intent of the AIS remains the same - to help Australian athletes realise their full potential in both sport  and life.”

“The AIS directly invests more than $145 million a year into 38 high performance sporting  organisations and their athletes, including $14 million a year in athlete grants across Olympic,  Paralympic and Commonwealth Games sports.

Media inquiries | Ainsley Koch | 0437327127  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania





We have progressed the support for Paralympics athletes, with funding up 40 per cent in the past  eight years.

“We are partnering with sports to develop emerging athletes and coaching pathways. We are at the  forefront of innovation, including research into athlete health and performance. We are exploring new  frontiers like artificial intelligence and data analysis.

“We naturally strive to win and we care about athletes. Our approach to athlete mental health,  wellbeing and community engagement has been crucial, especially in terms of supporting athletes  through the COVID-19 pandemic.”

Minister Colbeck said the next decade is exciting for Australian sport.

“There is a lot to look forward to. Australia will host the women’s world cup of basketball and football,  we’ve invested in a bid for the 2027 Rugby World Cup and, in the next two years, we are considering  a bid for the 2032 Olympic and Paralympic Games.

The leadership of the AIS will continue to be pivotal.”































































