

BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR GORTON





MAXIMISING LOCAL SHARE OF DEFENCE CONTRACTS



OVER the last 12 months there have been many things that the COVID-19

pandemic has taught us. It has exposed our flaws and highlighted our strengths. It

has shown us that local economies, including northern Tasmania, need to diversify

and cannot be reliant on one industry, such as tourism. It has also made apparent

that Australia needs to become not only more self-reliant, but also more ambitious

to protect and promote our interests in the world.



As an island nation, it is important that Australian defence manufacturing becomes

more self-sufficient. To build this sovereign capability, our businesses need a fair

go at winning defence contracts. We want to see Australian manufacturers, in

northern Tasmania and around the country, have access to these contracts and be

a part of the local defence industry supply chain.



Penguin Composites is an excellent example of how small businesses can obtain

and benefit from defence industry contracts, having started in 1976 as a

manufacturer of surfboards and other water sports items. The plastic composites

business was able to recently diversify and now makes parts for the four-wheel

drive protected mobility vehicles for the Army's Hawkei Project. Their work has

brought much needed growth and recognition to Tasmanian industry in the

defence supply network.





Labor is committed to ensuring major defence project contracts and procurements

contain measurable, enforceable, audited and transparent Australian industry

content requirements. Labor want to see northern Tasmania's industry be able to

diversify, and defence contracts could offer new ways to do that. This is especially

important in northern Tasmania, where COVID-19 has hit businesses hard,

particularly in tourism.



The defence industry is one of the largest industry sectors in Australia. There are

more than 3000 business already working in the industry. The Australian

government is spending $270 billion on defence procurement over the next decade

and we need to maximise the local component of that spend.



When we talk about Australian industry content this is more than just about

creating local jobs and an opportunity for Australian businesses to be a part of the

local supply chain, it is also the ability to enter global markets. We want to see

small businesses like Penguin Composites grow and export to the world.



I will continue to advocate for contractual requirements for defence industry work to

be done, where possible, here in Australia with local companies.



First published in The Advocate on Monday, 1 March 2021



MEDIA CONTACT: KYLIE JENSEN 0402 298 728



