

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

WEDNESDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: University job losses; JobKeeper ending; Bringing stranded Australians

home; Craig Kelly.



SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN TANYA

PLIBERSEK: Information from universities yesterday confirms that more than 17,000 people

have lost their jobs at universities. They are academics. They are groundskeepers. They are

admin staff. They are cafeteria workers. They're in our cities, in our outer suburbs and in our

regional towns. I cannot understand why Scott Morrison has allowed 17,000 workers to lose

their jobs because he has deliberately excluded universities from JobKeeper legislation. He

changed the rules three times to make sure that these workers didn't get JobKeeper. And so

far we've lost more than 17,000 jobs, with more jobs likely to go. These are people with

families. These are people who when they earn their wage are putting it into their local

community. I also would say this: it's our universities that we've turned to during the Covid

pandemic to ask them to look at vaccines, look at treatments, to look at the way the disease

spreads in our community. It's universities that we're turning to train the doctors, the nurses,

the epidemiologists as well as the engineers, the computer programmers that we're going to

need coming out of the recession. I don't know why Scott Morrison thinks that these jobs don't

matter. Any questions?



JOURNALIST: Tanya can I ask you, first of all welcome back after the summer break. Plenty

of speculation about the Labor leader Anthony Albanese over the course of the summer. You

were deputy under Bill Shorten, would you ever have ambitions to be Leader of the Labor

Party?



PLIBERSEK: Can I just stop you right there. Today, right now, I'm talking about more than

17,000 families that don't have an income because Scott Morrison decided that they should not

have access to JobKeeper, and he is too pig-headed to change that decision. Let's focus on

what really matters. People will not forgive us for talking about ourselves. I'm just not going to

do it. Any questions about policy.



JOURNALIST: There's been talk about targeted stimulus beyond the end of JobKeeper. Do

you think that the education sector is an area that there needs to be a consideration about

more support being given?



PLIBERSEK: I think the higher education sector should never have been excluded from

JobKeeper in the first place. You see the results of that now, with more than 17,000 families

missing an income because of the decision Scott Morrison made. We could look at targeted

assistance to the university sector. But what we really ought to do is get those 40,000

Australians who are waiting to come home, home. We need a federal government that plays a

role in a federal quarantine system so we can get desperate Australians back home. And when

we've got those Australians back home, then we can look at opening up international

education again. It's a $40 billion industry that supports 240,000 Australian jobs. And it's not

just the jobs in the university. Those students, when they live in student accommodation, go

out to the ten dollar meal down the road, and they pay rent to their landlord, and they catch the

bus to uni in the morning. They're creating activity in our Australian economy. So as soon as

it's safe to get them back to Australia and after we've got desperate Australians home, we

really want to welcome international students back to Australia.



JOURNALIST: What timeline is that? How much of the 40,000 Australians coming home

should be before you reconsider restarting international students?



PLIBERSEK: Australians will always have priority. And the shocking thing is, I've been

contacted by my constituents who are overseas, or their family members in Australia. Some of

them have bought five air tickets trying to get home. They've turned up to the airport with their

bags packed, and their kids dragged out of bed early in the morning in their pyjamas to make it

to the flight and then being turned back at the airport. We have to get Australians home first.

It's the Federal Government's responsibility to help Australians who are stuck overseas get

home. That's what the Australian passport used to mean. Until that happens we can't welcome

international students back. But if we’d done the first job properly, we'd be able to do the

second job.



JOURNALIST: Scott Morrison seems to be sort of tilling the soil on climate change policy, net

zero his aim now by 2050. Think he is going to make it policy for the next election?



PLIBERSEK: I would be so happy if we took some of the politics out of the climate change

debate. And I hope Scott Morrison has the courage to do that - to stand up to the fringe

elements in his own party room and actually admit that acting to provide more cheaper,

cleaner, energy for Australia would grow jobs. That won't cost us. It will grow jobs. It will

strengthen our economy. Look around the world at the transformation that is taking place. Why

should Australia be left behind when we've got so much ingenuity here? We've got so many

people who are inventing and discovering new, better, more efficient ways of generating

cheaper, cleaner energy, storing that energy, transmitting that energy. We could be a

renewable energy superpower. We shouldn't miss that opportunity for Australian jobs.



JOURNALIST: Anthony Albanese said last week you were happy in your job, he then changed

part of your job. You still happy?



PLIBERSEK: I love the education portfolio. I'm delighted to have the Women's portfolio back.

And I think it's wonderful to elevate TAFE and training to the Deputy Leader’s portfolio because

it's a really serious issue here in Australia. We've got a 140,000 fewer apprentices and trainees

today in Australia than when the Liberals came to office. They've cut more than $3 billion from

TAFE and training. We've got unemployed young people competing for jobs that they're not

trained for, and at the same time, we're cutting support to help them get an apprenticeship.

How can it be that we've got skills shortages in areas like electricians, carpenters, short-order

chefs, arborists -  right across those areas we've got skills shortages. We've got young people

begging for a job, and we haven't managed to put those two things together. It’s an enormous

failure. Thanks.





JOURNALIST: Can I ask one on Craig Kelly? Looks like the PM may have called him

yesterday and said "pull your head in." Too late?



PLIBERSEK: Well, it’s beyond time the Prime Minister told Craig Kelly to just shut up. I mean

we're spending $24 million on a campaign to tell people to get vaccinated, and we've got a

taxpayer-funded nong running around telling people not to. This is actually personal for me. I

grew up in Hughes, in the Sutherland Shire. My mum still lives in the Sutherland Shire. My

brother is still there, his daughter, her husband, their kid. I don't want them going to the shops,

getting in contact with people who have refused to be vaccinated because their local MP is

spreading conspiracy theories on the internet. It wouldn't matter if he was Liberal- if it was a

Labor person doing this, I would be saying exactly the same thing. He needs to shut up. And if

the Prime Minister had any spine, he would tell him to do so.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350



