

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR NATIONAL RECONSTRUCTION, EMPLOYMENT,

SKILLS AND SMALL BUSINESS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR SCIENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC NEWS BREAKFAST

THURSDAY, 4 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Victoria; the Morrison Government attacking the wages of workers;

Canberra sitting weeks



LISA MILLAR, HOST: Let's take you to Canberra now, where federal politicians will be closely

following the latest COVID cases in Melbourne and Perth, and how they might stall plans to

reboot the economy. The Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Richard Marles, joins us now.

Good morning. Welcome to Breakfast.



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Good

morning, Lisa. How are you?



MILLAR: As a Victorian, you would be even more concerned about the seriousness of what

we're seeing here this morning, this breaking news. Have we pushed it to think that we could

be hosting international events, like the Australian Open?



MARLES: I think at every step the Victorian Government has taken the best medical advice,

and it's been guiding those decisions. You know, we had the Boxing Day Test, and I think the

way in which the Australian Open has been set up has obviously been done with a great deal

of care. I mean, I can understand, as a Victorian, the anxiety that people are feeling, but I do

take comfort from the fact that, you know, the Premier has stood up straightaway, he is taking

responsibility. The response has been swift. And when you look at the way in which the state

Premiers have been acting in relation to this - in Queensland, in WA, in New South Wales - I

think what we are seeing is that to act quickly and to act hard, as soon as there is the hint of an

issue is what the medical advice is saying. But at the end of the day, that's what we need to

follow.



MILLAR: I want to ask you about the IR bill. Labor's revealed this week that you're going to

oppose the omnibus bill. But this all started with good intent, supposedly, and talk of

compromise on all sides. Is there nothing that will convince Labor at this point to support the

bill, even if, as small business and the Government have suggested, they'll remove the

changes to the ‘better off overall test’?



MARLES: Well, we bring good intent to all the legislation which is put before the Parliament.

And if you look at our record, you see us working with the Government to come up with

compromises in lots of areas. But when it comes to the industrial relations reforms, the only

intent that was shown by the Government at the outset was to book a room. And what they are

now proposing to do is to remove the better-off test, which really starts- well has the potential

to start a firing gun on a round of wages bargaining, which will see wages decline. And that's

the concern-



MILLAR: But if they remove the changes, will you support - you know, is there room for

compromise from Labor? Or are you saying, "That's it"? You're going to go to the election

campaign on this?



MARLES: The Government have brought forward a proposition about removing the better-off

test. We don't support that. And so, you know, we are going to oppose that in the Parliament,

each and every day, because if it is allowed to go through, it will cut wages. It will start the

firing gun on a process of wage bargaining which will see a decline in wage rates. And from

our point of view, you can't think of anything which is worse for the economy and for those

workers who have done so much during the pandemic - distribution workers, retail workers,



those in health, who have really got us through the pandemic to this point in time- to repay

them with the prospect of a wage cut, we think is profoundly unfair, and we're going to make

that point.



MILLAR: Richard Marles, there's reports this morning of another meeting of a group of Labor

MPs who are reportedly unhappy with the leadership of Anthony Albanese from the right

faction. Were you aware of this meeting taking place last night over dinner at a Chinese

restaurant in Canberra?



MARLES: I knew there was a dinner on last night there, as I knew there were a number of

dinners on around Canberra on a sitting Wednesday night-



MILLAR: As many grievances aired at those dinners as there were reportedly at this one?



MARLES: There's a lot more intent which is being ascribed to this dinner than actually

occurred. To me, the idea that-



MILLAR: So, Anthony Albanese's leadership wasn't discussed, then, last night?



MARLES: Well, I wasn't there. But I think that the idea that a group of MPs are having dinner

in Canberra on a Wednesday sitting night equals some conspiracy is, at the end of the day, a

beat-up.



MILLAR: Alright. Richard Marles, we'll leave it there. Thanks very much.



MARLES: Thanks Lisa.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363



