

Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE GOVERNMENT IN THE SENATE  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA



OFFICIAL

MEDIA RELEASE

3 March 2021

APPOINTMENT OF SMALL BUSINESS OMBUDSMAN

The Australian Government has appointed the Honorable Mr Bruce Billson as the new  Australian Small Business and Family Enterprise Ombudsman.

The Australian Small Business and Family Enterprise Ombudsman forms a key pillar of the  Australian Government’s commitment to small and family business as a strong voice for the  sector.

Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business, Senator the Hon Michaelia  Cash, said the role of the Ombudsman, at Mr Billson’s direction, will have a pivotal role in  shaping the Australian Government’s response and continuing support of small and family  business as they make their way out of the COVID-19 pandemic.

“Small and family businesses are the bedrock of local communities across the nation. We  know that they bore the brunt of the pandemic and we need to make sure that they are at the  forefront of the recovery,” Minister Cash said.

“Never has there been a more important time for small business to have a strong voice. The  appointment of Mr Billson as the new Ombudsman shows the Government’s unwavering  commitment to supporting and growing the sector as we collectively chart our pathway back  to prosperity.”

“As a former Minister for Small Business with a seat at the Cabinet table, Mr Billson brings  with him a valuable and unique perspective that will no doubt amplify the voices of small and  family businesses across the nation.”

“I thank the outgoing and inaugural Ombudsman, Ms Kate Carnell AO, for her dedicated  service to the small and family business community and her strong advocacy on their behalf  over many years. Ms Carnell leaves a significant legacy and has provided a solid foundation  on which to build.”

Mr Billson’s term will run for five years, commencing on 11 March 2021.

Media Contact:

Guy Creighton - guy.creighton@dese.gov.au - 0438 815 302



