

LUKE GOSLING OAM MP

MEMBER FOR SOLOMON

CHAIR, INDO-PACIFIC TRADE TASKFORCE





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC DARWIN

FRIDAY, 22 JANUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: US Presidential inauguration; Federal Government replacing Tiger

helicopter fleet with Apache; Labor leadership.



ADAM STEER, HOST: Mr Gosling, good morning.



LUKE GOSLING, MEMBER FOR SOLOMON: Good morning Adam, hey Jo. Happy New

Year.



STEER: Why is it so important that President Biden visits Darwin?



GOSLING: Because we've got such a long and deep relationship with the United States, that’s

obviously still going strong today. And with next year being the 80th anniversary of the

bombing of Darwin, that’s obviously a good opportunity for him to come and visit the US

Marines, but also to pay respects to those American soldiers, sailors and airmen and those

Australians and from other countries that defended Darwin back in 1942. I think would be a

great opportunity, and it's great the Chief Minister has also extended the croc insurance as

well, which would be another incentive for him to come across.



STEER: Yesterday, we were speaking to Brendan Thomas-Noone from the United States

Studies Centre regarding the chances of Biden actually coming to Australia. This is what he

said:



BRENDAN THOMAS-NOONE: Ah well, it’s a possibility we probably won't see until 2022, if

not after. So we're already getting towards—if that's the case—halfway through the

administration. So hopefully we'll see a bit more travel from this president, particularly to our

region at least.



STEER: Is it a pipe dream asking for Biden to come here, Luke Gosling?



GOSLING: No, not at all. So the 80th anniversary is February the 19th, 2022, which is just

over a year from now. So he's obviously going to be pretty busy in that time with a lot of

domestic issues to deal with. But he'll be travelling internationally and he's obviously welcome

here in another year and a bit of time. I think the timing will be, the timing will work well.



JO LAVERTY, HOST: Well, over the past couple of years, we've seen Australia's relationship

continue to deteriorate with China. How do you see Australia's current position in the region?



GOSLING: I think we've got a great position in the region, in that our relationships with our

neighbours are pretty good. We've got things we're improving, the respect that is shown to

Timor, for example. We've got a new partnership with the Indonesian nation in terms of

increasing trade there. And obviously there's a lot that we can do to help them. More broadly I

think our relationships with ASEAN are pretty good. Obviously, the Pacific wants us to take

climate change a lot more seriously, and we'll see a shift to that with President Biden already

re-joining the Paris Accord as one of the first issues of business. So I just think that affairs in

the Indo-Pacific are going to become a lot more predictable. But also President Biden will be a

lot more interested in multilateral action, which is what we need to keep the Indo-Pacific free

and prosperous.



LAVERTY: So would you expect to see a further US military build-up in the Northern Territory?



GOSLING: I think those discussions will continue to see what's in our interests, to see what

they're interested in doing. There's no doubt that there are some great benefits, but I also want

to see some economic input as well. Investment in Australia by the United States by their

private companies is really significant. A lot of people don't understand how significant it is. So

more investment in the Top End from the US will be good. And we'll see what makes sense for

us in terms of more military cooperation into the future.



LAVERTY: On ABC Radio, Darwin, you’re with Adam Steer and Jo Laverty, and Luke Gosling

is the Member for Solomon. Speaking of defence, there's been a decision made by the Federal

Government which will cost Territorians jobs, around 50 people or so. What's happened here?



GOSLING: Unfortunately, in the dying days of the Trump Administration, the Morrison

Government has made a decision on a replacement helicopter for the Tigers, which are an

attack helicopter [based] out at Palmerston. There's also rumours, pretty strong rumours, about

the Morrison Government wanting to move the Apaches, the replacement helicopter, to

Townsville. So obviously, I'm fighting against that. The decision is really problematic for a

number of reasons. There was another US helicopter option that the US Marines use, called

the Viper, which is actually marinized, which means it's really capable of going to sea and

doing its job from helicopter landing ships, which is obviously pretty helpful. But they

overlooked that without a proper process, so there are a number of concerns. One is my

concern that the 1st aviation regiment helicopters stay in Darwin, but secondly, that there's

been this dodgy process that the Federal Government's engaged in when there were other

helicopters that could have been considered that would have obviously strengthened the ability

for us to not only train with the Marines, but also maintain our helicopters together in a joint

facility, which would have been great for our local industry.



LAVERTY: So that 1st regiment that currently works on the choppers here in Darwin, are they

part of the ADF? Would they be relocated themselves or is that a private enterprise?



GOSLING: No, the 1st Aviation Regiment is located out in Palmerston. Airbus, who make the

Tiger—there are a number of uniformed and Airbus employees out there. What we're hearing

is that the Government is thinking that when the Apaches come into service from 2025, that

they may be stationed out in Townsville. There's obviously an ability for the Defence Force to

split up where units place their assets. We know that with the First Brigade, we've got half of

the brigade down in Adelaide, for example. So what I'm pretty sick of is the Coalition

Governments—there has been a succession of them now—not taking our strategic location in

Darwin seriously and moving our military units out of Darwin. That's got to stop. It makes no

sense. And it's not going to help us get that interoperability with the US that we need to do

what we need to in the region.



LAVERTY: So those jobs … whilst the servicing requirements for the new helicopters would

move out of the Northern Territory, the jobs would actually go with them as well. So people

wouldn't lose their jobs. They’d just be lost from the Northern Territory.



GOSLING: Yeah, those jobs, whether they be uniformed or the jobs from the company that

made the helicopter and as part of maintenance and training, they'll obviously go with the

helicopter. I've asked the Defence Minister a couple of times to confirm that when the Apaches

replace the Tiger, that they will stay right here in Darwin. But unfortunately, they keep using

weasel words about the 1st Aviation Regiment that is based in Darwin getting the Apaches. So

we just want a clear statement from the Government that the Apaches will stay in Darwin.



LAVERTY: The Federal Government is making some significant investments in the Northern

Territory with $8 billion to be invested, which includes refreshments of some of those barracks,

as well as looking at that fuel storage containment area here in the Northern Territory as well.

So is it really fair to say that the Morrison Government is overlooking the Northern Territory

when it comes to defence planning?



GOSLING: The problem with what the Morrison Government has been doing is that the

commitments to defence infrastructure up here, whilst they have started, they've kept sliding

right and they keep getting pushed out to the next year and the next year. So what's great

about the defence investments in Darwin is that it's really providing a lot of work. Obviously,

the investments themselves are important, but it's providing a lot of work to a lot of companies

in Darwin. So that's a good thing, don't get me wrong, and there's bipartisan support for that.

The concern is that they're delaying a lot of these projects well into the future, and that's not

going to get us to where we need to be quickly in case our region starts to become a lot more

dangerous place into the future. So we just need them to stick to the timetable that they'd

already set. And that'll be good for our defence preparedness and obviously for the rebound of

our economy post COVID.



STEER: Very briefly, Luke Gosling, moving on to the next election. The CFMEU national

political organiser Elizabeth Dodge has said this week Tanya Plibersek would have a better

chance at winning the upcoming poll than our current leader Anthony Albanese. Do you

agree?



GOSLING: I think Tanya's brilliant, she was an amazing deputy leader under Bill Shorten for



two terms, but Albo is doing a really solid job and I think he's come out of the box since his car

accident and he's taking it up to the Morrison Government. So I'm looking forward to getting

back to Canberra at the end of this month, representing Territorians and making sure that our

issues, as always, are first and foremost in the planning that's going on for the lead-up to the

next election. I don't know when that next election will be. Some people think September,

October, later this year. Others think it will be into 2022 in March or something like that. But I

think Albo’s doing a good job and I look forward to getting back and joining the team in

Canberra.



STEER: Luke Gosling. Thanks for your time this morning. Appreciate it. Luke Gosling, he's the

Member for Solomon.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JESS EVANS 0425 234 265





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











