

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR NATIONAL RECONSTRUCTION, EMPLOYMENT,

SKILLS AND SMALL BUSINESS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR SCIENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

TODAY SHOW

FRIDAY, 26 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECT/S: Vaccine rollout; Aged Care; the right to feel safe working at Parliament.



KARL STEFANOVIC, HOST: The report card from the first week of our National Vaccine

rollout is in and it doesn't look good. Elderly patients given four times the normal dose. Targets

for giving the jab to aged care homes already falling chronically behind schedule. And the

blame game starting. State leaders complaining it's all the PM’s fault. Let’s discuss with

Minister for Home Affairs, Peter Dutton in Brisbane, and Deputy Opposition Leader Richard

Marles in Melbourne. Good morning, gents. Nice to see you this morning.



PETER DUTTON, MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Good morning, Karl.



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Morning,

Karl.



STEFANOVIC: Pete, to you first. If you can't get aged care right, how's the general public

rollout for the vaccine going to go?



DUTTON: Karl, I think people should calm down a little bit. When you look at the numbers, the

logistics and what's involved here in this rollout, I think the first most important point is that the

vaccine, we've now demonstrated practically, obviously, to be safe, and people should be

reassured by that. So have a conversation with your doctor about when you will be eligible.

Most important thing is to continue the rollout. People snipe from the sidelines. It's pretty rich,

I've got to say for some of these Premiers who through thick and thin the Prime Minister's

backed during the course of COVID, even when they've made some stupid decisions about

border closures. And now, of course, you've got them playing politics so says more about them

than it does us, I suspect .



STEFANOVIC: Richard, it's mainly the Labor Premiers, of course.



MARLES: I don't know what to say.



DUTTON: You defend Dan Andrews. You defend Dan Andrews.



MARLES: You said the Prime Minister was supporting the Premiers while you give’em a slap-

all in the one sentence! I mean it says everything about 2020.



STEFANOVIC: He’s gifted.



MARLES: He is gifted - it’s extraordinary. Look, I -  first I completely agree with Peter that the

vaccine is safe. And that's the starting point here. And it’s gone through all the approvals. And

people should have a sense of confidence about taking the vaccine. And it's really important

that people do get vaccinated when their turn comes along. I do find it surprising that we've

seen the bungles that we have in the first week. I don't really understand how you could have a

situation where a doctor hasn't done the training, and is administering the vaccine. And, you

know, the rollout in relation to nursing homes has not been at the rate that was being

expected. The government has said that it will vaccinate four million people through March,

you know, we very much hope that happens. And we want to support them in doing that. But

it's for the Government now to give a sense of confidence to the Australian people that this

vaccine rollout is going to happen, you know, in an orderly and effective way.



STEFANOVIC: Richard and Pete, what I really worry about in this country is the way that we

treat our citizens in aged care. It's appalling. And this happening to them this week is a

reminder, there's another report out today. Pete it needs to be fixed.



DUTTON: Absolutely does Karl and that's why we've got a Royal Commission and the

recommendations aren't far off. And, and we've obviously been speaking a lot about ways in

which we can roll out support to our aged care facilities in a more efficient way. There's more

and more money going in each year. So there's not a reluctance to invest into this space.

People should live with dignity. People have - it's more complex of course now, Karl because

people are living longer with dementia- people were, a generation ago, dying of heart disease

or hypertension, etcetera, before they had the onset of Alzheimer's or dementia. So people are

staying at home longer, people want that care in home and those that are going into aged care

in many cases are more acute in terms of the needs, and we'd need to do more. There's no

question about that. The Prime Minister has been very clear and we'll do that.



STEFANOVIC: Okay. It's a shocking question to be asking in 2021 that; what woman would

want to work in our national parliament? A survey reveals sexual harassment and bullying is

rife. Two thirds of staffers too worried about their careers to report abuse. And the Australian

Federal Police writing to the Prime Minister to remind him that all abuse and criminal activity

happening within parliament has to be reported. In a strongly worded letter, the AFP

Commissioner says this, ‘I cannot state strongly enough the importance of timely referrals of

allegations of criminal conduct. Any delay in reporting can result in the loss of key evidence. It

also has the very real potential to compromise the rights of victims.’ Make no mistake about it,

the AFP letter was a massive shot across the PM’s bow. Pete,the Prime Minister wants to

know when something happens now. Wow! Hello?



DUTTON: Karl, honestly, the interpretation of this letter is quite remarkable. I sat down with the

Police Commissioner during the week and talked about this letter. I've read the letter. The

letter is a very clear direction to the parliament that if you have a complaint to make, if you've

received a complaint, if you know somebody that needs to make a complaint, refer it to the

AFP. That's exactly what happened in relation to this matter. And obviously for Brittany's own

reasons, for good reasons, she's decided that she wouldn't make a formal- or official complaint

to the Federal Police until Wednesday of this week. And the police can't start that investigation

until there is that complaint made by the complainant. And I think all the Commissioner was

doing, what he was seeking to do, I know from having spoken to him, was to make sure that

people knew of the process, that if other people come forward as a result of the publicity

around this case, here's the hotline that you call - get in contact with the Federal Police. He

doesn't want to read about it in the media. He doesn't want to see a trial in one of these

matters in 12 months time where there is a compromise of a verdict or where a judge makes a

judgment that an accused of an horrendous crime, like rape, can't be convicted because of an

unfair trial because of media attention. They were the points that he was trying to make. And

we should be very clear about it.



STEFANOVIC: Do you regret saying, ‘he said, she said’, yesterday?



DUTTON: I - look Karl, yesterday I tried to make the point that we have to have a rule of law

apply here in relation to these cases, and I've been an  investigator in relation to sexual

offences.  I've locked people up for rape. I have made it my priority in public life, to be honest

and I feel very passionately about this. To protect women and children, I have cancelled visas

of paedophiles. The Labor Party has criticized me for being too hard in relation to these

matters. I don't see any more important task for me than to protect women and children in this

job. And I do it every day. So the point I was making was that in relation to these cases, the

police will hear different accounts, they will hear evidence from different people. They will distil

all of that, and they will decide whether or not a prosecution needs to take place. That's not to

detract from a victim, not to detract from the seriousness of this matter. I find the sexual

assault of women, sexual harassment in the workplace, one of the most abhorrent acts that a

man could ever perform or undertake. And I've been very clear about my views on that over a

long period of time. I'm not going to be lectured by the Labor Party, who have played politics

with this issue for the last two weeks.



STEFANOVIC: Richard, the Coalition and Peter himself has rightly copped it - or wrongly. It’s

a good thing sexual harassment never happens in the Labor Party?



MARLES: No one's making that claim, Karl. I mean, I think what we've seen in Parliament

House is an indictment on all of us. And I've been saying that, we've all been saying that from

the get go. I actually don't think this is a partisan issue at all. I think this is an issue about the

workplace in politics, and particularly the workplace in Parliament House and making sure that

the privilege that goes with working in Parliament House is not a license to bad behaviour, but



is in fact the opposite. It’s a call to Parliament being what should be the model workplace in the

country. And that's what we've got to strive towards. I mean, I did think that the letter from the

AFP was pretty extraordinary, and that there was felt a need to have that letter written. I’d also

make the point; it's not just reporting the crime- that's obviously critically important as a first

step, but it's people being supported throughout that process. And ultimately, you know, that's

what Brittany Higgins is saying that she felt she didn't have in relation to her circumstances.

And the starting point in all of this is that we've got to deal with these questions openly and

honestly, and frankly, that's not what's been occurring from either the Prime Minister or from

the Prime Minister in respect of his Office.



STEFANOVIC: There’s a lot of eyes on Parliament House and how he navigates through this.

All the very best and let's hope it's done. So thank you for your time, gentlemen. Appreciate it.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363







