

MARK BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING

MEMBER FOR HINDMARSH





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

WEDNESDAY, 17 MARCH 2021



SUBJECTS: PNG COVID-19 support; AstraZeneca concerns; online booking system

chaos, vaccine rollout.



MARK BUTLER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING: I want to say a few

remarks firstly about the Government’s announcements in relation to the emerging COVID

crisis in our closest neighbouring country, PNG. As you know the Labor Party, through Pat

Conroy, had made some comments about this issue over the last couple of days, calling for a

very strong, coordinated response from the Australian Government. Labor welcomes the

response announced this morning by the Morrison Government. There is an emerging crisis on

our doorstep, this is the right thing to do as a good neighbour and the right thing to do in our

national interest and we support the measures announced today.



I also want to make a few remarks about the press conference that was conducted just before

Question Time by Minister Hunt and also the head of the TGA and the Secretary of the

Department about a number of adverse events that have been reported after the

administration of the AstraZeneca vaccine in Queensland. In particular, four events of

anaphylaxis amongst four different Queensland patients. I’ve read the advice that’s been

provided by the TGA. That advice essentially says that the batches of AstraZeneca that were

administered in Queensland, batches that have been administered across a number of

jurisdictions are regarded by the TGA as safe and batches that should continue to be

administered appropriately, in accordance with the advice of the TGA into the future. The TGA

has also reiterated standing advice that any patient that does have a history of severe allergic

reaction to vaccinations, particularly a history of anaphylaxis should have a discussion with

their treating doctor before seeking a COVID vaccine. This seems to us to be the proper

advice from the TGA and we support the advice of the TGA and the decision by the

Government to continue the implementation and administration of both the Pfizer and

AstraZeneca vaccines in accordance with and subject to those pieces of advice provided by

the TGA.



Finally, I want to make remarks about the National Booking System. That system has finally

been announced today weeks after it was first suggested by the Prime Minister. I say finally

because this is a system that should have been in place well before the commencement,

particularly, of phase 1b of the vaccine rollout strategy. Already, we are seeing widespread

confusion and widespread frustration on the part of GPs and patients right across the country.

The health system website continues to drop out, people are continuing to have problems

logging onto a website that is the gateway to the vaccine rollout strategy. We are finding that

GP practices that were announced through various newspapers this morning as GP practices

where patients can access the vaccines are not appearing on the Department of Health

website. We are also hearing from a range of GPs that they don't know how many doses of the

vaccine they’re going to receive as one of the first 1,100 or so GP practices rolling this vaccine

out. In some cases they are told they will only receive 50 doses of the vaccine despite having

hundreds and hundreds of patients who are already on their books who will be eligible under

phase 1b. We’re are also hearing story after story of patients who are ringing GP practices

listed in the newspapers and on the website as being eligible but being told that their books are

closed and so they will not be able to get a vaccine through that practice. We are also hearing

stories even of patients of those existing practices, so existing patients of those practices, that

they will have to ring back much later, as long as a month later, to be able to make a booking.

This is simply not good enough. These systems should have been tested and finalised weeks

ago. Instead all we are seeing out there today is chaos and confusion.



Happy to take questions.



JOURNALIST: We’ve spoken to a lot of older Australians today who are very stressed

because they haven’t been able to get an appointment. Do you think it’s a communication

breakdown or is it something that’s always going to happen with a vaccine rollout this large?



BUTLER: This is much more fundamental than a communications breakdown. We’ve been

saying for weeks now, that these key systems, particularly the system that drives how people

can book a vaccine should have been in place weeks ago. We knew last year that we were

going to have to conduct this sort of mass vaccination, the Government should have had these

systems tested and finalised weeks before the first phase of broad community rollout, which is

phase 1b, was anywhere close to being initiated. They’ve been too slow, too late putting these

systems in place and unfortunately no surprise that there’s the sort of chaos and confusion that

you see out there. It’s incredibly frustrating for GPs an the staff of GP practices that are being

inundated with phone calls today that they’re not able to respond to, clearly, and particularly

the frustration for patients.



JOURNALIST: Do you think this will have an impact of public confidence? Maybe even

disincentivise people from booking because it’s all too hard?



BUTLER: I really hope not. I really hope that people can be patient. Unfortunately these

systems should have been in place earlier. They should have been rolled gold systems that

should roll out smoothly as soon as phase 1b was ready to go. Now that’s not the case, but I

hope that doesn’t result in any increase in vaccine hesitancy. The position of Labor is that

everyone should, as far as possible, and as soon as possible, get access to this vaccine and

take the vaccine. We just want the systems to work properly, we want the commitments that

the government has made to be implemented.



JOURNALIST: Moving ahead with phase 1b, but 1a is continuing, would you hope that from

the first week of 1b that the Government would, and states, would be reporting the data of the

rollout in both of those phases separately, so it was possible to see where each state is at

rather than one homogenous total?



BUTLER: We want as much information as we possibly can get. We're not obviously party to

the discussions that happen within National Cabinet between State & Territory Governments

and the Commonwealth about that but we want as much granular detail about how this

strategy is being implemented as possible. We want to know how it's rolling out in aged care.

We want to know how the remainder of phase 1a is rolling out. It is so critical that our border

quarantine workers and frontline health workers, particularly those who might be exposed to

COVID patients are getting vaccinated very, very quickly. So you're right, that granular detail is

absolutely critical, can’t all be lumped in one single number that the Minister or his bureaucrats

roll out every day.



JOURNALIST: Mark, 8,000 vaccines for PNG, a country with 9 million people, is that enough?



BUTLER: We have said that advice from ACID, among others, is that the critical emergency

challenge is to get the frontline health workers in PNG vaccinated. And we've been told that

20,000 vaccines would be a better place to deal with that task. 8,000 is a very good start. We

know that this is a difficult measure for the Australian Government to take because we've got

our own challenges in rolling out the vaccine here in Australia. So we’d just like the

Commonwealth, the Morison Government to monitor this very closely. We support broadly the

package that announced this morning, obviously there's going to have to be close attention

paid to whether or not these measures are sufficient, or whether they need to be increased

over time.



JOURNALIST: You’ve criticised delays in the rollout, government not meeting its targets. But

they are handing substantial numbers of doses to states to administer and we've learned only

about 30 per cent on average of getting into people’s arms. Do you agree that to some extent

these state health jurisdictions do have to take responsibility that there's clearly delays at their

end of the delivery as well?



BUTLER: Everyone's got to do their job here. My role is as the opposition federal health

spokesperson, I get paid to hold the Federal Government accountable for commitments that've

made and responsibilities that they hold. But beyond that, look, all of us, every person with a

responsibility to roll out this strategy successfully needs to do their job properly. They need to

play their part in getting this strategy implemented safely, effectively, and quickly.



JOURNALIST: Is it starting to get away from the Federal Government? There's been quite a

few problems. This is only the latest in that series and the AMA today says unrealistic

expectations could be a problem.



BUTLER: I think this Government has a record of over announcement and under delivery well

beyond the health portfolio unfortunately. We support the vaccine rollout strategy. I heard the

Prime Minister make some very partisan remarks during Question Time. We support this

vaccine rollout strategy. We've been utterly united in supporting the idea that principle that

people in this building should follow the advice of bodies like the TGA. I can't say the same for

the Coalition party room, which continues to be divided on core issues like that. But that

doesn't mean we're not going to hold the government accountable for implementation. They

are the ones, I didn't make this commitment, they are the ones who said there would be 4

million vaccinations delivered by the end of March. Now, Greg Hunt called 200,000 today, a

milestone. There is well over 350 million vaccines that have been delivered around the world

more than 110 million in the US, 26 million in the UK, 200,000 is simply not good enough.

We've got to do better. We've got to start scaling this up quickly. And the failure, the acute

chaos, the confusion we're seeing with the National Booking System today is just one more

problem this government has essentially presented in the successful rollout of strategy.



JOURNALIST: The Federal Government is allocating 1 million vaccine doses from the

AstraZeneca supply from the EU. Clearly the EU is saying we are going to deliver them well

down the track. If PNG needs those doses should we really be helping them provide more than

that? Is it appropriate for the Federal Government to put the pressure on the European Union

in order to give our closet neighbour access to AstraZeneca right now?



BUTLER: It's obviously important that we continue to monitor this we've got to assist our

closest neighbour, a dear friend that PNG is, to be able to scale up a response to what is this

emerging crisis, as I said, the most immediate urgent action needed is to vaccinate the

frontline health workers. And I think the Commonwealth Government’s made some good

announcements in relation to that today. The announcement the Prime Minister made about

the further 1 million doses from the European supply of AstraZeneca is something we also

support. But we'll have to continue to monitor the adequacy of all of these commitments

because it's not just as a good neighbour that we undertake these actions for PNG, it's also in

our national interest. As Greg Hunt said, there is a clear and present danger posed by an

uncontrolled outbreak of COVID on our doorstep.



JOURNALIST: So if there was an outbreak that could be linked back to PNG, would you then

criticise the government for not doing enough then?



BUTLER: We support the measures that they've taken today. We would obviously encourage

them to monitor them and I think they will do that to make sure those are adequate, make any

refinements to the announcements they’ve made based on good advice from non-government

organisations on the ground as well as our own bureaucrats.





Thanks, everyone.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LUCY CARUSO 0408 803 428



