

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR NATIONAL RECONSTRUCTION, EMPLOYMENT,  SKILLS AND SMALL BUSINESS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR SCIENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  TODAY SHOW  FRIDAY, 29 JANUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Border closures; Jobkeeper; Labor reshuffle; COVID-19 vaccine; mullets.

ALLISON LANGDON, HOST: Well, within hours of making that border announcement,  Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk wasted no time calling on the prime minister to  extend support for the state’s struggling tourism sector. We're joined now by Minister for Home  Affairs, Peter Dutton in Brisbane, and Deputy Opposition Leader Richard Marles from  Adelaide. Nice to talk to you both.  So Peter, are you going to bail her out?

PETER DUTTON, MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Well, obviously we don't take economic  advice from the Queensland Premier, I think the Prime Minister's demonstrated Ally right  through this, that we've been able to make the right decisions, both in terms of Jobseeker,  Jobkeeper, but many other payments beyond that to support those on fixed incomes, people  who are on pensions. We've provided significant assistance to businesses and Jobkeeper is  coming to an end. But the government's been very clear that if we need to provide further  assistance, we'll look at that. And, everybody feels for people, particularly in the tourism,  aviation sectors, but other sectors as well. And it is made harder. As we just saw in that  interview where they snap decisions are made to close borders, bookings are cancelled  restaurants have ordered food, they've employed staff, they've got bookings, but they need to  close that night, with no warning at all. So we just need to get that balance right. And as was  pointed out there, there needs to be consistency by the Premiers around what the definition of  the hotspot is so that there is an ability to plan, particularly for businesses because otherwise  people are out of jobs.

LANGDON: What did you think when you heard her request yesterday?

DUTTON: I thought there was some politics in it. And you know, she's in politics, as Richard  and I are so you expect a level of that. But I thought, you know, the gentleman, in the previous  interview, summed it up well, that, yes, the health aspects have been managed well, we took  the right decision, as a country to close the border first with China and then the rest of the  world 12 months ago, and that put us in a very strong position. We obviously have managed  the budget well, in the lead up to COVID. So we've got capacity to provide support, not just to

businesses, but to the Australian community as well, to see us through this. But we are getting  lots of stories now from businesses who can't find staff, because they're at home on  Jobkeeper. So we've got the balance right so far as the Federal Government will continue to  do that, to listen to the concerns, but to get the balance right. And that's exactly what we're  seeking to do in this budget that’s coming up in May.

LANGDON: Well, I hope what we're hearing from that is that there will be support for those in  the tourism industry, not just tourism, aviation, they've got months and months of pain ahead of  them. Richard, is it fair for Anna to ask for help? The argument has been she shut the borders?  Why should the Federal Government have to bail her out?

RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Well, I  think it's absolutely reasonable for Annastacia Palaszczuk to be making that point. I mean, if  you think about certain sectors and you just mentioned them, tourism, aviation, I mean, they're  not back to normal. And the government's got to be really careful about the way in which it  transitions out of Jobkeeper. And if it does it at a rate which doesn't match up with what's  actually going on out there, well then we're going to see massive job losses. I mean, until  we've got the international border open, a place like Queensland, which is heavily reliant on  tourism is going to do it tough. So I completely understand why Annastacia Palaszczuk  would  be making that point given how important tourism is for her state. But I'd make the other point  in relation to borders. I mean, it's fine for Peter to make those points about states and the way  in which they're acting. The problem here is the federal government has completely abrogated  its responsibility here. I mean, it has vacated the field, I don't understand why Scott Morrison  and the Federal Government aren’t in these decisions and they've left all of this up to the  states.

LANGDON: I think the issue here is I think they've tried to be part of it, but it's a state issue.  They control the borders, and they're doing what they want when it comes to borders.

MARLES: There's an assumption about all of that. The Federal government from day one took  itself out of the whole question of our internal borders. I don't think we can say right now that  the question of our nation's internal borders are solely a state issue, I mean, that that's a big  call to make about where Australia is at. The issue here is that from day one, Scott Morrison  took himself out of the field. And so we've really got in terms of our Federation now, one of the  weakest national governments we have seen and that's why we've got the chaos that's played  out over the last year.

LANGDON: Well, look, I think it's hard to put this one on Scott Morrison, I think he's been  trying to speak to Mark McGowan and Annastacia Palaszczuk. The States make the decisions  about the border that's just the way it is. But Richard, we need to talk about what's happening  within your party, is everyone okay?

MARLES: Everyone's really good.

LANGDON: Congratulations on your promotion yesterday, by the way, you're basically in  charge of everything now. But I mean, the question is Albo, he can shuffle the ranks all he  wants, but he's not taking you to the next election is he?

MARLES: Anthony is absolutely taking us to the next election and what we saw yesterday,  with the re-shuffle is seeking to put a focus on jobs as being the key issue that we will be  contesting every day between now and when the Australians go to the next election. Because  the situation we've got at the moment is that when you consider both unemployment and

underemployment, there's more than 2 million Australians right now who are looking for work.  And what COVID-19 has done has really exposed problems within our economy. We don't  make things in this country in anything like the way we used to back in 2013.

LANGDON:  I mean, you need the shift, because as you say, you're not cutting through. Albo  reckons he will be our next Prime Minister after the next election. Peter, the sharks are circling  though, aren't they?

DUTTON: Well, they are and what he did yesterday was apply a band-aid to a shark bite, Ally.  It's quite unbelievable to watch the Labor Party going into what they went through in the  Rudd/Gillard years. Clearly, there's now going to be a challenge by Tanya Plibersek and Jim  Chalmers, that's just a matter of time. Richard at the moment is playing the loyal deputy role as  Julia Gillard did. And good on him. I mean, he’s the only winner out of yesterday and as all of  the commentators said after the presentation, Richard completely out shone Albo. Look, it's  game on in there, the problem, though, is that they can shuffle the personnel all they like. It  can be Albo, it can be Tanya Plibersek, it could be Richard. The fact is that their policies are  designed to destroy jobs, to jack up taxes, to increase electricity prices and frankly, that's the  real problem within the Labor Party, and they're not yet prepared to address it.

LANGDON: And that disarray, of course, that's something that the Coalition has never seen, of  course.

DUTTON: We learned our lesson, and I promise you, we have moved on.

LANGDON: Well, everyone thinks they have learnt their lesson until it happens the next time  around. But I do want to talk about this though because there are real worries about our  vaccine rollout. Germany is now warning against giving it to the over 65s. This is the one we've  ordered 50 million doses of, AstraZenica. Doesn't do much for public confidence, Peter.

DUTTON: Well, Ally, I really think people need to look at the advice that is coming out of the  TGA. Now Australia has one of the most superior health systems in the world. And frankly, this  has been a very strong bipartisan position. The Labor Party, I think has been responsible on  this as well, we do need to get herd immunity. Australians are great vaccinators and the  medical advice, the scientific advice in this country is what we should heed. Now we'll look at  what is happening in the rest of the world, the government's made a very prudent decision to  invest in a number of vaccines, for this very reason that if there are problems, then we'll be  able to address them. But I think people need to calmly look at the advice that's coming out of  the Australian authorities, we have the best scientists in the world, they have not rushed this  process. They've looked at the efficacy and the effectiveness of the vaccines. And we will  make the decisions to roll it out on that basis to protect Australians. And that will be the first  priority.

LANGDON: But Richard, I mean, this is all happening. And we just don't like it when questions  are being raised. And they may not being asked by the TGA here in Australia right now. But  we've got German scientists and doctors raising concerns about the effectiveness of  AstraZeneca and those over 65. All of this as Pfizer basically can't keep up with global  demand. It doesn't put us in a great position, does it?

MARLES: Well, there are a couple of points here, Ally; first of all, you know, we do make  criticism of the government in terms of its slowness out of the blocks in putting Australia in the  queue, in relation to a number of these vaccines. It matters that we are right up there in terms  of all the vaccines that are going to have an effect here in the queue to make sure that we



have availability here in Australia. And we're concerned about how the government has  handled that over the course of the last few months. But the second point where I do very  much agree with what Peter said is that the TGA, and our authorities are as good as any in the  world. And the advice that they give us in relation to the safety of vaccines is really important  for people to listen to and adhere. And when the vaccines come online, they will only come  online if they are safe to use. And at that moment, it's really important that people take up the  opportunity of that vaccination. And so, listening to the medical advice, the expert advice and  we've got great experts in this country is really important for Australians to do.

LANGDON: Which is why we need public confidence in the vaccination rollout. Look you  know, I always like to end on, on a bit of a,you know, an upbeat moment to finish on a Friday.  We’re celebrating all things mullet because the mullet fest is about to kick off and you know  where I'm going with this-

KARL STEFANOVIC, HOST: Poor old Pete.

LANGDON: Poor old Pete.

MARLES: I want to see the photo of Peter and his ute.

DUTTON: I would love a mullet.

LANGDON: If you rocked that mullet, you would be Prime Minister of Australia.

MARLES: That is the Rocky Horror Picture Show right there.

LANGDON: Don’t you laugh, Richard. Because this is you, my friend. That's a bit of like a 80s  Rock and Roll thing you've got happening there. Well, gentlemen, always good to talk to you.  And I mean, as we say, it was a bit of a backhanded compliment that Peter Dutton paid you  Richard-

MARLES: I am used to that.

LANGDON: You've been outshining Albo. Did you get it. Alright guys, enjoy your weekend.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363



