



CLARE O’NEIL MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR SENIOR AUSTRALIANS

AND AGED CARE SERVICES

FEDERAL MEMBER FOR HOTHAM





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC MELBOURNE DRIVE

WEDNESDAY, 7 APRIL 2021



SUBJECT: Aged Care Workers, Aged Care Vaccination Rollout.



MARY GEARIN, HOST: We're joined now by Clare O'Neil, the MP for Hotham and Shadow

Minister for Aged Care Services and Senior Australians. Thanks for joining us, Clare.



CLARE O’NEIL MP, SHADOW MINISTER FOR SENIOR AUSTRALIANS AND AGED CARE

SERVICES: Great to be with you, Mary.



GEARIN: What is your reaction to the experiences of Lisa and apparently a lot of others?



O’NEIL: I'd like to say that I'm surprised, Mary, but actually Lisa's experience is one that a lot

of workers in aged care have had, or at least some variation of. Lisa is a little bit unique in that

she is a doctor who works in aged care. There are several thousand around the country who

either primarily work in aged care or who do a large amount of their work there, and they are

having a lot of issues getting vaccinated.



GEARIN: This is the first time, I think, that this has come to light publicly but you're saying

you've heard about it elsewhere. Where has it been happening?



O’NEIL: This is a widespread problem. It's not it's not just confined to GP's who are working in

aged care. If we just go back a little bit, the Morrison Government promised that all aged care

residents and all aged care workers would be vaccinated by the end of March. What we know

is that, as of today, about half of aged care residents have been vaccinated, either one or two

doses.



Basically, there is no plan in place, today, - and that is the actual truth - there is no plan in

place, today, to vaccinate the 319,000 people who work in aged care. This is a major barrier to

us feeling confident, as a country, that we're protecting older Australians in the event of an

outbreak. You only need to look at what happened in Brisbane or in Byron Bay to see that

health care workers or aged care workers are obviously at the frontline and they're a major risk

for us in protecting the community from COVID.



What the Morrison Government initially said was that aged care workers would be vaccinated

along with residents. That’s the Government going into aged care homes and doing a whole

home in one go. But, what they've now said is that aged care workers need to, essentially, get

in the queue with others. They need to book through their GP. Anyone who has been listening

to any talkback recently will know that this GP system is, fundamentally, not working at the

moment. So we've got a situation, today in aged care, where this vaccination rollout is an

absolute mess.



GEARIN: So when it comes down to the bigger picture, of course, the ultimate problem, the

Government is also saying - and it's quite clear that there is a problem with the supply and with

the stoush with Europe - the Government has signalled today that they're going to send out

some more requests. That's a good thing, isn't it, because the EU has to actually then consider

it?



O’NEIL: I think, and I don't want to sound glib, because, the truth is, I desperately want this

vaccination programme to work. That's the key to getting my constituents back to work and

getting Australians back to life as normal. But, the idea that this is not the Federal

Government's responsibility to get right is just not true. Of course, this was never going to be

easy.



It's a complicated thing to vaccinate a population, to manage supply, to manage the various

agreements that we've got with different suppliers and vaccines. No one ever said this was

going to be simple or easy. The truth is that the sort of problems that we're facing in Australia

are being faced in America, and in Israel, and in the UK. We are 100th in the world in our rate

of vaccinating our population essentially. There are 100 countries around the world who are

doing it better than us.



I get that there are supply issues but there are more things that need to be done, I think, than

writing angry letters to people in Europe about this. We should have had more agreements

with companies who are producing vaccines. We're meant to have a domestic supply line, let's

not forget that. The Government told us that CSL would be manufacturing a million doses a

week by March and that's not happening. So there's a lot that's going wrong here and the

Federal Government needs to stand up and take responsibility for it.



GEARIN: So, certainly, the plan hasn't rolled out as we thought, but looking forward - without

going into the rear vision mirror too much - it's a good thing isn't it, though, that the Prime

Minister would be speaking up for Australia's interests now that this has happened, now that

we're in this spot. Does politicising that situation help if it is the national interest?



O’NEIL: I'm not sure that just angry missives to Europe is the beginning of the end of what's

required here. There are fundamental issues with various aspects of our vaccination rollout.

Vaccines don't save lives, vaccinations do. This is the problem that we have. We've got 75,000

people as the maximum that's ever been vaccinated in a day in Australia. In the UK they're

doing 750,000 a day. In America, I think 3,000,000 a day.



We're not being well served by the approach that's being taken here. I'm sorry if that sounds

like politics but we've got to have accountability for this. That's what's been missing for the

Morrison Government from the very beginning of this. Jobs have been pushed onto the states

and the states have been blamed when things have gone wrong. This is squarely within the

Government's court. They're not doing well enough and they need to change course as quickly

as possible.



GEARIN: Keeping it in that sort of brutally political discussion. If everyone gets vaccinated,

sure, late, in a month or two, but we've all got the jabs in our arms by the time an election

comes along, how much will people really care? Will it just be a thing of the past, then,

because how will that help, this conversation to be happening, if people have basically



forgotten all of the troubles?



O’NEIL: I don't care too much, honestly, about the politics of this in a year's time. That's not

what matters to me. We've got a country here that's pulled together so magnificently to try to

beat COVID and we have nailed that task of actually keeping COVID out of the country, of

managing these outbreaks. I don't want us to fall at this last hurdle. If we did do that and if

problems start to emerge because we've not done the vaccination roll out very well then the

people that I represent in Parliament suffer. They lose their jobs. They can't visit family. They

can't go overseas. Many Australians who are stranded overseas are not able to get back here.



So this is not actually about politics. This is about trying to get a good outcome for the country.

We're not going to get there if we keep having people from the Morrison Government stand up

in press conference after press conference pointing the finger at others or, otherwise, as has

been the case up to now, really saying, "oh, don't worry, everything's going just according to

plan". The only people in the country who believe that seem to be sitting around the Morrison

Government cabinet table.



We've got to get real here. There are real fundamental problems with this. Aged care is the

best example where things have just gone totally off the rails and we've got to get it back on

track.



GEARIN: Yeah, absolutely. I think everyone is united on that point. Clare O'Neil, thank you

very much for joining us this afternoon.



O’NEIL: Lovely to talk, Mary. Thanks so much.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JACOB KAHANE 0422 723 491



