



RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR NATIONAL RECONSTRUCTION, EMPLOYMENT,  SKILLS AND SMALL BUSINESS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR SCIENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS FIRST EDITION  TUESDAY, 2 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Border closures; Jobkeeper; Jobseeker; Australia’s relationship with  China.

PETER STEFANOVIC, HOST: We’re going to go to Canberra now. Joining us live is Deputy  Labor Leader, Richard Marles- who's now in charge of about 450 portfolios. Richard, good to  see. Thanks for joining us this morning.

RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Morning  Pete.

STEFANOVIC: First of all, I just want to get your thoughts on the WA- or specifically the Perth  lockdown. Is this how you think it should be going forward? Given the fact there's only one  case so far, these ad hoc shutdowns, is this how you think it should be going forward?

MARLES: Well, I don't like the term ad hoc, I think there is some science behind what's going  on in Perth. And it makes sense to me. And we saw a version of this play out earlier in the year  in Brisbane. After what happened in Victoria last year, I think the lesson that has been learnt  around the country is that when you get cases of this kind, and there's obviously a great  degree of anxiety about the UK strain and its potential to spread, but when you get cases, you  go hard and you go early. That's the way in which you contain it to make sure that you don't  have a wider outbreak. And, you know, that's what we saw play out in Brisbane earlier in the  year. That's what we're seeing play out in Perth now. And I think people would much prefer to  have a short lockdown at the start, then the kind of protracted lockdown that we saw in

Victoria, when the virus got out in larger number. So, I can understand the decisions which are  being made.

STEFANOVIC: Why not something a little more measured though and kind of mirror what the  contact tracers have been able to do in New South Wales, so you can have both?

MARLES: Well, I think what has been learnt in the experience of the last year is that to have a  lockdown within the area that is impacted by this, you know, across the city where the case  has been found- and that's what we saw in Brisbane earlier in the year- and that's what we're  now seeing in Perth now is best practice, like that's what the medical advice is in terms of how  to deal with this. That's why I don't think it's fair to describe it as ad hoc, there's a whole lot of  medical advice, which underpins this. And going hard, going early is the way in which the best  advice says we make sure this doesn't get out at a broader level, because we all understand  what the cost of that would be.

STEFANOVIC: Okay, just onto your new super portfolio now; do you accept that it's ruffled  feathers within the Shadow Cabinet?

MARLES: No, the portfolio is about making a statement and putting a focus from the  Opposition on the question of jobs, making it clear that what we intend to talk about and  prosecute between now and the next election is the whole question of jobs and secure  employment in this country. And we're doing that because right now we're seeing more than  two million Australians looking for work, who are either unemployed or underemployed. And  there's been a persistently large number of people who have been underemployed throughout  the period that Scott Morrison has been Prime Minister, even predating the COVID-19 crisis.  So, jobs is what it's about. And it's about that in the short term, making sure that small  business, which is the engine room of our economy, keeps going and that we don't lose whole  swathes of our small business as a result of COVID-19. And that's why it's really important that  Jobkeeper continues to be in place, so long as the effects of COVID-19 are being experienced.  And what we've just talked about in Perth is an example of the fact that we're not through this  yet. But it's also talking about in the long term, you know, we need to be having an eye to the  future about how we build and develop an economy which generates secure, permanent jobs  going forward. And this government just doesn't think about that.

STEFANOVIC: So just to clarify you; so do what you want Jobkeeper to remain in place until  the pandemic is over which could be a year, it could be two years away. Is that what you've got  in mind?

MARLES: Jobkeeper, and its transition needs to be tailored to the reality of the circumstances.  Now, if you're in tourism, if you're an aviation, the fact of the matter is things are not back to  normal. They're nowhere near normal. And that's why, you know, Jobkeeper and how it plays  out from here needs to take account of that. That's the point that we're making. Arbitrary cut  offs, which put businesses in a situation where you know, they're not back to normal as the  hope of them being able to conduct the kind of businesses that they had prior to COVID-19  without any assistance is going to mean those businesses go under and if that happens, we'll  lose sections of our small business landscape but we'll lose the jobs that go with it. And small  business is the engine room, is the major of this economy.

STEFANOVIC: Okay, that's a blank cheque, is what you're saying.

MARLES: It's not a blank cheque at all. It's about saying, you look at what is the reality of the

way in which we are coming through COVID-19, what parts of the economy are being affected,  and then you tailor the transition of Jobkeeper accordingly, that's the point that we're making.  But if you get that wrong, and if you don't tailor the transition of Jobkeeper according to the  reality of what's being experienced in the economy, then you're going to see really significant  job losses, and it is really critical that that not happen in a circumstance where there are two  million Australians today looking for work.

STEFANOVIC: Okay, a couple of figures that have been published this morning from the  Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, they say that Jobseeker, people should get a  $10 a day rise; so basically, that'd be living on $50 a day. And then for Jobkeeper, any  business that has had a one third reduction in profits, then each employee should get a bonus-  if I can put it that way- of $450 a week. What do you make of those figures? Do you accept  them?

MARLES: Well, I think what you're going to see is groups within our economy and our  community coming up with ways in which you try and tailor the transition of Jobkeeper in the  way I've described, in circumstances where what the government's flagging is removal  completely of Jobkeeper at the end of March. And in relation to Jobseeker, we've been saying  for a long time that there needs to be an increase in Newstart, that the base rate of Newstart  before COVID-19 struck was just too low. So, this kind of conversation doesn't surprise me.

STEFANOVIC: So up to $50 a day, would that be something that you'd accept, for  Jobseeker?

MARLES: Well, I mean, I'm not about to go through what our position would be in detail in  relation to each of those measures. But the point is, I would expect that kind of conversation to  be happening within our community, in circumstances where what the government's flagging is  an end to Jobkeeper at the end of March.

STEFANOVIC: Okay. Just another item we've got this morning, Richard; New Zealand's Trade  Minister has said that, with more diplomacy and respect our relationship with China would be  better off. What do you make of those comments? Do you agree with them? Or do you think  New Zealand needs a backbone?

MARLES: It's not quite how I would characterise our situation. But our relationship with China  is really important. That's to state the obvious. It's a mutual relationship. But we need to enter  into that relationship on terms where we make it abundantly clear to China that we value the  relationship. And it's got to be possible to make that comment without it being controversial in  Australia. We obviously need to value the relationship with China.

STEFANOVIC: That is despite their 14 grievances?

MARLES: China is our largest trading partner. And we've got to make sure that we are doing  everything we can to have that relationship in the best place. Now, right now, what we've seen  is a government which has been unable to manage that relationship, and there are thousands  of jobs at stake as a result. I was visiting an abattoir last year where hundreds of people have  already lost their job because of what's happened in relation to our trading relationship with  China. It's our largest trading partner. And it's critically important that we see this government  manage that relationship properly. Right now, there is not a single personal relationship of  substance that exists between a senior member of the Morrison Government and a senior  member of the Chinese government; that's unprecedented in terms of Australian history, since



the recognition of the PRC. I mean, governments past have been able to maintain those  relationships. And it's got to be possible to say that with all the difficulties, and there are many,  and with all the complexities, and I acknowledge them all, that we start from a position of  valuing the relationship with our largest trading partner.

STEFANOVIC: Okay. Richard Marles, as always, appreciate your time this morning. Thanks  for joining us here.

MARLES: Thanks, Pete.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363



