

MARK BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING

MEMBER FOR HINDMARSH





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RN BREAKFAST

TUESDAY, 6 APRIL 2021



SUBJECT: Vaccine rollout.



HAMISH MACDONALD, HOST: Mark Butler is the Shadow Minister for Health and Ageing. A

very good morning to you.



MARK BUTLER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING: Morning Hamish



MACDONALD: The rollout has clearly been slower than first promise, but it's likely that a

million doses will be in peoples’ arms by the end of today. Aren't we now seeing the

vaccination numbers accelerating as intended?



BUTLER: Well, no they’re still going far too slowly. The Prime Minister promised there would

be 4 million vaccinations by the end of March, which was last week. And per head of

population Australia is not even in the top 100 of nations in the world. We've got 60 per cent of

adults vaccinated in the UK, 40 per cent in the US and barely 2 or 3 per cent here in Australia.

We are running way, way behind schedule and that's why expert after expert is calling this

vaccine rollout a complete mess.



MACDONALD: Do you accept the primary reason for these delays is the fact that Europe

blocked AstraZeneca exports?



BUTLER: No, I don't. we've had well over 2 million doses batch approved by the TGA in the

country for some time now. And yet we've only managed to get 800 or so thousand into

peoples’ arms. We've got two and a half million doses of AstraZeneca vaccine made by CSL

awaiting batch approval by the TGA. So we've got vastly more doses in the country, have had

for some time, than we've managed to get out there into the community, into peoples’ arms. So

this is really a question of implementation, not just one of supply.



MACDONALD: So if that's the case, where is the blockage?



BUTLER: Well, it's clearly at a Commonwealth level. The states are doing very well at

vaccinating the people for whom they’re responsible, which are frontline health workers and,

quarantine workers, and emergency services. But aged care is running way behind schedule.

Only about 14 per cent of aged care facilities have been fully vaccinated. They were supposed

to complete the entirety of the aged care sector last week 14 per cent, about 1 in 7 facilities

and we have no data on the aged care workforce, which was also a responsibility of the

Commonwealth.



MACDONALD: Is that the whole picture? Is it fair to say it's just a blockage at the

Commonwealth level? I mean, states have acknowledged that they have received dosages

that they weren't prepared for, that they therefore weren't able to roll out immediately. Clearly

there are numbers here, if we're talking about the totality of this, that fall in the states

responsibility.



BUTLER: That's right, but that supply comes from the Commonwealth. The states’ complaints

about supply has been supplied from the Commonwealth. GPs have also said that they were

put in the frame by the Commonwealth a couple of weeks ago, telling hundreds of thousands

of patients to ring your GP and make an appointment for your vaccination, but GP surgeries

were getting maybe 50 doses a week. Now, there’s no way GPs can put together a proper

vaccination programme if they're only getting 50 doses a week and no sense of how many they

will get in the out weeks. That's why you have reports over the weekend of GPs essentially

saying they're not going to be able to take appointments until they get a clearer picture from

the Commonwealth about when they'll receive the doses.



MACDONALD: So how should this be done differently in your view?



BUTLER: Well, there's a range of different pieces of advice. The first thing the Commonwealth

has got to do is stop pretending that everything is going great guns. We are way behind

schedule here and it's becoming very serious, because although the Prime Minister said that

this is not a race, it is a race. There is a time imperative in getting vaccinations into peoples’

arms. First of all, to open up the economy and have strong economic confidence. But just as

importantly, maybe even more importantly, we need to get the current generation of vaccines

into people before we have to consider the possibility of booster shots, because this virus is

mutating around the world, we're seeing that with a range of different variants, now the

dominant strains around the world. And will probably need booster shots. And if we're running

way behind schedule will simply not be in time to get those booster shots going.



MACDONALD: It doesn't seem to me that there is much dispute about the need to get this

done. I'm just asking if you were in charge, what would you be doing to solve these blockages?

How would you be getting this out faster? Would you be talking about these mass vaccination

hubs that have been suggested in stadiums? How would you be doing this differently?



BUTLER: I don't understand why the Commonwealth is so resistant to an idea that's been

rolled out in pretty much every country I've looked at around the world. I mean, Stephen

Duckett and a number of others that made that point over recent days that these large

vaccination centres, of the type of the state governments would be able to operate fairly

straightforwardly, I think, are the way in which other countries are racing ahead of Australia in

their vaccine rollout. Stephen Duckett has said this morning we should bring on pharmacist

sooner. At the moment it doesn't look like pharmacists will be brought into the strategy until

June at the earliest. GPs are having to deal with all of this, outside the aged care and health

workforce, having to do all of this on their own with no sense of how many doses they’re

getting. While they're also having to implement the flu vax strategy, which is obviously

happening between April and June as well. It's just not enough hands at the wheel. And the

Commonwealth’s got to recognise that.



MACDONALD: So, so you're in disagreement with the Acting Chief Medical Officer on this,

Michael Kidd? He says those sorts of things are not necessary sporting stadiums and the like.

At the moment he says, we don't need that sort of system because we are rolling out this

system effectively.



BUTLER: I just don't think the numbers lie and the numbers show how far behind schedule we

are, how far behind the rest of the world we are, and I think the Commonwealth's got to be

honest with the Australian people. Come clean with them about that and get people around the

table to come up with some alternative ideas. Because the strategy put together by the

Commonwealth is not working. I think sooner or later the Commonwealth is going to have to

admit that they're going to have to ask the state governments yet again through this pandemic

to bail them out because the Commonwealth just not up to the job of delivering this vaccine

rollout.



MACDONALD: I just want to clarify what you mean by the Commonwealth. Are you talking

about the Chief Medical Officers here in terms of coming clean?



BUTLER: No, I'm talking about Scott Morrison and Greg Hunt. I'm talking about the Prime

Minister and the Minister for Health who are responsible for this vaccine roll out. Now the

states have responsibility under the National Partnership Agreement for their own workforce

and they’re busy doing that, particularly, the frontline health workers, quarantine workers,

emergency services workers, and suchlike. But Scott Morrison and Greg Hunt have taken on

responsibility for the aged care sector, both the residents and workers, and the rest of the

community through their GPs and Community Pharmacy Network and experts are saying the

way in which Scott Morrison and Greg Hunt are proposing to do that simply won't work in a

timely and effective manner.



MACDONALD: The government's original targets were relatively ambitious, fully vaccinating

everyone who wants the shots by October, that seems to be being adjusted as we speak. Do

you have a view as to when it is likely to happen by?



BUTLER: No, I don't. They're going to have to accelerate this very, very quickly. As I said that

the original target was 4 million by the end of March. They missed that by more than 3 million.

The next target was 6 million by the 10th of May. Well they're going to have to get a million

jobs done every single week between now and then to achieve that. That seems very unlikely.

October is a really important deadline. I mean, we need to have this current generation of

vaccines into people in the likely event that we're going to need to consider booster shots over

the coming 12 months or so. It is really critical that we start to meet these commitments. What

was really notable though over the weekend when Greg Hunt did a press conference on

Sunday, is that he dropped any sense of targets. He was asked when is the current phase of

the most vulnerable people, that's phase 1a, aged care sector, frontline health workers,

quarantine workers, when will that be completed given that the original target was last week

and he refused to say when that would be completed. Now, it appears the Commonwealth as

in Greg Hunt and Scott Morrison, are now taking a strategy of making no particular

commitments around timelines, and that's an unacceptable position for them to take.



MACDONALD: Given the circumstances, given the difficulty of getting vaccines into Australia,

developing or producing them here. Is there the urgency that you describe? Notwithstanding

the variants that are emerging overseas, there is very little COVID present in Australia right

now.



BUTLER: Thankfully we don't have the urgency that you see in the Northern Hemisphere. You

know, places like the US, the UK, Brazil, many others and that's why perhaps they've been

able to achieve those rates. But there is urgency here. You only saw it in Brisbane last week

with a breakout that shut down the economy there, shut down a whole range of other events in

northern NSW. It doesn't take much to cause enormous dislocation to our community. The loss

of jobs, the loss of economic activity. So unless we're going to shut Australia up to the rest of

the world for time immemorial, we're going to have to roll this vaccine out properly. Do it in a

timely manner. So that we’re then ready to deal with whatever the pharmaceutical industry and

our health experts say is necessary to respond to the variants that already spreading right

throughout the rest of the world. We see in Europe, the variant now is the dominant strain of

the virus through Europe, the pharmaceutical companies and researchers are already working

furiously on a booster shot that will deal with those variants. If we don't get our skates on,

we're not going to be ready for those booster shots.



MACDONALD: National Cabinet meets on Friday. There could be agreement to publish more

data around this, such as how many doses are being delivered to the states, how many have

actually been administered. Do you think that level of transparency for all levels of government

might make this process a bit more accountable?



BUTLER: I think the two things we need more transparency and a greater sense of urgency. If

those two things can come out of the National Cabinet, and frankly, particularly from Scott

Morrison and Greg Hunt, then the country will be served well. This thing is running way behind

schedule. You know there are too many political fights being picked by the government when

they get under pressure. We've seen that yet again in relation to Queensland by ministers like



David Littleproud and Peter Dutton, presumably licenced by the Prime Minister or his office. So

greater sense of transparency and a greater sense of urgency is needed.



MACDONALD: Mark Butler, thank you very much.



BUTLER: Thanks, Hamish.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: TOMASZ SKLADZIEN 0409 959 552



