

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP   SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION   SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2GB DRIVE WITH JIM WILSON  TUESDAY, 23 MARCH 2021

SUBJECTS: Sexual assault and sexual harassment; Scott Morrison; Floods across  Australia.

JIM WILSON, HOST: Well joining me now, as she does every Tuesday, is Labor heavy  hitter and our political influencer, Tanya Plibersek. Hi Tanya.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SHADOW MINISTER  FOR WOMEN: Good to be with you Jim.

WILSON: Well, it was an emotional Prime Minister earlier today. What did you make of his  comments?

PLIBERSEK: Look I think the words he spoke were exactly the right words Jim, but what  we really need to see is action. And for too long, we've heard, every time there's a crisis, a  crisis blows up, and we get the right words. And then we launch an inquiry, or someone  calls for a report, the issue dies down, and nothing ever happens. The reason that so many  people are so raw, so angry, so upset about this, is that there's been report after report,  inquiry after inquiry. Just one example Kate Jenkins has been asked - the Sex  Discrimination Commissioner has been asked - to do a report into the workplace culture  here in Parliament House. I absolutely support that. Labor has supported that in a  bipartisan way. But the last report the Sex Discrimination Commissioner did about sexual  harassment in all Australian workplaces, has been sitting with the Government for a year,  with no action on it. So I absolutely accept that the Prime Minister loves his family. I've got a  family I love too, and I know that they motivate me every day as well. But enough with the  words, let's actually get some action here.

WILSON: But Labor is committed to working with the Government, so as the PM said get  the house in order?

PLIBERSEK: A hundred percent. I mean we've been demanding action all the way  through. But I have to say, the Prime Minister has to be prepared to face this real issue,  rather than deal with this as a political problem. And, you know, all of last week we heard



him saying, ‘yes, the inquiry into what my office knew when about Brittany Higgins is  ongoing’. We find out yesterday through Senate Estimates that he was lying all last week in  the Parliament about this. So how can how can we trust, and more importantly how can the  Australian people trust, that he is really up for the hard work that needs to happen in this  place and in workplaces right across Australia - on our streets, in our homes, wherever  women aren't safe? How can we trust he’s up for that hard work, when he spent last week  lying about whether the inquiry into the Brittany Higgins sexual assault allegation was  actually ongoing or not?

How can we trust when he says- Brittany Higgins herself says that that the Prime Minister's  office has been briefing against her loved ones. He refuses to answer that question. Like  we actually need him to deal with this - not as a politician, but as the human being that he  was in that speech this morning.

WILSON: Well hopefully that's the light-bulb moment for the Prime Minister this morning.  He was very emotional, and I know what his family with Jenny and the girls mean to him,  and hopefully that is the moment that - again there is a toxic culture, we know that, it needs  addressing sooner rather than later. Before I let you go, you are the Member for Sydney,  your reaction and your response to well the incredible community spirit with these dreadful  floods in recent days in our city and also around the state. What's your response?

PLIBERSEK: I'm so grateful to the professionals that are keeping us safe, the volunteers,  the SES. A lot of my colleagues are back in their electorates working, filling sandbags and  doing whatever needs to be done. Just one example of this - on both sides, people are  back in their electorates helping out - but my colleague Susan Templeman, the Member for  Macquarie. She's got the Nepean River, she's got the Hawkesbury - this comes after  drought, fires in the Blue Mountains, where Susan lost her own home, COVID that  smashed tourism, and now these terrible floods.

I'm full of admiration for the people who are working hard to keep us safe, and the best  thing that the people of New South Wales and Queensland - wherever you are - can do to  help out those amazing workers is to follow their directions. Don't cross floodways. Stay  safe.

WILSON: Well said. And certainly yeah, I think the community spirit and the resilience has  been unbelievable. Thank you for your time as always this afternoon, Tanya.

PLIBERSEK: Thank you, Jim.

WILSON: That's Labor heavy-hitter and our Tuesday political influencer, Tanya Plibersek.

ENDS  MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350









