



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

The Hon Scott Buchholz MP  Assistant Minister for Road Safety and Freight Transport  Federal Member for Wright



The Hon Michelle Landry MP  Assistant Minister for Children and Families   Assistant Minister for Northern Australia  Member for Capricornia







The Hon Mark Ryan

Queensland Acting Minister for Transport and Main Roads  State Member for Morayfield

Bruce Saunders MP  Queensland Assistant Minister for Regional Roads   State Member for Maryborough

Barry O’Rourke MP  State Member for Rockhampton



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au



18 January 2021

ROAD SAFETY FUNDING FLOWS TO QUEENSLAND

New road safety upgrades and jobs will be delivered right across Queensland with the Australian and  Queensland Governments unlocking close to $300 million in additional funding.

The Australian Government announced today it has approved $225 million for Queensland under  tranche one of the $2 billion Road Safety Program, joining a further $64.6 million to be provided by the  Queensland Government.



Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the additional works are required to begin and finish by 30 June 2021, improving safety  and supporting around 950 jobs in Queensland.

“This funding will deliver key lifesaving improvements such as shoulder sealing, rumble strips to alert  drivers they are moving out of their lane, median treatments to prevent head-on collisions and barriers  to prevent run-off-road crashes and protect against roadside hazards,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“Of this $289.6 million, $267.4 million has been earmarked for regional Queensland demonstrating the  substantial focus we are placing on our regional communities.

“Road safety is everyone’s responsibility and the Australian Government is playing our part by investing  heavily in road safety upgrades across Queensland.

“This is all about getting Queenslanders home sooner and safer whilst we also create more jobs during  this difficult economic time.

“Communities such as Rockhampton will benefit through projects such as upgrading intersections and  roadside widening on the Bruce Highway at Nielsen Avenue and projects to improve safety for  vulnerable road users on various sections of the Bruce Highway.

“These build on major existing investments such as the $158 million Rockhampton Northern Access  Upgrade, which will increase safety and reduce travel times by increasing the capacity on the Bruce  Highway to four lanes.”

Acting Transport and Main Roads Minister Mark Ryan said the joint funding announcement would see  another 87 projects across Queensland started and completed within the next six months, creating close  to 1,000 jobs and safer roads for families, businesses and industry.

“It means just over a year, the Queensland and Australian governments have delivered more than $5  billion in stimulus to build roads and create jobs as part the state’s economic recovery plan,” Mr Ryan  said.

“Last year was one of the worst when it comes to number lives lost on our roads - so to be able make  our roads safer sooner while also supporting employment in our regional communities is a great  outcome as we enter the new year.

“These projects will add to the record $26.9 billion in roads and transport projects being delivered by  the Queensland Government over the next four years, and our real jointly-funded $12.6 billion Bruce  Highway plan.”

Assistant Minister for Road Safety and Freight Transport Scott Buchholz said road safety was a key  priority for the Australian Government and this investment in road upgrades would provide a boost to  the economy while ensuring Australians can get home sooner and safer.

“Making our roads safer is a critical component of our work to reduce deaths and serious injuries on our  roads and move towards achieving Vision Zero - or no deaths or serious injuries on our roads,”  Mr Buchholz said.

“Projects are already underway through the $500 million Targeted Road Safety COVID-19 stimulus  package and this additional funding complements that work, resulting in an even greater roll-out of  improved infrastructure and roads right across the nation.

“Queensland unfortunately saw a 26 per cent increase in road deaths in 2020, despite the falls in traffic  due to the pandemic.



“We know we must do better - and this funding is part of our Government’s unwavering commitment  to doing our bit to get all Queenslanders home sooner and safer.”

Queensland Assistant Regional Roads Minister Bruce Saunders said the list of projects would see  intersections with a high crash history made safer, roads widened and more dirt roads sealed.

“These types of projects play an important part in supporting our industries right across Queensland, in  particular those industries that rely on our regional roads to transport goods,” Mr Saunders said.

“They build on major projects already being delivered like the $480 million Bruce Highway upgrade  south of Cairns, the $1 billion Gympie Bypass and $514.3 million Bruce upgrade south of Townsville.

“The works will give new opportunities for businesses as we continue to recover from COVID-19 and  spark more jobs in industries like construction, traffic management and engineering.”

Federal Member for Capricornia Michelle Landry said she was pleased to see a number of vital projects  in Central Queensland - both small and large - would benefit from the Federal Government’s funding  for road safety projects.

“All of the works undertaken will mean better and safer roads, including improving lighting and  widening busy roads to ease traffic congestion and hazards,” Ms Landry said.

“Rockhampton is the gateway to northern Australia, and we are committed to investing much-needed  funds in ensuring the safety of our roads.”

Queensland Member for Rockhampton Barry O’Rourke welcomed the joint funding, with a number of  projects to be delivered in Central Queensland, including upgrades to the Capricorn Highway and Bruce  Highway.

“Our community has already been reaping the benefits of major upgrades like the $75 million Capricorn  Highway duplication and Rockhampton Northern Access upgrade, plus a pipeline of future projects like  the $1 billion Rocky Ring Road,” Mr O’Rourke said.

“With billions of dollars being injected into Queensland’s economy thanks to local businesses and  industry, making our supply chains continue to see sustained and additional investment is a welcome  outcome for jobs and for the thousands of families who live here.”

The Australian Government’s funding for the Road Safety Program will deliver lifesaving measures on  regional roads and to protect vulnerable road users across the Queensland while also supporting local  jobs and providing a welcome boost to local economies.

The funding is subject to “use it or lose it” provisions which require States and Territories to use their  notionally allocated funds within a timeframe, or those funds can be reallocated to projects in other  jurisdictions. The program will be delivered in three, six-month tranches.

In total, the Australian Government has approved up to $225 million and the Queensland Government a  further $64.6 million to fund the state-wide upgrades.

For more information on the Australian Government’s road safety initiatives, visit  www.officeofroadsafety.gov.au.

Ends.

Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Jo Williamson 0418 475 668 | Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Minister Ryan - Toby Walker 0439 347 875



Assistant Minister Buchholz - Josh Christian 0439 897 926  Assistant Minister Landry - Tom Birkbeck 0418 908 159  Assistant Minister Saunders - 07 4114 1100  Mr Barry O’Rourke - 07 4994 2100

