

ANDREW LEIGH MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR TREASURY  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR CHARITIES  MEMBER FOR FENNER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2SM WITH MARCUS PAUL IN THE MORNING  TUESDAY, 19 JANUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Companies using JobKeeper to pay out executive bonuses;  Companies repaying JobKeeper payments after reporting profits; Deloitte  Business Outlook; the risks of cutting support payments too soon;  Federal election.

MARCUS PAUL, HOST: It's time to catch up with Andrew Leigh MP. Good  morning, Andrew. How are you, mate?

ANDREW LEIGH, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR TREASURY AND  CHARITIES: Great, Marcus, how are you?

PAUL: Okay. BonusKeeper - that's what you dubbed JobKeeper. You and I  went through the detail at length on the program late last year. A number of  Australian businesses that were still doing quite well were paying executive  bonuses and also making quite a handy profit while receiving JobKeeper. Now  we learned that there's a handful of Australian companies pledging to return  some of the money.

LEIGH: It's terrific, Marcus. Toyota Australia is one of those who've given the  money back. They've given $18 million in JobKeeper payments back to the  taxpayer and their CEO, Matthew Callachor, said that it was ‘the right thing to  do as a responsible corporate citizen’. And then yesterday, we had Super Retail  Group - which owns Rebel, Supercheap Auto and BCF - saying much the same,  plenty of good sales. They decided that they didn't need the taxpayer money  and so they're giving $1.7 million back to the taxpayer. I really think those two  firms are really going to go up in their public standing. They show that their  corporate ethics are in line with most Australians. If you're doing well, you don't  need taxpayer handouts.



PAUL: No, you don't, and congratulations to them. And also congratulations to  you, Andrew, because you and I but you in particular have been on about this  for quite some time. You've brought pressure to bear where it's needed,  because you're saving Australian taxpayers dollars.

LEIGH: Absolutely, Marcus, and this is a time in which government budgets are  tight. We know that the government is looking at phasing out JobKeeper even  before the recovery takes hold. The Deloitte figures that were out yesterday  show pretty weak wages growth for years, unemployment not returning to pre  pandemic levels for a number of years. And so it's quite clear that there are  people that are going to be struggling - the million out of work, the million who'd  like to have more hours. And the JobSeeker payment is scheduled to fall again,  and that's going to make it very tough for many of those people who are just  struggling to get by and pay rent and pay the bills. At a time like that, we  shouldn't be giving many millions of dollars to firms whose profits in 2020 were  better than their profits in 2019.

PAUL: Well, the other concern of course, and we'll speak a little bit more about  it this morning on the program with NCOSS - they're suggesting that a rise in  child protection notifications during the COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the  need for a stronger focus on mental health, family violence and housing and  homelessness. Now, that's the New South Wales Council of Social Service.  They've produced some data here from the Australian Institute of Health and  Welfare that shows that child protection notifications fell during COVID-19 and  rose again once they were lifted. What their main concerns are is that a number,  in fact nearly 30,000 more children could be at risk of neglect across New South  Wales due to increased unemployment. And also, of course, there'll be some  distress, whether it's mental distress or certainly distress that's caused by  financial strain. I suppose we could call it financial distress. What they're  suggesting is that more than 9,000 more people in New South Wales are at risk  of becoming homeless once JobKeeper and JobSeeker payments cease to  exist.

LEIGH: It's interesting, Marcus, because we often don't think about the impact  of a recession on kids. But of course, anything that affects the financial stability  of a household or causes adults to lose their job flows onto kids. And then  you've got the school closures on top of that, some of the uncertainty over  unstable housing. We know that there's family violence - reports of that going up  as well. And so we really do need to make sure there's enough resources for  those extraordinary frontline workers that are out there helping families who are  in these really awful conditions.

PAUL: When's Parliament back, Andrew?





LEIGH: Parliament's back in the beginning of February, Marcus, and we'll be  pushing strongly for some of the other firms to step up and do the sort of thing  that Super Retail Group and Toyota have done. I'm thinking particularly of  Premier Investments, which operates Smiggle and Dotti, Portmans and Just  Jeans. They’re a firm that's gotten many millions of dollars of JobKeeper.  They've paid their CEO a bonus, they paid their billionaire shareholder a good  dividend, and yet they're refusing to pay money back to the taxpayer - despite  enjoying a very big increase in profits.

PAUL: Alright. Well, keep the pressure up on them.

LEIGH: Absolutely.

PAUL: On another aside, some news yesterday. It came from one of the union  heavyweights who's pushing for Tanya Plibersek perhaps to replace Anthony  Albanese as Labor leader. I don't know whether you will buy into any of this or  not, but are there some concerns within the rank and file of Labor that Albo  mightn’t be able to get you across the line if ScoMo pulls an early election this  year?

LEIGH: No, none at all. You've had many conversations with Anthony, you  know how passionately committed he is to making sure that we have a recovery  which takes us back to a better place than we were before the pandemic.  Anthony sets the standards much higher than Scott Morrison in wanting a  recovery which will make sure that we get strong wage growth, that we have an  economy which is dealing with dangerous climate change, and in which no  one's left behind and no one's held back. That's his passion. Of course, it's  tough to be an opposition leader in these times. We see that around the world.  But I think he's doing a terrific job.

PAUL: Alright, mate. Good to chat. We'll catch up next week. Thank you,  Andrew.

LEIGH: Great. Thanks, Marcus.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHANIE ANDERSON 0431 344 056









