



Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, Sydney.





THE HON PAUL FLETCHER MP  Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts

MEDIA RELEASE

15 January 2021

Funding flows for touring Australian Arts performers

The Morrison Government will support 30 arts tours across Australia during 2021, providing a major  boost to artists and audiences, particularly in remote and regional communities.

The Government will invest more than $3.6 million through the latest rounds of two touring programs:   Playing Australia: Regional Performing Arts Touring Fund and the Contemporary Music Touring  Program.

The programs will fund 30 projects in this round, to support tours spanning contemporary music,  theatre, and dance to 268 unique locations nationally, with a focus on performances in regional and  remote communities across Australia.

Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, the Hon Paul Fletcher MP,  said the grants highlight the Government’s commitment to supporting the growth of a national arts  sector accessible to all Australians.

“Live performance and touring are vital to the ongoing sustainability and vibrancy of Australian arts,”  Minister Fletcher said.

“The projects supported in this latest funding round will provide new opportunities for contemporary  musicians and performers to resume performing and touring as we emerge from COVID-19, and will  allow them to engage with audiences across Australia.”

One of the largest grant recipients is the Bangarra Dance Theatre Company, which received almost  $500,000 in funding.

Bangarra is an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander organisation and one of Australia’s leading  performing arts companies. With the Government’s support, Bangarra will tour their work ‘SandSong’  to eight venues in regional WA and NT.

“Bangarra has been captivating audiences for 31 years, and now our regional and remote communities  will have an opportunity to experience authentic Indigenous stories through world-class dance theatre,”  Minister Fletcher said.

The Australian Government is committed to supporting the Australia Council to deliver strong  outcomes for a vibrant arts sector. The Council continues to receive significant funding of around  $214.9 million in 2020-21 to support Australian artists and arts organisations.

To further support a sustainable and vibrant arts and creative sector across regional and remote

Australia, the Government has also announced almost $400,000 to support a series of six national  strategic projects under the Regional Arts Fund. The projects will be delivered by Regional Arts  Australia in 2021 and include a regional arts fellowship program, and sector wellbeing and online  studio programs supporting the regional arts network. The Regional Arts Fund received an extra $10  million last year due to COVID-19, on top of standard funding of about $3.5 million.

“Our investment in the long-term development and sustainability of the regional arts network, arts  organisations and arts workers is crucial for the recovery of our cultural and creative sectors and  communities,” Minister Fletcher said.

For the full list of successful recipients, and for information on when the next grant round closes, visit  the Australia Council website.

For more information about the Regional Arts Fund visit: www.arts.gov.au/funding-and-support/regional-arts-fund.

Media contact:  Christine Vanden Byllaardt | 0409 433 357 | christine.vandenbyllaardt@communications.gov.au

