

ANDREW LEIGH MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR TREASURY  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR CHARITIES  MEMBER FOR FENNER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC NEWSRADIO  THURSDAY, 28 JANUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Labor calling for an inquiry into the JobKeeper scheme;  Companies using JobKeeper to pay out executive bonuses; Companies  repaying JobKeeper payments after reporting huge profits; Climate  change.

THOMAS ORITI, HOST: As Australia's economy recovers from the initial blow  of the pandemic and we approach these final weeks of the JobKeeper wage  subsidy, there are calls for large companies that recorded profits to return  government funds. Mining Company Iluka resources has joined carmaker  Toyota and the Super Retail Group in voluntarily returning millions of dollars in  JobKeeper payments after a surprisingly profitable year. So that begs the  question, I mean, are there other companies that have profited from the wage  subsidy and should they be forced to pay it back? Andrew Leigh is a federal  Labor MP and the Shadow Assistant Minister for Treasury and he joins us live  now. Morning, Andrew. Thanks for your time.

ANDREW LEIGH, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR TREASURY AND  CHARITIES: Good morning. Great to be with you.

ORITI: Are you surprised that companies are volunteering to pay back millions  of dollars to the government?

LEIGH: Not at all. Every large company says it's committed to corporate social  responsibility, and this is simply the expression of that sentiment. If you've  claimed JobKeeper thinking that your profits are going to be down and in fact  they turn out to be up, then the right thing to do is to say to the taxpayer ‘we  don't need government handouts, we've done well and here's the money back’ -  in order to support people in the tourism sector, university sector, the arts

sector, to support casuals, to support the million people who are out of work or  the other million people who'd like more hours. There are people out there doing  it tough and good corporates recognise that if they're not among them, they  should hand the government subsidies back.

ORITI: Indeed, indeed. That’s in an ideal world, though. These are just the ones  we know about. How many more companies do you think are out there in a  similar position?

LEIGH: Unfortunately we don't know this, and that's because the government's  kept the information secret. In New Zealand, there’s a public register which lists  all of the firms that have received their equivalent of JobKeeper. In Australia, the  government's refused to disclose that information to the COVID Committee,  which is why I've written to Treasurer Josh Frydenberg asking for the House  Economics Committee to be empowered to conduct an inquiry into JobKeeper  and to get to the bottom of how many firms saw increased profits in 2020  despite receiving JobKeeper.

ORITI: Okay, but an inquiry of all these companies, though - I mean, wouldn't  that take a lot of time and effort? I mean, would it really be worth it?

LEIGH: The information’s at the fingertips of the Tax Office. They simply need  to disclose it to the Australian people. The thing about JobKeeper is the  eligibility required was simply a brief downturn. Many firms that shut their doors  in March of last year received JobKeeper. But then after they reopened their  stores, they saw a profit boom and in the case of say Premier Investments -  which owns Portmans, Just Jeans and Smiggle - they saw their best profit year  ever in 2020. They’re a firm that was doing so well, they could afford to pay their  CEO a $2.5 million bonus, doing so well that they paid out a significant dividend  - a chunk of which went to their largest billionaire shareholder, Solomon Lew.  And yet they won’t return to the taxpayer the JobKeeper subsidies they received  which they clearly didn't need. We know about Premier, but we don't know  about many other firms and it's important to get to the bottom of it because  JobKeeper is the largest and most effective program in keeping people in work.

ORITI: The government maintains though there is no legal requirement to return  the funds. I mean, should there be?

LEIGH: There’s no legal requirement, simply a call for good corporate ethics.  But these firms all say that they’re committed to good corporate social  responsibility. And if they are, then they should do the right thing. Now corporate  social responsibility isn't just about greenwashing or making some donations to  charity at the end of the tax year. It's fundamentally about doing the right thing,  and not just by your shareholders, but by your customers, by your workers and

by the Australian community. That's what it is to be a good firm in the modern  age. This whole idea that firms are only for the shareholders, that went out the  window with the Gordon Gekko era of the 1980s. That's an old-fashioned view  of corporations.

ORITI: Okay, Andrew Leigh, I've got to ask you about another issue making  news this morning. The Leader of the Opposition Anthony Albanese will  reshuffle the Shadow Cabinet on the weekend. It's been reported he'll remove  Mark Butler from the climate change portfolio amid some factional rifts. I mean,  will the Cabinet reshuffle see Labor move to the left or to the right?

LEIGH: It'll see Labor still holding the centrist position on climate change that  we've held for the past decade. In fact is that climate is really a problem of the  Coalition’s, where they’ve failed to move with the rest of the world. Seventy  other nations have now signed up to net zero emissions by 2050, the Biden  administration signing on, the Chinese saying they'll be there by 2060. The  Coalition's incredibly out of step on this. Whether it’s Chris Bowen, Mark Butler  or someone else, I think they’ll do an excellent job.

ORITI: Indeed. It is important to note it has been widely speculated will be Chris  Bowen, he's a member of the right faction. I mean, what should we read into  that?

LEIGH: The thing is, you just don't see big differences between left and right on  climate change, Thomas. I've been following the debate very closely obviously  as a member of federal parliament since 2010. The big differences in the  parliament are not between the factions of the Labor Party. They’re between the  recalcitrants in the Coalition, who are dragging behind not just Labor, but behind  the rest of the world-

ORITI: Mark Butler though, he wanted to maintain short term targets to cut  carbon emissions. Are you saying that that's not going to change if there's going  to be a cabinet shift?

LEIGH: We'll work out precisely what our medium term targets are going to be  as we get to the election. The fact is-

ORITI: Surely Labor’s got a policy position on reducing emissions now.

LEIGH: Absolutely. We want to get to net zero by 2050. To the last election, we  took a series of policies which would not have hurt the coal industry but would  have done significant amounts to reduce Australia's carbon footprint. We are  more affected by dangerous climate change than any other advanced country,  so we have a much stronger interest in acting fast on this. I just don't know why

the tinfoil hat brigade and the knuckle draggers in the Coalition have been  allowed to hold Australia back from serious climate action. And whoever holds  the portfolio in Labor, they will continue the policies we have pursued of moving  with the rest of the world to act on dangerous climate change.

ORITI: Mark Butler is not new to the portfolio though. So I'm trying to get my  head around what the motive would be in changing that now ahead of the next  election, if there's no change in the policy platforms and factional disputes have  nothing to do with it.

LEIGH: It’s a matter entirely for the leader on this and he'll be making his  announcement this weekend and making some preliminary comments in about  10 minutes when he stands up for a press conference. But the fact is Mark  Butler's done a fabulous job in the portfolio since 2013. People do periodically  move around different portfolios. Anthony Albanese himself held this portfolio  when we were in the opposition for time. So it's perfectly normal for people to  move around different roles. But your listeners can be assured of one thing,  which is that Labor’s strong commitment to action on climate change will  continue whoever is in that portfolio.

ORITI: Bill Shorten, the former Labor leader, criticised the party's policies or in  his view lack thereof recently. I mean, do you think this has the makings of a  leadership spill or are you confident that Anthony Albanese will lead the party to  the next election?

LEIGH: I think that's been oversold. I've seen what Bill has been saying there  and his commitment is to having a commitment to strong policies and to making  sure that we're in there in the ideas debate. That's a tradition that goes right  back through Labor. It’s a tradition that Anthony Albanese, Bill Shorten and the  rest of the Labor team are committed to. Politics isn’t Coke and Pepsi. Labor  has a special role in Australian politics as the generator of ideas, and we will  continue to play that role in this term of government as we did in the previous  term of government. Australia's wage subsidy scheme is there in large part  because of Labor's strong advocacy for it, along with that of many in the  community sector. We had a banking royal commission as a result of Labor’s  strong advocacy and the reforms that flow from that are a direct result of Labor's  commitment to better policy in that space. So that'll continue whoever's in which  roles following the cabinet shuffle.

ORITI: Okay. I like the Coke and Pepsi analogy there. Andrew Leigh, thank you  very much for your time this morning.

LEIGH: Always a pleasure, thanks Thomas.



ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHANIE ANDERSON 0431 344 056





