

NITA GREEN

SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC FAR NORTH

FRIDAY, 29 JANUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Senate hearing into aviation sector; Jobs, Far North Queensland tourism

sector; JobKeeper.



KIER SHOREY, HOST: Okay, the aviation industry. That’s what we are going to talk about

right now. There is a committee hearing happening in Brisbane today that brings together

Senators with a chance to speak to people from Jetstar, Virgin, Qantas etc to try and

understand the implications for Far North Queensland and what challenges to the aviation

sector are leading to the job losses that are happening, what the future is and if there is a plan.

A short while ago I spoke to Senator Nita Green.



NITA GREEN, SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND: Today we are having a Senate hearing in

Brisbane and I’m actually really pleased the Senate hearing is coming to Brisbane. It is

something I asked for because I know that Queensland really is the epicentre of this

discussion about tourism and the aviation sector. We’ll be hearing from the new Virgin CEO

and unions and also some airports are coming along and we have got the Queensland

Tourism Council coming. So what the hearing is about is how the aviation sector is faring

because of COVID and what the future of the sector will be like. But as you and I know Kier -

the tourism industry is so closely linked to the success of aviation that I’ve got some really

important questions to put to witnesses today.



SHOREY: What will those questions be Senator?



GREEN: I’ll certainly be asking about the future of JobKeeper. It is something everyone is

talking about in Cairns. It is not getting as much coverage in other places in the country, but we

know the future of JobKeeper needs to be answered by Scott Morrison and the Federal

Government. I’ll be asking industry experts whether they think there should be an extension of

JobKeeper and what they would like to see in place of JobKeeper if it’s not extended. I know

from the submissions they have already made that they are very much calling for the Federal

Government to come up with some sort of support package until international tourism can get

back online.



SHOREY: Do you have a sense of what the impact has been here in Far North Queensland? I

know there have certainly been some ground staff job losses. Even my next door neighbour is

in that situation.



GREEN: Yeah, we have seen job losses from Jetstar particularly. We know they were running

international routes out of the Cairns International Airport, but we have also seen some ground

staff who have lost their jobs. It is really disappointing to see that happen. We know that there

is a real balance between making decisions that companies need to make during COVID to get

through the crisis - and then questions about whether the company is actually taking

advantage of the COVID crisis to outsource jobs. The ground staff in Cairns that have been let

go by Qantas, they are actually going to be outsourced. So that is something we will be putting

to some of the witnesses today. What are their plans for jobs in the future? Do they think they

will be able to go back? And I’ll particularly be asking Virgin what their plans are around routes

to Cairns. We know we need planes to come to Cairns to bring tourists and what is their plan

to bring more flights and more people back into Cairns?



SHOREY: And Senator also the Federal Government has had a support program that has

been working for regional airlines. My understanding is that expires late in March? Will you be

asking about whether that can continue?



GREEN: Yes, that expiry date was moved a few weeks back, so it will sort of fall off the cliff at

the same time as JobKeeper and some of the witnesses have already expressed their concern

about that happening. We know that in a regional place like Cairns we are connected to other

airports. Places like Mount Isa, Longreach and all the way through Western Queensland are

really reliant on this support to get flights to our regional ports. So we need to understand what



the plan is around that future support. Interestingly what’s happening is some of the airlines

have been compensated or given a bit of support to get those flights happening - but the

airports themselves have not been given the same level of support. So even though you might

have one flight a day flying into your airport, you need to keep the airport open, you need to

staff it, you need to have security on. So the adequacy of these supports is definitely under

question, and quite frankly I have been frustrated to hear Scott Morrison try to dodge and

weave this question in the last couple of weeks. We will be doing media today in front of the

inquiry and calling for more certainty for these businesses.



SHOREY: And do you mind if we catch up early next week to see how it all went?



GREEN: We are heading back to Parliament next week so we will have heaps to talk about

Kier. I would love to come back on your show and talk about what’s going on in Canberra, and

I will make sure everyone else is getting this message down in Canberra as well.



SHOREY: Senator Green, thanks for your time.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JACOB WILSON 0457 961 596



