TRANSCRIPT

Wednesday, 07 March 2021

Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment Dan Tehan interview with Hamish MacDonald, RN  Breakfast

SUBJECTS: NZ travel bubble, vaccines

Hamish MacDonald: Airline passengers are being warned, but there's an element of flyer beware  with the long awaited New Zealand travel bubble. Airlines are shouldering hundreds of extra  scheduling- rather hundreds of extra flights to accommodate the expected demand for seats from  April 19, when Australians will be able to fly across the Tasman quarantine free. But the travel  corridor could be suspended at very short notice in the event of a COVID outbreak, leaving travellers  stranded overseas.

Dan Tehan is the Minister for Trade and Tourism. Good morning to you.

Dan Tehan: Morning Hamish, it’s great to be with you again.

MacDonald: There is a fair amount of uncertainty in all of this. If you had a few days off, would you  be going to New Zealand? You couldn't guarantee that you'd get back, could you?

Tehan: Hamish, I'd love to be going to New Zealand but, more importantly, as Australia's Tourism  Minister, I want as many New Zealanders to come here to Australia. There is 1.4 million New  Zealanders that usually visit Australia each year, and they spend $1.6 billion. Now, we know that our  Kiwi cousins have got nowhere else to go, so I'm hoping we can build on that 1.4 million and, in  particular, build on that $1.6 billion that they spend each year, because that’d be great for jobs here.

MacDonald: Yeah, there's no doubt about the tourism upside. There is just a question about the  practicalities of this. With border closures within Australia all the time, clearly that's going to impact  what might be possible between Australia and New Zealand. You'd be aware that for many  Australians just booking a ticket to go there and vice versa might be too risky currently.

Tehan: Well, what we've seen here in Australia through our discount airfares is confidence return to  our travel industry. We saw one airline, in particular, have record bookings in its history in a 24-hour  period. So, I think, we are starting to see confidence return and, I think, this will be another step in  that confidence boost for Australians to know that they can travel. But, as importantly, you've got to  remember that our medical experts here in Australia, the AHPPC, and their counterparts in New  Zealand are meeting regularly — almost once a week as I understand it — and so the decision to  open this bubble is not one that hasn't been taken without proper medical expert advice as well.  Now, our hope is-

MacDonald: [Interrupts] But what happens if you go to New Zealand, though, and there's a small,  isolated outbreak? Do you then have to quarantine on your way back? Just- Can you be clear with us  about what the rules will be?

Tehan: Well, obviously, like with everything, it would depend on the severity of the outbreak, and it  would — and ultimately, in the end, we would have to take the advice of the medical experts as to  what they think needs to be done to make sure that we don't get a spread of COVID-19 that would  then ultimately hurt not only the health situation here in Australia, but our- the economy as well. So  we would take the expert medical advice on that.

But what we've seen just here domestically in Australia over recent weeks, and especially now we've  got the vaccine being rolled out, is that states and territories, more and more, are understanding  that they should use border closures, in particular, as a last resort and trust the contact tracing and  the testing regimes that are in place.

MacDonald: But- So that-

Tehan: And that's very much the situation that New Zealand is taking at the moment as well.

But we're in a pandemic. Can we ever guarantee that we won't need to make some decisions to  protect the health both of Australians and, in New Zealand's case, New Zealanders? No, we can't.  But I think what we can do is very much have a look at what's occurring currently here in Australia  domestically, and we're seeing more and more confidence coming back for people's ability to be  able to travel and that's why we've got this two-way bubble going and, I think, people can have  confidence to book and enjoy a holiday, if you’re a New Zealander here in Australia, and if you're  Australian in New Zealand.

MacDonald: But, given that it is about confidence, just so we all understand, is it up to the Federal  Government to decide what happens if there's a small, isolated outbreak in New Zealand? Or is it the  states that will decide whether you can come back?

Tehan: Well, ultimately, in the end it's the- it would be the medical expert panel, the AHPPC and, as  you know, that is made up of representatives from state and territory governments and the  Commonwealth Government — so, it would be that medical expert panel which would give the  advice to governments, and obviously the chief medical officers from each state and territory who  sit on that on that panel give the advice to state and territory governments. So-

MacDonald: So there'd be one national rule. If there's an outbreak in Auckland and you're over  there, there'd be a Federal Government decision would there, about whether you have to  quarantine on return? Or the state health authorities would be making those decisions? I’m just  trying to really understand what the risks are for people.

Tehan: No, that's good, Hamish and it's very good to be able to provide people with the details as to  how it works. So we have an organisation called the AHPPC here in Australia, and it has the  Australian Chief Medical Officer on it and it has the state and territory chief medical officers that sit  on it as well, and they come together and they then decide what measures need to be put in place if  there is, if there is an outbreak.

Now, obviously, also those chief medical officers from state and territory governments, not only do  they have input into what we do at the national level through the AHPPC but they individually also  provide advice to state and territory governments. So, what you would get is the AHPPC would make  a decision as to what we should do nationally, but the chief medical officers at the state and  territory level would also advise their state and territory governments as to whether there would  need to be additional measures, or whether they might take additional steps, that they would deem  necessary for their state or their territory and that might depend on the number of flights that are  coming in from that location, say, from Auckland into Melbourne, as an example. So, they might  decide whether they might need to put further steps in place.

MacDonald: Okay.

Tehan: So, that’s - you know, what I think, you know, I’d be saying to Australians is in a short way, of  having sort of detailed that process — is you should have a lot of confidence in how we have

reached the decision to have this bubble. And also, what you should look at as well is that the  Australian Government is now going to spend $3 million in a tourism advertising campaign in New  Zealand, which will start later this week to encourage 1.4 million New Zealanders or more to come  here and spend, hopefully, more than $1.6 billion to help support the 600,000 jobs we have here in  our tourism industry.

MacDonald: We'll look forward to seeing them. I need to ask you about the vaccine and the claim  that the Prime Minister has been making about three million doses of the vaccine being blocked by  Europe. Is that true?

Tehan: What we have seen is that the EU has put in export control measures to prevent vaccines  being exported from the European Union to countries, and that has stopped or prevented  AstraZeneca, for instance, in putting in applications to be able to send the vaccine here to Australia.  Now-

MacDonald: [Interrupts] So, that's slightly different, though. It doesn't mean that Europe has actually  blocked three million doses from coming to Australia, does it?

Tehan: Well, what it, what it means is that they have said that if AstraZeneca puts in applications to  export to Australia, or to other countries, that they will be restricted from being able to do this.  Now, the really important thing about what [indistinct]-

MacDonald: [Interrupts] So, just so our listeners understand. Those applications have not gone? And  Australia has not requested three million doses that haven't been- that have been then blocked by  Europe?

Tehan: Well, we had contracted three million doses with AstraZeneca and if the export controls  hadn't been put in place in Europe then AstraZeneca would have been able to, as I'm advised, be  able to meet those vaccines that they had contracted with the Australian Government to provide to  us. Now, as a result of the export controls being put in place they haven't been able to do it. Now,  the really welcome news here-

MacDonald: [Interrupts] But, this is not the reason though that- this is not the reason though for the  slow roll out in Australia, is it? Because there are currently 2.5 million doses in CSL’s cold storage  awaiting batch testing by the TGA in Australia right now?

Tehan: So, the plan that the Australian Government put in place was, while we were ramping up our  domestic production — and one of the most important decisions that was taken by the Government  last year was to put in place our own domestic production because we always had in the back of  mind concerns about what would happen if there were restrictions on supply from overseas, but  we’ve stood that up. And in- what we also planned to do was, while we were standing that up and  ramping it up, we would contract vaccines from overseas to fill the gap while we're doing that. Now,  obviously-

MacDonald: [Interrupts] I think everyone’s aware of that. I'm just wondering why the Federal  Government doesn't accept that there are some problems with the roll out? Given that these  excuses about Europe blocking the vaccine, clearly, are not the reason why it's not getting out to GP  clinics, it’s not in shopping centres or sports stadiums. I mean, these are decisions that have been  made by the Australian Government.

Tehan: Well, obviously, if we had three mill- over three million doses here from overseas we would  be able to roll those out right across Australia and work cooperatively with the states and territories,

to be able to make sure that that is occurring but those vaccines didn't arrive. But, the really  welcome news, and I hope this is what we're hearing from the European Union overnight, is that  they're no longer going to have these export controls in place so, for instance, the one million doses  of the vaccine that we have put in a request to go to PNG, where it’s much needed — my hope is  now, what we're going to hear from the EU is that they accept that request and those vaccines are  on their, on their on their way. We still haven't heard from them, but my hope is-

MacDonald: [Interrupts] When will the 2.5 million that are in Australia already, in CSL’s cold storage,  when will they be rolled out?

Tehan: Well, that's being ramped up as we speak and we- our anticipation is that what we will be  seeing, sooner rather than later, is nearly a million doses a week being produced by CSL that can be  rolled out. But we always knew that it would take time to ramp up the vaccine making here in  Australia and that is why we went overseas and we had contracted with AstraZeneca and with Pfizer  for those-

MacDonald: [Interrupts] I can’t hear the answer as to when, I can’t hear the answer as to when  they’ll be rolled out in Australia? These doses that are here already, waiting for TGA approval?

Tehan: Well, well, they're being rolled out as we speak, and the TGA is approving them as we speak.  But, you've got to remember, Hamish, one of the things that- the key responsibilities of Government  is to keep Australians safe and that means, as we roll the vaccine out here, we've got to make sure  that we are going through all the proper procedures, that we're going through the processes that  the TGA put in place so that we know that the vaccine that is being distributed here in Australia is  safe for Australians — and we will continue to do that, and we will not shy away from that  responsibility of making sure that as we roll this vaccine out, that it’s got all the proper approvals  and has been through all the proper safety tests that are required to ensure that the vaccine not  only protects people from the virus, but we know that it is, it is being- what is being administered is  safe for Australians.

MacDonald: Dan Tehan, really appreciate your time this morning. Thank you very much.

Tehan: Pleasure Hamish. Thank you.

MacDonald: That’s the Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment.

