

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT HOUSE, ACT  TUESDAY 16 FEBRUARY 2021



EO&E…

PRIME MINISTER: Thank you, everyone. I am joined by the Minister for Health and Aged Care Greg Hunt  and Professor Skerritt, who heads up the Therapeutic Goods Administration. I said several weeks ago at  the Press Club that our top priority this year was to roll out the vaccination programme here in Australia.  This is an enormous exercise. There has been meticulous planning undertaken for an extensive period of  time to make sure we get this right, so Australians can have absolute confidence in the programme that's  being rolled out here in Australia. The vaccination programme is critical to our ongoing management of  the COVID-19 pandemic. And the vaccines that we have, they address the critical issue of serious disease  and indeed, the risk of fatality that can arise from COVID-19 and increasingly we're seeing positive signs  about its impact on transmissibility as well. This is an enormous exercise that requires many steps. The  planning of the strategy, the securing of the vaccines, going through the important approvals process  which can give Australians confidence. I said this morning when we take our children to be vaccinated, it's  Professor Skerritt who says that vaccine is safe for your children to take. This is the same Professor Skerritt  who is telling you when it comes to these vaccines that they’re safe to take and it's in your interests and  in the public health interest of the nation.

That's why I'm pleased to say today that the Therapeutic Goods Administration has today approved the  AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine for use in Australia following a full and thorough assessment process. The  vaccine has met requirements for standards, for safety, quality, and efficacy, and will be provided free to  Australians and it means that Australia now has two safe and effective COVID-19 vaccines available. Initial  supply into Australia will be imported from overseas. In the coming months, the AstraZeneca vaccine will  be manufactured here in Australia, as the Minister for Health and Aged Care and I visited the facility in  Melbourne just last Friday. And that will mean Australia is one of the few countries in the world that can  manufacture its own COVID-19 vaccine here by CSL.

Our vaccination programme is on track. Our vaccination programme has the backing of Australia's best  medical experts and that means that we can proceed along the path that we have set out and I look  forward to working with all the states and territories and medical health professionals across the country,  those involved in the logistics supply chain, to ensure we can get this out right across the country and it's  going to make a huge difference to how we live here in Australia this year, and in the years ahead.

I will pass you to the Minister for Health.

THE HON. GREG HUNT, MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGED CARE: Thank you very much, Prime Minister  and Professor Skerritt. AstraZeneca is cleared for lift-off. What I can say is that the TGA has approved the  AstraZeneca vaccine for use in Australia on the basis of all ages and a second dose at 12 weeks. They have  taken the best advice from around the world. They have also had the opportunity to examine the advice  and real world evidence gathered from the emergency use provisions in other countries. In particular, the  Lancet Journal said very recently in an article published on 3 February 2021, ‘COVID-19 vaccine  AstraZeneca confirms 100 percent protection against severe disease, hospitalisation, and death in the  primary analysis of phase three trials.’ That's the Lancet. And then overnight, the World Health  Organisation in its statement for authorisation of use noted that the AstraZeneca vaccine was shown in  clinical trials to be safe and effective in preventing symptomatic COVID-19 with no severe cases and no  hospitalisations, more than 14 days after the second dose. Now, the world will obviously continue to  gather evidence on safety and efficacy, but from the Lancet journal, from the clinical trials, from the World  Health Organisation, the strongest possible advice. Our Australian officials have taken advice from the  United Kingdom.

What that means is that the vaccine rollout is on track. Yesterday we mentioned the Pfizer vaccine, I can  confirm today we're expecting at least 240 aged care facilities to be included in the vaccine programme  next week. That's a very important step forward in protecting our older Australians. The AstraZeneca  vaccine, on current advice, we hope and expect that it should be able to commence subject to shipping  confirmation, which we can now proceed to, in early March, if not earlier. In early March if not earlier.  And then, of course, we move to an increase in total numbers with the CSL Australian-made AstraZeneca  vaccine due subject to TGA approval to commence in late March at one million doses per week to be made  available. So that programme will help keep Australians safe.

Then finally I would note that around Australia, we have seen two new cases of community transmission,  both within Victoria, both already on the advice I have, within isolation. Seven states and territories with  zero cases and a total of 55,000 tests around the country at a time when we know that there were 374,000  cases and 8,200 lives lost around the world. So our containment is strong. But we always have to remain  vigilant. The vaccine rollout is on track and today's another important milestone. I particularly, thank John,  before asking you to speak, want to thank you and all of the team at the TGA that have worked  extraordinary hours to tick every box, to assess everything, to make sure that safety, safety, safety, is the  number one priority. They and our medical professionals and all the companies involved have worked  literally around the clock for a long, long period. Thank you.

PROFESSOR JOHN SKERRITT, HEAD OF THE THERAPEUTIC GOODS ADMINISTRATION: Thank you, Prime  Minister, and Minister for supporting the work and the announcement. So this is the second vaccine that  we have approved for COVID-19. We are also the second, only the second regulator in the world after the  European Medicines Agency, with whom we work very closely. We have a preferential, long-standing  collaboration and relationship, and it's been strengthened under COVID times. But we're the second  medical regulator to have actually done a full conditional approval of the vaccine. There's a number of  other countries such as the UK, you're familiar with, Brazil, and so forth, who have authorised this vaccine  in emergency authorisation.

As the Minister said, just overnight, the World Health Organisation confirmed its support for an  emergency use listing for this vaccine. They also confirmed a couple of things I want to tackle head on,  because I know they've been the subject of some discussion, both in the medical fraternity and the media.

The first relates to age. And our approval of this vaccine does not have an upper age limit. While the data  for this vaccine in older groups is limited, and that goes back to the original design of the trials, where  AstraZeneca targeted their initial trials towards health care workers, who obviously are of working age  and usually under 65, and only included older people later on. But our analysis of the data gives us no  reason to suspect that the vaccine would not be fully efficacious in older groups. Secondly, the experience  in the UK, in the rollout, and we've got to remember they have been vaccinating with the AstraZeneca  vaccine now for more than a month, and their experience is also of very good results obtained with both  of the major vaccines in older groups. And of course, their rollout has been targeted, not only towards  front-line health workers, but towards those in what the British call care homes. So there is real world  evidence of the vaccine going well in older groups, and also there's evidence from blood tests looking at  the response of the immune system to these vaccines, which again shows a strong immune response in  people over 60, people over 65, and so forth. Yes, more data on a lot of things will emerge as months and  weeks and years go by, including the duration, how long these vaccines actually provide protection for.  But on the balance of the evidence, we have no reason and we felt there was no reason to limit its use to  particular age groups.

The second thing I want to tackle head on is efficacy, because a lot has been said about this vaccine. As  the Minister said, a recent study just published a couple of weeks ago in Lancet, one of the world's top  medical journals, showed from a more detailed analysis of trials, because as time goes on, you have more  people who may or may not get COVID from these trials, more people whose data can be assessed for  safety and performance of these vaccines. And it showed 100 percent efficacy against severe disease,  illness and death. More importantly, it showed that when there was a 12-week interval between doses,  and this is what ATAGI, the advisory group has recommended, there's 82 percent at least protection from  those groups. And what is important with that 12-week interval is it seems if you leave it more and more  weeks, that you do get greater protection. And frankly, there's not a difference when you go into the real  world whether something is 82 percent or 90 percent. So I would emphasise that a lot of the discussion  on numbers is not particularly relevant. What is important is to get vaccines into people's arms.  AstraZeneca gives us a vaccine that can be used not only in major facilities, but also in primary care  through GPs and potentially through pharmacy practices. And having a vaccine accessible in a country as  wide and brown as ours is absolutely important. All this information has now been published. If you go to  the TGA website as well as the main Health Department website you will see that information.

Finally, I will mention a little bit about pregnancy and vaccines. As a group of international regulators, this  is something that's obviously keeping a lot of us thinking. Now, like many clinical trials, vaccines are not  tested in pregnant individuals, whether it's a new medicine or a new vaccine. Generally, if you're known  to be pregnant, you can't volunteer for a clinical trial. It's just a safety measure, a precautionary measure.  However, there were a number of people who didn't know they were pregnant or became pregnant  during the trials, and there haven't been reports of adverse outcomes. The other thing that regulators  worldwide are doing is recognising, especially in countries like the UK, US and Europe, some of the  hospitals cannot afford to take their pregnant nurses and doctors off the front-line, when we're in a crisis  situation with a sheer number of cases. So many of those people have exercised personal choice by being  vaccinated. They're being closely followed on a register. Obviously, those babies are yet to be born and  so forth, again, there's no evidence of anything untoward such as miscarriage or illness during pregnancy.  But as the weeks and months go on, we'll know a lot more about pregnancy with these vaccines. The aim,  of course, is as time goes on we'll know more about the vaccines in all the groups in the community,  including children.

I’d also just like to close by saying that each of the major vaccine companies has now commenced studies  in adolescents or in some cases in children as young as six. Thanks very much.

PRIME MINISTER: Thank you, Professor Skerritt, and thank you again to you and everyone at the TGA for  the extraordinary job they have done for their country over these many, many months. I seek your co-operation as usual, because we have Professor Skerrit with us, why don't we focus on the vaccine and the  announcement first? I'm sure there's other issues you want to raise and we can address those then. So on  the vaccine. David?

JOURNALIST: On the science, and possibly Professor Skerritt could answer this one too, but you  mentioned that there was a stronger efficacy with the 12-week delay between the first and second jabs.  I thought we were heading towards a rollout that was a 3-week gap. Is that changing, what is going to be  the approach on the gap?

PROFESSOR SKERRITT: So the 3-week gap relates to the Pfizer vaccine. The recommendation on the gap  for the AstraZeneca vaccine is 12 weeks. That will add complication to the logistics. This is something that  the rollout team, part of our same Department of Health, we’ve been meeting just today, Brendan Murphy  and I and the others met to discuss that today. Now what we said at TGA, is you could give the second  AstraZeneca jab anywhere between 4 and 12 weeks. Because let’s say sadly if you had to start  chemotherapy in a few weeks' time, you might want to bring that jab forward. So it’s efficacious as soon  as 4 weeks after, the AstraZeneca, but the recommendation, routinely, is to leave it 12 weeks.

JOURNALIST: Professor Skerritt, the TGA information on the jab says it should be a case-by-case basis for  older people you’ve just said that there's no upper age limit. Can you explain what that means? And should  older people get the AstraZeneca vaccine?

PROFESSOR SKERRIT: So we recommend that older people should get the AstraZeneca vaccine. The  wording "case-by-case" I guess relates to a discussion of really, it comes down to what old means. I'm 61,  when I was 40, I thought that 60 was old. Now I've decided that 61 is very young. So old is always in your  mind. To be fair, what, I'm going to get into trouble now. To be fair, we were aware and there were reports  globally of deaths in Norwegian aged care facilities. Now it turned out that sadly, hundreds of people in  any state or territory die per month in aged care facilities of what we used to call old age. So the issue  about old people for any medicine or any vaccine or indeed any surgical procedure is look at what doctors  call futility. If someone only has a few weeks to live, you don't give them a hip replacement and you may  not give them a vaccine or medicine. So that's where we’re hinting at, but the vaccine is recommended  for use in all ages.

JOURNALIST: Given the 12-week gap here, does that mean reaching your goal of having everyone  vaccinated by October, you would expect every Australian to have had at least their first jab by the end  of July, and if I may Professor Skerritt, how does that gap interact with people getting the flu vaccine? Do  they have to wait until they've had both doses or could they get it in the middle?

PRIME MINISTER: I'll let Professor Skeritt deal with the second question and then Greg can deal with the  other one.

PROFESSOR SKERRITT: I'll talk with respect to the flu vaccine and again, this is an issue which has occupied  the minds of regulators worldwide. Because we're wanting to identify whether there are particular  adverse events related to the COVID vaccines, or the flu vaccines for that matter - if you give both of them

together, you don't know which one may have caused the problem. Not that we're seeing significant  problems. There's well known issues such as headache, temperature and sore arm and so forth, but  nothing that seems to be really very serious. So at the moment, it's recommended that you have your  shots 14 days or so apart. So if, for example, you're in a phase 1A group, if you're say a front-line  quarantine worker or whatever and you have your shot in the next couple of weeks, we'd recommend  them to wait a couple of weeks until they have their flu shot. But they don't have to wait until the end of  12 week or the end of both shots to have their flu shot.

THE HON. GREG HUNT MP, MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGED CARE: Just in terms of the timing, what it  means is that more Australians will have more vaccines earlier. That's a happy by-product of the decision.  It also means that we are absolutely on track, so every Australian who seeks to have the vaccine will be in  a position to have had at least the first dose. We'll look at what it means in regards to the second dose.  But frankly, it's very, very good news. It means higher efficacy. It means more Australians earlier and it  means a position where every Australian who seeks to have it will undoubtedly have had their first dose.  We will now remodel what it means in terms of the tail But I would say - it doesn't mean we're on track.  It means that we're ahead of schedule for where we intended to be.

PRIME MINISTER: One here, and then we’ll come over the other side.

THE HON. GREG HUNT MP, MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGED CARE: Can only deal with 12 weeks.

JOURNALIST: Sorry just on the AstraZeneca vaccine for over 65s. Are you breaking away from precedent  in terms of lack of data? Would this have been approved if we weren't in a pandemic?

PROFESSOR SKERRITT: No we're not really breaking away from precedent. It's perhaps not very well  known, but many vaccines are actually approved on what are known as immunological correlates. In other  words analyses of blood samples, so let’s use the seasonal flu vaccine. As many of you will know, every  year, because the flu vaccine mutates or drifts - the flu virus mutates or drifts so much, we need to bring  in a new flu vaccine. Sometimes it has four components. Sometimes one changes, in a bad year 2 or 3 or,  we’ve never had all 4 change thank god, but 2 or 3 can change. So it changes every year. Now, we simply  can’t, don't have the time to wait to a flu season happens to see people get the flu and whether the  vaccine works. And so, we use a lot of tests with blood and cell samples. And so, it's quite well established  in vaccines to look at that evidence from blood and cell samples, and it showed quite a strong immune  response in the over 65s. And so, it's very similar to what we've been doing with other viruses such as the  flu virus for a long time.

JOURNALIST: If we had either one or both of these vaccines last month or the month before like we have  seen in other nations, Melbourne would still be in lockdown, other state capitals would have gone into  lockdown, and with that in mind, was it worth it to go through the slower approval process rather than  going through the emergency approval process?

PRIME MINISTER: Look I appreciate the question. Firstly, there has been no slow approval process. This  has been, I think, the most efficient and timely process that the TGA I think has ever undertaken for any  vaccine. And they've done it in a way which has cut no corners, ensured every inquiry that they would  have undertaken in relation to a vaccine would have been undertaken. And that was the safest way to  conduct that process and to arrive where we're at today. So the option of doing something different was  not present without putting at risk the safety of the process. That is sacrosanct I think to the effectiveness  of the vaccine. And let's not forget that the significant success that Australia had over the course of last

year in comparison to other countries created the space, Australians created the space for Professor  Skeritt to be able to do the best job that they are capable of doing. And I've got to tell you - Australia's  TGA’s best is the best in the world. And so that enabled them to do that. So that was the right decision.  That was the right decision to do that and that's why we proceeded on that basis.

Phil?

JOURNALIST: I’ve just got one on IR, can I just ask about IR, that...

PRIME MINISTER: Unless there’s vaccine questions? Because I’m going to excuse Professor Skerritt.

JOURNALIST: Professor, obviously dealing with something new in terms of a multi-dose vial. What  wastage are you building into the supplies, obviously we are over supplied by raw number? And are there  any circumstances in which you can envisage a particular person getting both vaccines?

PROFESSOR SKERRITT: As you’ve mentioned, the Government has procured many more vaccines than the  whole population of Australia requires. And it may well be that we're in a position to share them with our  Pacific neighbours in the coming months once we get to a situation of vaccine rollout in full swing. In terms  of wastage - this is something that the group working on the rollout is very focused on. And I won't steal  their thunder by going into detailed strategies, but they have detailed strategies to make sure that there's  going to be enough people present and available, for example to use up the entire Pfizer vial. One of the  advantages of the AstraZeneca vial, and that's why I said earlier - it's important to remember that approval  of the AstraZeneca vaccine will really help with people getting vaccinated. Because this is a vial that can  go- if you use half a AstraZeneca vial in a GP's practice, it can go back in the fridge overnight and then it  can be used again the next day. You don't have to throw it out. So there's a lot of advantages to this  product - including less wastage.

JOURNALIST: Are there any circumstances in which someone could get both?

PROFESSOR SKERRITT: We're encouraging people and this is a consistent message globally, we're  encouraging people with your two shots to have two of the same thing. We don't have a crystal ball and  what we don't know, especially with the emergence of variants or maybe these vaccines provide two  years of protection but not life. Whether in 2022-2023 people will have to have a booster. No-one knows  that, again it’s something that we are looking at fairly closely. The immune response seems to be pretty  durable but there's only one way that we will know next year whether people have to have a booster and  that is wait until next year. It may be then that a different vaccine is ideal to use as a booster. There  actually are some trials starting in the UK and one or two other countries where they're deliberately using  two different vaccines to see how well that combination works.

JOURNALIST: Professor Skerritt, people who've already had coronavirus, will they be receiving either of  these vaccines? And Prime Minister, today, Victoria's announced it's going to be building its own  quarantine facility, which could spell the end of hotel quarantine. Given that we've just approved two  vaccines, and we're starting the rollout, is something like that necessary? And will you be providing any  federal assistance?

PRIME MINISTER: I’ll let Professor Skerritt do the first one.

PROFESSOR SKERRITT: I'll do the first one short. Again, the advice, there is no advice saying don't have it.  And of course, in Australia, we're fortunate that the numbers are fairly small. But a number of other  countries are vaccinating people who have had coronavirus, there is no adverse event. In fact, what we're  suggesting is that some people may only get off with one shot because in a way, what the vaccination  does is give a further boost to the natural immunity you may have had from catching the disease. But time  will tell with Australians. That's one area that our hospitals and doctors will carefully monitor. They'll take  particular interest in people who have had coronavirus and then they give a vaccination to.

PRIME MINISTER: Thank you, Professor Skerritt. The other issue, of course, we will work with the Victorian  government, the New South Wales government, the Queensland government on all these issues, as we  always have. I mean, we've provided significant support to all the states, particularly through the  Australian Defence Force. And when it comes to supporting those quarantine arrangements in New South  Wales, they've operated hotel quarantine at triple the capacity of when Victoria was actually open and  they've been able to do that quite successfully through hotel quarantine. I note also that the New Zealand  government, which doesn't operate as a federation, have also consistently used hotel quarantine as the  most effective way to enable people to come back and for those facilities to also provide an appropriate  quarantine period. But we'll continue to work with states on these issues as they wish to pursue them.  Also seeking to get as many Australians home, I should stress international travellers are not allowed to  come to Australia. Australians, residents and citizens are allowed to return home. And that's what we're  seeking to do, in many of these cases we look at these as supplementary capacity to hotel quarantine. It  is true, even though on an international scale, the number of incidents in the Victorian situation are few.  They've, of course, had a pretty significant impact, particularly last year. But it is also true that in seven  other states and territories they've had, they've had great success in managing that inflow and also  preventing both breaches. But where breaches occur, their systems have been very strong, whether that's  in Queensland or Western Australia, of course, New South Wales or other places. But we'll work with  them as we always have. And I know the Victorian government has always appreciated that support. Yep?  Greg?

JOURNALIST: These facilities- are you saying they should not be used to replace hotel quarantine but  complement it,

PRIME MINISTER: We’ll work with the Victorian government That's all I said, Greg.

JOURNALIST: Are you concerned that Victoria, through this announcement today and through the  language of Dan Andrews over the past week, that he is shifting away from the hotel, preference for hotel  quarantine?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, that's just not clear yet based on the information that's in front of us. But, you  know, the objective, the task doesn't change. Our focus as a government is, of course, on delivering the  $6 and a half billion dollar vaccine programme, and that's where the Commonwealth has been putting in  our effort around these issues and we've worked with the states on the many other issues, so 2021 can  prove to be a far more open year than 2020 was.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you said this morning that I'm not happy about this being brought to my  attention about the Britney Higgins,

PRIME MINISTER: Sounds like we’re moving onto other issues which I'm happy to do but I don't think we  need to detain Professor Skerritt for that. But Chris, did you have one more for Professor Skerritt?



JOURNALIST: On travel, as you roll out this vaccine and people are vaccinated, are you going to change  your disposition towards Australians travelling overseas and returning who have been vaccinated?

PRIME MINISTER: Not clear yet, and we have to wait on the evidence for that and the success of the  vaccine and what that means in terms of transmissibility and other issues, that obviously we don't rule  that out. But those decisions will be guided by the medical advice when they're ultimately taken. But I  look forward to that day.

So we're going to move away from those issues. Professor Skerritt, thank you to you and all your team.  Doing a great job, thank you very much.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you said, I'm not happy about the fact that this, the Brittany Higgins matter  was not brought to my attention. And I can assure you, people know that, amongst those people, I assume,  is Defence Minister Linda Reynolds. Are people from your office also, have they also been spoken to, with  your disquiet about this?

PRIME MINISTER: People, people know, people know and they should know. And these are issues that I  would hope would come to my attention. And that is one of the many things that that I've asked the  deputy secretary of PM&C to look at is as we work through the issues that have to be worked through and  we want to make sure that those systems are up to the standard that I would expect.

JOURNALIST: Will heads roll over this?

PRIME MINISTER: I’ve answered the question Andrew thanks.

JOURNALIST: The question though, Prime Minister, Brittany Higgins says there were three very senior  people in your office who knew about this alleged rape within days of it occurring? And you found out  almost two years later, these are people you talk to on a daily basis. Why did they not tell you? Were they  protecting you? What was the reason for you not being informed?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, in terms of three people, well, I should stress that the chief of staff of the  minister's office at the time was not in the Prime Minister's office. They came and worked in the Prime  Minister's office at a later time. So they were not there working directly to me or to Dr Kunkel in my office.

JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]

PRIME MINISTER: Well, there is I should stress that in relation to my principal private secretary, there is  nothing that has been put in front of me, nothing, including phone records or anything else that suggests  that that indeed was the case. So there was an issue of a security breach which was dealt with at the time.  And the alleged perpetrator was sacked, removed, quite swiftly over the security breach, in terms of the  allegation of a sexual assault that was not in front, I'm advised, of my office at that time. And so that that  matter came later and was being dealt with within the Minister's office and on an anonymous basis  ultimately. And so that matter was not at that point brought to our attention because the matter then  didn't proceed to a police investigation. And that's why today I've expressed my concern about how these  matters didn't progress to a police investigation, because that is always that would always be my wish  that that- should that be what Brittany wanted.

JOURNALIST: [inaudible] didn’t express that? They didn’t tell you, were they protecting you?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I know that Minister Reynolds expressed that wish directly and that it was her  wish that this matter be taken forward for investigation. But ultimately, ultimately, that was a choice  made at the time.

JOURNALIST: Why didn’t the Minister tell you Prime Minister, why do you think the Minister didn’t tell  you?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I understand Minister Reynolds will say something further about this, but I  understand there was a judgement made about the balance of protecting Brittany's privacy at the time  and a judgement was made on that basis. Now, that judgement can certainly be commentated upon. It  can certainly be judged. But that was my understanding of what occurred at that time. I want to stress  again that this awful incident, this terrible incident, those who were around Brittany at the time were  endeavouring to support and to help her. Now, as I said this morning, over the passage of time, clearly  that was not effective. And I accept that. I accept that absolutely.

JOURNALIST: Picking up what you said about phone records then, do you not believe Brittany, that she  was contacted by a senior person in your office to be checked in on in the wake of similar reporting? But  why would someone from your office check in with her following the reporting on Four Corners around  that issue if it wasn't because they were aware of it being beyond a security issue?

PRIME MINISTER: The point I'm making to you is that is not the recollection or the records of my staff on  that matter. It's just not, so I can't really speak more to it than that. I understand that over time,  particularly in situations like this, that information can become confused over time about who makes  contact and things like that. I accept that. So I make no judgements about that. In fact, one of the things  that has concerned me most about this issue is that clearly the trauma that built up over a period of time  well after the incident itself as well. And I think that's one of the key things I want to hear from the Deputy  Secretary about how we can ensure that support is immediate, effective and ongoing. Because on those  three tests, particularly the latter one, clearly that support wasn't provided in a way that supported  Brittany. As I said, that's something I would expect for my daughter and I should have no lesser  expectations for Brittany and that's why I've taken the actions that I have today.

JOURNALIST: Was she mistaken in her recount that she is making?

PRIME MINISTER: I can’t comment on it because I wasn’t a party to either of the conversations.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, God forbid something like this was to happen again, how quickly would you  expect to be told if one of your ministers was aware? And who would you expect to be told by?

PRIME MINISTER: There are two points there. The first one is and this is what I've referred to the Deputy  Secretary and I flagged this, that in cases like this, there is an argument for a mandatory advice to the  relevant department, which in this case would be the Department of Finance. But I just add a note of  caution on this, that I would not want to have anything done in this process that in any way might create  a triggered action that might lead to someone like Brittany in this circumstance not wanting to proceed.  So I want to be very confident that any of these things that we might do around this event would in no  way impede the agency of the victim in these cases and someone like Brittany in these cases. So I'm not  going to rush to or any knee jerk reaction here. There is best practise in a lot of other jurisdictions, in a lot

of other workplaces. And I would like them to look at that and carefully advise us about what the  automatic response should be. Now, it is also possible that in circumstances like this, a terrible incident  like this, can be advised to me, both by the Minister and through my office in an anonymous way. And I  think it is very important to protect the privacy of individuals in these situations. And it is my absolute  understanding that that was the intent of Minister Reynolds.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what is your advice on the exact time your office knew about this alleged  rape? What is your advice on that? You've obviously been speaking to people in your office about it.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, my understanding is that that precise matter was within the last couple of weeks.

JOURNALIST: Can I ask on IR, PM. Minister Porter has announced you have dumped that provision  pertaining to the better off overall test in order to secure the rest of the Bill. Labor is unmoved by this,  saying if you get re-elected, you're going to try and bring it back anyway. Can I get your response to that?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, the reason that we've decided not to proceed with that element of the package  is because we've been engaged in good faith discussions with parties in the Senate and that those good  faith discussions have arrived at the point where if we want to go further, then it's important that that  provision no longer be pursued. So we think in good faith that that is a good one. Now, that shouldn't  come as a surprise. We were very clear that in trying to get things through the Parliament, we would work  with good faith partners. Now, the Labor Party hasn't sought to engage with us at all. We've got more  engagement out of the union movement than we've got out of the Labor Party. And so the question now  is, given that seemed to be the issue they had, well, why are they now going to vote against a Bill that  actually ensures people get paid and that there's a pathway from casuals to permanent? I mean, is Labor  going to drop the politics now and get on with it so we can get people back into jobs? Or are they going  to cling onto this as a way of continuing to engage in a political debate here in Canberra? It's really a  matter for them. But now, once we go through this package, then that's the package that we'll put and  that's the package that we will legislate. I've always been very clear that we're seeking to get things done  here. Where things can't get done and the Parliament doesn't support things, then why would we put  people through that process?

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the review you've announced this morning, the one by the Deputy  Secretary and one from Celia Hammond. What's your timeframe for those reviews and will you commit  to making the finding of them public?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I'm going to wait for further advice from both Celia and Stephanie about both of  those issues on the timing. I mean, is this new. I want them to consider what they need to do, how long it  would take for them to do that job thoroughly, and so I'll wait for further advice on both of those questions  to come from both of them as we work through the process of having this set up and established. Today  in the party room, I had a fair bit to say about this issue with my colleagues and the responsibility on all  of us. But as I said in my earlier press conference today, it's just not on the Government members of  Parliament to ensure that it's the right environment here in this place. It's incumbent on all members of  Parliament in this place, they're all employers. And frankly, everybody who holds a position of authority  in this building, whether they're running a news agency, they're running the prime minister's office or  they're running an MP's office, we all who work in this building have an obligation to try and make it as  safe as possible for everyone who works here. I'm going to have to call it then after that one, because  Question Time.

JOURNALIST: Jacinda Ardern is not very happy with you and your Government for the stripping of  citizenship of someone who went overseas potentially to be recruited by ISIS. Can you give us the  background to that? And what assurances are you going to give Jacinda Ardern that what Australia did is  in New Zealand's interests as well as its own?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, my job is Australia's interests. That's my job. And it's my job as the Australian  Prime Minister to put Australia's national security interests first. I think all Australians would agree with  that. Now, the legislation that was passed through our Parliament automatically cancels the citizenship of  a dual citizen where they've been engaged in terrorist activities of this nature. And that happens  automatically. And that has been a known part of Australia's law for some time. I understand that the  New Zealand government has had some issues with that, and I understand that. And the Prime Minister  and I are scheduled to speak later today. We speak quite frequently. This is an issue we've discussed  before. So I'll leave how we practically deal with those issues to our discussion later today and I'm sure  the many others that we'll have. There are still a lot more unknown about this case and where it sits and  where it might go to next and so I think that will also be a subject of our discussions. But Australia's interest  here is that we do not want to see terrorists who fought with terrorism organisations enjoying privileges  of citizenship, which I think they forfeit the second they engage as an enemy of our country. And I think  Australians would agree with that. Thanks very much.

[END]

Media Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

