

SENATOR DON FARRELL

SHADOW SPECIAL MINISTER OF STATE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR SPORT AND TOURISM

SHADOW MINISTER ASSISTING THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA





THIRTEEN UNLUCKY FOR MOST IN SCOTT MORRISON’S TOURISM FAIL



Jobs of hundreds of thousands of Australians working in tourism remain at risk

because the Morrison Government has failed to listen to the industry.



According to the Tourism and Transport Forum (TTF), as many as 300,000 or

more tourism jobs could still be lost despite the package announced by Scott

Morrison today, after the industry already lost 506,000 full-time jobs in 2020 due to

COVID-19.



That is more than 800,000 Australians potentially unemployed because the

Morrison Government says its listening but doesn’t hear a word the tourism

industry says.



The PM’s thumbs up photo opp from the cockpit of a Qantas jet won’t save jobs.



Failing to provide a tourism-targeted wage subsidy after ripping away JobKeeper

won’t save jobs.



Encouraging tourism operators to take on more debt won’t save jobs.



Tourism operators outside of the Morrison Government’s 13 chosen discount fare

destinations will still struggle just to survive and will still be forced to lay off staff.



The Australian Tourism Industry Council (ATIC) last week said the industry didn’t

want “more grant programs or pork-barrelling in a few regions” and today said it

was deeply disappointed in the Government’s package, which it said will “fail to

stem major job losses and closures”.



TTF today said the fact that the package contained “no wider support beyond more

loans and debt, was not what industry needed”.



Programs which drive demand, like the aviation support announced today, are a

first step in encouraging Australians to travel.



However, businesses on the ground say they need both direct support to stay open

and keep staff and their own, targeted demand-driving measures, such as the

voucher schemes introduced by every state and territory.



Programs the Government is extending, like the Zoos and Aquariums Program,

were so badly targeted in the first place that they’ve had huge underspends.



The Consumer Travel Support Program was so badly designed by the Morrison

Government that the Australian Federation of Travel Agents said it had “multiple

flaws”, covered as little as two weeks’ worth of business costs and that, despite it,

many agents would not survive.



Support for the tourism industry should ensure jobs are saved and businesses

survive to offer the same high-quality experiences when international visitors return

that they did before the pandemic.





The industry has made it clear that it does not believe the Morrison Government’s

package will do that.



THURSDAY, 11 MARCH 2021



MEDIA CONTACT: TOM ZED 0419 227 286



