

MATT THISTLETHWAITE MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR THE REPUBLIC  MEMBER FOR KINGSFORD SMITH



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS  TUESDAY, 26 JANUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Australia Day; Nationals comments on coal; borders;  vaccines.

TOM CONNELL: Let's go to our panel, Andrew Bragg Liberal Senator and Matt  Thistlethwaite from the Labor Party join me now. Gentlemen, thanks both for  your time. Look it’s become a perennial debate, interesting today a proposal  from Anthony Albanese, a referendum on constitutional recognition for First  Australians could be held on January 26th, so don't change the date, but  perhaps broaden the meaning of particular First Australians, what do you make  of that?

ANDREW BRAGG, SENATOR FOR NSW:Tom, happy new year and happy  Australia Day look. I think there is no doubt that Australia Day while also being a  difficult day for many Indigenous people is also an opportunity for us to think  about what a great contribution Australia has made to so many peoples lives,  and that is very pertinent as we go through this pandemic, frankly people don't  want to be living in any country other than Australia. But in terms of the day  itself, I think there is more that we can do to view the contribution of Indigenous  Australian into the date self. This morning, I was at a smoking ceremony down  at Barangaroo with the support of the New South Wales Land Council, and the  traditional owners, I think it’s a good way to start the day off.

CONNELL: So all of these suggestions, it's interesting to reflect on you know  even while this debate seems to go on every year and then go back and forth,  the day has changed a lot Matt Thistlethwaite even over the past 10 years or so.

MATT THISTLETHWAITE, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR  FINANCIAL SERVICES: Yeah, it certainly has changed Tom, and I think it's

wonderful Australians do now recognise the wonderful contribution of the First  Australians’ history and culture. I'm standing on the edge of the waters of  Botany Bay where I’ve just been at a citizenship ceremony, and these are of  course the cliffs and the waters where the La Perouse Aboriginal community  have inherited this special place for many, many centuries, and it was their  ancestors that were the first Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to see  those tall ships come in through Botany Bay. So for them, I've spoken to that  community, for them this day isn't a day of celebration, it’s a day or some  burden and sorrow, and I think that we have to respect that and that's been the  great thing about Australia Day in recent years that there has been this  movement to respect that and we can have a debate like the one that Anthony  suggested about having constitutional recognition on this date.

CONNELL: Andrew Bragg, I want to ask you about another headline today in  The Australian, The Nationals pushing for more manufacturing jobs, apparently  they would like up to four more new coal fired power plants, you getting sick of  this suggestion that never seems to go away and never seem to have any real  support?

BRAGG: Well, we're in the middle of an energy transfer transition where you're  seeing a high reliance on gas and a lower reliance on coal and ultimately a  bigger reliance on renewable energy, especially as the storage issues are  resolved in that renewables space. So, that is the trend in energy generation.  But other than that, I mean I'm agnostic, I'm driven by the science and the  science is telling us the best transition is a combination of gas and renewables.

CONNELL: Well let's be frank, you are a straight shooter, the Nationals are  kidding themselves here, aren't they?

BRAGG: Well as I say I'm not an agnostic about the form of generation and we  want to have the cleanest, the most reliable energy mix, and that's going to  come from gas and from renewables over the medium term, and I think it's very  unlikely you are going to see new coal fired power stations built in Australia.  Certainly the market is not willing to build these things. I don’t see why the  government would.

CONNELL: So you’d never support any government money to essentially  underwrite new coal fired power in Australia? Would you support that?

BRAGG: No, I would not.

CONNELL: Alright, clear. Matt Thistlethwaite, what about Labor's various  positions if you like on coal, a lot of talk out of the last election was of course  was that the rhetoric on coal was all wrong, that's why we lost all those seats in

Queensland. Is it still the case of the sand shifting a bit of the Biden  administration?

THISTLETHWAITE: Well I think Tom on all of these issues the market will  determine where the investment will be in the future, and that is what is  occurring at the moment, and I think you're right to say that the Nationals are  kidding themselves because the market and the people investing in what are  very, very big pieces of infrastructure are moving away from fossil fuels towards  renewables for a number of reasons. Firstly because it's better for our  environment and we’re going to leave a safer environment for our kids if we do  so, but more importantly on economic terms, it's cheaper. We all know that  renewables, the cost of renewables, is coming down year on year, so that's  fossil fuel based energy production is becoming outdated, and it doesn't make  any sense, and I congratulate Andrew for saying that we shouldn’t be putting  public dollars into investing in outdated technology when the markets are  moving a completely separate way.

CONNELL: Matt, I want to ask you about the vaccine, we’ve got Labor carping  about this, Australia has multiple vaccine options and Astra Zeneca looking  more promising, it will be approved soon, which we can make here, so we avoid  the issues of production overseas. I mean do you really think the Australian  people agree that this has been mismanaged by the government?

THISTLETHWAITE: Well we’re but we certainly behind the eight ball in terms of  other nations getting access to the vaccine and rolling it out quicker than we've  been able to and that's a product we believe of the government not investing in  enough options. We had one of those hit the fence in the UQ vaccine and we  knew that there was going to be situations where they couldn't all come to  fruition…

CONNELL: That’s why they invested in four, what was the key number, was it  five, four seems quite a bit, they're getting Pfizer not long after the others.

THISTLETHWAITE: Those other nations have been able to roll it out more  quickly than Australia has. It’s good news that the TGA has approved the  vaccine for Australia and in other cases where it’s been approved it has been  rolled out almost immediately. So we are hopeful that the government will now  get their act together and start rolling this vaccine out as quickly as possible  because the sooner we can vaccinate more of the population the sooner we can  begin lifting restrictions are getting more people back into employment.

CONNELL: But if Australians are listening to Labor's complaint on this and the  overall situation with Covid, we have basically no Covid in the community, the  first vaccine rollouts are going to happen in three or four weeks. It doesn't seem

to be something that's actually, when it comes to it, affecting the nation very  much.

THISTLETHWAITE: But we’ve also seen Tom just how quickly and rapidly  Covid can spread. It only takes one case for the spread to go through the  community very quickly, and for borders to be locked. So that has economic  consequences for people's jobs. But if the TGA has approved and other nations  have been able to roll out very quickly in the wake of those authorities  approving, Australia should be able to as well.

CONNELL: What about those borders, do you agree with everything Mark  McGowan has done?

THISTLETHWAITE: Yeah, I do because they’re acting on the advice of the  Chief Medical Officers and Labor has always said that it’s the science that  should dictate how we approach this.

CONNELL: But there’s not one answer from these professionals, here’s a  national hotspot approach, New South Wales your state has been dealing with  this, but they have been managed to quash each time and actually allowed  people in Australia to travel in and out of New South Wales. WA is just taking  this to an extreme?

THISTLETHWAITE: Firstly we believe you should take the advice of the  medical experts, and that's what the Western Australian government is doing.  Secondly, other states have adopted a similar approach for instance  Queensland, in the midst of that the Queensland people had an election and  they overwhelming, with an increased majority, voted to return the Palaszczuk  government because they accepted and they liked the approach that the  government was taking in protecting their citizens, so I think the Australian  people have well and truly spoken about those issues.

CONNELL: Well, it seems like incumbents are the winner in Covid, anyway look  we’re nearly out of time, I haven't forgot about you Andrew Bragg, what about  the Moderna vaccine, we don't have access to that, do we need a clear  explanation as to why we couldn't get it? It might end up being the best  candidate, reports today that it might also keep people still healthy from the  latest strains.

BRAGG: Tom we've availed ourselves to a mix of vaccines. Now we don't have  community transmission as is occurring in the US and the UK and for that  reason our vaccination program can happen in a more orderly fashion and that  is a huge difference. Now this Albanese is obviously suffering from having Mr  Chalmers breathing down his neck for the leadership, so he’s desperate to get a



headline, but the reality is our better management of the coronavirus pandemic  relative to comparable nations can mean that we can have an orderly rollout of  the vaccine which is going to happen next month, so I’d rather be in Australia  than be anywhere else.

CONNELL: But what about Moderna? Do we need to hear exactly the ins and  outs of why we couldn't get it?

BRAGG: I think we can look at all the options that we’ve been doing the whole  time. It's science lead and I think overall we've done well, so we'll put our record  next to comparable governments.

CONNELL: Alright, we’ll have to leave it there, Andrew Bragg and Matt  Thistlethwaite, appreciate your time. We'll see you back here in Canberra next  week.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: BEN LEESON 0404 648 275





