1/2

Skilled migration in a post-COVID Australia medianet.com.au/releases/196514

Skilled migrants make a vital contribution to Australia. Prior to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, more than 100,000 migrants entered Australia under the skilled migration program each year. These migrants play an important role in filling gaps in the Australian workforce and will continue to do so in future.

“The COVID-19 pandemic gives us a chance to consider how current skilled migration settings are serving Australia’s needs now and into the future,” Mr Leeser said.

“The Committee will consider how we attract entrepreneurs, venture capitalists and highly skilled migrants to make Australia their first choice to invest, establish businesses and create jobs.”

“Australia’s excellent health and economic response allows us to attract great entrepreneurs and skilled people looking to relocate. We want them to see Australia as the best place to establish a business with our safe, highly functioning democracy, good health and economic systems and the rule of law.” Mr Leeser said.

Mr Leeser is encouraging people to contribute to the process. Submissions responding to terms of reference 1(a) and 2 will be accepted until 1 March 2021, while submissions addressing the remaining terms of reference will be accepted until 31 March 2021.

More details on the inquiry are available on the Committee website.

The terms of reference for the inquiry are as follows:

The Joint Standing Committee on Migration shall inquire into and report on Australia’s skilled migration program, with reference to:

1. The purpose of the skilled migration program and whether it is meeting its intended objectives, including:

a) If any immediate adjustments are necessary in the context of the future of work and pandemic recovery; and

b) If more long-term structural changes are warranted;

3 February 2021

2/2

2. Australia’s international competitiveness in attracting entrepreneurs, venture capital, start-ups, and the best and brightest migrants with cutting edge skills;

3. Skills lists and the extent to which they are meeting the needs of industries and businesses and keeping pace with Australia’s job landscape;

4. The administrative requirements for Australian businesses seeking to sponsor skilled migrants, including requirements to prioritise job opportunities for Australians and job creation;

5. The costs of sponsorship to businesses seeking to sponsor skilled migrants;

6. The complexity of Australia’s skilled migration program including the number of visa classes under the program and their requirements, safeguards and pathways; and

7. Any other related matters.

Media inquiries Annie Phillips Julian.Leeser.MP@aph.gov.au 0411 860 078

For background information Committee Secretariat 02 6277 4560 migration@aph.gov.au

For more information about this Committee, you can visit its website. On the site, you can make a submission to an inquiry, read other submissions, and get details for upcoming public hearings. You can also track the Committee and receive email updates by clicking on the blue ‘Track Committee’ button in the bottom right hand corner of the page.





