Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg







THE HON KEITH PITT MP

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia  Member for Hinkler

THE HON MICHELLE LANDRY MP  Assistant Minister for Children and Families  Assistant Minister for Northern Australia   Member for Capricornia



MEDIA RELEASE

25 March 2021



NAIF reforms pass through House of Representatives

Significant reforms to the Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility (NAIF) that will speed up  its delivery and broaden its scope to support job-creating projects have passed a major step  through parliament, despite the efforts of two southern MPs to delay it.

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Keith Pitt, said the Bill has passed  through the House of Representatives and will now head to the Senate.

“Our reforms follow extensive consultation with stakeholders throughout northern Australia  and the Coalition Government has listened,” Minister Pitt said.

“We will ensure NAIF has the flexibility it needs to further drive economic activity, create  jobs, drive population growth and open up new opportunities for people across northern  Australia.

“It was the height of hypocrisy to see inner-city southern MPs trying to delay the Bill  because the NAIF proudly supports resources projects throughout the north.

“The message from Adam Bandt and the Independent “Green” member for Warringah to  the north was clear - we’re against jobs for the north,” Minister Pitt said.

“NAIF supports a wide range of industries and I look forward to the Bill passing through the  Senate so we can deliver new projects for the north as soon as possible,” Minister Pitt said.

Assistant Minister for Northern Australia, Michelle Landry, said the NAIF has already had a  significant positive impact on development in the north.

Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg



“Our reforms will help NAIF play an even more crucial role at a time when the Government  is committed to driving opportunities as part of the national economic recovery from the  COVID recession,” Assistant Minister Landry said.

“NAIF investments in health, education, resources, energy and agriculture projects , will  supporting more than 7,200 jobs in Australia’s north and generate billions in economic  activity.”

Minister Pitt said people throughout the north in cities, regional and remote communities  deserve the opportunities that NAIF can deliver.



ENDS

Media contact:    Minister Pitt - Matt Dunstan 0411 535 072/ Marnie Hobson 0407 090 230  Assistant Minister Landry - Thomas Birkbeck 0418 908 159





















