

JULIAN HILL MP

DEPUTY CHAIR, JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT  MEMBER FOR BRUCE



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2SM MARCUS PAUL IN THE MORNING  WEDNESDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Craig Kelly MP; Prime Minister’s failure to rein in Government nutters.

MARCUS PAUL, HOST: Alrighty, Julian Hill - morning, Julian!

JULIAN HILL MP, DEPUTY CHAIR OF THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT: G’day Marcus.

PAUL: How are you, boss?

HILL: Oh, terrific, and it’s great to be with you this morning.

PAUL: I haven’t spoken to you, I don’t think, in the New Year - Happy New Year to you.

HILL: Happy New Year to you and all your listeners. We're back into it here in Canberra.

PAUL: Absolutely. Why won't Scomo call out the crazy nutjobs on Craig Kelly's Facebook  page, and Craig Kelly in particular; all the others who are pushing these conspiracy theories in  relation to COVID-19 miracle cures? I mean, while this goes on, the longer it will take Australia  to recover from COVID-19. I mean, for goodness sake, Craig Kelly, he's not a doctor. Even the  Prime Minister said so. So why doesn't he address Craig Kelly in a more, I don't know, severe  manner, considering where - how much money are we spending? I think it's 23 odd million  dollars to sell the COVID-19 vaccine. Why are we spending taxpayer money on this when  you've got a very senior government minister who won't shut up about the thing not being  effective?

HILL: It's a complete failure of leadership by the Prime Minister. Craig Kelly's a clown.  Everyone knows that, your listeners know that, people are not fools. But he's a dangerous  menace. There is nothing more important at the moment in this country than getting this  vaccine response right, and he's a threat to our COVID response, your listeners would know.  There's already anxiety over the vaccines. People spending money and effort trying to  reassure the community based on science. Yet the Prime Minister's own captain’s pick, this  loony MP, is out there undermining public confidence, spreading dangerous conspiracy  theories. It was only a few months ago he was preaching Donald Trump's kooky remedies.  You know, inject yourself with bleach and unproven drugs. The Prime Minister - it's way past

time - he needs to haul him in and it's a good question.

I don't know why he won't haul him in. Either he agrees with him or he's just weak. Yesterday,  or two days ago, at the National Press Club, the Prime Minister said that Craig Kelly was doing  ‘a great job’. I mean, seriously, this man is dangerous.

PAUL: Well, I don't get it. I mean, we're spending all of this taxpayer money to promote people  getting a jab, etcetera. And yet we've got a very senior minister with a, you know, with a big  following on social media, I guess, who's going against the grain.

HILL: Well, he's got 90,000 Twitter followers, and, you know, it’s a free country, people can  listen to who they like. But this is not about freedom of speech. You know, the Prime Minister  bats it away and says ‘oh, it's freedom of speech’. It's not. This guy's a government MP. You  have to be held to a higher standard if you're going to sit in the Government Party Room. He’s  not a One Nation loony or an independent nutbag Senator. He's a Government MP. And the  Prime Minister has to take responsibility for the words that come out of his mouth when they're  this far off the reservation - that's actually doing harm to the Australian people, undermining  public confidence in the vaccine. And, you know, we spoke - I think last time we spoke,  actually, Marcus, we were talking about the US Capitol riots - and, yeah, we've seen in the  United States where this kind of stuff leads if conspiracy theories are not called out by leaders  and they’re enabled and tolerated by leaders like the Prime Minister. Then we've seen, it leads  to mad right-wing extremism and violence in our society. It's got to stop.

PAUL: Well, I agree. I just want to play something here for you. You'll be able to hear it Julian  in the background, I’ll get your thoughts on it in relation to Craig Kelly.

[Extract Plays]

XXX: “As spreaders of misinformation are banned from social media, there's only one man you  can turn to for reliable untruths. Craig Kelly”

Craig Kelly MP: “There has been complete abandonment of reason.”

XXX: “The most trusted man in lies is backing up every ill-conceived social media post and  every awful conspiracy to his own website, CraigAnon.com. For just $1 a week, you can get all  the posts that Craig Kelly will soon be banned from posting publicly, at CraigAnon.com, where  he'll be posting anonymously under the nom de plume, Craig Kelly MP.

“But how will you know it's Craig?”

“Posts will be unhinged, misspelt and recycled from his Sky News rants”.   Craig Kelly MP: “If you look at the peer reviews numbers, we’re going to have pestilence and  plagues, the seven seas are gonna sort of boil and rise.”

XXX: “Because there's only one thing better than free speech and that’s speech so free it's  untethered to reality.

Sign up to CraigAnon.com. Because the cost of free speech should be $1 a week.

CraigAnon proceeds will go towards Craig Kelly’s Senate run in 2021 so we can be a Craig  upon both your houses.”





PAUL: Now that's a satirical skit on the ridiculousness of this bloke. Surely the Prime Minister  needs to rein him in.

HILL: Look, I agree. I mean, on one level, yes, it's funny listening to it, but it's a serious  business.

PAUL: Yeah.

HILL: This guy, Craig Kelly, is a Liberal Party member of the Government. The Prime Minister  backed him in. The only reason he's in the Parliament still is cause Scott Morrison wanted him  here. Why did Scott Morrison want him here? That's, that’s one of the mysteries. Does he  agree with these views that he tolerates and, you know, nudge nudge, wink wink? Or is he just  too weak? He's a fake, failed marketing guy. Is he just too weak to actually call out the nutters  in his government and rein them in. That's a question for the Prime Minister, and so far he's  ducked it. He just said, Oh, yeah, Craig Kelly, he’s doing ‘a great job’. Well, that's not good  enough.

PAUL: Alright, mate, good to chat. Sorry to rush you this morning because we are a bit busy,  but let's talk further on this. Have a great day and all the best in the trenches there in the  nation's capital, Julian.

HILL: You too, mate, have a great day.

PAUL: Alright, there he is - Julian Hill MP, talking common sense as always.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: CAM GREEN 0406 507 727



