JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW   FIVEAA MORNINGS WITH LEON BYNER  MONDAY, 18 JANUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Home Care Package Waitlist; Morrison Government’s aged care  failures.

LEON BYNER: Nearly 100,000 people are waiting for these vital packages as  of September 30 last year. There are 80,000 older Australians approved for level two or  three care. They are waiting, in fact, some constituents have been waiting two years.  Now, the Aged Care Royal Commission reported the failure to deliver on home care  was crew and discriminatory. They are not my words, they other words of the Royal  Commission. Countries are judged on how they treat their most vulnerable. So what we  can say is that Australia has not distinguished itself in glory in looking after the elderly.  And one wonders why this matter has been allowed to fester and why it's not been  addressed. And remember, it is not new. Let's talk to the Shadow Aged Care Minister  Julie Collins. Julie, good morning. Happy New Year. Have you got some sort of intel as  to why we're in this position?

JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS: Well, I don't  know Leon other than what you've already said. And that is that the Royal Commission  more than a year ago indeed in October 2019, made interim recommendations, very  unusual for a royal commission because they thought these issues were urgent. And  the very first recommendation was for the government to fix the homecare waitlist. As  you rightly point out, there's still 100,000 older Australians waiting for the care that  they've been approved for and that they need now. And the fact that we've got, you  know, 90 year-olds with terminal illnesses being told that they have to wait a year or two  to get the home care they need I just find outrageous.

BYNER: Tell me, these Royal Commission recommendations, do they carry any, any  gravitas or weight? Because if they do, the question is why have they been ignored?

COLLINS: Well, that's a very good question and one that it's a shame can't put to the  Minister.

BYNER: I will when I get him on don't you worry.

COLLINS: I'm sure you will. But I think what concerns most Australians is we've got the  Royal Commission about to make its final recommendations at the end of February.  How can the Australian public have any confidence that the Federal Government will  implement those recommendations if it still hasn't dealt with the very first  recommendation of more than a year ago? I think that is the thing that Australians are  saying, how can we trust the Government to actually fix aged care in Australia? We  know it's in crisis, we saw what happened with COVID we've seen this waitlist of  100,000 people now consistently for two years, and the Government hasn't done nearly  enough. So how can we have any faith or any trust that they will actually implement the  recommendations of the Royal Commission?

BYNER: Julie, as the age care opposition spokesperson, what is your recommendation  for people listening this morning who either themselves or their loved ones are waiting  for help? And they can't get it? What do you think they should do? What is your  suggestion?

COLLINS: Well, all they can do unfortunately is try and contact their local Member of  Parliament and/or the minister and try and get them to understand how critical this is.  My office just last week had been contacted by numerous Australians trying to get home  care either for themselves, or their loved one, particularly elderly parents. People are  really concerned about it, it means people can't plan their lives. We know that 30,000  Australians died in the last three years waiting for their home care. We know that  another 30,000 went into residential care or into hospital while they were waiting for  their home care package. Now, if the Government was to fix the home care waitlist  these things might not be happening and older Australians will be getting the help they  need, when they need it.

BYNER: Julie, thank you. That's the aged care spokesperson for this area of policy. As I  said, we made very honest attempts to get the Minister on and I am most disappointed  in the Minister. And he won't be surprised I'm telling you this because we had a  conversation like this months ago, last year. It appears no headway has been made.  Why? What's the point of having a Royal Commission into aged care? What's the point  of having recommendations, interim suggestions and fixes? And everybody just throws  up their hands and says, oh, well, it's not my problem.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119

