

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

The Hon Angus Taylor MP  Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction

The Hon Keith Pitt MP  Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia

Phillip Thompson OAM MP  Member for Herbert

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

Wednesday 20 January 2021

DELIVERING COPPERSTRING 2.0 AND CREATING REGIONAL JOBS IN  QUEENSLAND

The Liberal National Coalition Government is backing regional jobs, industry development and  affordable reliable power through continued support for CopperString 2.0.

The Morrison Government is announcing support of up to $11 million to help progress the project to  Final Investment Decision in 2021.

Prime Minister Scott Morrison said this support will help deliver this important energy project for the  people of Queensland.

“Our support for CopperString is an investment in the future of Queensland that will bring power prices  down, create 750 direct construction jobs and unlock the significant economic potential of the North  West Minerals Province,” Prime Minister Morrison said.

“Access to affordable and reliable energy supply will help drive new investment and new opportunities,  providing a long-term future for families, businesses and local communities from Townsville to Mount  Isa”.

Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction Angus Taylor said as Australia recovers from COVID-19, it is  critical that we invest in projects that support our economic recovery.

“The Government is absolutely committed to delivering a fair deal on energy for the families and  businesses of central and northern Queensland,” Minister Taylor said.

“Connecting north Queensland with the National Electricity Market will help deliver lower cost, reliable  power to our important job-creating and export oriented regional industries and increase opportunities  for the many other energy projects along the corridor.”

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt said continued support for this project is  a key part of the Government’s broader commitment to central and north Queensland.

“Queensland’s mining sector is a significant driver of Australia’s economic success story, and cheaper,  more reliable power in the north will continue to support this important industry,” Minister Pitt said.

“Affordable reliable electricity is essential in driving downstream manufacturing and creating more local  jobs.

“This will help open up new investment and create new, high-paying jobs for the people of Queensland.”

Member for Herbert Phillip Thompson has long been an advocate for CopperString 2.0 as a way to  deliver lower power prices and opportunities for North Queenslanders.

“This will be an important boost for the region now as we recover from COVID-19, and well into the  future,” Mr Thompson said.

This project will help unlock the full economic promise of the North West Minerals Province and our  important job-creating and export oriented regional industries.

The combination of cheaper energy supply will help drive new investment and new opportunities for  Australians, providing a long-term future for families and local communities from Townsville to Mount  Isa.

Support for CopperString builds on Liberal National Government action already underway in regional  Queensland to bring down prices and improve reliability. Today’s announcement builds on previous  support for the project of $5.17 million in 2019.

[END]

Media Contacts:   Prime Minister’s Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  Minister Taylor’s office, Liam O’Neil 0418 113 617, John Hulin 0466 443 917  Minister Pitt’s office, Matt Dunstan 0411 535 072  Phillip Thompson’s office, (07) 4725 2066  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

