

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T

Monday 22nd March 2021

Minister Littleproud iv Today Show with Allison Langdon

ALLISON LANGDON: You're looking at the radar map. Would you look at the colour and you  look at it mainly over New South Wales and South East Queensland there. It's been described  as a once-in-a-century weather event, putting millions of people in the firing line. Huge  amounts of rain falling and there is plenty more on the way, I'm sad to say.

Let's discuss this now with Emergency Management Minister David Littleproud and from Triple  M, Gus Worland. Nice to see both of you this morning.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Morning.

ALLISON LANGDON: David, you've made 34 national disaster declarations for areas in New  South Wales. We know it will be extended. South East Queensland's going to be smashed  today. It's bad, isn't it?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: It is. This is potentially a very dangerous situation we're going into.  And we just can't have a she'll be right sort of attitude to this. If you're in those areas, you need  to adhere to the warnings from emergency services personnel.

I've just had an update from the Bureau saying they believe there'll be heavy rain again today  into Tuesday. So, with the catchment so wet, you've got to expect that water's going to cause  flash flooding and particularly when we've had, you know, when you just look at the  Hawkesbury and Nepean alone, there's 2800 people that have been evacuated. But  potentially, that's up to over 54,000 residents that could be impacted. So that's at worst case  where we're saying to people you have a responsibility to yourself and your family to  understand the risks that are coming your way and particularly for those men and women that  are putting themselves on the line. You owe it to them. They're out there, many of them  volunteers are prepared to save your lives. And they've made so many rescues already, that  this is a very dangerous situation that we all have to appreciate that we have a responsibility to  act in. And I know that we're working with the state governments. We're thinking about  recovery but we've got another 24,48 hours to get through. We're ready to move and I've been  talking to David Elliott and the Prime Minister, with the Premier about making sure whatever  federal assets are required, they will be there.

But we just need people to act safely today and tomorrow, get through this. There's no need to  go through any water to go for a look. Just- if you don't need to go near the water, stay away  from it.

ALLISON LANGDON: Yeah. We are still in the thick of it, aren't we, Gus? I mean, we heard in  from the New South Wales Emergency Minister over the weekend saying 74 people had to be

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

rescued from floodwaters. The SES crews who put their lives on the line, 10,000 calls for help  yesterday.

GUS WORLAND: Yeah.

ALLISON LANGDON: They're the heroes.

GUS WORLAND: They sure are. And they know - just like the Minister - the next couple of  days are going to be even bigger and even stronger. So yeah, let's just look after those people  when they come to our areas too.

Just when I left this morning on the Northern Beaches of Sydney, just trucks everywhere, you  know, and people coming out and giving them cups of tea and you know, everyone rallies  around these heroes and let's just make sure we keep doing that over the next couple of days.

ALLISON LANGDON: I always find it amazing to see the emergency responses - how they  just kick into gear during an emergency like this. When you consider, David, that we had the  bushfires last year, obviously, we lived through the pandemic.

Can you imagine if it this was happening this time last year when we were right in the thick of  COVID? We were in lockdown. I mean, it could be worse, I guess is what I'm saying.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah. But let me tell you, this is how good these guys are. They've  planned for all this even with COVID over the top of it. And we've brought emergency service  personnel from my home-state of Queensland, even though we're copping it in Queensland  today and yesterday, and South Australia.

So, we work together. And this is a great thing about Australia. We might have a federation  where we like to compete as states. But I can tell you, when the chips are down, every state  has put their hand up. And we have the professionals from right across this country, doesn't  matter what the emergency is. They just get in and get it done.

And we should be so proud of these men and women that they're prepared to do this. And you  know, we faced bushfires and now this and COVID over the top and we're all doing it in a  COVID-safe way. So, you know, they're the best in the world.

ALLISON LANGDON: Okay. And as we say, like, the next 24 to 48 hours are going to be  critical. But there's this stoush now brewing between senior New South Wales ministers in  regards to Warragamba Dam. The Emergency Services Minister David Elliott believes the  water should have been released weeks ago. The Water Minister responded saying that's  naive.

Gus, would it have made a difference or is, you know, now even the time for the debate?

GUS WORLAND: Yeah. Let's not even have that debate at the moment. The next couple of  days are the most important. And you know, could have, should have, [audio skip] wasn't  done, so let's think about that at a time when we've got more time to think clearly.

But at the end of the day, it wasn't that long ago that we were worried about not having enough  water and building things to make sure we captured all the water. And now, we're in this  situation. So, let's just all take a breath and take it - and just look after each other for the time  being.

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

ALLISON LANGDON: And just quickly, David, in regards to - I mean, we're seeing a lot of  families right now - they've lost their homes, you know, they've escaped with maybe just the  clothes on their back. What help is being offered to them from a federal level assistance wise?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah. Yesterday, we went for the 34 LGAs; $1000 per adult and $400  per child. That's just an initial support just to give them some dignity and respect. We're  working obviously with the New South Wales Government about what other support that will  be required. But this is just the first phase of that. There's also support we initiated with the  New South Wales Government and that's also towards councils as well because they have to  get in and do clean-ups around their communities and they can't bare that cost.

So, we'll continue to make those assessments. But that $1000 and $400 per child is available  from 8:00am this morning. So, if they contact Centrelink, there's a designated line for anyone  in those 34 LGAs to make the call and they will get the assistance straight away this morning.

ALLISON LANGDON: Okay. Thanks for that, David. Let's move on because there's another  big story happening today too and it is a huge day in our pandemic recovery - the all-important  Phase 1B being rolled out with GP surgeries across the country leading the vaccination of the  first of 6 million Aussies.

David, obviously, we heard good news overnight that the regulator has approved the  AstraZeneca jab for local production here. What kind of a difference is that going to make?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Oh, big, considering what the European Union has done to us in  constraining some of the supplies. So, being able to make it here in Australia and Melbourne  will give us a great impetus to move forward. And we expect over the next six months, we'll do  6 million jabs. And we did that last year in COVID for flu jabs.

As the former AMA president said last night, this is fully achievable. We've got 4000 GP clinics  signed up to this and 1000 have had their doses provided to them. So, we're on the home  stretch. But you've got to understand, there's no race. Australia is better placed than anyone.

We don't have to race into this. We've got time because we don't have the people dying in  hospital beds that other nations around the world have because we've managed it well. And  Australians have stood up and done what they've been asked to do. So, we should be  profoundly proud of how we've achieved this. We've got the time to get this right and we'll  make sure we vaccinate everyone who wants one.

ALLISON LANGDON: Got to be disappointed with the EU though, blocking supply to  Australia. But Gus, it's a big day because I know your mum …

GUS WORLAND: Yeah.

ALLISON LANGDON:… is planning on getting the vaccine today.

GUS WORLAND: Exactly. Nel is getting it today and she's so excited. And I wanted to talk just  briefly this morning about just the hope that it's given her. So it's not just the jab itself, it's  feeling like the worst of it's behind her and the fact that we haven't been able to see her and  she hasn't been able to see her grandchildren and all that sort of stuff. And she has been  isolated for a while. It's now just given her a bit of a- the starting line again of her thinking that  she would be able to get through this.

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

And she's 87. She's beautiful. She's- her mind is still very, very active and she just wants to  get out there and get amongst it. And this has given her hope and I think that's all that we can  give each other at the moment which is really cool. So, I'm excited about that.

ALLISON LANGDON: I can see - I just want to give your mum a hug.

GUS WORLAND: She's the best. She'd give you a hug too. She's probably listening now. So,  she'd love to give you a hug.

ALLISON LANGDON: Alright. Well, there you go. We're sending you a hug down the line.  Because as we say, like the elderly have done it harder than anyone else during the  pandemic.

GUS WORLAND: They sure have.

ALLISON LANGDON: It's been a really scary time. Now, I do want to end on some very  positive news. Professor Brendan Murphy hinting home isolation or shorter hotel quarantine  stays could be just around the corner when international travel resumes. David, this is huge  news.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah. It's a start. I mean, we're starting to evolve and understand  COVID better and as we do, science is giving us the new directions but how we can evolve  with it. And I think this is a great step forward.

I wouldn't dust the passport off just yet. But I think obviously, we just need to allow people like  Brendan Murphy who's done an outstanding job in guiding us through this to give us the  scientific advice that we need and act accordingly. And I think if we do that, then I think we'll  see some of these restrictions ease and make it more attractive.

But above all, I'd say, go and spend a quid out in Australia this year. Our tourism operators  need it more than ever. But we're happy to take any inbound ones in a COVID-safe way when  the Professor tells us we can.

ALLISON LANGDON: Yeah. Well, that's it, I mean, that was always going to be an issue that  people coming in wouldn't cop the two weeks' quarantine if they're coming here on holidays.  So, if we can fix that, it means we get more people in, which means we're spending more  money with our tourism operators. And we're back on track.

GUS WORLAND: Yeah. I'm going to Adelaide today and I've never been more excited. I'm just  like, I never thought I'd be so excited about going to Adelaide but I am. Just getting back to the  airport, getting on a plane again, it feels like we're getting back to some sort of normalcy.

ALLISON LANGDON: Yeah. We just need to get pass this flood crisis.

GUS WORLAND: Yeah.

ALLISON LANGDON: So, our thoughts are with everyone this morning. It's a big 24 to 48  hours ahead. David, Gus, thanks for being with us this morning. We appreciate it.

GUS WORLAND: Pleasure.

Media contact  0455 448 985

