



The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister  Acting Minister for Health and Aged Care



MEDIA RELEASE



Sunday 14 March 2021

IS IT TRUE?

COUNTERING THE MISINFORMATION ON COVID-19 VACCINES

The Australian Government is ramping up its campaign against misinformation on the COVID-19  vaccines, as the vaccination program ramps up moving into Phase 1B.

Australians can get all their questions answer on the health website to find out what they want -  and need - to know about the COVID-19 vaccines.

The new material on the website, called Is it true? - www.health.gov.au/covid19-vaccines - will help  answer questions people may have about the vaccine, and respond to vaccine misinformation they  may have heard.

This new function will provide trusted, credible information on COVID-19 vaccines for everyone in  Australia. It will sort the fact from the fiction.

The information on the website will be clear, accurate and timely. This will help reassure Australians  about the safety and effectiveness of the vaccine and answer commonly asked questions and  misinformation relating to the COVID-19 Vaccination program.

The vaccines are the next, crucial step on the road out of this pandemic - and it’s the one step that  we can all take to protect ourselves, our families, our communities from severe illness.

It’s essential that people get their information on the vaccines from credible sources - and that  should be on official government websites.

With new vaccine developments every day, it’s very normal for people to have questions and  possibly feel hesitant about getting the vaccine. That doesn’t make them anti-vaccination.

The new section on the website will address the most common questions being asked by people and  will be updated regularly.

The Government is running an extensive $31 million education campaign through the rollout,  providing people with information about the approval process for the vaccines, details on what  phases the rollout is at and who is now eligible to be vaccinated.

As the vaccination program starts to move into Phase 1b , which covers more than six million people,  it’s essential people understand the facts about the vaccines as they make their appointments to get  vaccinated.

The more people vaccinated, the more people protected from severe illness and death, keeping  themselves and the broader community safe.

[ENDS]

Media Contacts:   Prime Minister’s Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

