

SENATOR MURRAY WATT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR NORTHERN AUSTRALIA

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DISASTER AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

SHADOW MINISTER FOR QUEENSLAND RESOURCES

LABOR SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC CAPRICORNIA

TUESDAY, 2 MARCH 2021



SUBJECTS: Aged Care Royal Commission final report; Morrison

Government aged care funding cuts; Home Care waiting list blow-out;

workplace culture; alleged sexual assault by Cabinet Minister.



PAUL CULLIVER, HOST: Well, yesterday, the final report from the royal

commission into the aged care sector was handed down. There were two

commissioners behind it, Tony Pagone and Lynelle Briggs. They actually both

provided very different ideas in the one report, 148 recommendations overall. The

Prime Minister fronted media yesterday. He committed to a detailed response to

this, including $452 million to overhaul the aged care sector. We understand in the

May budget is when we'll learn about a lot more detail on what those measures will

actually be, spending that almost half a billion dollars. Obviously, it's a big report,

there's lots to get through it, a lot of detail. Let's start to get a sense of where the

Opposition is at with this, Senator for Queensland, Murray Watt with the Labor

Party. Good morning to you, Senator.



MURRAY WATT, QUEENSLAND LABOR SENATR: Good morning, Paul.



CULLIVER: Of what you've been able to digest so far of this report, what is your

reaction?



WATT: Yeah, well, obviously, it's a very detailed report and we're still working our

way through that. But I think overall, the royal commission has confirmed that our

aged care system is in total crisis. It's something that I think anyone who's paid any

attention to this issue over the last few years has known, with story after story

emerging of severe neglect in aged care homes, gross underfunding of the system,

you know, the best efforts of aged care workers being to no avail because the

system is so broken.

So this report has to be - once and for all - a turning point for our aged care

system. The Government has just ignored this issue for too long. They're in their

eighth year of government and they've known this has been a problem. Aged care

is a 100 per cent federal government responsibility - they fund it, they regulate it.

And on this Government's watch, our system is in crisis, so it's got to be fixed.



CULLIVER: Well, they've also called the royal commission, and committing to act

on the report, so isn't that exactly what a government should be doing?



WATT: Well, I think the test is more what they do in response to the

recommendations, rather than merely calling a royal commission. Of course, that's

a good thing that they called a royal commission, and it's something that Labor

called for this Government to do, long before they agreed to do so. But as I say,

the real test now is whether they actually deliver on the recommendations. They've

got to do a lot better than what they have done with the interim report of the royal

commission, which was handed down in October 2019, nearly 18 months ago. And

there are still many recommendations from that interim report that have yet to be

implemented. So I really do hope that this Government does a much better job of

implementing the final report than they have done so far with the interim report.



CULLIVER: I want to look at some of the recommendations, obviously there's 148

of them, we can't get through all of them. But this idea of enshrining rights or a

rights-based aged care system where older Australians have a right to aged care,

it would possibly lead to caps on aged care being lifted. What do you make of that?



WATT: Well, as I say, we're still working our way through this report, so I can't give

you a categorical answer on our position. But it does seem to me that altering the

act that oversees aged care to put the right of residents and consumers of aged

care more at the centre of the system seems to be a good thing. As I say, we'll

have to take on board what various stakeholders have to say about that. But I think

that one of the problems that we've seen with aged care is that the system has

been far too directed to the interests of private providers and people being able to

make extreme profits from running aged care services, rather than having the

interests of residents, consumers and their workforce at heart. So at first blush,

that seems to be worth considering but we'll obviously talk to people about that a

bit further.



CULLIVER: So to be clear, you're saying Labor is considering a position whereby

for-profit aged care would not be allowed in this country?



WATT: No, no, I haven't necessarily said that. What I'm saying is that I think the

way the system is run at the moment doesn't adequately have the interests of

residents and consumers of aged care at its heart. And those interests have to be

given a lot greater priority in the legislation that governs the system, in the funding

mechanisms that the government has in place, and in the way that the system is

regulated from here on in.



CULLIVER: Is stopping for-profit aged care under consideration from Labor?



WATT: Well, again, we're going to be going through the royal commission report to

have a close look at what it says about how the system is funded and who

operates it. So we'll have a good chat to everyone involved in the system before

we announce any policies about that.



CULLIVER: Well, how it's funded is an interesting one. There is one idea in the

report that suggests we could have an aged care improvement levy - one per cent

of taxable personal income. What's your reaction to that?



WATT: Well, again, I think this is a serious recommendation that has been made

by the royal commission and the Government's got to take that recommendation

seriously. We do want to have a good think and a good talk to people about the

implementation of that. What I can say is that the funding for aged care has been

proven to be grossly inadequate. Several years ago, when Scott Morrison was the

Treasurer of this country, he imposed a funding cut on aged care. And it doesn't

take a rocket scientist to realise that some of the problems we've seen in the

system are directly linked to that decision to cut funding. So there's no doubt that

we do need to see more funding put into the system. We've got to see workforce

numbers increase. We've already said as the Federal Labor Party, that we think

that we need to be thinking about minimum staffing levels in aged care facility. So

there certainly has to be more funding put in the system and we'll certainly

consider this recommendation as one option in terms of how to fund it.



CULLIVER: And just on the fact that the two commissioners, Tony Pagone and

Lynelle Briggs, they've delivered really drastically different models for aged care

reform, they've given differing views of some of the solutions here. Is that a

problem for, well, the people in Parliament to make a decision about which way to

go here?



WATT: Well, I think it does reflect that it is a complex system, but the bottom line is

that we can't allow the Government to use some differences of opinion between

the commissioners as a reason to not take action. We've seen too many times this

Government has used different circumstances, whether it be COVID or other

issues, to excuse their failure to take action to fix aged care. This is something

that's their responsibility, and whether the commissioners agree on every single

recommendation or not, action has to be taken.

One other thing that's probably worth mentioning at a local level, Paul, is - and it

doesn't get a lot of attention - is the severe shortage of home-based aged care as

well. These days there's a lot of older people who prefer to receive their aged care

in their home. It's more convenient. They can remain in their home longer. And in

fact, it's actually cheaper for all of us who pay for it than having people in

residential aged care villages. And the latest figures that come from the

Department of Health show that in the Central Queensland region alone, there's

about 800 elderly people who are still waiting for aged care in their home, even

though they've been assessed as needing it. And about 70 per cent of those

people have been assessed as needing one of the two highest level care

packages. So it's not just a problem that we're seeing in aged care homes. The

underfunding and neglect of this system is impacting on people who require aged

care in their home as well. And it's impacting on people in Central Queensland, like

it is right around the country.



CULLIVER: My guest this morning is the Senator for Queensland with the Labor

Party Murray Watt. I do want to ask you as well, obviously, there's now multiple

allegations when it comes to Members of Parliament and just to detail, obviously,

late Friday, we learnt of a letter that was sent to the Prime Minister and various

other people in Parliament detailing a historical rape allegation allegedly committed

by a Cabinet Minister. The person making that allegation died in June of last year,

and I understand that may lead to an end in the police investigation. Additionally,

there's also a rape allegation that's been made against a Federal Labor MP and

that has been referred to the AFP. What should Parliament and the Government

be doing here to properly investigate both allegations?



WATT: I think that it has been a very disturbing couple of weeks, not just in the

Parliament, but I think for the entire community that these allegations have come

forward. I certainly know from my staff, other staff, other MPs that it's been

extremely distressing to people, and I've had similar feedback from people in the

general community as well. I am pleased that the Government has taken up

Labor's suggestion that there does need to be a proper independent review of

what has been occurring and the kind of policies that apply in the workplace at

Parliament. Clearly, the policies that exist at the moment just haven't been

sufficient to protect women in the workplace. It's a pretty basic ask for people that

when they go to work that they be safe.

I think in terms of these most recent allegations, I think anyone that watched the

Prime Minister's press conference yesterday was pretty unimpressed with the way

he has handled this so far. He seems to think that simply referring this matter to

the Federal Police is enough, when they don't actually have the jurisdiction to

investigate these matters. And I think that people do expect better of their Prime

Minister.



CULLIVER: Well, what does that look like? What should he do?



WATT: Obviously, it's a matter for the Prime Minister, and he should be asked

about that, to explain his behaviour. But I do note that the under the Ministerial

Code of Conduct, the Prime Minister does have the capacity to initiate inquiries.

That might be an option that he is prepared to consider, and if he's not prepared to

do that, then he should explain why.





CULLIVER: Senator, thanks for your time today.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: TALI ELEY 0448 078 456



