

Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE GOVERNMENT IN THE SENATE  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA



MEDIA RELEASE

18 March 2021

MENTAL HEALTH SUPPORT FOR SMALL BUSINESS OWNERS

The Morrison Government is putting the mental health of small business owners first with the  with the launch of a coaching and support program.

NewAccess for Small Business Owners will provide free, confidential and tailored mental  health coaching to small business owners.

The program is part of the Government’s $7 million BusinessBalance initiative, announced in  the 2020-21 Budget. BusinessBalance provides immediate, short-term support of mental and  financial wellbeing for small business as it recovers from the COVID-19 pandemic.

Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business, Senator the Hon Michaelia  Cash, said Australia’s small businesses are the backbone of our economy, and yet small  business owners suffer more from depression and anxiety than the general population.

“Despite collectively employing more Australians, small business owners have the fewest  resources to deal with their own needs, including their mental health. The COVID-19  pandemic has exacerbated this, putting our small business owners under even more financial  and emotional pressure,” Minister Cash said.

“That’s why it is crucial to our economy that small business owners get the support they need  towards recovery from COVID-19 and beyond.”

Developed by Beyond Blue, in partnership with the Australian Small Business and Family  Enterprise Ombudsman, NewAccess for Small Business Owners is designed to help small  business owners who are feeling overwhelmed about everyday life issues, which may be  caused by business challenges, staffing, relationships, health or loneliness. Coaches will have  a small business background.

BusinessBalance also includes the Counting on U program, delivered through Deakin  University, which is a free and professional development program that builds the mental  health knowledge of trusted business advisers.

The advisers are trained in mental health first aid and relationship-building skills so they can  recognise signs of mental and financial stress in small business owners and connect them to  specialised services.

For more information about NewAccess for Small Business Owners, visit  beyondblue.org.au/get-support/newaccess

For information on Counting on U and business advisor registration for upcoming training  starting late April 2021, visit blogs.deakin.edu.au/counting-on-u/







MEDIA CONTACTS  Guy Creighton - Guy.Creighton@dese.gov.au - 0438 815 302



