



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina



The Hon Andrew Constance  New South Wales Minister for Transport and Roads  State Member for Bega



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au

13 March 2021

CYCLEWAY PLANS TO BOOST SAFETY ON SYDNEY’S OXFORD ST

Plans are underway to build a new cycleway on Sydney’s Oxford Street east, connecting Taylor Square to  Paddington Gates, which will improve connections and safety for cyclists.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the Federal Government is contributing 50 per cent of the funding for the cycleway,  which will enhance safety on the critical corridor, which connects Sydney’s eastern suburbs to the CBD.

“The Road Safety Fund is delivering lifesaving upgrades to roads right across New South Wales and  whether it is in regional, rural and remote communities or right here in Sydney, we are providing the  investment needed to move towards zero fatalities by 2050,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

The proposed new cycleway on Oxford Street east will provide a seamless connection to the planned  Oxford St west cycleway, which was announced in November last year by the NSW Government and the  City of Sydney, as well as cycleways in the eastern suburbs.

New South Wales Minister for Transport and Roads Andrew Constance said there has been up to a 40%  increase in cycling in Greater Sydney since the start of 2020.

“The proposed Oxford Street cycleway - the final piece in the NSW Government’s Eastern Suburbs Link  election commitment - will take us another step closer to creating a connected cycling network right  across Greater Sydney,” Mr Constance said.

Sydney Lord Mayor Clover Moore said the project would benefit cyclists and business owners alike on  the fabulous Oxford Street strip.

“Thousands of people ride along Oxford Street each day. Adding a separated cycleway will make it safer  for cyclists and help calm traffic - creating a more pleasant environment for those on foot and the many  businesses along the strip,” Ms Moore said.

“All levels of government are working together on this important project because it’s crucial for  commuters and will breathe life into Oxford Street.”



As a road safety precaution, the current COVID-19 pop-up cycleway on Moore Park Road and Fitzroy  Street will be retained until the new Oxford Street cycleway goes live.

Federal Member for Wentworth Dave Sharma thanked the City of Sydney and Transport for NSW for  listening to his community’s feedback regarding the COVID-19 pop-up cycleway on Moore Park Road  and Fitzroy Street.

“This is a good outcome for the local community. With plans for Oxford Street cycleway now underway,  I will be pushing for the removal of the COVID-19 pop-up cycleway on Moore Park Road and Fitzroy  Street and the return of parking spaces for local residents,” said Mr Sharma.

New South Wales Independent MP for Sydney Alex Greenwich said the proposed Oxford Street east  cycleway will give commuters more travel options from the eastern suburbs to the city.

“It’s so exciting that the local, state, and federal governments have come together to invest millions of  dollars in the future of Oxford Street. This active transport infrastructure improvement comes at a  critical time for this world famous street,” Mr Greenwich said.

Separately, community consultation will commence from Monday on the existing COVID-19 pop-up  cycleways before a decision is made on whether they are retained into the future.

The City of Sydney will also consult the community on the proposal to retain the COVID-19 pop-up  cycleway on Moore Park Road and Fitzroy Street only until the Oxford Street cycleway is complete.

To provide feedback to Transport for NSW on the Sydney Park Road and Bridge Road COVID-19 pop-up  cycleways, visit nswroads.work/covid-infrastructure.

To provide feedback to the City of Sydney on the Dunning Avenue, Pitt Street, Henderson Road, Moore  Park Road and Fitzroy Street COVID-19 pop-up cycleways, visit sydneyyoursay.com.au.

The City of Sydney will update the community on the next steps, including the commencement of the  community consultation on Oxford St east, in due course.

The NSW Government is investing around $710 million into walking and bike riding infrastructure over  the next four years, bringing its total investment to around $1.1 billion - the largest commitment in the  State's history.

Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Dean Shachar 0418 202 860   Minister Constance - Kaycie Bradford 0417 129 445   Sydney Lord Mayor - Paul Mackay 0436 816 604

