



TRANSCRIPT  Senator James Paterson

Chair, Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security  Liberal Senator for Victoria



Tuesday 09 February 2021

ABC Radio National: RN Breakfast

Subjects: Cheng Lei, PJCIS, universities inquiry



Fran Kelly: Liberal  Senator  James  Paterson is the newly  appointed chair of  parliament's  powerful Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security. Senator Paterson, welcome to RN  breakfast.

Senator James Paterson: Good morning, Fran.

Kelly: Does this come as any  surprise to you that Cheng Lei has now been formally   arrested after being detained for almost six months?

Paterson: No, I can't say  that it's surprising, Fran, and it is something that we are very   concerned about. In the Chinese system  it's not unusual for people to be detained for up to  six  months without charge or without even being formally  arrested. But they've now gone  to that next stage. She has been formally  arrested and the upcoming stage could last for  up to seven months of  investigation before she's formally  charged, let alone tried.

Kelly: These are very  serious charges that we're hearing of. She's accused of  unlawfully   supplying or attending, intending to supply  state secrets or intelligence to an overseas  organisation to individuals. So very serious accusations. The Chinese ministry  said  overnight  Australia  should  respect  China's  sovereignty,  stop  interfering,  and  Cheng  Lei   has  been  granted  guaranteed  various  rights.  How  should  Australia  respond  to  this?  What   should our government be doing? What can it do?

Paterson: Well, that really  is an absurd accusation from  the Chinese ministry. We've done  nothing of  the sort of  interfering in their legal system. We have no capacity  to interfere in  their legal system. All we have done is the same thing we would do for any  Australian  citizen  detained  anywhere  in  the  world,  which  is  to  robustly  advocate  for  their  interests,   both directly  to the Chinese government and publicly, as the foreign minister did yesterday   to ensure that basic  norms, international norms that almost all countries  says  they  agree  to

of  procedural fairness and justice are followed. And particularly  in the case of  this woman

who is a single mother who has two young children here in Melbourne who she has not  seen  for  at  least  six  months  now.

Kelly: The, Australia's foreign minister, Marise Payne, says Australia expects basic   standards of  justice, procedural fairness and human treatment. Do you hope that Cheng  Lei will receive that?

Paterson: That is, of  course, our hope, and that is what we'll be advocating for. And it is  really  up to the Chinese government to provide that and knowing of  course that the  international community  and the world will judge them  according to how they  conduct  themselves.

Kelly: What  leverage  does  Australia  have,  though?  I  mean, there hasn't been any  high  level contact at the ministerial level between Canberra and Beijing for some time now,  more than a year, maybe even two years, close to. How much harder does that make it for  Australia to try  and influence and make sure that Chang is afforded fairness?

Paterson: That's true, Fran, although it's not due to any  lack  of  trying on our part.  Ministers at every  level in our government have been trying to engage constructively,  diplomatically  with their counterparts in China for some time now. And it's on the Chinese  side, that they've decided not to reciprocate. And that's a decision that lies entirely  within  their own control and not within ours. We do make representations directly  at every  other  level,  though,  and  it  doesn't  stop us from  raising robustly  the interests of  Australian  citizens, both privately  to the Chinese government and publicly.

Kelly: What is your reading on this? I mean, the minister said she wouldn't speculate, but,  you know, is this a tit for tat situation for Australia's foreign interference laws? The  interviews ASIO conducted with Chinese journalists last year, for instance, the two visiting  scholars who had their visas taken away  on the ground cancelled on the grounds of  being  a risk  to security. Is that what's going on here?

Paterson: Well, we don't know, Fran. And all I can say  is that I really  hope that that is not  the case, because if  it were the case, it would amount to the Chinese government  admitting that it takes political hostages in a retaliatory  way. There really  is no comparison  to be made between Cheng Lei's case and all those other cases that you mentioned. For  example, the raids on Chinese journalists. None of  those journalists were detained without  charge. None of  them  were held to be investigated for months on end. They  were all  allowed to return home safely  and uninterrupted by  the Australian government, so there is  no comparison to be drawn there.

Kelly: Is there a fear of  hostage diplomacy  being ramped up? I mean, Cheng Lei was a  respected broadcaster in Beijing. Very  high profile. Does the fact an Australian of  her  standing, could be seized by  police taken into secret detention for six  months without  formal charges being laid, mean that no Australian is really  safe in China. What's your  what's your view? What's your advice?

Paterson: Well, as I said, Fran, we don't know. But the official travel advice from  DFAT is  that Australians should not travel to China and not just because of  the risk  of  covid. We  have publicly  said that we believe Australians are at risk  of  arbitrary  detention in China.  And it's not just Australians, citizens from  other western countries have faced the same  risks. There are two Canadian citizens who have now been detained in China for three  years with no apparent justification.



Kelly: What is the your, you don't resile from  the tag China Hawk. In fact, I think  you're a  founding member of  the Wolverines, which is the bipartisan committee that formed has  been highly  critical of  China and raising issues around China. How do you think  China will  react? Beijing will react to your appointment as chair of  this very  important committee  around security  and intelligence. This is the committee that oversees national intelligence  and security.

Paterson: Well Fran, my  views on the Chinese Communist Party  don't differ much from   the previous chair of  this committee, Andrew Hastie, and it's a very  consistent position  from  the Australian government to appoint people to this committee who are very  strong  protectors of Australia's democracy and sovereignty.

Kelly: And very  strong critics of  China. I think  both of  you were refused visas to China a  couple of  years ago, weren't you?

Paterson: Yes, we were. But that shows Fran our genuine interest and engagement with  China,  our  genuine  interest  in  hearing  their  perspective.  And  it's  unfortunate  that  we   weren't allowed to go visit China. I hold hope that one day  I might be able to and I look   forward to that.

Kelly: Another potential flashpoint for the committee that you now chair. You're running  this inquiry  into foreign interference in Australian universities. And ASIO's submission to  that inquiry  warns researchers and their families. University  researchers and their families  are being, quote, threatened, coerced or intimidated by  actors seeking to have this  sensitive research provided to foreign states. How big a threat is this to our higher  education  and  research  sector?

Paterson: I thought, Fran, that ASIO's submission to the committee was very sobering and  it's consistent with all the issues we're aware of  publicly  with our universities. From  the  high  profile cases around free speech of  students and academics, like Drew Pavlou or  Elaine Pearson at UQ and UNSW, to arrangements that universities have entered into with  Chinese counterpart institutions unwisely  in my  view, or naively  in my  view. I think  we do  have really  serious challenges with our higher education sector, but I think  there is  differences between universities. And one of  the things I hope to draw out from  this inquiry   is those universities who do have best practise and can serve as models for other  universities to lift their standards and better protect their institutions.

Kelly: I haven't read the ASIO report, but I've only  seen reports of  it. Is it signalling that  some of  our technology  and scientific  advances are falling into the wrong foreign hands.

Paterson: Well that's always possibility. It's an absolute possibility  Fran.

Kelly: Do they go further than possibility? They say that's happening?

Paterson: Well, ASIO does believe that there have been attempts to intervene in our  university  systems. There've been high profile stories of  hacks at our universities. ANU is  one such example, but there are others. And we're also aware that through the reporting  on the thousand talents programme, which is a talent acquisition programme with the

Chinese Communist Party, that some Australian university  researchers appear to have  entered into arrangements with the Chinese Communist Party, unbeknownst to their  universities or not with full visibility  of  the universities. And that is very  troubling.



Kelly: Troubling too the submission to your inquiry  from  the federal police. They  said that  academics and their families are being threatened by  foreign entities when ASIO warns  about foreign states and the AFP talking about foreign entities, are they  referring to China?

Paterson: Well, I think  it's pretty  clear, Fran, that the biggest country  in this in this area is  is China. But it's not the only  country  in this area. And the lessons that we can learn from   robustly  defending  our  institutions  against  potential  Chinese  foreign  interference  can  be   applied to any  other foreign state actor, particularly  authoritarian states.

Kelly: And when you talked about the university  sector, this inquiry  in the sector, you talk   say  when they  acted unwisely  or naively, do you trust the sector when it comes to doing  the right thing at these decision points and is it likely  it is your inquiry, do you think, likely  to  lead to any  new further regulation imposed on universities? There's already  been  significant regulation reviewed and imposed in the recent last 18 months.

Paterson: That that's right Fran. The inclusion of  universities in the foreign relations  bill,   which gives the foreign minister the power to cancel international arrangements between  universities in Australia and authoritarian based universities overseas I think  is evidence  that it's not just me, but it's the parliament and the government that  holds  these  concerns.   This is an opportunity  for universities to demonstrate that they  do deserve that trust, that  they  are on top of  this issue and I would much rather -



Kelly: Aren't they  already  doing that, though? They  are already  co-operating with the  government? There's been a new committee set up. Are you happy  with the cooperation?

Paterson: I am, but I think there's more evidence to be provided to the committee and the  parliament to reassure us that all universities are on top of  this problem, not just some  universities, and that they  do take this threat seriously  and they're well equipped to  robustly  respond  to  it.

Kelly: James Paterson, thank you very much for joining us.

Paterson: Thanks Fran.

ENDS



