

JASON CLARE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR REGIONAL SERVICES,

LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND TERRITORIES

MEMBER FOR BLAXLAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

TUESDAY, 16 MARCH 2021



SUBJECTS: NSW government rips off struggling renters; Vaccine.



JASON CLARE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS: There are

tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of people, probably, right across the country that

today are struggling to pay their rent. In the peak of the pandemic, state governments across

the country set up schemes to help people struggling to pay the rent, because they've lost their

job because of COVID or lost hours at work.



There's a story in the Sydney Morning Herald today that I think deserves a bit of attention.

What that story tells us is that in New South Wales, the scheme that the government set up

there to help renters pay the rent has abjectly failed. It was a $220 million scheme to help

people pay the rent. How much of that do you think has been spent? The answer is 4.6 per

cent. $220 million of taxpayers money designed to help landlords and renters who are

struggling to pay the rent because they lost their job and only 4.6 per cent of it has been

allocated to people who need help. This is bloody appalling, straight out of the Scott Morrison

playbook: make a big announcement and then do absolutely nothing.



To make matters worse, the scheme is now being wrapped up and all of the money sent back

to consolidated revenue. In two weeks’ time, JobKeeper ends and the JobSeeker supplement

ends. If the information from Treasury is right, more people are going to lose their job, more

people are going to struggle with to pay the rent, and this scheme is wrapping up. I’m calling

on the New South Wales Government today to keep the scheme going and fix it, make it

easier for people who are struggling to pay the rent to access it.



I'm calling on all state governments across the country to do the same thing. There's other

schemes like this. We need to get help to people who are struggling to pay the rent now and in

the months ahead when more people lose their job, because JobKeeper disappears. And

finally, I’m calling on the Prime Minister to act. This is the sort of thing that National Cabinet

should look at. I've been calling on them to put this on the agenda for National Cabinet for a

while. Now that we know these schemes aren't working, I ask the Prime Minister to get the

Premiers together and fix these schemes once and for all so people who need help get it

because they're going to need more help in the months ahead.



JOURNALIST: Is there any reason the Government's given for this scheme not using the

allocated funds?



CLARE: One of the big problems with the New South Wales’ scheme is that they said to

landlords, "if you cut the rent, we'll cut your land tax". In New South Wales, most landlords

don't pay land tax, so the scheme was badly designed from the start. They should redesign the

scheme so the tenants can say, "Look, my income’s been halved because I've lost hours or

I've lost my job," and then be able to easily access the money without having to go through the

landlord when the landlord's got no incentive to cut the rent because they can't get a cut in

land tax that they don't pay.



JOURNALIST: Just on vaccines today, there's more European countries that have suspended

the use of the AstraZeneca vaccine. Are you concern by that at all and does it show that do

you think perhaps that Australia was right, even though we're going bit slowly that Australia's

got a bit of an advantage moving second on vaccines?



CLARE: I've got total trust in the Therapeutic Goods Authority. The TGA do a good job and I

think all politicians here will tell you the same thing: we have trust in them. That doesn't excuse

the fact that the rollout is so slow here. I said on the weekend, this is like Cliff Young, the old

ultra-marathon runner, who used to shuffle down the Hume Highway in his gumboots. This is

taking a long time. The Prime Minister told us that we'd all be vaccinated October, looks like

we won't be. Told us four million would be vaccinated this month, looks like that won't be the

case either. I think that the government can do two things at once here. They can give

confidence to the Australian people that the vaccine is safe and they can actually make sure

that the vaccine goes into people's arms.



JOURNALIST: What about, you know, these countries have clearly suspended it for a reason.

Do you think perhaps, Europe's got its own political climate, are they reacting to each other? Is

that the reason? Maybe they're kind of jumping the gun here?



CLARE: I defer to the experts. I heard on the news this morning that all the evidence from our

authorities is that there is no causal link there and so rather than pretend that I'm a scientist or

a doctor, like some politicians do, I'll refer to the experts.



JOURNALIST: But does it make the job harder in an electorate like yours with such a diverse

community?



CLARE: Yeah, I think that's probably spot on. In a community like mine, where it's critical to

get confidence up and information out, and that's part of getting confidence up, getting

information out in lots of different languages, that we've got to make sure that all levels of

government, all the politicians, all the religious leaders, all the community leaders, are

speaking with one voice: that the vaccine is safe, and that we encourage people to access it. I

caught up with some leaders in the Islamic community the other day who put out a Facebook

video explaining to the Islamic community that the virus is safe to take and people should take

it. Sorry that the vaccine is safe to take. My apologies. They're the sorts of things that I'd

encourage all community leaders to do. Because building that confidence, will see more

people vaccinated. As one Vietnamese doctor said to me the other day, "this is not just about

saving your life, it's about saving our community".



JOURNALIST: Do you think the Government's done enough to address multicultural

communities and make sure that they know that, to put official information out rather than just

relying on communities?



CLARE: They've made big promises, we need to see action. The Government has a habit of

making big announcements, and then not delivering the promise to do this. I'm just calling on

the Government to make sure it happens.



JOURNALIST: What about the anti-vaxxer community? They seem to be running riot on

platforms like Instagram. The government puts out token things to stop them but does the

Government really need to really ramp up its opposition to them?



CLARE: I see it on my own Facebook page. If you go onto Facebook, or you go into

WhatsApp or you go into WeChat, you can see a lot of rubbish about how vaccines are

dangerous. And the government does need to combat that. All of this mischief thrives in a

vacuum and so the work that the government, but not just the government, politicians,

generally, community leaders nationwide, do to combat this mischief and misinformation is

very important. So yes, the government can do more. We need to make sure that campaign

gets out in all the languages that people speak on the streets, in my community, and right

across the country. But community leaders, political leaders, religious leaders, we've all got a

job here to build confidence and the sooner the vaccine gets out, the sooner the better. I'm

planning to visit my local GPs, film people in my community, young and old, getting the vaccine

and have GPs tell the story about what they're doing. That'll build confidence. You can't do that

until needles are going into arms and that's taking too long. I've got GPs in my community

telling me that they're only being given 50 vials of the vaccine. They want more, they want to

speed it up. I think most Aussies sitting here today listening to this will be saying "Bring it on.

Give me the jab. Give me two jabs". It's taking too long.



JOURNALIST: On the rollout, though, Australia is certainly in a very privileged position in that

we haven't had widespread spread of the virus. Is it fair that Australia really accelerate and

order in a lot of doses when other countries, when production is limited and other countries are

really struggling to access it?



CLARE: We want to see everyone in the world vaccinated. One of the encouraging things out

of The Quad meeting over the weekend was a billion doses of the vaccine going into our

broader community. The world won't get back to normal until everyone's vaccinated. But the

key point here is the Australian economy won't get back to normal until everybody is

vaccinated. We talk a lot in this building about wanting to get people back to work, get jobs

back, get the economy back up and running. The borders aren't going to open and we're not

going to have the sort of country and the sort of economy that we had in 2019 until everyone's

vaccinated. That's why we've got to speed this up.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ARLEY BLACK 0458 834 978



