







The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology  Federal Member for McPherson

MEDIA RELEASE

$1.3 BILLION MODERN MANUFACTURING INITIATIVE OPENS FOR  MEDICAL PRODUCTS

26 February 2021

The Morrison Government is backing Australia’s medical products manufacturers to grow  and create new jobs, with applications for projects in the sector opening under the $1.3  billion Modern Manufacturing Initiative (MMI).

Medical Products is the second of the six National Manufacturing Priorities which will be  supported under the MMI to help manufacturers to scale-up production, commercialise their  products and operations, and integrate into domestic and global supply chains.

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said co-funding from the MMI  will drive forward industry-led projects in this priority area, greatly improve our self-sufficiency, and open up new export opportunities.

“This support will help us make more medical products right here at home - creating more  skilled jobs for Australians and helping build a resilient and competitive manufacturing base  at the heart of our economy,” Minister Andrews said.

“Australia has pioneered many commercially successful medical products that have made it  on the world stage, including the cochlear implant, the green whistle pain reliever and the  cervical cancer vaccine.

“Through the Modern Manufacturing Initiative, we’re supporting more manufacturers to turn  their clever ideas and research into commercial outcomes, and harness global  opportunities.”

The medical products National Manufacturing Priority road map, released today, will guide  government and industry investment under the MMI, and focuses on keeping sophisticated  manufacturing capability in Australia.

The road map highlights specific areas of investment opportunity including smart monitoring  devices and diagnostics, personalised implants and bionics, high-value pharmaceuticals,  biologics and complementary medicines, cutting-edge treatments like mRNA vaccines,  regenerative medicine and genomics, as well as digital integrated products and platforms.







“This dynamic, industry-led road map sets out the vision for the sector with a focus on high-value opportunities that will position medical products manufacturers for long term growth,”  Minister Andrews said.

“Australia’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic showed the remarkable capability and  expertise that already exists within our medical products manufacturing sector, as well as  our potential for future success.

“The MMI is focussed on scaling-up that capability - both to create economic opportunity  and to ensure the supply of critical products during times of crisis.”

The $1.3 billion MMI is the centrepiece of the Government’s $1.5 billion Modern  Manufacturing Strategy, an action plan to position Australia as a globally recognised, high-quality and sustainable manufacturing nation.

The road maps in the remaining priority areas will be released in coming weeks to coincide  with the opening of their respective MMI funding rounds.

The remaining road maps are; Resources Technology and Critical Minerals Processing,  Food and Beverage, Recycling and Clean Energy, and Defence.

Initial applications will be limited to the Translation and Integration streams of the MMI, with  expressions of interest for the larger Collaboration stream to open in coming months.

For more information on the road maps and available grant funding  visit industry.gov.au/manufacturing.



Media Contact: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846 / Jen Jennings 0435 121 347

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

