

BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR GORTON

LUKE GOSLING OAM MP   MEMBER FOR SOLOMON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  DARWIN  FRIDAY, 9 APRIL 2021

SUBJECTS: Darwin’s strategic importance for Australia’s defence; Royal  Commission into veterans’ suicide; Cyber security; Defence procurement cost blow  out; Australia’s military presence in Myanmar.

LUKE GOSLING, MEMBER FOR SOLOMON: Thanks, everyone for coming down on a  beautiful day here at the Esplanade. It's awesome to have Brendan O'Connor the Shadow  Minister for Defence in town again. Brendan is no stranger to the Northern Territory. He's a  frequent visitor and he will be up again a couple of times later in the year. It’s going to be  great to get out to Robertson Barracks today, visit the troops and talk about a range of  issues, including defence industry.

Here in the capital of the north, we've obviously got Navy, Army and Air Force bases, a  secondary air force base down at Tindal and we've got border command operating out of  here. So we are really important strategically. It's great to have the Shadow Defence  Minister Brendan O'Connor in town, once again, to be talking to stakeholders, talking to the  Northern Territory government because we have a bright future here, not only in terms of  the defence bases that we host, the defence families that mean so much to our community,  but also our growing defence industry. And we're going to be, with the ship lift, maintaining  more naval and border patrol vessels hear in Darwin.

But there's so much more that we can do here. We've got big projects to expand our base  down at Larrakeyah. Also new facilities out of Robertson Barracks, it's going to be good to  get out there and also say G'day to the US Marines, who are also obviously very welcome  here. And it's going to be great to catch up with them. We have so many shared interests in  our region and one of the great things about the Marine deployment that was announced by  Federal Labor under the Prime Minister Julia Gillard is that when it comes to humanitarian  and disaster response, having the US Marines here is great, because we can work with  them and regional countries.

We know that the ADF has deployed to Papua New Guinea in support of the COVID rolling  out there and some breakouts of COVID. The Timor Leste government had said that they  are needing international support to deal with the massive floods that have occurred there  in the last week. We've asked for briefings from the Minister of Defence and the Minister for  Foreign Affairs on what should be from the Australian government, a comprehensive and  coordinated response that is going to assist East Timor are near friends and neighbours  with the logistic challenges that they face. There is in excess of 10,000 people that  homeless and living in evacuation centres in Dili. There's been at least 40 killed, but there's  many more still missing, probably under landslides, some will have been washed out to  sea.

So it's been a great sense of pride for me as a federal member for Darwin to see  Territorians respond. Last night at the Portuguese and Timorese club, there were massive,  massive donations of non perishable food and items that are going to help people that have  literally lost everything in East Timor. We look forward to the federal government  announcing a comprehensive response that will no doubt involve ADF assets going to  assist. Obviously, in Timor Leste, we already have members of the Australian Defence  Force the defence cooperation program, and they have been responding as best they can.  But there will be a need to assist with things like drinking water for those large amounts of  people that are displaced, emergency food and logistics support to get to some of the  communities in Timor Leste that have been cut off. They've been cut off because the  flooding has destroyed roads and bridges.

So we look forward to the Australian government announcing a comprehensive support  package for the Timorese and it once again underlines the importance of Darwin as a  forward operating base for our nation to project our influence and our support our  assistance into our near region. Whether that be assisting in eastern Indonesia, in Timor  Leste in Papua New Guinea there's a very big role for us to play. So that's all I wanted to  say by introduction, and it's great to have Brendan O'Connor in town. And I'll now hand over  to him. Thanks.

BRENDAN O'CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE: Thanks very much,  Luke. It's great to be in the Territory. Obviously, given the COVID situation, I wasn't able to  be here last year, but it will be a place I'll continue to visit. It's critical for our defence  strategic priorities and I think it's even enhanced by the fact that in its federal member  Darwin has a former ADF personnel who has a lived experience of the role that the ADF  play in so many ways. So it's great to be here with Luke. It's wonderful to be here in  Territory in in Darwin. I've only recently acquired the portfolio just some eight weeks ago,  and in that time, have been looking at the major priorities of defence and in in terms of  national security, but also in terms of defence industry as well. The reality is we spend  enormous amounts of taxpayers money. We do so to keep our nation safe. We do so to  ensure we have the right defence assets, the capability to protect our nation and our  citizens in a time of massive technological change. We are concerned quite frankly that  many of the programs, some of which were announced under the previous Labor federal  government, have not gone to plan.

There have been major blow outs, for example, in the submarine program at least in terms  of timelines, at least a decade, in terms of the first time a submarine will hit the water. We  have got major blowouts financially, we've seen a expenditure increase between from $50  billion to $90 billion under that program. This is the largest contract program we have had in

our history. To think that that has happened under this government's watch is a problem.

Now I've made very clear to Peter Dutton, the incoming Defence Minister, that Labor will  work very closely with the government to work together to deal with matters of national  security, but it is also incumbent on us to hold the government to account to ensure that  they comply with the commitments they made to the Australian people and make sure that  the contracts that are entered into are actually properly implemented and enacted in  defence of our nation. We will continue to do so, to do just that. That's our job.

One other thing I just wanted to touch upon before I mentioned what we're doing today is of  course, calling on the government to announce a Royal Commission into veterans'  suicides. The Parliament unanimously passed a motion in the House of Representatives,  prior to that the Senate, to enact a Royal Commission to investigate the very significantly  high number of veterans who have suicided and to find the root cause of that and what we  can do as a country to stop that happening in the way it's happening, to mitigate the  likelihood of any suicide. Now, the government members of the House voted with Labor  and the crossbench to do that. I've just noticed that the incoming minister Peter Dutton has  said he supports the Royal Commission but none of that matters unless there are there is  direct action by the executive government. Parliament in and of itself cannot determine a  Royal Commission, that is done by the executive government.

So if Scott Morrison and Peter Dutton are sincere about their support for a Royal  Commission into veterans’ suicides then they must announce the terms of reference or the  draft terms of reference, the timelines, the budget, so that we know that their words mean  something because without those decisions it is quite frankly paying lip service and  insulting to the families of veterans who have, of course, been advocating for such a Royal  Commission for so very long.

So that's something we expect the government to do to match their rhetoric with action and  announce a royal commission into veteran suicides. It's a critical problem, we need to  address it, the government is in a position to do so. But quite frankly, currently, their words  are hollow if they don't make any significant executive decisions.

Today, I have the good fortune to accompany Luke to Robertson barracks. This is a  remarkable part of Australia in terms of defence strategic priorities, and has been so  historically. Only two nights ago I stood in Adelaide River War Cemetery, which reminded  me when it came to dealing with the brunt of war, the Territory has probably dealt with it in  a way that very few parts of this nation have. It will be the 80th anniversary next year of  course of the bombing of Darwin. The Adelaide River War Cemetery, where of course there  is a commemoration to those that fell during that time, is a reminder how important it is,  firstly, about the strategic role that this region plays in our defence and secondly, a  reminder of the loss that has endured as a result of those terrible conflicts. And also, I think,  just another reason why we need to focus on what we can do to build our capability to  make sure that they are placed in areas of the nation that protect us more effectively.

Now, Luke has talked about the upgrades on the new assets that are developing in these  areas in the Northern Territory, and we welcome that. We welcome any upgrades to assets,  any reinvestment and new investment in the defence assets in the Territory. But we also  want to make sure, as I say, that those contracts that are so significant are properly  executed so that we have what is required, dealing with the threats we have in the 21st

century.

There are some really significant threats that are there. We need to make sure we are  ready and well placed to deal with them. We'll want to work with the government to do so  but the government needs to ensure and assure the Australian public that those significant  programs, whether it's frigates, submarines, or other defence assets are properly  undertaken. That will be the role of Federal Labor between now and the next election to  hold this government to account and if they fail to deliver on what they said they would  deliver, make that very clear to the Australian public.

I'm happy to take any questions.

JOURNALIST: You've identified a number of issues there, even though you're quite new in  the role. What about say the cyberspace? You know, there was recently quite a significant  breach in the corporate world here in Australia in a media organisation. Is that something  you potentially have identified as a real concerning aspect to defence in Australia?

O'CONNOR: Absolutely. Cyber security, or cyber attacks that have happened around the  around the globe are increasing. They certainly are a threat to us. That's why we have to  have the technological capabilities to deal with such cyber attacks. We need to build  resilience not just in the civilian world, or the corporate world, as you mentioned, but also in  government and in defence.

Any briefings I've received from any agencies of government have highlighted that the  growing threat that cyber attacks bring to this nation. Of course we need to be ready and be  able to deal with them. Obviously when I get around the bases, get the briefings from ADF  and other governments and defence agencies, talk to the experts in the defence field,  certainly we'll be looking at what we need to do more, if we're not doing enough, and clearly  we have to be considering other options available.

Only recently, there's been a disruption to the intranet in the Australian Parliament House.  There's no determination as to exactly what happened there. Until I receive a briefing we  can't be fully aware, but we have asked the Australian Signals Directorate to brief us on  whether in fact that was a real threat to the information stored by parliamentarians. We  want to get a briefing on that. We've yet receive such a briefing, but we want to work with  the government, if indeed we can in a bipartisan manner to deal with such issues.

But it is a constant reminder that if they can breach - if it has happened and they breached  APH intranet then we need to just make sure we have built in resilience, both in the  commercial world and in the civilian and government world.

JOURNALIST: There has been a number of contracts that have not been delivered. Can  you comment on why they haven't been delivered by the Morison Government?

O'CONNOR: Well, I think it's fair to say that when the submarine program was being  negotiated with the prime contractor, the prime Naval Group, it would seem from the  information released through senate estimates and through other means that the  government did not at the time of negotiation make sure that there was sufficient provisions  in place to, I think, exact out of that contract what was required. It's no point just shaking  hands or signing the document without enforceable provisions. The same goes for local

content.

You think about the problem we had. We had a government going to the 2016 election  promising that the submarine program would have 90 per cent local content. That was  proven to be untrue. They went to the last election saying that there would be at least 60  per cent local content of a submarine group. That was also proven not to be true. Now  they're suggesting they can fix it in a sort of retro way. In hindsight it would have been a lot  easier for them to get those enforceable provisions in the submarine contract at the  beginning of the negotiations, at the timing of the first signatures by the Naval Group and  the Commonwealth of Australia. Now trying to fix it in the way they are, I think it's got major  challenges. If they can fix it, we'll be the first ones to welcome that remedy. But right now,  we have, because of the inability to exact from the other party what was promised, we have  the first submarines under the program, the first submarine to be in the water by as late as  2035 instead of midway through this decade.

We have expenditure increases of up to $40 billion on one project, one contract, and we  have no assurance regardless of what's been said by government, that there is sufficient  local content.

In fact, the variations they say they have made to the contract some two weeks ago have  not even been seen by a Minister of the government. Not the Defence Minister, not the  Defence Industry Minister, not the former acting Defence Minister. No one in government  has actually seen the actual variations to the contract. That, to me, is quite remarkable that  something as significant as this program in terms of its scale terms of its cost, when they  sought to make variations to assure us that there's a 60 per cent local content at a  minimum, no Minister could give a guarantee that they'd sighted the actual variations to the  contract.

So that does not fill us with a lot of confidence. And we would like to know more as to how  they're going to secure local content. There are companies in Darwin and the Territory and  around Australia that are looking for more work out of these contracts. I mean, this is  massive amounts of public money. We want to see our defence industry grow. It can only  grow if we see investment in local businesses. The only way that can happen is that  government makes sure that there are enforceable provisions in large contracts so that  local businesses get a go. So, they grow and more employment follows as a result,

JOURNALIST: Just in terms of the Royal Commission, now, you mentioned that despite  Dutton’s support for, for one happening, had you expected that they would have been terms  reference already released by now and when do you expect them to be?

O'CONNOR: Well, there's been no announcement. The reality is that all government  members voted for the Royal Commission into veterans’ suicides, yet, there's been no  announcement as to what happens from here. Firstly, the Member for Solomon, Luke rose,  as he did so powerfully, and spoke about the need for, for this Royal Commission, having  spoken for so long to advocates and others and his former defence colleagues about this  issue.

My contribution was to say this commitment, this vote by government members to support  that motion would mean nothing if the Government doesn't make an announcement about  the Royal Commission. It will be just left as a motion that has passed the Parliament

without action. So, we haven't heard a word. Now if Peter Dutton is sincere about his  support, if Scott Morrison is sincere about his support for a Royal Commission, we would  expect them to at the very least foreshadow a set of draft terms of references so that  stakeholders could engage with the terms and so could the federal opposition, indicate  when it would be likely to take place, also potentially the composition whether it be one or  two or three Royal Commissioners, and a timeline.

These things are usually a matter of course. But if you think about the Government and  Royal Commissions, it took them years took to agree to a Royal Commission into the  banks. It took them a very long time, years, in fact, for them to agree to a Royal  Commission into Aged Care and it would appear they’re dragging their feet here. Now, the  only way we can be assured that there's sincerity in their sentiment, in their words, is  action. They are in government. Governments determine Royal Commissions, not  Parliament. They need to do that, as a matter of course.

JOURNALIST: A question that has a foreign affairs dimension, but it is primarily defence  and that's actually the defence relationship with the Myanmar military, which recently was  suspended as you know earlier in March. Firstly, do you think it was a mistake for the  Australian military to engage with the Myanmar military when it was well recorded that they  were engaging in human rights abuses since 2012/13? And secondly, do you do see if  Labor were in power in the future, any rekindling of that relationship between the Australian  military and the Myanmar military?

O'CONNOR: Well, firstly, we have grave concerns about what's happening at Myanmar. Of  course, overturning an elected government or suspending democracy in this way, this  brutal, repressive way, is something that Federal Labor condemns, as does I believe the  federal government. I think what follows from that is that our defence force, of course,  should not be engaged in a way it was engaged in prior to that coup that occurred in that  nation.

As to what we should have done in 2012/13, to be honest, I haven't been briefed sufficiently  to have a significant or precise opinion on that. However, of course, human rights abuse is  something that we abhor. We should be using all means we have diplomatic and otherwise  to prevent that from happening, or certainly stop it from happening, wherever we can.  We've got a role as a middle power in the region and beyond to obviously advance  prosperity through democracy, and peace and stability. We have a role to play and we've  played a role in many other countries in many close neighbours in helping restore stability,  whether it was Timor Leste many years ago, whether it was in Solomon Islands, we have  always acted, I think in, in a way to try and foster democracy, stability and peace.

So, to answer your question, I think we've already made clear, maybe a month ago that we  think the defence has to desist from engaging in the manner in which it did prior to the coup  that occurred. And I think we need to send a strong message to those that have overturned  democracy, that this will not be acceptable to Australia. We need to use the international  forums to make sure that there is pressure on those that have chosen to take this path, that  that is not acceptable to most sovereign nations, that make up the United Nations and other  international fora.

JOURNALIST: Do you see that happening again, though, in the near future, given this is  the same military that expelled 700,000 Rohingya, the same military that's engaged in



multiple ethnic conflicts in all over Myanmar, both in the west and eastern states? It just  seems odd that it took this particular coup for the government to react as it did. I'm sort of  asking you really, in terms of the near future, what you would plan to do?

O'CONNOR: I think first, we have to see how this unfolds, certainly, and things are much  more complicated. Sometimes disengaging is not in the interest of the people you're  seeking to defend or protect or advance their interests. So, I think it's fair to say, whilst it's  easy to suggest that we should withdraw all of our sort of engagement because of  something that happens that is contrary to democratic principles. That might not always be  the case. It turns on the facts, it turns on the circumstances and I think to that extent you  really have to see what is happening at the time at any given nation for that matter, as to  how we would respond both diplomatically and in terms of a military response.

But we are very concerned about the people of Myanmar, of course, particularly those  ethnicities that have been treated so, so terribly, and we should be acting in a way through  the international fora to do whatever we can to see the restoration of democracy and of  course, the end of this effectively, police state that's appearing in Myanmar.

Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KYLIE JENSEN 0402 298 728





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.









