

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR NATIONAL RECONSTRUCTION, EMPLOYMENT,

SKILLS AND SMALL BUSINESS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR SCIENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC AFTERNOON BRIEFINGS

WEDNESDAY, 17 MARCH 2021



SUBJECTS: COVID-19 in Papua New Guinea; Ensuring Evidence to the Kate Jenkins

Inquiry is confidential; Nicolle Flint; Creating a better culture in Parliament House;

Labor; Australia’s relationship with China.



PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: Richard Marles, welcome.



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Good

afternoon. How are you, PK?



KARVELAS: Good. Let's start on the PNG COVID Assistance plan. Labor says the

government should have acted earlier, but are you satisfied by the assistance that has been

offered now?



MARLES: I think we are seeing a significant package being put forward by the government.

And we do support it. What's going on in PNG is a tragedy. You know, I think we've all been

concerned that at some point or another, this is how COVID was going to play out in Papua

New Guinea. And on lots of levels I am deeply concerned about what this is going to mean for

the country. Sickness is a reality in PNG in a way we don't really appreciate it here. And the

comorbidity associated with having other diseases and then getting COVID, and what that

means in terms of the death rate has got me really worried. There is obviously, you know, we

need to be mindful of it being our nearest neighbour, as well, and protecting ourselves in

relation to this. So, helping those in PNG is important, I think, for the national interest in terms

of our own health outcomes.



KARVELAS: Okay, let's move onto a couple of other stories that have been dominating today.

An open letter signed by 30 women, including former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins, and also

former adviser to multiple Labor Leaders, Fiona Sugden, calls on the Prime Minister Scott

Morrison and Anthony Albanese, your side, to ensure an independent review into Parliament is

confidential. Should it remain confidential?



MARLES: Well that -  I think what is being sought is that those people who give evidence can

do so with their evidence being confidential and that it not be subject to the normal processes

which might apply in relation to a HREOC-type inquiry, and I think that is important. We have

made that clear to the government. I understand the government also are agreeable to the

idea of trying to make sure this is what happens. Obviously the report itself will become public,

but it's really important this is done. It's really important we have an overhaul of the culture in

Parliament House and it is really important people feel safe in coming forward and that they

can tell their story fully, but knowing that they will be able to do so in confidence. So I

completely understand the letter that has been written and I think it's really important that the

thrust of what is being sought there is ultimately implemented. And I am pretty confident that is

exactly what is going to happen.



KARVELAS: Let's talk about Nicolle Flint's treatment and what she has been talking about.

She calls it "a coordinated sexist campaign". But it was pretty well-known, wasn't it? Why

hasn't Labor denounced it earlier, doesn't it demonstrate there was a double standard here?



MARLES: I don't think it demonstrates a double standard. But let me clear; it's an appalling

campaign. And Nicolle Flint should not have been subject to this. And all of- well, every woman

in public life, every woman full stop, needs to feel safe in the work that they do. And Nicolle

Flint should not have been subject to the kind of campaign that she was subjected to. I think

it's not fair to try and wrap Penny Wong and Tanya Plibersek into this. They’ve also been very

clear in their condemnation of the campaign that was run against Nicolle Flint. And it's really

important that, you know, we are working across the aisle to make sure that all of us, but

women in politics, women in general , can do their jobs safely.



KARVELAS: Nicolle Flint's point is that it's only today that we have heard this response from

Labor. Why not earlier?



MARLES: Well, I am not -  I am not sure that that's right in terms of when responses were

given.



KARVELAS: When else have you condemned the sexist treatment of Nicolle Flint?



MARLES: But the point is that as soon as the question was raised with both Penny Wong and

Tanya Plibersek, they were completely unequivocal, as we have all been, in our condemnation

of this.



KARVELAS: Liberal Senator Sarah Henderson also says that she's been subjected to abuse

from the left side of politics. If you are serious about improving the culture of politics, should

she be apologised to? Does there need to be a sort of concerted effort to deal with the fact that

the left is sometimes responsible for some of this sexism, too?



MARLES: Well, I am not sure what the substance of Senator Henderson's claims are in the

context of whether she is making a claim that those criticisms or campaigns against her have

been sexist in nature. The simple point here is this; that the way in which we conduct politics

needs to be done in a way which is completely free of sexism. At no point have we sought to

say that this is a partisan issue. In fact, from the outset we have made really clear that this has

to be seen in a bipartisan context in the sense that we need to be dealing with the culture of

politics as a whole, across the political spectrum. I would be the first to say that Labor needs to

own its share of that, and we have been pretty clear about that from the get-go. But it's really

important that we are actually working together in terms of trying to change the culture of

politics so that there isn't any sexist overtones in the way in which - the way in which we go

about the business of politics.



KARVELAS: There have been dozens of anonymous complaints made by current and former

Labor staffers as you know. The things that have been alleged, unwanted touching, forced

kissing, bullying, an older Labor man getting a young woman drunk before having non-consensual sex. If a male frontbencher is named, right - because at this stage there’s

unnamed allegations - should he stand aside?



MARLES: Well, that may be where this goes. If there is a credible and substantiated

allegation, well, then, that may be a course that is taken -



KARVELAS: What do you mean it "may be"? Isn't it just a standard thing now -that you would

expect that?



MARLES: What I would expect and what is really important here, is that all allegations are

taken completely seriously. And we have sought to do that. And that they are taken seriously

when they are made by a complainant, with the complainant's interests forefront in the minds

of how we deal with this. And it may well be that where this ends up. Ultimately, it's going to

be- a question of that kind will be - a matter for the Leader of the Labor Party. And it’s going to

be dependent, you know, on the circumstances of the allegation. And it's difficult to answer that

in the context of a hypothetical, or in the abstract. But let me say this, Patricia; I absolutely

accept the thrust of what has been reported by Sam Maiden in relation to the private Facebook

group. I am appalled by what we - what is said there. You know and I have said this before but

as the Deputy Leader of the Labor Party and on behalf of the party, I am really sorry to women

who have experienced what has been described in those posts. We need to be encouraging

women to be a part of our movement, to obviously serve in Parliament, but to work in

Parliament here- and to do so in a way which is safe. And the sorts of things that are described

there should not be a part of a woman's experience in working in the building, but working for

any member of the Labor Party in the building. And I acknowledge this is about our house;

Labor's house, and we need to make sure we're getting our house in order. And it's really

important that we are shouldering the burden of the culture change in this building, but within

our own party as well, and that we make it a party where women want to work and want to

serve, and do so safely.



KARVELAS: And do you think that has been achieved at this stage, based on what we have

read there?



MARLES: I think we have a long way to go is really the answer to that question. We have got

processes in place for sure, and we seek to make them the best processes they can be. They

have been in place for a number of years and we have updated them recently. But not for a

moment am I telling you that I think we have got the culture right here. I think there is a long

way for us to go. I think there is a long way for the culture to go across the Parliament. And,

that is why the Jenkins inquiry is going to be really important. That's why all of us need to own

the behaviours within our own parties. We do need to take responsibility for that. And that

applies to Labor as well.



KARVELAS: When you read those claims, did you think, 'I think I recognise some of those

blokes in that story?'



MARLES: When I read those claims, I, you know, I mean-  well the first thing to say is I

absolutely believe the thrust of them. And there is something in that which is completely

heartbreaking for the women involved, obviously, and, it's talking about a party that we have all

devoted our lives to and we all love. And it's just not - it's not good enough, and it's not what it

should be. And we need to fix this. We really need to fix it. And, you know, we mean to. But

part of that is making sure that we take these allegations seriously. And we will.



KARVELAS: Just on a very different topic but very topical at the moment; China has blamed

Australia's wrong words and deeds for driving the relationship to a low point, with of course

Beijing rejecting the Biden Administration's call to cease its trade actions against Canberra.

This is after a top US official signalled that America's own relationship with China would not

improve unless Beijing stopped its economic coercion of Australia. This is China's Foreign

Ministry speaking, it was saying that it was Canberra that had jeopardised that trust. What is

your response to that?



MARLES: Firstly, it’s- hearing the United States talk in that way, I think, can give us all a sense

of comfort about the importance of our alliance with the United States. And, I think we all feel

better for the interest that the United States has in the role it's playing in the alliance with us.

We've got to get the relationship with China to a better place. We obviously need to do that.

And it's important that we are doing that in a context where Australia is able to exercise our

voice, and to do that on occasions where you know, we speak to our national interest, where

that differs from Chinese action. We need to have the courage to do that, and that obviously

has to come first. It is also clear to say that, the trading relationship with China is something

that is very positive for Australia, and we need to do what we can to try and get that back to a

better place. And that in terms of discussing our relationship with China, the starting point is



that we value our relationship with China. It has got to be able to be - for that to be said without

that being a controversial comment. And so, you know, unquestionably, I think our relationship

with China is something we need to value. We do need to get it into a better place. Our side of

that relationship is what we get to control as Australia. And we need to be doing everything we

can to work on that, and that doesn't mean we subjugate our own national interests. It's really

important that we continue to pursue our national interest, but it also matters that we seek to

try and get this relationship to a better place. And having, you know, relationships- personal

relationships- at the level of government ministers with senior figures in China would be a start.

And it worries me those relationships don”t exist at the moment.



KARVELAS: Thank you so much for your time.



MARLES: Thanks, Patricia.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363



