Jason Falinski MP  Federal Member for Mackellar

TRANSCRIPT  Sky News, (28 January 2021)

Topics: Labor Leadership, Coal Fired Power Stations and Climate Change, TGA  and misinformation

E&OE…

Tom Connell: Let's go and talk about this, amongst other things, with our political panel, Jason Falinski,  Liberal MP, and Patrick Gorman from the Labor Party. Let's start with you, Pat. Your leader begins the  year under obvious pressure. I'm sure you'll agree. You don't need to add to that the policy shifts in  terms of what is happening here...

Jason Falinski: Oh Tom, you should let him answer that if he wants to.

Tom Connell: Well, I will let him. You didn't even let me put the question to him, Jason, but some shifts  here. Is this an indication that the current team isn't really cutting through in portfolio? Some of them  have been there for a long, long time.

Patrick Gorman: Well, we always said that and Anthony always said that he'd reshuffle after the Prime  Minister did his reshuffle at the end of the year. So we're doing exactly what we said we would do more  than a month ago. So, of course, as we head into what is likely to be an election year, you don't want to  make sure that you've got the people in the best position to take it up to the government in each of  those portfolios. And inevitably, as you say, some people have been in those portfolios a long time. If  Anthony decides to move some people around, which is inevitably what happens with a reshuffle, you  don't have a reshuffle where everyone stays in the same spot, then I trust Anthony's judgment that he's  got everyone in the best position to put forward Labor's plans, Labor's policies, and hold the  government to account.

Tom Connell: So what about Chris Bowen going to energy and climate? Is that an indication? This goes  from someone on the left of the party, Mark Butler, to the right of the party, Chris Bowen, that we're  going to see some element of policy shift here?

Patrick Gorman: Well, we'll wait till the announcement is done, but I think it's worth noting for all of  your viewers...

Tom Connell: Take it to the bank mate.

Patrick Gorman: All the debate that our policies are set by the shadow cabinet and by the caucus. So, of  course, anything that is put forward is not just shadow ministers out on a whim, doing their own thing.  They do it for... [Inaudible]

Patrick Gorman: I've got a lot of respect and time for both Chris Bowen and Mark Butler. They have both  served in government and opposition. They are incredibly hard workers. I'm sure that if there are shifts  amongst those portfolios, there will be a much more orderly transition of power than what we've seen  in the United States in recent weeks. I think it will be a good thing to have a refreshed team bring it up  to the government. And of course, you know, we've seen Josh Frydenberg used to be the energy  minister not that long ago, and now he's got to stop the National Party trying to raid the piggy bank to  build coal fired power stations all over Australia.

Tom Connell: We'll get to that in a moment. I like your low bar there. It'll be smoother than the US  transition. That'll be tough. Jason Falinski and i'll note, you promised me you'd be in the studio this  week. You're not. And you just had to get up mid interview to do who knows what. So this is your first  broken promise of the day. I want to ask you, though, about another call from the Nats on more coal  fired power. It comes under the guise of a manufacturing plan. What did you make of this this week?

Jason Falinski: Well, firstly, Tom, can I say congratulations to Patrick, he's looking far to well rested as a  new father. So congratulations on your delivery, Patrick...

Patrick Gorman: Thank you Jason.

Jason Falinski: and also I'm glad that Patrick hasn't been promoted because then we wouldn't be able to  have these political panels. As I would be far to beneath him...

Tom Connell: Nah he would stay on, of course he would.

Jason Falinski: Oh, maybe maybe, you never know, it would be very nice if he did. Look, the call for new  coal fired power stations is, you know, a long held belief of the National Party. It's no news to anyone  that I personally believe that coal fired power is not the answer. Looking forward that there are more  reliable and better forms of energy technology than coal fired power as we look to provide cheap and  reliable energy for Australian industry and Australian consumers into the future.

Tom Connell: But I mean, a lot of liberal MPs have been biting their tongues over the contribution of the  Nats, both in party room and also publicly. It doesn't seem to be working, does it?

Jason Falinski: Look, I think one of the things that we have on our side of the fence is that there's  although, you can't ignore Joel Fitzgibbon, but is that we have a very healthy level of debate on these  matters. But I think I think it's pretty obvious that where most people want to invest in terms of energy  production moving forward into the 21st century is not coal fired power. That's not to say that coal fired  power stations won't have a role in our energy mix into the future. But we will see growth in energy  production in the Australian market and indeed in the global market will be in other forms of electricity.

Tom Connell: But if there was this path that Scott Morrison went down of new coal fired power,  perhaps subsidized in some way, it might placate the Nats. He'd have a serious problem with the Liberal  Party members. Would he not?

Jason Falinski: Well, I would have a serious problem with my electorate. Absolutely. That's not  something that they would be in favour of. And I just don't think that the economics of it more than  anything else actually stack up. That's the biggest problem that we have.

Tom Connell: Pat I wanted to ask you about leadership rules, Joel Fitzgibbon is questioning them. Let's  just remind ourselves that in opposition you need 60 per cent of the caucus to decide they want to spill  the leader before it will happen then. And it's a joint vote by caucus and the party membership. It's a bit  of a straitjacket, isn't it? 60 percent cent. It's a very high bar.

Patrick Gorman: Well, these were the rules that the caucus put in place after we went through an  incredibly difficult period a number of years ago, I support those rules. Those rules have given stability  that gave stability to Bill Shorten. They give stability to Anthony Albanese. And they also mean that once  we've made a decision, we just get on with trying to win the election. I believe that you wave the white  flag and give up and say, oh, it's all too hard. We've got to go and fiddle with the rules. We've actually go  out and win more votes than we did last time. And when it comes to changing those leadership rules,  what people are really saying is about taking away a say from our party members. Those rules delivered  for the first time, I say for Labor Party members to have a say in who their leader was. That was a  historic reform to take away... I would not...

Tom Connell: But do you you believe, Joel Fitzgibbon? When he says this call for a change around  splitting it between caucus and party members, he said don't conflate it with the current tensions at all.  Do you believe him?

Patrick Gorman: I take Joel at his word.

Tom Connell: All right, you're not as cynical as me then. Is there an issue if this were to happen right  now with Victoria? They have party voting rights suspended. So if you had a Victorian candidate, they'd  be disadvantaged. Do you need it a short and sharp solution for Victorian members to be able to vote on  the most important thing they can do on a on the leadership of the party?

Patrick Gorman: Well, I think this is where Joel and I would agree, one hundred percent. This is not  something that we should be changing or talking or doing now. As for the situation in the Victorian  branch, obviously it's been through an incredibly difficult period. Pleased to see they're starting to see  the light at the end of the tunnel and that that branch is starting to get itself under control. But all of us  stand up for it.

Tom Connell: But they wouldn't get a vote, would they, if something happened this year?

Patrick Gorman: Well, I don't think that's likely. And as far how you deal with the Victorian branch, I  mean, I'm sure the national executive will deal with that, as they have done a number of times  throughout 2020. The important thing is that you preserve the principle of people having a say in their  political parties. It shouldn't just be up to us as elected members. It should be up to party members to  have a say in who their leader is. And it's not now just the federal Labor Party. Most state branch of the  Labor Party across the country have also adopted those rules, because we recognise that when you  empower your members, when you actually commit to democracy, you end up with a stronger political  party for the long term.

Tom Connell: Let's talk Borders, Jason, Falinski, you and all your brethren throughout Sydney, you can  now head up to Queensland. I'm sure you're thrilled with this. You think it's a fantastic decision by the  Queensland Premier and no other comments?

Jason Falinski: That's about the level of it Tom. You know, what do you say? What are you saying? What  you know, they can put these borders up at a moment's notice, but it takes them weeks and weeks and  weeks on end to bring them down. So, yeah, look, if you live on the northern beaches, you can now go  to Queensland. We're very happy.

Tom Connell: Pat, after the school holidays, after that period of time when family might have been able  to catch up, then the decision gets made. It doesn't seem that bold does it?

Patrick Gorman: Well, the the virus doesn't work based on the school holidays and Christmas is so I  don't think we can criticize that this is somehow linked to school holiday times and trying to restrict  families in that particular period of time.

Tom Connell: Doesn't work around elections either, but obviously decisions made just after them.

Patrick Gorman: it's been incredibly...

Jason Falinski: These decisions don't seem to be made on advice either.

Patrick Gorman: We had families that had made plans that were unable to fulfill those plans over  Christmas and school holiday period, of course, I feel terrible for every family that has not been able to  do the things that been looking forward to throughout the entirety of twenty twenty, that is to get back  together with their family. But it's good news that people can now travel from New South Wales to  Queensland. I'm looking forward to an announcement from the West Australian government likely next  Monday that I hope providing that everything continues as well as it is on the East Coast, start to  remove some of the borders that were erected to prevent people who travel as easily to Western  Australia. But we've got to take both sides of this. You've got to have a strong border response when it is  the best way to protect our population, as we've seen with New Zealand in terms of the Australian  government, of which Jason's a part of, putting up a hard border against New Zealand and every other  country in the world, for that matter, these things are necessary. It doesn't mean we like them, doesn't  mean they're nice. It doesn't mean that they work for everyone at that point in time. They have to be  erected. But the announcement today from the government is good news and I welcome it.

Tom Connell: Well, the WA government there's a conservative approach on COVID . You won't get an  argument from me on that one. Just finally, nearly out of time, Jason, and always be wary when I start a  question like this. You're a straight talker. Your colleagues are avoiding this question. I know you won't.  What do you make of some of your colleagues talking down the TGA that the Australian government  should be using other things to treat covid and so on? I'm talking about Craig Kelly, George Christensen.  What do you make of the information they're trying to put out there?

Jason Falinski: Well Tom, I guess I'll just repeat what Greg Hunt has said, which is our decisions are  informed by the science and by the experts. We have an incredibly well regarded authority in the TGA  who make these assessments around pharmaceutical goods. You can certainly always suggest that there  are better ways for them to do what they do. And I think I'm on the record as saying I think they take too  long in some of their approval processes, but by and large, they considered to be one of the better  agencies in the world. So, yeah, I think that's where we should stay and we should obviously follow their  advice and follow their processes.

Tom Connell: All right. Good to hear those talking points again. Jason Falinski, Patrick Gorman, a  pleasure. Welcome back to twenty twenty one. I assume you'll be back next week if I haven't been too  harsh speak soon, Thank you.

