

JULIAN HILL MP  MEMBER FOR BRUCE

DEPUTY CHAIR JOINT COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT



HAWKE’S PARENT VISA PANIC IS ALL ANNOUNCEMENT, NO DELIVERY

After months of forcing elderly and frail parents of Australians to leave the country during  the COVID-19 pandemic to get their visas granted, Immigration Minister Alex Hawke  yesterday backflipped and gave a vague promise that at some point in the next three  months he would change this stupid rule.

This is too little, too late and not nearly enough for thousands of Australians and their  families who desperate need this rule changed now.

At the start of the pandemic, the Morrison Government promised ‘visa flexibility’.

But after the announcement, nothing has been delivered.

The Government’s arbitrary visa rules still require applicants for parent visas, partner visas  and over 30 other visa types who applied for their visas overseas, but are currently in  Australia, to fly overseas and back again just so their visa can be issued. This is madness.

Labor has been lobbying the Government to make sensible amendments to the rules  which, during a pandemic, risk the health of the applicants, jeopardise the safety of the  community and unnecessarily take up valuable quarantine spaces.

With 40,000 Australians still stranded overseas, it was always scandalous that the Liberals  were proactively forcing people to travel overseas, only for them to get their visa, fly back  again, and waste a quarantine place. Quarantine places are precious and should be  preserved for Australians wanting to return home.

Yesterday’s ambiguous announcement by the Minister come after months of refusing to  admit there was a problem at all. The previous Minister even told the parents of Australians  that he wouldn’t change the rules because parents “are not considered immediate family  members”.

Late last year the former Immigration Minister, Alan Tudge promised to change the same  rule for the partners of Australians, but the Government has yet to deliver on that promise.  There is no guarantee the government will follow-through with the panicked promises made  yesterday.





When Parliament resumes in February, I will be introducing a Private Member’s Bill, which  will end this madness once and for all. During the pandemic, maintaining a ‘fly out, fly in’  rule for any visa class is madness.

People who are already in Australia should be able to have their visa granted regardless of  where they initially lodged their application.

It is well past the time the Morrison Government stopped announcing changes, exercised  some common sense, and acted on their promises.

FRIDAY, 29 JANUARY 2021

MEDIA CONTACT: CAM GREEN 0406 507 727





