





SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE   Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women  Senator for New South Wales



SENATOR THE HON LINDA REYNOLDS CSC  Minister for Defence  Senator for Western Australia

MEDIA RELEASE

DEFENCE PERSONNEL RETURN FROM OP FIJI ASSIST

2 February 2021



More than 600 ADF personnel who deployed on Operation FIJI ASSIST have arrived  back in Sydney on HMAS Adelaide, following a five-week deployment to the Republic of  Fiji.

The Joint Task Group deployed on Christmas Eve following a request for assistance  from the Fijian Government in response to devastation caused by Tropical Cyclone  Yasa.

Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Women, Senator the Hon Marise Payne said the  Australian Government was, and always will be, there for our Fijian vuvale.

“Australia is pleased to have worked in partnership with the Government of Fiji in response to  Tropical Cyclone Yasa,” Minister Payne said.

“Fiji's Military Forces and Australian Defence Force personnel worked extremely hard over the  Christmas/New Year period to refurbish schools, clear roads and distribute clean drinking water  as well as food and hygiene kits.

“Unfortunately, the resilience of Fiji is being tested again with Cyclone Ana causing  widespread damage over the weekend and more bad weather forecast this week.  Australia stands ready to assist where we can”.

Minister for Defence, Senator the Hon Linda Reynolds CSC thanked the personnel for  their efforts.

“The more than 600 personnel spent the holidays away from their own families to assist  the Fijian Government with tasks such as repairing damaged school buildings and  delivering essential supplies to local communities,” Minister Reynolds said.

“I thank the friends and family of our Defence personnel. It is your support which  enables the ADF to achieve these meaningful missions.

“The ADF is proud to have assisted Fiji in its time of need, and once again work side-by-side with the RFMF.

“Australia is extremely grateful to the Republic of Fiji Military Forces for the support  provided to us during the Black Summer Bushfires last year.”

Australia’s assistance for TC Yasa included:

- Helping repair 32 schools in time for the start of the school year;  - Delivering 165 tonnes of relief stores and supplies;   - Generating and distributing 918,000 litres of clean drinking water;  - Providing humanitarian supplies on five RAAF C-17A flights; and  - Utilising a P-8A Poseidon to conduct aerial damage assessments of Fijian

islands in order to aid recovery efforts.   - $4.5 million package of assistance, including:  o humanitarian relief supplies for building materials, tents, medical supplies,  solar lighting and hygiene kits

o education supplies to enable children to return to school  o support for international and local NGOs and the Fiji Red Cross to aid their  work with affected communities.

All personnel have completed a 14-day quarantine period at sea. Personnel were also  tested for COVID-19 on departure from Fiji and prior to arriving in Sydney.

HMAS Adelaide remains Australia's high-readiness vessel for responding to natural disasters at  home and in the region. She will resupply in Australia in preparation for any future events during  the current high-risk weather season.

Imagery from Adelaide’s return can be found at:  http://images.defence.gov.au/S20204061



Media Contacts  David Wroe (Minister Payne): +61 429 531 143  Melanie Ruiz (Minister Payne): +61 427 888 392  Nicky Hamer (Minister Reynolds): +61 437 989 927  DFAT Media (02) 6261 1555, media@dfat.gov.au  Defence Media (02) 6127 1999, media@defence.gov.au

