

LINDA BURNEY MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AUSTRALIANS

MEMBER FOR BARTON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC NEWS WITH MATT DORAN

TUESDAY, 30 MARCH 2021



SUBJECT: Linda Burney says First Nations women must be included in discussion

about women’s safety.



MATT DORAN, HOST: We're here at the federal Labor conference in southwestern Sydney at

the Revesby Workers Club. It's quite a different looking Labor conference this time around

considering it's basically all virtual with the 400 delegates meeting on Zoom to try to nut out

some changes to the Labor Party platform. One of Labor's federal frontbenchers is Linda

Burney, the Shadow Social Services Minister and Shadow Minister for Indigenous Australians.

Thank you for making some time for us today.



LINDA BURNEY, SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AUSTRALIANS: My pleasure.



DORAN: Let's pick up on what has been a topic I guess, not just here at the conference, but

more broadly, the topic of respect for women in Australia. The - we saw the ministerial

reshuffle announced yesterday, extra women getting senior roles in the Morison Government

and new portfolios added to some existing women serving on the frontbench. Is that something

that you welcome that you'd like to see?



BURNEY: A couple of points there. Obviously, Labor wishes to work collaboratively with the

government on addressing what is not just an issue about respect for women in the parliament,

but more broadly across society. But I do think that the Prime Minister is still left wanting. I

mean, he can't farm out his responsibilities as prime minister on this issue of respect for

women, to just the women in the in the Liberal National Party. And it feels a bit like he's done

that. I hope that we get some good outcomes, but just adding responsibility to women's

portfolios is not the answer to the problem, he has to recognise that he is the Prime Minister.

And he has a responsibility in this as well.



DORAN: Would you go so far as to say that this is a reflection that the coalition has been

failing on certain issues when it comes to women and hence why you've got people like Jane

Hume being given this specific responsibility for economic security or Anne Ruston looking at

women's safety?



BURNEY: Well, Jane Hume had the idea of women escaping violence should raid their

superannuation to get out of violence situations, which was a terrible idea. And I'm glad the

government recognised that. A lot of pressure from Labor and walked away from that policy, I

really hope that the task force that the Prime Minister has set up is successful, but it will only

be successful if it's willing to consult, and if it's willing to listen to voices of women that don't

necessarily have a forum to have their views expressed in. And by that I mean, particularly

First Nations women who we know, terribly over represented in terms of homicide; in terms of

violence; in terms of hospitalisation; women with disability enormously over-represented in

terms of putting up with abuse, and of course, women from a English - diverse English

speaking background, CALD Women that's really, really important.



DORAN: That is an area which you have interest in as well, not only from your portfolio

responsibilities, but your lived experience, as well as a First Nations Australian. On the issue of

Indigenous relations, the issue of constitutional recognition is something that is not going

away, and it won't be going away anytime soon. And as you would be campaigning to do so

there was some debate in the Labor conference today to do with policies relating to Indigenous

recognition. Can you explain what they were?



BURNEY: So what happened today is that Labor reaffirmed through the platform, its absolute

commitment to the whole Uluru Statement. And there are three elements to that: constitutional

recognition; a voice to the parliament, constitutionally enshrined; the establishment of a

Makarrata Commission that would have the responsibility to oversee a national process of

truth-telling, as well as treaty and agreement making. All of those elements critical to the Uluru

Statement and absolutely fundamental and supported by the Labor caucus. And this platform

conference.



DORAN: The issue of constitutional recognition, there's been a lot of debate about whether or

not that would go ahead. We know the Prime Minister has said that that is not on the agenda

at the moment, how much of that is reliant on the fact that there would need to be a policy or a

platform that is put forward that does have bipartisan support; that does have a possibility of

being voted in favour of by the Australian people to get that over? How important is that?



BURNEY: That point that you're making Matt is absolutely critical. In my view, it is confusing

as to what the Prime Minister's position is. We've heard so many different things. And of

course, the Prime Minister is now saying that it's not the policy of the Liberal Party. In fact, I

can tell you, that Minister Wyatt's working groups, the whole three working groups were

forbidden, absolutely forbidden to deal with the with the Uluru Statement. And I'm just very

pleased that this platform conference, and the Labor caucus is 100% the three elements of the

Uluru Statement.



DORAN: Noel Pearson, in a speech, the other week at the National Museum in Canberra, he

seemed to suggest that there should be some bipartisanship here, or at least it needs to be

some responsibility taken from Labor as well for  how it's handled this debate over the last few

years. Do you agree with that?



BURNEY: I think Labor has been pretty magnificent, actually. And -



DORAN: We could file that in the Linda Burney would say that sort of categories.



BURNEY: Well you could say that, but let's think about it. For a constitution or a referendum

change, there really does need to be the bipartisan support that you've just spoken about. Very

hard to see how you get a referendum to be successful, unless there's bipartisan support. And

I just think, you know, what an amazing legacy it would be for Scott Morrison, to be the Prime

Minister to bring about recognition of First Peoples in the Constitution, extraordinary legacy.

And I urge him to, to think about that. And think about his place in history. The points that Noel

has made, in a sense leads to the same thing that that was saying that there should be a voice

to the parliament, and has to be constitutionally enshrined. He has a slightly different view to

me and the Labor Party about how we might get there. But the end goal is the same.



DORAN: Well, how do you think we get there, considering it is such a seemingly fraught path?



BURNEY: Look, I guess you could say it's a fraught path, but to me, what people at Uluru

asked for was incredibly modest. They're not asking for a voice to the parliament that would

have any veto power. It has an advisory role. it does not usurp the role or the sovereignty of

the Parliament. That was never, ever the intention. And I have spent a lot of time thinking

about this, and talking to people. And it would seem to me that the pathway to constitutional

recognition, firstly comes from a bipartisan commitment to that. And then for a referendum to

be held in the not too distant future. And that if the cases argue, if it was explained properly,

I've got no doubt that the Australian people with their sense of fairness and justice would see

this as the next obvious step in developing us as a nation.



DORAN: Just Finally, Linda Burney, this is a vastly different Labor conference than what we've

seen. It's not your first rodeo. You've seen a lot of these conferences over the years. Some of

the criticism that's being put out there is the fact that we're not seeing the same level of debate

on amendments to the policy platform that we would normally. Not only are we dealing with

COVID-19 restrictions, but are we dealing with a much more sanitised process here?



BURNEY: We're not dealing with a sanitised process. I've been involved in a very real way in

the discussions of the different resolutions and the process that we're seeing here today. I

mean, it's just extraordinary that we can have this conference in the safe environment and still

have the discussions, still have the debate, still have the votes, and it's online. I just think that

it's a triumph in organisation.



DORAN: So we're not rushing things through?



BURNEY: No, we're not rushing things through. In fact, today, you can see that there was a

vote earlier in the day, and the conference stopped 45 minutes to allow people to vote online.

The votes were tallied in the same way, and announced in the same way as normal. And

there's possibly another vote this afternoon. So the idea of the platform has been revised, that

we have heard from all of the groups that would normally participate, the rank and file, the

trade union movement, and the resolutions have been arrived at but that doesn't mean there's

no contented votes. There clearly has been and there will be.





DORAN: Well Linda Burney, it is going to be a very busy afternoon and evening for you. Thank

you for making the time to speak with us.



BURNEY: Thanks Matt.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DARYL TAN 0422 028 222



