

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  MARYBOROUGH WEST, QLD  THURSDAY 21 JANUARY 2021



EO&E…

ROBERT NIOA, MANAGING DIRECTOR NIOA: Thank you very much for coming along. It's my great  pleasure to welcome the Prime Minister here today to have a look at the progress that's been made in  the construction of this artillery shell forging facility here in Maryborough Queensland. This factory is  going to create 100 jobs in a new industry in Maryborough, and it's going to go on for generations. And it  will benefit tradespeople and young people as they come through from school and progress in the  workforce. It's going to provide economic benefit to this town, as I say, for quite a long time to come. This  facility is, has only been made possible because of the support of the Federal Government through the  regional growth fund. More broadly, the Federal Government has a very solid defence plan for the  sovereign industrial capability priorities where they identify what capabilities are essential for the  sovereign protection of our nation. Weapons and ammunition was the number one priority identified  within those sovereign capabilities. The Government also implemented a policy around Australian  industry capability. So to make sure that this product wasn't just imported, that there was local companies  benefiting from the defence contracts. On top of that, this Government put in place a defence export  strategy. And that formed,  well that strategy informed us to create a partnership with world leading  company Rheinmetall and 50 per cent of the product in this factory is already committed to export  customers. The last pillar of government support was the Regional Growth Fund itself, which is a fund set  up by the Government to target regional areas that were in need of economic support and particularly in  areas of high youth unemployment and high unemployment in general. And this Government has backed  Maryborough and has backed us as a company and has done it to the tune of $28.5 million dollars to make  sure that this factory is built here in Maryborough and is delivering those jobs. This is a rare occurrence  to see a factory like this built. This is the first factory of its kind to be built as a greenfield site since World  War Two. What we're undertaking here is very challenging, very difficult. We started the construction at  the beginning of the COVID period and we had to quickly realign the plans on how we were going to design  the floor layout, the robotics in certain areas, the very complex processes. We can't buy these factories  off the shelf. The IP and the design and how this has been done has been created by the incredible team,  many of which are here and many of which are in Germany. We've had to work on plans instead of being  co-located. We've had to do things separately, but everybody's adapted, I’d like to congratulate the team  from Badge who's been overseeing the construction and delivering the construction of the project. It's on  time, which has been a fantastic outcome given the constraints. I'd like to congratulate Kirk Architects for

their work in making sure this very complex project is being brought to life. I like to welcome our first 10  employees who are here today, and it's the start of the 100 jobs that we had promised and that are  happening here in town. So I'd like to give the Prime Minister a token, so we know that we want shovel  ready jobs and this one is definitely shovel shovel ready. The Prime Minister was keen to come here early  on and COVID disrupted that process but nonetheless, we didn't want you to go without a shovel. So I'd  like to thank you very much for your support. Also, I think it's a great example of the support that you’ve  been able to engender from both state and local governments as well, who’ve got in behind and supported  you as well on this project. So we're really looking forward to the next phase, the commencement of the  fit out of the forging facility and the heavy equipment and the employing of the remainder of that position.  So thank you very much.

PRIME MINISTER: Thank you very much. Well, look, thank you very much, and it's wonderful to be here  with you, and can I congratulate everybody that's been involved in this project but can I particularly  congratulate you Llew. Llew O’Brien is just a very hardworking member for his electorate. And the number  of times he and I've spoken about how we can create jobs, particularly here in Queensland and particularly  here around Maryborough especially, you know, with youth unemployment and the challenge of getting  young people to jobs can be a big challenge. And so the brainchild of the program, which has delivered  almost $30 million dollars to this project, really came from those discussions and advocacy that Llew has  always led. You know, we're making things in Australia, we're making things in Queensland, we're making  things in Maryborough. And that means we're making jobs, and making jobs through our programs is  really how we come out of the COVID-19 recession and how we build for the future with the economic  recovery plan, some 50,000 additional jobs, 50,000 more jobs in December. You know, the vast majority  of those, almost all of them were for women in this most recent month, and that's great to see. The  majority were permanent jobs in this most recent month. We've seen labour force participation rise again  to very high levels, we've seen the underemployment rate fall, we've seen the number of working hours  increase and all that says that Australia is working its way out of the COVID-19 recession. And the way  we're doing that is everybody pulling together, everybody doing what they need to do. And I particularly  want to congratulate the team here for pushing through throughout 2020. And the project started in  March and they haven't skipped a beat, had a few issues to deal with but they sorted them working  together. Whether it was the building company, the architects, Rheinmetall, the whole crew, working  together to overcome those problems and get this done. And so they're on track and by about April this  year they’ll have it done and they'll move into the next phase.

I was at the oil production facility earlier today, and we were talking there about our gas plan. And I want  to come back to that because our manufacturing plan is built on three key things. The first one is to get  the fundamentals right. We've got to get lower energy costs. You've got to get your skills right. You've got  to get your taxes low. You've got to ensure that your industrial arrangements are purpose built for the  sort of things you're going to do. You've got to get those fundamentals right. That's the first plank of our  manufacturing plan. The second thing is, you've got to have focus and priorities and Defence  Manufacturing is one of Australia's priorities. Why? Because we're really, really good at it and you can see  that here, you can see it. We are building the Boxers up at Rheinmetall in Ipswich, you can see it all over  the country where defence manufacturing is becoming something that Australians have been well known  for. We’re smart at it, we’re good at it. We work well with partners from overseas and we get it done on  the ground. That's why it's a priority. That's why we're investing more. And that works together with the  more than 2 per cent of our total size of our economy that we're investing in defence. And that reinforces  the priority we have. The third part of our manufacturing plan is about those critical sovereign supply  chains. Those critical sovereign capabilities we have to have in manufacturing. And that means what we're  doing here, right here. We've got to be able to do what we're doing here with these munitions, in Australia.

We can't be relying on other places for that to happen. The last year has taught us more than anything  that sovereign reliability for manufacturing in critical areas like this is things we need to do here. And  that's what's happening. And so that's why I was really pleased to come here today Llew, because it  brought all that together, in this project. So I look forward to coming back. I look forward to seeing the  progress that is going to be here. But most of all, Llew I want to thank you and the whole team. The whole  team, for the great job you've done, getting the project to this level, but without your advocacy Llew we  wouldn’t be standing here mate so well done. It's great to see things being made in Maryborough.

LLEW O’BRIEN MP: Thanks PM. Thanks so much, thanks Rob for your introduction and tour of the facility,  it's really my great pleasure to welcome the Prime Minister here to Maryborough. There is probably no  greater friend to Wide Bay in Canberra, aside from myself, than the Prime Minister. We have had  discussions about the direction that Wide Bay needs to head. And these are discussions that happened  before COVID, that involve things like the billion dollar Gympie bypass, the Cooroy to Curra bypass. It was  when I sat down with the Prime Minister as then Treasurer, we put the case forward, before that Budget  it was delivered. He's a man that understands how this, what this electorate needs. This facility is just a  great boost for Maryborough. It's a great boost for the economy, a great boost for employment. But what  I said to the Prime Minister when we were down in that forge pit there, what really strikes in my mind is  that this is the technology that will keep our diggers safe. And it's these artillery shells that will go further  and more accurately. And the reality is we need to keep our diggers safe, we know no one wants to go to  war. No one wants these to be used in anger. But as a nation, we need to have the best technology to  keep our Australian diggers safe and that's what we're doing here. So I appreciate everything you've done  today Rob. As the Prime Minister said, our sovereign manufacturing has never been brought out into the  forefront of our mind more than in the last 12 months. We have reliable, good international friends we  trade with. But at the end of the day, when you have a global pandemic, when you have a major incident  the only country you can really, really rely on is your own country. And for us, we need to secure our  sovereign manufacturing capability and that's what the Morrison government is doing here. So thank you  very much.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks Llew, thank you for everything Rob. Very good.

JOURNALIST: How important- sorry just move a bit closer-

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah sure, we covered the national press conference earlier in the day, so happy to  take some local questions.

JOURNALIST: Fantastic. How crucial do you see this facility in Australia's overall defence?

PRIME MINISTER: Well I think that the point that Llew just made, I thought was a very important one. I  mean, this fits as part of a much bigger plan. No government since the Second World War has invested  more in Australia's defence capability than this Government, and that has its strategic defence objectives.  But we just didn't pursue that, we saw this as an opportunity by scaling up again to more than, to 2 per  cent of GDP, which we hit ahead of target, and now we'll go beyond that. That's now floor, not a ceiling.  But we also took the decision that in making such significant investments on behalf of the Australian  people that we were going to build more than our defence capability. We were going to build our  manufacturing capability because we've seen how that's worked in other countries where defence  industries have not just provided the goods for their defence forces, but they’ve become important export  markets, they’ve could become important hubs for technology and design, research, and science and the  things that are learnt in how you make one of those, can be applied to how you make a whole bunch of

other stuff. And then the skills that are developed not just here and working in a plant like this, but the  skills that are picked up with working with partners from overseas, with Rheinmetall partners and the  work that they are doing and the and the transfer of skills and technology and knowledge that comes  through those partnerships, also critically important. So this sits- what we're seeing here, sits at the heart  of what the Government's strategy is. To keep Australia safe, but also to get Australians into jobs and to  make sure that we have a highly competitive, advanced manufacturing industry.

JOURNALIST: PM just one from Cairns from our North Queensland bureau, Labor fears North Queensland  isn’t prepared for a natural disaster because of a lack of funding. Do you agree with that?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, that's not the assessment that has been provided to me by our authorities or  indeed by the Queensland Government. And we know that in Queensland, and particularly this time of  the year, they're no stranger to significant weather events whether they be cyclones or bushfires or floods.  And we've been through all those things and on each occasion, Australians have been equal, I think, to  the task and I think the authorities, having been through all of those things with Queenslanders in the last  couple of years, I think the authorities and the community response has been very strong. Now as we  came into this season. As always, we went through those plans. We looked at all the weather information  that was there, we actually had to pull ADF people off what was then COVID assist, and make sure that  they are available for preparing for any response that we might have to provide to support the State  Government in what might happen with any potential disaster situation be it in Queensland or, frankly,  anywhere else. And so those plans were put in place. They were put in place months ago and funding to  support those, the planning. So that's what we've been doing. Hopefully it's not called upon, but I can tell  you, if it is called upon, the federal resources are ready to go. OK, thanks very much. Oh yeah, sure.

JOURNALIST: Why is it important to bring the recruitment of national defence industries such as this to  regional centres like Maryborough?

PRIME MINISTER: Jobs, jobs, jobs, that's why. That's why. And I was just saying, I think I was saying to you  Rob on the way down, I’ve been to a lot of these places now that are the product of the Government's big  investments in advanced manufacturing and defence industries, and so many of them are in regional  areas, and there's a range of reasons for that. One is the footprint of this site proves it, and the way that  you can develop a facility like this in the sort of greenfields type of infrastructure that you need to do  something as sophisticated as this. So I think that's important. I think regional communities around the  country have a lot to offer in being able to host this type of a project. Now, that's not to say it doesn't  happen in major cities as well, it does. I've visited facilities in south western Sydney and places like that.  They tend to be often, sometimes a lot smaller, they’re doing very high tech type things, the componentry  that goes in particular weapons systems and all that sort of stuff, but, you know, if you need a forger, the  size of Hercules as what's going to be down there, then this is a great place to put it. And the jobs will  come. Thanks, cheers.

[END]

Media Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

