



The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology  Federal Member for McPherson

STATEMENT FROM KAREN ANDREWS

29 March 2021

I am incredibly honoured to have been asked by Prime Minister Scott Morrison to serve  as Minister for Home Affairs.

The security of our nation should never be taken for granted. Our deepest responsibility  as parliamentarians is to keep Australians safe and secure - and that is what will drive  me every day in the Home Affairs portfolio.

My priorities will be keeping our borders secure, our communities safe, and ensuring our  nation maintains its reputation as a serious global citizen in international efforts to  counter extremism.

It has been a privilege to serve as Minister for Industry, Science and Technology and I  am proud of what’s been achieved since I came into the role in 2018.

Our $1.5 billion Modern Manufacturing Strategy has put Australian manufacturing back  on the map and at the centre of our nation’s economic recovery.

COVID-19 has shown the incredible capability of Australian industry, science and  technology - from our manufacturers who worked with Government to start producing  essential medical supplies to the scientists who’ve played a critical role in the  development of a vaccine.

I’m also incredibly proud of what we have achieved in promoting Women in STEM,  including the appointment of the first Women in STEM ambassador and our Boosting  Female Founders Initiative.

I also look forward to being involved in the new Cabinet taskforce established by the  Prime Minister to address the Government’s agenda and response to key issues  involving women’s equality, women’s safety, women’s economic security, and women’s  health and wellbeing.

I intend to bring the same passion and dedication I’ve had for Australian industry,  manufacturing and science to my new role as Minister for Home Affairs and will do all  that I can to continue delivering for the Australian people.



Media Contact: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846 / Jen Jennings 0435 121 347

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

