Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, Sydney.





THE HON PAUL FLETCHER MP  Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure,  Cities and the Arts

MEDIA RELEASE

26 February 2021

Hit television series The Wilds set to film in Queensland  Starring Rachel Griffiths, Mia Healey, and Shannon Berry

The Morrison Government will provide $9.8 million to ABC Signature to film the second season of the hit  Amazon Prime Video series The Wilds: set to commence filming on the Gold Coast in April.

The Wilds centres around a group of teenagers who are unexpectedly marooned on a deserted island while  en-route to a weekend empowerment retreat.

Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, said  the production is expected to bring investment of more than $73 million to the Australia economy and  create more than 270 jobs for cast and crew.

“A major benefit of international productions filming in Australia is building capacity in areas of skills  shortages for our screen industry. I’m pleased that ABC Signature has committed to undertake training and  development opportunities for Australian crew - both for those who live in Queensland and across  Australia.”

“We have a world-class film industry, extremely diverse filming locations, outstanding studio facilities,  and a careful management of COVID-19 risks. These factors have cemented Australia as an attractive  destination for international studios to film their productions,” Minister Fletcher said.

“Queensland is the ideal location for season two of The Wilds, with its beautiful scenery and beaches, plus  the deep pool of incredibly knowledgeable and skilled craftsmen and crew who are so vital for our  production with ABC Signature. We can’t wait to get started,” said Albert Cheng, COO and Co-Head of  Television, Amazon Studios.

Jonnie Davis, President, ABC Signature said, “We couldn’t ask for a more perfect setting for the second  season of our ABC Signature hit series, The Wilds, on Amazon Prime Video. The beaches, the terrain, the  incredible talent both in front of and behind the camera will truly add to the exciting story we’re telling  with this series.”

The Wilds Season 2 is supported under the Morrison Government’s $400 million boost to the Location  Incentive to create a pipeline of international projects, which will generate tens of thousands of Australian  jobs in the screen industry over coming years.

For more information on the Location Incentive Program please visit: www.arts.gov.au/what-we-do/screen/australian-screen-production-incentive.  ENDS

Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, Sydney.

Media contacts:  Imre Salusinszky | 0432 535 737 | Imre.Salusinszky@communications.gov.au  Christine Byllaardt | 0409 433 357 | Christine.VandenByllaardt@communications.gov.au

