

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RADIO MELBOURNE 774 DRIVE WITH RAFAEL EPSTEIN

WEDNESDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Craig Kelly; Loss of 17,000 university jobs.



RAFAEL EPSTEIN, HOST: So what do you have to do to get sanctioned by your colleagues?

And when should you be sanctioned? When should we pay attention? And when should we

ignore you? Craig Kelly is definitely muddying the waters. He says especially on his pretty big

Facebook page that has a lot of followers. He says things like getting kids to wear a mask

against COVID is child abuse. He keeps promoting drugs that - they're not approved by

Australian regulators. They're not recommended by your Chief Medical Officers, your Chief

Health officers. But he says the failure to do that is quote one of the most costly and most

deadliest lies in history. Now Labor's Tanya Plibersek was giving a press conference this

morning in the corridors of the Press Gallery at Parliament House, denouncing his views when

he came along have a listen.



[AUDIO CLIP]



EPSTEIN: The nong comes along as she says that, that's the journalists saying that to her and

you'll hear that confrontation in a moment. You'll hear from Tanya Plibersek. You'll hear from

her. But just be very clear this is someone who is talking about drugs, he says the failure to

use them is one of the biggest mistakes in history, when the government's trying to persuade

people to take the vaccine. He also of course says things climate change is causing untold

damage to children's mental health. He's just done a podcast with Pete Evans, Pete Evan's

content is bad enough to get kicked off Facebook and Spotify and Craig Kelly's done podcasts

with the sort of people who are keen to talk to neo-Nazis and other far-right leaders in

Melbourne. So what did Tanya Plibersek make of today, you'll hear from her after you hear the

explicit confrontation the clash between Craig Kelly and Tanya Plibersek.



[AUDIO CLIP]



EPSTEIN: Craig Kelly there the Liberal backbencher talking to or facing off against Tanya

Plibersek. She is of course Shadow Minister for Education, Shadow Minister for Women, part

of Anthony Albanese's team. Tanya Plibersek. Thanks for joining us.



TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION, SHADOW MINISTER FOR

WOMEN: Hi Raf. How are you?



EPSTEIN: Listening to that what was going through your mind?



PLIBERSEK: I just actually was up in the Press Gallery doing an interview about the 17,000

jobs that have been lost in the university sector. I got asked a question about Craig Kelly. I was

answering the question and the journalist said, “oh, he's right behind you.” So that's how it

happened, it wasn't any more organised than that. And I really wanted him to understand just

how dangerous I think it is to be putting doubts in people's minds about vaccination and the

sort of treatment regimes for Covid-19. My mum lives in his electorate. She's almost 90 years

old. I don't want her going to the shops and running into people who don't want to get

vaccinated because their local MP is saying that potentially it's not the right thing to do.



EPSTEIN: He does insist, firstly he insists is behind the vaccination campaign or at least he

did this statement, and he also says it's a free speech issue. Do you think it is?



PLIBERSEK: First of all just yesterday, he said that when it comes to a vaccine he's going to

tell people to make up their own minds and that he'll look at the evidence and make up his own

mind. That's a bit of a concern because he's been running all sorts of crackpot theories about

treatments for COVID-19 that are not supported by the Prime Minister. They're not supported

by the Health Minister. They're not supported by the Chief Medical Officer. They're not

supported by the Chief Medical Officer of Victoria or any other state in the Commonwealth of

Australia. So he is, with his enormous social media reach, pushing theories medical theories

that contradict the best medical advice we've got, the medical advice that the Prime Minister is

behind and the Health Minister is behind. That's dangerous. It's not about free speech, that's

dangerous misinformation and at a time like this when we want to protect Australians from

getting sick and we want to open our economy up as quickly as we safely can, that's really

unhelpful.



EPSTEIN: What do you actually want the Prime Minister to do? You can't you can't silence an

MP, especially when they have been elected to a seat in the Federal Parliament. What you

actually want the prime minister to do? He's sanctioned him a bit today. What would satisfy

you?



PLIBERSEK: I think it is very important that the Prime Minister makes clear that he believes

Craig Kelly is wrong about these things. Yesterday the Prime Minister voted in the Parliament

to protect Craig Kelly. The day before that he said in the Press Club that Craig Kelly is doing a

great job. It's important that the Prime Minister publicly says that these theories are not

supported by the government. In fact, they’re contrary to their health advice and at a time like

this, actually, leaders should be standing together backing the best medical advice that we've

got.



EPSTEIN: Do you think it would be the right thing for a Prime Minister to say to someone like

Craig Kelly 'Take stuff off your Facebook page'. Would that be what you want or is that going

too far?



PLIBERSEK: I don't really want to get into the, you know, ins and outs of that. I think there's

plenty of ways that a Prime Minister can show that information that's being pushed by one of

his MPs- well I say one of his MPs. In fact, it's two of his MPs because George Christensen's

just come out today saying that, you know, his good friend Craig Kelly's being put upon by

people who think that he shouldn't be spreading dangerous misinformation. I think there's

plenty of ways the Prime Minister can make clear that these are not acceptable messages.

The government is spending $24 million of taxpayers money to have an advertising campaign

that encourages people to get vaccinated and they've got one of their own MPs using his

taxpayer-funded communications resources to give the exact opposite message. That's not

great.



EPSTEIN: I want to come to the 17,000 jobs and universities. I have to ask. Are you worried

your confrontation fuels leadership speculation about Anthony Albanese, because this this

confrontation will be in all the TVs tonight.



PLIBERSEK: Not at all. I mean, I think any Labor MP in that situation would have called Craig

Kelly out on it and frankly, I would have called out anyone whether it was a Liberal MP, Labor,

Nat, Green, whoever. Anybody who's out there saying Australian should hesitate when it

comes to a vaccination program that is backed by all of our medical experts, I'd call out anyone

who's doing that.



EPSTEIN: 1300 222 774 is the phone number. Tanya Plibersek, you are the Shadow Minister

for Education. It's a significant number from the big universities that 17,000 people have lost

their jobs, more than 10 per cent of the workforce. At the same time, it's kind of inevitable isn't

it? Without the international students they're going to be a bit smaller?



PLIBERSEK: Well, what would have protected this is if universities had access to JobKeeper.

The government instead changed the rules three times to stop universities having access to

JobKeeper. We are turning Australian students away from university this year, so it's not that

there isn't demand there.



EPSTEIN: Well, the Federal government insists they're maintaining funding for students in

Australia.



PLIBERSEK: Well, we know that a lot of the research, a lot of the teaching that happens in

universities is cross-subsidised by international students. So when you take international

students out of the equation, it has an impact on Australian students and it has a huge impact

on research in Australia. Now don't forget, we are relying on our brilliant researchers to get us

through this pandemic and we're seeing them having to walk out the doors of Australian

universities that have lost the funding they used to spend on research. But it's not just

researchers. It's not just academics and tutors. It's the cafeteria worker, the librarian, the admin

staff and that's bad enough in our big cities, but universities are in our outer suburbs and in our

regional communities. I can't understand why the government has turned its back on these

17,000 people and said we're not prepared to help.





EPSTEIN: Just finally, they're going to have to be smaller though, aren't they? There's no way

all those 17,000 people are able to keep their jobs. Universities are going to be smaller. We're

not going to have international students like we had.



PLIBERSEK: Well, we've still got actually record demand from Australian domestic students

because the gap years aren't happening, the jobs aren't out there, the entry-level jobs that you

can do with no qualifications. I would much rather see those young Australians getting an

education at TAFE or university than going on the dole queue. And that means investing more

in our TAFEs and universities to give them that opportunity.



It's absolutely true too that a lot of the people who are losing their jobs are researchers, for

example. This isn't about the fact that there's no demand for the work they do. This is a direct

result of a lack of government support. And just one thing I'd say about the international

students - if we had got our borders right, if we had got those Australians who are stuck

overseas home - and we promised to get them home by Christmas, well Scott Morrison

promised to get them home by Christmas. If we managed to get Australians home, we could

be - when it's safe to do so - welcoming international students back. The universities have got

plenty of accommodation that they'd like to put them in for quarantine. They could do that quite

safely once we get Australians home. The fact that our Federal Government has failed to bring

Australians home means that the delay on welcoming international students back will be much

greater. It's a $40 billion a year industry that we are losing because of their inaction.



EPSTEIN: Tanya Plibersek, thanks for your time.



PLIBERSEK: Pleasure Raf.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350



