

#SportAUS       #TheAIS

25 FEBRUARY 2021

South-East Queensland Games would be a win for all Australians

A 2032 South-East Queensland Olympic and Paralympic Games can be a “beautiful beacon on the hill  for all Australians”, says Australian Sports Commission (ASC) Chair Josephine Sukkar.

The ASC, comprising the Australian Institute of Sport and Sport Australia, has welcomed a  recommendation overnight from the International Olympic Committee that South-East Queensland is  the preferred bid candidate for the 2032 Games. It does not confirm South East Queensland as host for  the 2032 Games, but it is an important step as the IOC has announced it is advancing to “targeted  dialogue” with the Brisbane 2032 Committee because of its “very advanced Games concept”.

“This would be a beautiful beacon on the hill for all Australians to look towards,” Ms Sukkar said on  behalf of the ASC Board. “For the young boys and girls now enjoying their sport and dreaming of  representing their country, this is an announcement that makes the possibility of a home Games more  accessible and real. A home Games would be a driver for increased sport participation too.

“A home Games can also show the wonderful power of sport to influence lives and communities far  beyond the competitive arena. I was lucky enough to be at the 2000 Sydney Olympics for Cathy  Freeman’s gold medal race and for the Opening and Closing Ceremonies. But my personal highlight  are the memories of my late father, a volunteer doctor at the 2000 Games, who was able to enjoy that  experience of a lifetime with thousands of other volunteers. I still have my father’s volunteer uniform  from the Sydney Olympics and treasure it.”

AIS CEO Peter Conde says Australia is well placed to host a successful Games, courtesy of a more  united sporting system and a sharpened focus on athlete development.

“There is no doubt that the build-up to Sydney 2000 united Australian sport and the AIS, along with our  state and territory partners, have taken positive steps over the past few years to further enhance our  collaboration,” Mr Conde said. “We now operate together as a National Institute Network and it was just  over a year ago that we signed a united high performance strategy for the first time in history. This  collective approach can become Australian sport’s greatest competitive advantage.

“We also commend the Australian Government for believing in the AIS vision and our future Australian  athletes by boosting funding to development pathways and athlete wellbeing. That investment has  given us a head-start on producing the Olympic, Paralympic and Commonwealth Games champions of  the future.”

COVID-19 has impacted sport participation and volunteering, but Sport Australia CEO Rob Dalton  said the next decade was shaping up as one of the most inspiring periods for Australian sport.

“Things have been tough, but we’ve said all along that sport will play a prominent role in lifting the  nation’s energy and spirits again, and there are few events that can match the inspiration of a home  Olympic and Paralympic Games,” Mr Dalton said. “Next year Australia will host the FIBA Women’s  World Cup of Basketball, then in 2023, the FIFA Women’s World Cup. These all present wonderful  opportunities for Australian sport to thrive over the next decade and beyond.”

Media contact: Chris Wilson 0407 135 280 or chris.wilson@ausport.gov.au



