UNOFFICIAL



The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

Senator the Hon. Marise Payne  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women

The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health and Aged Care

The Hon. Dan Tehan MP  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment

The Hon. Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Home Affairs



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

Tuesday 6 April 2021

AUSTRALIA WELCOMES TWO-WAY TRANS-TASMAN TRAVEL

Australia’s flight-path to recovery is well underway with the Australian Government welcoming the  New Zealand Government's announcement that it will join the Safe Travel Zone between Australia  and New Zealand.

This announcement will enable quarantine-free travel between Australia and New Zealand on both  sides of the Tasman helping to reunite families and friends and giving tourism operators a significant  boost.

It follows Australia’s opening of a one-way Safe Travel Zone from New Zealand to Australia six months  ago, with more than 34,000 arrivals into Australia from New Zealand during that period.

This latest major step in the resumption of international travel has only been possible due to the  internationally recognised, world-leading responses to the COVID-19 pandemic by Australia and New  Zealand.

The Federal Government’s decisions to close Australia’s international border early last year, declaring  COVID-19 a global pandemic before the World Health Organisation did and working with the States  and Territories through the National Cabinet to suppress the virus has ensured we are the envy of the  world today.

The importance of this announcement is demonstrated by the fact that the Trans-Tasman route is  Australia’s busiest international aviation market with more than seven million passengers in the one  year ending January 2020 before the effects of COVID-19 hit international aviation.

Throughout this pandemic, the Federal Government has supported more than 40,000 flights through  various programs and initiatives. As of last month, flights on common routes in Australia were at 57  per cent of the pre-COVID average, up from a low of 3 per cent at the height of the pandemic and  today’s announcement by the New Zealand Government will be a further boost to Australia’s aviation  industry.

The announcement also represents a major boost to our tourism industry with around 18 per cent of  all international air arrivals from New Zealand annually and with visitors to Australia now having the  opportunity to travel without having to quarantine at either end of their journey. In 2019, New  Zealand travellers spent $1.6 billion on travel and tourism in Australia.

Should temporary restrictions need to be applied due to a COVID-19 outbreak, both countries will  provide as much notice as possible to Government agencies, passengers, airlines and airport operators  affected by any such measures.

Given that Australian and New Zealand airlines had already been operating under a one-way Safe  Travel Zone to Australia for the past six months operating “green” flights to Australia, we are optimistic  that airlines will commence additional services to meet the demand generated by the two-way Safe  Travel Zone.

Australian and New Zealand government health and border officials will also continue to work  together to facilitate the safe and effective introduction of the two-way Safe Travel Zone.

[ENDS]

Media Contacts:  Prime Minister’s office: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  Foreign Minister’s office: David Wroe, 0429 531 143  Minister Hunt’s office: James Perrin, 0447 534 427  Minister Tehan’s office: Byron Vale, 0428 262 894  Minister Andrew’s office: Keegan Buzza, 0447 697 846  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

