





The Hon Josh Frydenberg MP   Treasurer

The Hon Stuart Robert MP  Minister for the National Disability Insurance Scheme  Minister for Government Services

Senator the Hon Anne Ruston   Minister for Families and Social Services

MEDIA RELEASE





Authorised by S. Robert MP, Canberra

Thursday, 4 March 2021

$1.3 billion boost for Australian households

Around $1.3 billion will land in eligible Australians’ bank accounts from this week, as the Morrison  Government delivers a fourth Economic Support Payment.

As part of the COVID-19 Response Package introduced last year, a further two Economic Support  Payments were announced for delivery in December 2020 and March 2021.

Minister for Government Services Stuart Robert said the Economic Support Payment of $250 will be  automatically paid to individuals living in Australia who received an eligible payment or held a  concession card on 26 February 2021.

‘There’s nothing you need to do to receive this payment,’ Minister Robert said.

‘The vast majority of payments will arrive in bank accounts by mid-March. The payment will appear  in your Centrelink online account on myGov or the Centrelink app generally 48 hours before it goes  into your bank account.

‘Families who claim Family Tax Benefit as a lump sum will get the payment with their lump sum after  they’ve confirmed their income for the 2020-21 financial year.’

Treasurer Josh Frydenberg said the payments provide an immediate financial boost to eligible families,  pensioners, carers, veterans and concession cardholders.

‘Combined, the four Economic Support Payments are expected to inject around $12 billion into the  Australian economy,’ Mr Frydenberg said.

‘As we move towards a more optimistic and stronger recovery this year, this latest payment will  provide further support to millions of low income households recovering from the impacts of  COVID19.’



Authorised by S. Robert MP, Canberra



Minister for Social Services Anne Ruston said the extra support is being paid to around 5.1 million  eligible Australians from this week.

‘These payments will support lower income Australians who aren’t currently receiving additional  assistance through the Coronavirus Supplement,’ Minister Ruston said.

For further information, visit: https://www.servicesaustralia.gov.au/economicsupportpayment

[ENDS]

Media contact:  Minister Robert’s office (02) 6277 7200     Treasurer Frydenberg’s office (02) 6277 7340

Minister Ruston’s office (02) 6277 7560



