

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP   SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION   SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS ALAN JONES SHOW  THURSDAY, 11 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECT: Covid-19

ALAN JONES, HOST: Tanya Plibersek, one of our regulars, and former Deputy Leader of  the Labor Party, and now in all the debate about Anthony Albanese, the most favoured  Labor figure to replace him. And Concetta Fierravanti-Wells, who has been a Senator of a  New South Wales since 2005, born in Wollongong and to be fair to her one of the first  Federal politicians to alert Australians to the expansionist disposition of the Chinese  government in the Pacific. My thanks to you both for your time. Tanya, I must come to you  first because I invited you on to this program on Monday night to debate Craig Kelly on  things like hydroxychloroquine and vaccination. As is your entitlement, and I said on  Monday night you courteously declined. But you had called him a nong and guilty of  misinformation. Have a look at this headline here from The Herald Sun newspaper of  Tuesday of this week and there it says in the headline. I think we're getting it up here a  minute. See I hope we do. Anyway the headline from The Herald Sun said 'Senior Doctors  across Melbourne have formed an alliance and are urging health officials to consider the  use of two drugs, which they say can cure Coronavirus.' Now, I think the editorial byline  ‘cure Coronavirus’ is not what the doctors were saying, not what Craig Kelly was saying,  but further on one of the many doctors, Dr. Eamonn Matheson, is quoted in the story as  saying quote: 'the evidence in favour of the efficacy and safety of the treatment options for  the management of the early phase of Covid-19 illness are now considered by many  Australian and international medical experts including the esteemed Professor Robert  Clancy to virtually be beyond dispute’. Now Tanya, Craig Kelly has given these doctors the  confidence to speak out. Can I ask you is Harvey Risch, a professor of epidemiology at  Yale University, is he dealing in misinformation when he says and I quote  'hydroxychloroquine is effective in the treatment of Coronavirus if given in the early  infectious stage to outpatients', and the American Journal of Medicine published a peer-reviewed paper authored by 20 doctors, it's lead author, Dr. Peter McCulloch, said quote:  'I'm confident that hcq is safe and effective. It can be used as the base in the treatment for  Covid-19 in the early ambulatory phases'. Tanya question to you, are they nongs and  guilty of misinformation?

TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION, SHADOW MINISTER  FOR WOMEN: Alan, I'm going to take my advice from our Therapeutic Goods  Administration, from our Health Minister, from our Prime Minister, from the clinical  evidence task force, which is a collection of our most distinguished professionals and

organisations - health organisations. And the weight of their evidence is that these  treatments aren't effective. So I'm going to go with the bulk of medical and scientific advice  here.

JONES: But Tanya, this is the American Journal of Medicine. The American Journal of  Medicine.

PLIBERSEK: I'm not dismissing or disrespecting anyone. But we've also got our own  Therapeutic Goods Administration and our own clinical evidence evaluation task force,  which are our most distinguished health professionals across Australia. I'm going to stick  with them. Their advice might change over time. I’m going to stick with them.

JONES: I'm sticking with the scientists too. I'm simply saying we should, Craig Kelly is  saying, put all of these opinions on the table and that's not happening. Craig Kelly is not  an nong for alerting us to these opinions. Concetta, could I come to you, has the Morrison  Government and its various lickspittles pulled the wrong reign, in seeking to silence Craig  Kelly. I mean there were thousands of comments on my Facebook page. Tony said 'Craig  Kelly is one of the few decent and honest politicians in Canberra today, of course, being a  conservative means you become a target for all of the lefty media types'. And Robert said  'I'm disappointed with Morrison, stopping people from speaking out is not on’. Now, he has  merely quoted experts from all over the world, which I have done. I mean, you can't beat  Yale, Stanford and Oxford University. Don't they count, Concetta?



SENATOR CONCETTA FIERRAVANTI-WELLS: Well Alan this is a very complex issue  and it's a very difficult issue and whether it's the opinion of Professor Clancy or other  professors, there are different views. The important point I think Alan here is that in any  debate, whether it's about medicine or science or climate or anything, there has to be  contestability and there has to be contestability of ideas and so therefore different people,  different experts are able to put their point of view and debate this issue and come out with  what is the best possible issue. And I am sure, I'm sure and I would hope that our medical  authorities are all cognisant of the diversity of views. And so that you know contestability  is...





JONES: Let me take that word, Concetta, Tanya just a quick one because I want to come  on to a couple of other things here, but on contestability we're virtually being all told to toe  the line and you've actually said that well, I'll take what the Prime Minister said, I'll take  what the Health Minister said. I'll take what Professor Murphy says. Where is the  contestability of his view against the views from Yale and Stanford and Harvard and a  whole stack of them from around the world. There is no contestability.

PLIBERSEK:  Alan, you know what, there were there were always doctors who would say  that smoking was healthy for you. I chose to believe the vast bulk of medical evidence that  smoking kills you.

JONES: Tanya that's called a red herring.

PLIBERSEK: You'll always find someone who is prepared to say X, Y, Z - that goes

against mainstream thought in a particular area.

JONES: Tanya when a Professor of epidemiology, I'm sorry, at Yale says  hydroxychloroquine is effective in the treatment of Coronavirus if given in the early  infectious stage to outpatients, and Craig Kelly is told to shut up, there's no contestability  there. But look enough of that, on a related subject to come to you first, Tanya, the  distinguished epidemiologist and University of New South Wales academic whom I know  you know, Marylouise McLaws, has said this week that vaccines are not a silver bullet and  that Australia would have to roll out as many as a hundred and ninety thousand injections  a day to achieve herd immunity and that we'd have to vaccinate at least 90 to 95% if we  were covering a variant of concern. Now firstly I'm saying people should be vaccinated.  That's my view. But a poll has said that only 75 per cent of voters have said they'll be  vaccinated. Now again, the point that Craig Kelly was right in making was France,  Germany, Sweden and Poland are saying that the AstraZeneca vaccine should only be  used for people under 65. The French President Macron says it is quasi ineffective on  people over 65, but we've ordered 3.8 million doses of this and 50 million to be produced  at the Commonwealth Serum Laboratory. What are the people watching us meant to make  of all of this?

PLIBERSEK: Well Alan, you know it's very clear that I'm very much in favour of the  vaccination program. But that shouldn't stop us asking some questions. Like, did we put all  our eggs in one basket? Will we stick to the timeline? The Government said they want to  see four million people vaccinated by the end of March. Are we at the head of the queue?  We were told the head of the queue internationally, to get the most effective medicines.  And then some practical things like how will people get it?

JONES: I agree.

PLIBERSEK: So far, it seems only 2,000 GPs have registered to provide it. These are  questions that are all very worth asking.



JONES: Quite. We're debating it here now. We're talking about it here now, but it's not  discussed anywhere else. I mean Concetta, Pfizer say they'll have progressive graduated  shipments of 80,000 in the next month. So I would have thought that for AstraZeneca, and  Tanya is right there. She's saying, well, we don't quite know whether this stuff can be  delivered. For AstraZeneca and Pfizer there must be uncertainty about arrival, isn't this the  point? The public aren't being told all this.



FIERRAVANTI-WELLS: Well Alan, we have agreements to purchase the amount of  vaccine 125 million doses and also an additional 26 million under an international COVAX  agreement. The reality is that we are relying on CSL, and CSL is an experienced  manufacturer of vaccines in Australia, the Commonwealth Serum Laboratories, to deliver  the AstraZeneca vaccine in Australia. So we are relying on CSL and we have a program  and indeed only yesterday Greg Hunt indicated to us the program for the roll-out of the  vaccination and how that was going to happen.



JONES: But Concetta, I just come back to the point about Macron. President Macron says  AstraZeneca is quasi ineffective for people over the age of 65. Now Moderna and Pfizer  are allegedly the most effective. But Tanya, we haven't been able to reach a deal with  Moderna over the supply of that vaccine and the federal government hasn't disclosed the  reasons, should it?

PLIBERSEK: I think it's certainly worth interrogating Alan, why we going with a particular  vaccine, and I guess really doubling down on one or two vaccines rather than looking at all  of the vaccines that are available. I think it really is up to the Government to explain some  of the decision-making here, but also the practicalities.

JONES: But we've got a $24 million, we've got a $24 million advertisement campaign.

PLIBERSEK: If the GPs don't know...

JONES: We've got a $24 million advertising campaign.

PLIBERSEK: You don't need to advertise to me. I'm happy to take it. I'd like to know  where I can get it, when I'll get, which vaccine it'll be. I think it would be good to know the  details.

JONES: I agree. That's my concern. Concetta, AstraZeneca has very little experience in  vaccines. It has a very small role in global pharmaceuticals. Vaccine production is not one  of their core competencies. So we are relying on these companies. I mean, what are your  thoughts?

FIERRAVANTI-WELLS: Well Alan, we are relying on CSL and CSL is going to roll out the  vaccine for us. Sorry to go back to your previous point in relation to the Pfizer and  Moderna. My understanding is that the discussions between with Moderna are  commercially in confidence. So that's the reason why I understand...

JONES: But if we can't do deal with Moderna and they say it's an effective vaccine, I come  back to the point about Macron who's not a fool, he's a scholar, and he says that it's quasi  ineffective AstraZeneca. Now, I think the whole of Australian people should be told these  things and if we’ve got a $24 million advertising campaign, I'm not too sure what we're  advertising.

FIERRAVANTI-WELLS: Well Alan, can I just say my understanding is that the World  Health instructions and the World Health recommendation is that AstraZeneca, can- the  AstraZeneca vaccine can be given to all people including the over 65s and that's the  recommendation that's been made by the World Health authority.

JONES: Alright, Tanya thank you for your time, see you next week. And Concetta thank  you for your time.

PLIBERSEK: Always a pleasure.

ENDS  MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

