ANDREW GILES MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR CITIES AND URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

SHADOW MINISTER ASSISTING FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

MEMBER FOR SCULLIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

PODCAST ONE INTERVIEW

YOUR MORNING AGENDA WITH NATARSHA BELLING

MONDAY, 4 JANUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Lasting impacts of COVID; Long COVID sufferers.



NATARSHA BELLING: Victorian MP Andrew Giles is so concerned about the rising number of

sufferers experiencing long term side effects. He's now calling for more government support.

He wants a better long term strategy that looks into the lasting impacts of COVID and ensuring

survivors get the financial and emotional support they need. Thanks so much for joining us,

Andrew.



ANDREW GILES, MEMBER FOR SCULLIN: Great to be with you, Tarsh.



BELLING: So why are you calling for better support of people that are suffering long term

consequences of COVID-19?



GILES: Well I'm concerned that too many of us think that COVID ends when someone's

discharged from hospital and that's clearly not the case. There is an increasing body of

evidence that suggests for many people, they suffer long COVID which may be one syndrome

or perhaps a number of syndromes, that can be incredibly debilitating and it's something we

just don't know enough about. Dr. Anthony Fauci  is America's top diseases expert we've

heard a lot about and a lot from lately, told a webinar the other day that the unknown effects of

long COVID is a major concern right now and that's something that I'm very concerned about.



BELLING: And I understand you also are very interested in this because a mate of yours Ben,

he's a long term sufferer as well?



GILES: Yeah, and I think it's important to tell these stories, I mean Anna’s is incredibly

effective, and for me, understanding that this may affect thousands of people is one thing, but

being able to appreciate the personal consequences on an individual is something that will be

in my view a big spur to action. I think about Ben who contracted COVID in March. On one

level was better in July, but has gotten no better since then and since then has been living a

really challenging life where he can’t exercise, doesn't know from one day to the next whether

he'll be, at best, just lethargic and tired or at worst unable to get off his back and understanding

the challenge that he faces and his anxiety that he feels he may not get any better than this for

six months. Now the impact on him is enormous but something he said to me Tarsh has really

struck me and that's the nature of his work in professional services, means he can keep

working in keep connecting to work, which is great for his well being and also enables him to

earn an income, but there are many, many others who may work in construction or in retail,

who wouldn't be able to do this and Ben asked me to think about these people and that's

something that I'm very keen to talk about as well.



BELLING: Andrew, I immediately think about these people, Anna was very adamant that she

would not be able to work in a full time capacity again. Where does that leave all of these

people that can't return to their former jobs that's a massive issue financially for these people?



GILES: Well it’s a huge issue for those people and I think Tarsh for our country as well. We

talk a lot about the recovery and I've been talking along with my colleagues about the need to

make sure that our recovery doesn't leave anyone behind and long haulers are a classic group

that we can't allow to be left behind, which means we've got to make sure that we have an

awareness that they are there, believe that they exist and offer support to them, it means we've

got to make sure that we conduct research to understand exactly what's going on. And when it

comes to them being able to support themselves, we need to think about what's required in the

workplace as well.



BELLING: Then you make an excellent point they're referring to Dr. Anthony Fauci the US top

infectious diseases expert, now he praised Australia in leading the world in what we have done

with smashing the COVID-19 curve and how we've offered financial support via the

government through JobKeeper JobSeeker, but what financial support would you like to see

for these long haulers?



GILES: Well, this is a complicated question and, you know, one person's circumstances are

going to be the same as others, but I think we do need to understand that there'll be a

significant number of Australians whose capacity to be in the workforce will be affected by this.

And if we're talking about changes to our industrial relations system. Let's just not talk about

support for businesses, let's make sure that we get the right support for every worker to be

able to continue to go about their work and return to work on their terms if they are affected by

this.



BELLING: Andrew, you mentioned earlier about the long haulers as there's increasingly

concerning data coming out from both the US and UK about long term impacts on children that

have suffered COVID-19, is that something that you're concerned about? Because if you can

track COVID when you're in your 70s and 80s, that's a different scenario to when you're

contracting it when you're seven or eight, and you could have long term organ issues or long

term damage to your heart or lungs.



GILES: Yeah, it is concerning and I guess I'd make a couple of points. I think the median age

from the UK evidence of people affected by long COVID is 45 and that to me at any rate

seems relatively young and the condition seems to persist for quite some time. And of course

as you say when we're talking about children, it's very very concerning and for me that anxiety

is exacerbated by the fact that we just don't know enough about this. And that really goes to

show how critical I think it is that we get the research done so that we understand what is likely

to happen and of course what sort of interventions we might be able to put in place to support

children and younger people who are long haulers.



BELLING: So what would you like to see happen from now, Andrew?



GILES: Look I think there's three things for me. The first one is awareness and understanding

to make clear to people who are going through this, or the friends and family people are going

through this, that they're not alone, that there are people on their side you're going to make the

case to make sure that they don't get left behind when, perhaps, as we hope, 2020 and

COVID-19 are forgotten about as a daily concern. The second question is to make sure that

we focus our research on understanding exactly what long COVID is and what can be done

about it. The last thing is to make sure that these people get the support they need to continue

to lead lives that involve economic activity and participation in the workplace, as well as



support to do the other bits and pieces that make their lives, worth living on their terms, the

example like Anna, and my friend Ben have made so clear.



BELLING: Important conversation we need to have in this country, Andrew thank you very

much for joining us.



GILES: Great chatting with you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LACHLAN POULTER 0423 937 655



