

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT

Q&A, AFR BUSINESS SUMMIT  SYDNEY, NSW  TUESDAY 9 MARCH 2021



EO&E…

PHIL COOREY: Thanks very much, Prime Minister. My name is Phil Coorey and I’m the political editor at  the AFR. We’ve only got time for a couple of quick ones. So if I could just ask you about I think an  interesting aspect of your speech about the migration, your comments on migration, temporary visa  holders. Would you, I mean it is early days, but would you let us into your thinking, would you be looking  at changing the overall migration cap to allow in more skilled temporary migrants or just changing the  migration mix? What’s your thinking?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, temporary migration isn’t capped, it is demand driven and always has been. But  it is really about the design of the classes of the visas and the Ag 2030 Strategy which has been developed  by David Littleproud, I think will play a key role in particularly in how those visas can address workforce  challenges in the ag sector in particular. But it is not just about the ag sector. Anyone who runs a hospitality  business will be aware of these issues and particularly if they’re operating one in regional Australia as well.  I mean, backpackers play an important role in that process but our systems to date have not been as direct  as they might be. So all I’m saying really is that I’ve got a very open mind on this. We have tried in the past  to first get Australians into these jobs and having tried to do that with any number of incentives, and I’m  sure Peter Costello remembers the things they were trying back two decades ago. It has been incredibly  difficult and we have to call it as it is. And that is, when Australians won’t do the jobs, the jobs still need  to be done and I can’t have, as is occurring, horticulturalists ploughing their produce back into their fields  because they can’t get the workers. That is a tragedy for our economy and particularly for those  producers. So this is a clear area where I think we are going to have to lean more forward on. Not at the  expense of Australian workers, as I said. If you’ve got a missing link in your workforce, then that actually  impedes growth of your economy, which costs the economy jobs. It’s cost those businesses those  opportunities and so I see this as a value-add at the end of the day and we’re going to have to make our  case on this but the regional members of my team, my Nationals colleagues who sit in the Cabinet, the  Liberal members from right across regional Australia have been very consistent on this view.

COOREY: Would there be conditions tied to these visas, though? You’d have to go to the regions, would  there be the lure of permanent residency perhaps at the end?

PRIME MINISTER: I think you have all of those options that you have to consider and you need to think  about their broader impact on population growth. I mean, obviously, we’re not seeing any of that at the  moment. But yeah, that conditionality is one of the great advantages of the temporary visa system. As a  former Immigration Minister, I know it pretty well. You can’t put conditions on permanent visas about  where people can live. Rightly, you’re a resident. You’re a citizen, you’re a citizen. You can go wherever  you like. But if you’re on a temporary visa, you’re here on conditions. And those conditions can help us  direct where people can go which can ease population pressures in metropolitan areas but also hopefully  create opportunities in regional areas.

COOREY: PM, you’ve announced another $1.2 billion for apprentices. Since March last year, I think this is  your fourth announcement on wage subsidies for apprentices and trainees. We’re up to nearly over  300,000 positions now. Is there an assurance, because it is a wage subsidy for the first 12 months of that  apprenticeship. Do you have an idea of what the completion rate would be in terms of getting value for  money? I mean, I know you can't prescribe.

PRIME MINISTER: It would be difficult to predict in the current environment, Phil, and one thing I've learnt  during COVID-19 is don't get too far ahead of yourself about what the economic conditions are going to  be. But, you know, I don't think businesses lightly take on young people into their businesses. I think they  do it with intent, taking those people into their employment, particularly in small and medium sized  businesses. These are predominantly family businesses in many cases, so many of them in regional parts  of the country. And so I don't think they see this as a short term measure. I see a lot of confidence out in  these businesses as I move around the country. I was up at a quarry service business just the other day  and up in the Hunter and they're growing their business, they're taking on apprentices. I mean, other  apprentices that started in the middle of COVID and at the start of COVID and they know the reason  they're still in that business is because of these programmes. Those businesses want to take them on  because they know they need them and they need to build up those skills. But as we know, when you're  in those early parts of the skills development, apprentices won't add as much value as they ultimately will.  So by sharing what is the heavier part of that load in the early parts of their training, I think we're giving  business the leg up to give them a long term future.

COOREY: You spoke on the vaccine. You talked about hopefully we'll get the results coming out of the UK  and Israel and so forth, the efficacy and we’ll be able to treat this hopefully as a bad flu in the not too  distant future. But we're still not there yet. And a lot of people in this room I know and outside this room  will be worried about the ad hoc nature of border closures and the inability of the Federation to come to  an agreed set of rules for shutting them. Isn't that just the way we're going to be for the next six to eight  months as the vaccine comes out?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah, look, I understand the frustration. Believe you me, I've shared it on many  occasions. At the end of the day, I think one thing we've learnt during the past year is that states have  some sovereign responsibilities and they’re responsible for the decisions they take and they have the  authority and power to take them. Wherever possible, we seek to try and get some consistency on that.  And we've had some great success on that in some areas, but regrettably, on the borders that has not  occurred. What we're now doing this year, though, I think is very different to 2020. The 2020 response to  COVID-19 must be different in 2021. Why? Because the risk has changed. I mean, when you don't have a  vaccine, when you're building up your health system and you're highly vulnerable at the start of a  pandemic or running the quarantine system under great stress, well, you're going to be more cautious  because as we see with an outbreak in an unprotected way, then it can have catastrophic effects on your  economy. So that is that is understandable. But if you go back to the start of COVID, what were we most

concerned about? Thousands upon thousands, upon thousands of Australians dying an undignified death  in ICUs right across the country, potentially without ventilators in an agonising and horrific scene. We saw  those scenes overseas. These are not made up scenes. We saw the mass graves in New York, we saw the  large tents in fields in the UK where the bodies were just lined up, one after the next. Let's not kid  ourselves how serious this was. And this year is different. This year that risk with the vaccine means that  serious and severe illness don't become that risk. That is changing every day, around about 25,000 or  thereabouts aged care residents have already now been vaccinated with their first injection. That's about  270, I think, facilities that have already been reached. They are our most vulnerable. They are the  Australians who would be most likely to be victims of COVID-19 without these protections. So once you're  able to protect the most vulnerable, once you're able to vaccinate your quarantine workforce, once you're  able to vaccinate your frontline health care and aged care and disability care staff, well, it changes. And  so the parameters for the decisions that premiers are making this year are different from last year and  the justifications for actions will need to be different. Now, good news is it has opened up a lot more this  year. You can even get the West Australian now. There you go. That’s great. I hope to get there soon. It's  been a long time since I've been to West Australia and for most people. But, you know, those decisions I  understood. But this year is different and Phil Gaetjens has been tasked together with all the director  generals of the premier's departments to develop a new risk management framework for the states and  territories and the Commonwealth to inform these decisions this year. And so that means, you know, it's  not just about the health because the health risk is diminished. It's about the economic risk, the impact  on livelihoods, the impact on regions. And it's important that all premiers, chief ministers, prime ministers  make decisions that are very commensurate with the new risk framework that we are facing this year,  which is different to last year. And so for that reason, I expect the decisions made this year should be  different to last year.

COOREY: And just finally, PM, I must ask you about the current issues of the day. Issues surrounding your  Attorney-General and the Defence Minister does go to workplace culture and they are things people in  this room, CEOs and so forth, have had to deal with themselves in their own internals. A couple of  questions. Is it still your view you don't need a separate enquiry into the allegations against your Attorney?  And he's also your Industrial Relations Minister. Senator Cash is now doing that. What's it mean for the IR  Bill, the Industrial Relations Bill, which you were hoping to have next week? Is that now going to spill over  into the Budget session?

PRIME MINISTER: Sure. Well, first of all, I believe in the rule of law. I believe in equality before the law. I  believe every Australian should face the same legal processes as any other Australian. And on that basis,  I see no justification for any extra judicial inquiry that might be set up by a prime minister or any other  politician. All Australians are equal before the law. We have competent and authorised agencies to deal  with these matters, both through the police and through the courts. And that's where I will make my  assessments of those matters, and that's where it should be done. You don't have to go too far from this  place to see countries where the rule of law doesn't operate and the chaos on the streets and the mayhem  that that can ultimately lead to. So I don't take the rule of law for granted in this country, and I would  never do anything that would undermine the rule of law in this country. It is the basis of our democracy.  It's also the basis of our strength and stability of our economy. And so for all of these reasons, I'm not  entertaining that proposition. Coroners should follow their own processes, they should make their own  decisions and if there should be a coronial enquiry, then that is, of course, the process. And I'm happy to  see those processes proceed as coroners see fit. On the other matter, the great thing about my team is  one of my team, in this case, the Attorney or indeed the Defence Minister, if they're unable to do their  duties currently for health reasons, then I have wonderful people I can turn to. In Defence, I can turn to  Marise Payne, the first ever female defence minister in this country who understands these issues up and

down and backwards and frontways. And she's all over it as am I and we will continue to address those  matters each and every day and we won't skip a beat. But I can also say in Industrial Relations and matters  of the Attorney-General, I can turn to another great woman in my cabinet, Michaelia Cash, a very  accomplished lawyer in her own right, and a former industrial relations minister who has got some  experience in getting important industrial relations reforms through the Senate on other occasions when  she previously had that portfolio. So once again, we know what our job is. We know what issues are  serious and important, and they're important issues to deal with and the sensitive matters raised in  Canberra over the course of this last month. But I also know what Australians are relying on me to do, and  that is to lead us out of this COVID-19 pandemic and to lead us out of this covid-19 recession and that's  exactly what we're going to do.

COOREY: Thank you, Prime Minister.

PRIME MINISTER: Thank you.

[ENDS]

Media Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

