

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



MADELEINE KING MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE AND RESOURCES

MEMBER FOR BRAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

DAMPIER

MONDAY, 12 APRIL 2021



SUBJECTS: Visit to WA; resources sector; ex-tropical cyclone Seroja; climate change;

net zero emissions by 2050; vaccine rollout; gas; importance of WA during the next

Federal election; WA state election; Ben Roberts-Smith; Kerry Stokes; WA Labor;

Andrew Laming; Australia Post.



MADELEINE KING, SHADOW MINSTER FOR TRADE AND RESOURCES: Thanks,

everyone, for coming here today to the Karratha Gas Plant. My name is Madeleine King. I am

the Member for Brand but also, very proudly, the Shadow Minister for Trade and Resources.

So it is an absolute honour to have the Labor Leader, Anthony Albanese, here today at the

North West Shelf Project. This is an iconic project that was started over more than 35 years

ago here in Karratha. Karratha, and Dampier itself, has been built off the back of Hammersley

Iron, first mining iron ore but now the unbelievable productivity that is associated with LNG and

also domestic gas powering Western Australia. Today, Woodside have told us, our host this

morning, that it is the 5,688th shipment that has left the North West Shelf Project since it

began decades ago. It is a magnificent achievement. It is a testament to the ingenuity of the

resources industry, the gas extraction industry of Australia and Western Australia, that sees

gas power great cities of the world and also the great city of Perth and all the suburbs that

surround it.



I also, before I go on, just want to acknowledge our friends in the communities that are

suffering in the wake of ex-tropical cyclone Seroja. We know that Kalbarri has been severely

hit, and other towns as well. So our thoughts are with the communities that are trying to live

through this. I know there's been a loss of power and there will be lots of damage to people's

property. And I want to acknowledge the work of the new Emergency Services Minister, Mr

Reece Whitby, who is working to help all Western Australians and visitors affected by the

cyclone. And with that, I'm really pleased to be able to hand over to Anthony, a great supporter

of the minerals and resources industry in Western Australia and right across the nation.

Anthony?



ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Thanks very

much. It is great to be here, back here in Karratha. Once again, I do want to begin by

acknowledging the hardship that many in this community in Western Australia are suffering at

the moment due to ex-tropical cyclones Seroja. We've seen many houses lost. Hopefully we

won't see a loss of life. And that is a great credit to the emergency services personnel who do

such an amazing job in this country of ours in a time of need of local communities. So I say

once again, thank you to those personnel for doing what they can to alleviate the damage

which has been caused, but also to keep people safe. The important thing is you can always

build back property, you can't build back lives. That is why it is so important, the work that our

personnel do, at times like this.



Can I say also here where we are in Karratha, we have been guests of Woodside, having a

look at the facility here, the gas plant and also at Pluto. What we have is literally one per cent

of Australia's GDP right here. Contributing to jobs, contributing to powering our country, but

powering other countries as well, and contributing important revenue that goes towards

schools and hospitals and services, playing such a critical role in our national economy. Of

course, Woodside, as well, have a commitment to reducing emissions. And we have been

talking with them today about their plans. Woodside is one of the companies that has

committed to net zero emissions by 2050 and has a plan for a staged reduction in their

emissions, including the use of offsets to make sure they reach those important goals.



Can I also make some comments today about the vaccine rollout or lack thereof of?

Australians did it tough in 2020. They made sacrifices. And the response was world-leading by

Australians. Everyday Australians who helped out their families, their neighbours, their

communities, their state and their nation, including here in Western Australia where we've had

no community transition, a remarkable achievement under Mark McGowan's Government, and

one that I had discussions with him about just last night. But it is also the case that whenever

the Commonwealth have been responsible for action to deal with the pandemic and the

aftermath, the Commonwealth has not had a great record. We, of course, know that

Australians were told that if they downloaded the COVIDSafe app, it would keep them safe.

And we know that it basically had a negligible role in keeping people safe during that time. We

know also, when it comes to the Commonwealth response, that they were responsible for aged

care. And we know the problems that have been there with the considerable loss of life in our

aged care facilities. But if Scott Morrison had one job this year, it was to get the rollout of the

vaccine right. And it's quite clear that it's just a debacle. And the fact that last night, Scott

Morrison made an announcement through Facebook, which is of such significance that it

should have required the Prime Minister to front up to a full-scale press conference and explain

why it was that the Government was abandoning any targets for the rollout of the vaccine. But

he simply didn't do so. We know that the previous targets have not been met, that this is a

Government that always over-promises and under-delivers. They said four million Australians

will be vaccinated by the end of March. And we know that they have just reached one million in

mid-April. We know also that they said that everyone would be vaccinated by the end of

October. They then changed that to just having the first jab by the end of October. And now

they've abandoned any pretence and won't even say if Australians will receive a first jab by the

end of this year. We know also that vulnerable Australians are missing out. We know that

people in the disability sector, for example, people in the disability sector are being told that

they can't even guarantee when they will get a jab. And there's major disability service

providers whose clients haven't received any vaccinations whatsoever, even though they were

in the first category. This is an absolute failure by the Federal Government. It was failing before

the issue with AstraZeneca. It was failing before. But the AstraZeneca issues have been used

by the Government as an excuse for why that failure was occurring. The truth is that the

Government needs to be transparent. It does need to have objectives. And it does need to get

it right. Because the opening up of the economy is dependent upon these vaccinations. And if

it doesn't get it right, not only will there be an impact on health, but there'll be a considerable

impact on our economy and on our way of life. You'll continue to see lockdowns from time to

time in particular places. This is a failure by Scott Morrison. And the fact that Scott Morrison

has changed the advice that he was giving the Australian people on Thursday night, and has

now changed the advice again last night just through a Facebook post, is really not acceptable

for a Prime Minister. And it's a failure of his leadership to do so. Happy to take questions.



JOURNALIST: On the gas projects here in the Pilbara, what sort of plans are in place to

reduce emissions?



ALBANESE: Well, what they're doing here is, both in terms of the way that they operate the

plants but also in terms of having carbon offsets, they are a very efficient plant in terms of

Pluto, for example, in making sure, in the way that the production occurs that they minimise

their footprint. And the company, like the rest of business, is committed to taking action. What's

extraordinary is that you have companies like Woodside, companies like Rio Tinto, BHP, peak

organisations, be they the Minerals Council of Australia, the Business Council of Australia, the

National Farmers' Federation, all committing to net zero emissions by 2050. And yet what we

have is a Federal Government that's failing to commit to that. The Federal Government needs

to acknowledge that because the whole world is moving, it's having an impact on the way that

business operates. And that is why, in terms of risk mitigation, business is responding to this

new environment. And this year, we'll have a considerable conference soon hosted by

President Biden. And then we'll have the Glasgow Conference towards the end of the year.

There's no doubt in my mind that as the world further examines these issues, then we'll see

more and more action in a globally coordinated way.



JOURNALIST: Will WA be a battleground in the next election?



ALBANESE: WA will certainly be a battleground. I was with Premier McGowan last night with

700 of our closest friends. 700 people committed to the election of a Federal Labor

Government to follow the re-election of the McGowan Labor Government. And if you look at

the WA Liberal Party, what you see is that there's already been a considerable loss of talent in

Julie Bishop, in Mathias Cormann, in Michael Keenan. I doubt very much whether you'll see

the ministers who have been elected or re-appointed to the Cabinet, Christian Porter and

Senator Reynolds. You have Christian Porter, who we now know that the New South Wales

Police were not able to travel to South Australia to conduct interviews that would have been

appropriate had there actually been an investigation take place into those allegations that have

been made. But he remains in the Cabinet, even though there hasn't been an appropriate

investigation to see whether he was a fit and proper person to continue in that role. And we

see Senator Reynolds still sitting in the Cabinet, even though she referred to Brittany Higgins

as a lying cow. I think they will have a position over a period of time whereby they will have to

reconsider their involvement. And what we see is that other members in WA, including Minister

Wyatt, potentially not running again that the next election. And Steve Irons who was demoted

in the last reshuffle as well. So I think the prospects for the Liberal Party here were shown to

be devastated by the state result. And I believe that Labor can do very well in Western

Australia. We've got an outstanding team, led by Madeleine King, in our Shadow Cabinet, but

an outstanding team. We've got the quality. What we need now to match that is the quantity.

And we'll be putting forward very good candidates, strong candidates, in all of the seats at the

next election. And we see WA as a battleground. We'll be reminding people, as well, that Scott

Morrison supported Clive Palmer in the legal action that he took place against the WA Labor

Government keeping Western Australians safe. In a choice between Mark McGowan and Clive

Palmer, Scott Morrison chose Clive Palmer. Well, Western Australians overwhelmingly chose

Mark McGowan at the state election. We stand with Mark McGowan. We will leave Scott

Morrison to explain his alliance with Clive Palmer and the response and the impact of that in

the lead-up to the Federal election. I understand Scott Morrison is actually visiting Western

Australia this week. It's amazing that he can find it. Because this is a bloke who has his own

plane but hasn't been able to find his way to Western Australia. I was here in 2020, even

though with the lockdowns, pre-lockdown I was here three times in the first few months of

2020. This is my second visit here so far this year. That's five visits while Scott Morrison hasn't

troubled the scorers since late 2019.



JOURNALIST: On Ben Roberts-Smith, what did you make of the allegations made by Channel

Nine last night?



ALBANESE: Well, given these matters before the courts, it's not appropriate to comment on

them. People will draw their own conclusions. But I don't intend to comment.



JOURNALIST: Should Kerry Stokes remain in his War Memorial roles while these matters are

before the courts?



ALBANESE: I think Kerry Stokes has done a very good role as Head of the War Memorial.

And I think they are very distinct issues.



JOURNALIST: Should Western Australians give you the same support they gave McGowan

during the next election?



ALBANESE: Well, I'd like to say that, I've got to say. But whilst were very hopeful of gains,

we're not expecting the stratospheric results that Mark McGowan achieved. But we do want to

see stronger representation from Western Australia in a Labor caucus and in a future Labor

Government. And it's very clear that the Liberal Party used to regard Western Australia as

being very important, and that has diminished. So we think that the additional people at the

next election, we'll be looking at a range of seats, including here as well, of course, was once

represented by the Labor Party during the Hawke Government. And we think that one of the

lessons of the Western Australian election is that no voter can be taken for granted. I think one

of the things that we've seen over a period of time here in the West is a Liberal Party that has

got complacent about its support base here has taken voters for granted. And that shows. And

I think that voters will respond at the next election to that. The fact that Scott Morrison thought

he could just go along with Clive Palmer's court case. And remember his excuse. He said he

did not have a choice. Well, he changed that decision. So both things can't be right. That

exposes, once again, Scott Morrison's habit of changing his views and pretending that the first

views that he had held right up to the point in which he changes his mind, he's never ever held,

and thinking that people don't have any memory. And that's what he's trying to do on the rollout

of the vaccine as well. He's trying to put it that somehow nothing's changed, that he always

knew that this would be difficult and that's why we can't set targets, because of uncertainties.

Well, there were uncertainties there from the very beginning, which is why you needed to do

five or six deals in order to mitigate risk. Scott Morrison rolled the dice. He put all his eggs in

the AstraZeneca basket and the chickens have come home to roost. That's the problem here.



JOURNALIST: When do you think all Australians will be offered their first COVID-19 vaccine

dose based on how the rollout is tracking?



ALBANESE: Well, based upon the rollout, it isn't tracking hardly at all. That's the problem. And

the Government needs to be transparent about this. And what I do know is that the delay in the

rollout of the vaccine will have an impact on people's health, but also on our economy and on

jobs.



JOURNALIST: Will you commit to elevating more Western Australians to your Cabinet?



ALBANESE: I want more Western Australians in the Caucus and more Western Australians in

all positions throughout the Parliamentary Labor Party. I think that will be very important. One

of the things that we had a few years ago was we had a complete turnover in the House of

Reps, at least, of the Labor members, with Madeleine, Anne, Josh and Matt, coming in. And

over a period of time, then Patrick in a by-election. They're all relatively new. But what's

happened over a period of time is that they've stepped up, whether it be in frontbench roles or

the important role that Anne Aly is playing in terms of national security. They're all talented

people, along with our senate team, which is led, of course, by Sue Lines as the Deputy

President, but also, of course, Louise and Glenn Sterle and the team there. So we have a very

good team from Western Australia, but what we need is quantity. And I'll be here, as I have

been, on average ten times a year over a period of more than a decade now. I know Western

Australia. I spend time here. Not just in Perth but in the regions. And I look forward to really

making a difference. I'll be campaigning right around the country. Later this week I'll be in

Queensland and also in Tasmania.



In Queensland, can I say this about Andrew Laming? Scott Morrison said that Andrew Laming

was a problem. He asked him to apologise. Scott Morrison then watched while Andrew Laming

apologised to the Parliament on the Thursday afternoon just before Parliament rose, and then

the day after said didn't know what he apologised for. Scott Morrison then said that he had a

discussion with him, and it was announced that Andrew Laming wasn't running again. Andrew

Laming, we know today, is running for pre-selection for the Liberal National Party. Scott

Morrison gave a reference to Andrew Laming prior to the 2019 election, when locals in the

electorate of Bowman said that he wasn't fit to continue as their representative. Scott Morrison

chose him just like he chose Craig Kelly in Hughes, to intervene in support of. It goes to Scott

Morrison's judgment. Andrew Laming is not fit to be a Member of Parliament. And Labor will be

raising a range of issues around that when Parliament resumes.



JOURNALIST: What's your response to the announcement of a new Australia Post CEO and

the timing of that announcement?



ALBANESE: Well, you have Christine Holgate, who's due to appear before a Senate

committee tomorrow. And the decision being pre-empted with this new CEO being announced

today of Australia Post. This is a Government that takes forever to make decisions. That

leaves positions vacant for a very long period of time. And now we have a circumstance

whereby Christine Holgate, before her appearance before the Senate committee, we have a

new CEO announced for Australia Post. I think that Australians will draw their own conclusions



there. And can I say this? Australians will also look at the response of Scott Morrison to

Christine Holgate, where he demanded that she go, on the floor of the Parliament, on national

TV, before everyone in the House of Representatives during Question Time, said that if she

didn't step aside, she could go. They were the words that he used on the floor of the

Parliament. And yet Andrew Laming can stay in the Liberal National Party. People with clouds

over them can stay in the Federal Cabinet. There's no consequences for Angus Taylor and his

actions. There's no consequences for the Robodebt debacle. There's no consequences for any

minister for the vaccination rollout debacle. And yet Christine Holgate was effectively asked to

go on the floor of the Parliament. And then Scott Morrison said that she voluntarily stepped

aside. Anyone who looks at what he actually said, and what he said over the weekend, knows

that it just doesn't stack up. Scott Morrison needs to actually stop with the spin cycle on

everything and actually be honest and transparent. That's what national leadership requires.

And that's what they're not getting from this Prime Minister. Thanks.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053



