

The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health and Aged Care



TRANSCRIPT

18 February 2021



PRESS CONFERENCE  CANBERRA

E&OE…

Topics: Vaccine rollout in Australia.

GREG HUNT:  Good afternoon everybody. I am joined by Professor Brandan Murphy who is the head of the  Vaccines Taskforce. We wanted to outline today the next steps with regards to phase 1A of  Australia’s COVID vaccine program, which begins next Monday.

Before doing so, I, in particular, wanted to mention that with regards to national progress on  containment, it’s a positive day.

Zero cases of community transmission nationwide on the advice of the National Incident  Centre. Zero Australians in ICU with COVID-19 and 73,000 tests completed in the last 24  hours to take it to about 13.9 million COVID tests. And at the same time, almost 400,000  cases worldwide, and sadly, over 11,000 lives lost.

All of that reminds us why no matter what we do with containment, we have to have a broad  scale national vaccination program.

And that program begins with a focus on those who are most vulnerable, either the risk of  catching COVID-19 or the consequences if they were to catch COVID-19.

And so today, Professor Murphy and I will set out briefly the initial towns and suburbs, hubs,  and groups. In essence, the where, who, and how for the commencement of the Pfizer element  of the phase 1 program.

Once we have shipping conformation, we’ll provide further detail on the additional  AstraZeneca component. And then as we work through the plan, which has been based on  safety and effectiveness, we’ll outline each stage in advance, but that always depends on  making sure that we have very clear confirmation of the shipping details to be able to provide  to Australians. But we’re on track.



In particular today, if I can just turn and remind. Ro the next slide, what we see here, you'll be  familiar that we're proceeding in five phases.

Phase 1A is the three priority groups, which Professor Murphy will set out, of our aged care  and disability residents and their staff, our quarantine and border workers, and our frontline  health workers.

Phase 1B will focus on the over 80s, the over 70s, Indigenous Australians over 55, those who  are immunocompromised, and our police and emergency services, amongst others.

Then phase 2A will focus on the over 60s, over 50s, the balance of Indigenous Australians,  and then also critical service workers. And then phase 2B will be the balance of the  population.

And phase 3, if clinical trials were to provide global information on the efficacy and safety in  children, then it would proceed to children.

If I can just then move to the next slide. What we're doing now is, this week, we commence  the aged care rollout as well as work through the state Pfizer hubs.

There will be approximately 240 aged care facilities, if not more, that are vaccinated in Week  1. And we're of the expectation that that will be at least 190 towns, and we'll also have 16  Pfizer hubs.

And those towns cover all of Australia, commencing in Alice Springs in the Northern  Territory, or Farrer, or Tiwi in the Northern Territory.

Here in the ACT, towns such as Weston and Narrabundah.

We know that in Tasmania it could be in Burnie, or in Somerset, or in Wynyard. All of these  are on the list amongst others.

We then go to New South Wales and across New South Wales, in the city areas such as  Blacktown or Penrith. Across the state, areas such as Gosford West and Orange will see  facilities inoculated.

If we turn to Queensland, we'll have areas such as Aspley, Bundaberg, Cleveland, Mackay,  and many others.

And then, if we move to Victoria, Altona Meadows, Ballarat, Bendigo, Cranbourne,  Dandenong, and a variety of others.

And then in South Australia, what we'll see is Aldgate, Encounter Bay, Heathfield, Mount  Barker.

Western Australia areas such as Bunbury, or Emu Point near Albany, Kingsley, Mirrabooka,  and Rockingham, amongst many others.

The point of that is that right across Australia, every state and territory, rural and regional, and  urban areas will be covered. It has to start somewhere and it has to finish somewhere, but this  is the beginning of the process.

We then, of course, have the Pfizer vaccination hubs, which include the Royal Prince Alfred  Hospital in New South Wales, the Monash Medical Centre in Victoria, the Gold Coast  University Hospital in Queensland, the Royal Adelaide Hospital in South Australia, Perth  Children's Hospital in Western Australia, Royal Hobart Hospital in Tasmania, Canberra  Hospital here in the ACT, and the Royal Darwin Hospital.

And if we then look at the map, over the coming six weeks, which is our rough expectation for  the phase 1A program, we'll see that, progressively around Australia, the aged care centres and  the hubs will cover - we seek to address all of the aged care centres in Australia.

That's the initial group of hubs, and they will continue to expand out as the vaccine suppliers  and the states are at readiness to do that. And we want to thank all of the states and territories  for their work.

So, that's a little bit of an outline of where we begin, in terms of the areas. I'll turn now to  Professor Murphy, who will talk about who will be vaccinated and how they'll be vaccinated.

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Thank you, Minister. So, I'm going to provide a bit more detail on the advice from ATAGI, the  Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation on the priority groups for frontline  vaccinations in 1A.

So that will include frontline healthcare workers, border and quarantine workers, and people  living and working in residential aged and disability care settings.

Just a bit of information on the frontline healthcare workers, these are the group of healthcare  workers who are most at risk of being exposed to someone with COVID.

Fortunately, at the moment, that risk is quite low, because we don’t have community  transmission. But if we did get further transmission, these are the healthcare workers most  likely to see someone who could have unsuspecting COVID.

So it includes those clinical staff who work in emergency departments, COVID respiratory  wards, intensive care units, and high-dependency units. Those lab staff who are doing those  thousands and thousands of COVID tests every day, ambulance and paramedics, people  working in those special GP respiratory clinics that do COVID testing, and people working in  other testing services. Next slide.

The quarantine and border workers are the single most high-risk group at the moment, because  as we've seen in recent months and recent weeks, that is where COVID is in Australia at the  moment. It's in returning travellers in quarantine. And we've seen a number of small  transmission events.

So we believe that vaccinating the quarantine and border workers will substantially protect  them from transmission, we hope, but certainly from getting symptomatic COVID. And that's  our single highest priority in the first few weeks of the Pfizer hubs in the states and territories.  Next slide.

So then at the same time, we'll be starting our highest-risk group of serious disease. We all saw  in the Victorian second wave the tragic deaths in aged care. And aged care and residential  disability care settings will be starting next week, along with those other front-line workers  across the nation, as Minister Hunt said.

And we'll be going into those facilities with special in-reach teams to vaccinate the residents,  and other teams to vaccinate the workers. Next slide.

So, how can I find out more about being vaccinated in phase 1A? So the border and quarantine  workers, the state and territory health departments are arranging those things, and they will  notify you.

In residential and disability care, we are working directly with the operators of those  residential and disability care services to work out the logistics of the rollout, when the teams  will come in, to arrange consent.

And you will be vaccinated over the period of some weeks according to the schedule of rollout  that the Minister’s talked about. But your facility will provide you that information. And we  are so grateful to the facility management for their cooperation in doing this. Next slide.

How can someone prove that they’ve been vaccinated? Well, as we all know, it's now  mandatory for all of these vaccines to be recorded in the Australian Immunisation Register -  that is the law.

And so everyone's vaccination will be in the Australian Immunisation Register and it can be  accessed through Medicare for proof of vaccination, both online and in a hard copy, as  required. And your immunisation history will record both COVID-19 vaccinations following  each dose.

Just to finish off with, I'd like to say a couple of things. This is a really, really exciting time,  but we are about to start the single-biggest, and most complex, vaccination task in the history  of

this nation.

There are so many players involved and there's so much planning. We are so extraordinarily  grateful in the Commonwealth to our partners in the states and territories, the vaccination

workforce, the logistics and data providers, the aged care operators, who have been asked to  do so much, so quickly, GPs and pharmacists who have expressed interest in being vaccination  providers down the track.

We know we are asking a lot of everybody in this huge and complex task. And much of it is  being done very quickly but safely. Our mantra has been we want to vaccinate Australia as  safely and quickly as possible. We all want to protect our vulnerable Australians as soon as we  can.

We know there will be bumps in the road as we commence this task, and unanticipated  problems which we will solve together with our partners.

But as Minister Hunt said, we have no community transmission in Australia, we don't have a  burning platform, so we can go as fast as we safely can do, and embark on this really, really  exciting journey.

Thanks, Minister.

JOURNALIST:  Just a question on the regional areas. Say I'm in Bunbury, where am I going to be getting my  vaccine in the first week?

And my second question is regarding those hubs. If there are people protesting, as we've seen  them do through the pandemic about the vaccine and so on, is there an idea of how that will be  handled.

Given you've outlined the dangers of misinformation, and if people are literally near those  hubs spreading that misinformation, have you got a plan on how to handle that?

GREG HUNT:  Sure. That first group of towns, that was in relation to the aged care facilities themselves. So,  we will be taking the vaccines with surge workforce that are well-trained and that have been  through the vaccination programs to the facilities in those towns.

Those facilities have been notified and the residents are providing consent, or their families,  where it's the family that's in a position to provide consent. So that outreach is occurring.

Secondly, the states are obviously responsible for the hubs. All of them have in place very  cautious, sensible, appropriate security protocols, as they do with any hospital, but in  particular they've taken that into account for now.

JOURNALIST:  Minister, first of all, Richard Colbeck said mandatory vaccines for aged care workers remain  an open question. Given the rollout starts next week, will a decision be made before then?

And Professor Murphy, if I may about the aged care centres, obviously at the moment we don't  have enough vaccines for all the residents and staff, so what advice are you giving to aged care  centres? Is it a 50-50 split between staff and residents? Or how does that rollout begin?

GREG HUNT:  Do you want to go first?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  So, in terms of mandatory vaccination, that is something that AHPPC is considering on a  regular basis. And we are waiting until we have data on the transmissibility of the virus in  vaccinated people.

If it is very effective, as we expect, at preventing transmission, once we have an opportunity  for all of the workers to be vaccinated, that is something that will be reconsidered. That's  something that National Cabinet has asked to reconsider on a regular basis.

At the moment, the plan is for aged care residents to get the Pfizer vaccine. We have enough  Pfizer vaccine to roll that out to the maximum of our workforce over the next month or so.

So, it's a fairly short period of time. It will be getting that first dose out over the next three or  four weeks.

The staff will mostly get the AstraZeneca vaccine. That will be a separate workforce that will  go into facilities at different times.

The evidence from overseas is vaccinating the staff and residents at the same time is not  actually a very effective way to do it. The staff vaccination programs have a different logistic  need and will have a different workforce to do that.

So, we will have enough of the Pfizer vaccine to cover all of the aged care residents pretty  quickly. And the AstraZeneca vaccine is coming online, we think, in early March and we'll be  able to get the staff vaccinated pretty quickly first.

JOURNALIST:  So, confirming those first few weeks, it’s purely aged care residents, not staff.

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Yes, for the Pfizer.

GREG HUNT:  Today what we’re setting out is the residents. Once we have the next round of material,  because we wanted to focus- the medical advice was the greatest risk within 1A was  quarantine and the aged care residents because of risk of transmission and vulnerability  respectively.



JOURNALIST:  Minister Hunt, just on those first batches of Pfizer vaccines that arrived this week, has batch  testing been completed yet, and if so, have they started been rolled out to or transported to the  states?

And Professor Murphy, if I may, so today we’ve seen Facebook not only banning news sites  but also some important government health sites, blocking information to Facebook users. Are  you concerned by that move, in terms of I guess, communicating important health advice with  the public?

Any concern about misinformation more broadly in light of the rollout starting this week?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  So, on that question, obviously we are concerned about anything that blocks legitimate sites of  information, and I understand that Facebook has unblocked some of those sites that they  inadvertently blocked, such as some health sites.

But we encourage the population to go to trusted sites. So, health.gov.au is the most important  site for you to get COVID-19 vaccine information. There are some good material on social  media but go to the trusted site, health.gov.au.

GREG HUNT:  Okay now just in relation, firstly to Facebook. Let me say, we are profoundly shocked that  they would take action that would affect health and appropriately related sites.

We understand that ACT Health, Queensland Health, South Australian Health, Dementia  Australia sites, the Kids’ Cancer Project and Bowel Cancer Australia have all been affected.

I can't say whether or not they have been addressed in the last hour or so but the fact that the  Kids’ Cancer Project could be affected is frankly a disgrace. Facebook should fix it and they  should address that immediately.

Now more broadly, my understanding is there have been no problems found, and so far, all of  the testing and details with regards to the vaccines are progressing as the TGA would hope.

The rollout will be formally over the course of the weekend with the logistics to make sure  everything is in place. And so, the timing of the particular trucks, I’ll leave with DHL and the  states, but we are on track for a Monday morning commencement.

Tamsin?

JOURNALIST:  Minister, how were the first aged care facilities that will receive the vaccine next week chosen.  What was the selection process for that?

And further on aged care rollout, what do you expect the uptake to be for aged care residents  in these centres? And what kind of communication process is happening with the residents to  make sure they understand what's going on?

GREG HUNT:  I will deal with the communication and I’ll let Professor Murphy deal with the selection  process.

In terms of the communication, we have outreached both to facilities and to families - there’s  a very strong communication program.

The facilities are providing advice and materials to residents, all those residents that aren't in a  position to do that, to provide that to their family, consent is being sought in all cases. The  take-up, we will judge it afterwards.

We know with the flu there has historically been a very solid take-up. We’re hopeful that we  will see a high take-up. I respectfully won’t put a figure on it. And we’ll learn more as we go.  But we’re positive about it, we’ve had a positive reception from the facilities.

BRENDAN MURPHY:  In terms of the selection of facilities and the scheduling, that’s a complex logistic exercise.

As of already, we do not have community transmission, so there is no burning platform. It’s  perfectly safe to take four of five weeks to vaccinate all of the aged care residents.

And the logistics teams have planned a very detailed logistics plan along with the distribution  providers, along with surge workforce providers to get distribution across the country, and a  schedule where they can move from one site to another.

So, that was a complex decision in the logistics team and we’ve notified those facilities in the  first week and we’re continuing to notify others.

GREG HUNT:  And they’re done in clusters, defined geographically to we make sure that we have the most  effective distribution and that also preserves sanctity of the Pfizer process.

JOURNALIST:  Can I just ask one further question on that, sorry. Just in terms of, obviously we’ve just seen  the outbreak in Victoria, we’ve seen these other spot outbreaks, especially from hotel  quarantine. Is there a contingency plan if there is an outbreak in a state, that we’d see a rush of  vaccines go there?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Yes. We have contingency. If there were an outbreak, we would have contingency to vaccinate  at risk people in that outbreak area.

GREG HUNT:  And I will add one thing, one very important part of this is the goal to make sure that all  border and quarantine workers are vaccinated within the first three weeks.

We are hopeful that most states and territories will be in a position to do that largely within the  first two weeks. But of course, people will have leave, they may be ill, they may be on  holiday.

But all up, we are making sure that there is sufficient vaccine sellers in their focus. They can  address, in particular, their quarantine and border workers as early as possible.

JOURNALIST:  Minister, on a different topic. There’s reports, claims this morning that members of the  Government, employees of the Government are backgrounding journalists against Brittany  Higgins and her current partner, making negative assertions about him.

Do you know anything about this, and if that was happening, would that be an appropriate  thing for someone inside this building to be doing to, backgrounding journalists in that way?

GREG HUNT:  No, I’ve not heard that, and I’m not aware of that. And our job is to provide the absolute  maximum support. Both for Brittany, who’s obviously been through the most agonizing and  horrific of personal experiences imaginable. And also to see real and lasting change as the  legacy out of this.

Up at the back?

JOURNALIST:  New South Wales has confirmed it will only be able to extract five, not the full six doses from  each vile of the Pfizer vaccine because of the type of syringe available.

Are you concerned that we’re wasting up to a sixth of each Pfizer shipment, and what attempts  are being made to obtain the correct syringe that ensures there’s no wasted shipment?

GREG HUNT:  So, two things there. Firstly, I’ll let Professor Murphy address that particular thing. But from  the outset, I think we said that we would distribute 80,000 in the first week, we were  presuming 60,000 administered doses.

We’re hopeful that the actual result will be significantly higher. They’re being cautious and  conservative, as they should be. But I know that Professor Murphy and the team have been  directly with them on the medical logistics.

BRENDAN MURPHY:  So, the standard syringes, which are widely used and which we have supplied in great  quantity, they can't guarantee to get six doses.



Some people can get six doses because there is enough in the vial to get six doses there is no  wastage but we understand, if you have a low dead space syringe it is much more reliable than  you can get six doses.

And we’ve acknowledged with New South Wales Health that we won't hold them to getting  six doses out of each file.

They will try their best, as will all vaccination providers. We have, on order, some low dead  space syringes that will come in the future. But these syringes are the standard ones that are  used for all vaccines.

JOURNALIST:  When are we expecting those orders?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Well, in coming weeks. We’re not confirmed yet. But these syringes are absolutely fine, and  many providers around the world are getting six doses, most of the time out of them.

GREG HUNT:  I would just say this, when we ordered, we based that on the foundation of five, and more than  that is a bonus, it's not the other way round.

More than that is a bonus, and New South Wales has been quietly working on getting the  maximum, but we’ve been very cautious, they’ve been cautious in their expectations, more  than that, would be a bonus.



JOURNALIST:  Professor Murphy, to take the vaccine to this many aged care facilities will require a huge  number of staff. Do you have a number of how many staff?

And to Minister Hunt, on the Facebook thing, if news organisations can't post links, people  can’t post links to new stories, is there a risk that misinformation and anti-vax sentiment might  rise in the wake of that big gap?

GREG HUNT:  Yes, there is. There is a risk that if you cannot have accurate information, that those who wish  to promulgate falsehoods and fictions can do so without a response.

I would say again to Facebook, think again, you may be in it for the money. But the rest of us  are in it for safety, protection and responsibility.

This is the moment, to return to your origins. Where you were meant to be, as a company,  focused on community, engagement, not on the money.

Forget the money, start growing up and making sure that you are about community and safety  above all else, I'm sorry for such a strong response.

BRENDAN MURPHY:  So, on the workforce we have engaged 500 direct specialist nurses who have been undergoing  intensive training in the last few weeks to administer the vaccine in aged care.

That’s on top of the logistics providers who will be delivering vaccine to the facilities. It has  been a very carefully planned outreach program, and we have the capacity to bring on more  nurses if we need to.

GREG HUNT:  So Jonathan and then one more?

JOURNALIST:  Minister, just go back over the locations, I've not seen places like where Newmarch House is  in New South Wales, I’m not seeing Eden Gardens. Is there a reason behind that, and what’s  the number in the vaccination dosage you factored in for wastage? An exact number.

GREG HUNT:  So look, all up the sites have been selected through a process of looking across the country,  urban, rural, the risk matrix was developed by the Department of Health.

We always have to have somewhere that is first and then the whole of the chain. And they  have done it on a risk basis for the country, as well as making sure there’s diversity across  urban and rural, and all parts of Australia. So nobody is missing out.

We begin this process in the next week, and that's an immensely important thing. By  definition, if in the first week, we're looking 60,000 doses, actually being administered, then  that's the first part of Australia that will have it.

It may well be higher than that. But we are working on the basis of getting those out. On dose  administration?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  It's really important to recognise we have no community transmission at the moment, we have  several weeks, to safely vaccinate our aged care facilities, and that's what we’re planning to  do.

Clearly, if we had an outbreak we might change the schedule. But there is no impending  serious risk at the moment, which is a great position to be in.

We factored in a small proportion of wastage. It depends on the vaccine. And we don't have a  set figure at the moment but we’re going to monitor wastage very closely, particularly with  those precious early doses.

GREG HUNT:  One thing that we do want is, and the Health Department has been very strong on this. Where,  for example, there’s an extra dose or two doses at the end of the day, just practical action, that  if there are carers or nurses or other people who aren't in the target group but who are present,  we don't want them to be wasted.

We want to give people the freedom to be practical Australians, to make sure that they are able  to minimise any wastage.

JOURNALIST:  Minister, just a follow-up on the Eden Gardens and the Newmarch issue, was there a  consideration of not putting it into places like those homes in the first week because the virus  has already been through those homes?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  No. No. No, there wasn’t. We don't yet know- many of those facilities have new residents who  weren’t exposed to the virus. That hasn't been a consideration.

The considerations has been simply a logistic one. We’ve got several weeks, we’re in a safe  position; let’s do it in the most efficient way we can.

GREG HUNT:  Everyone will be covered over the course of six weeks and it wasn't about individual facilities,  it was about regions.

Last question.

JOURNALIST:  Professor Murphy, could you tell us more about the contingency for people using the vaccine  supply in a potential outbreak, what metrics would be involved? Whose decision would it be?  What would trigger it?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  It would be, AHPCC has advised, collectively our governments, on whether an outbreak is of  the significance. So, if there were a significant outbreak in a particular part of a city, then we  would activate an AHPCC meeting.

And if they recommended, a ring vaccination process for a group of people or an area, then we  would undertake that.

JOURNALIST:  Would it me more than a few cases though?

BRENDAN MURPHY:

Well, these things depends what the cases are. If they’re all in household contacts, as they  were in the recent Victorian outbreak, it’s not so much a risk. If you had 19 community cases,  it would be a different circumstance.

GREG HUNT:  So I’ll just finish with this. I apologise.

JOURNALIST:  I just have one question for Professor Murphy if that’s okay?

GREG HUNT:  Briefly, yes.

JOURNALIST:  So around Pfizer and AstraZeneca for aged care homes. So, Richard Colbeck yesterday  indicated, though, that some aged care residents may end up getting AstraZeneca. So can you  just clarify?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  That was our initial plan. But I think, and there may be some parts of the country where we  may have real difficulty getting the frozen Pfizer to, but our intention at the moment is to try  and get Pfizer to every aged care resident if we can.

If we can't, AstraZeneca is a very, very good vaccine which protects and there may have to be  some facilities in very difficult areas. But the logistics team is going to try and get them to  everywhere.

JOURNALIST:  Can you just explain - sorry.

GREG HUNT:  Sorry, I really do have to go for Question Time.

JOURNALIST:  With the frozen Pfizer; will it be before it’s transported or will it be sort of packed in dry ice?  Can you just explain?

BRENDAN MURPHY:  Well, it will be defrosted before it’s transferred to the aged care facilities and then  reconstituted on-site. So it lasts in the fridge for three or five days.

In the Pfizer hubs in the states and territories, it will largely be defrosted on the day of  administration.

GREG HUNT:

So the final thing is, today is the next step in the national vaccination rollout. Now we know  where and we know who and we know how.

We’ll continue to provide more information, but with zero community cases today, Australia-wide, zero community cases yesterday, we are in a globally very fortunate position, thanks to  the work of Australians.

We begin the task of providing more hope and more protection to Australians going forward  and the vaccination rollout will proceed over the coming months and we ask as many  Australians as possible to come forward and help protect themselves and protect their families  and to protect their communities.

Thank you very much. Take care.

-ENDS-





Mathew Langdon | Media Adviser   Office of the Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health and Aged Care | Federal Member for Flinders  Suite M141, Parliament House, Canberra, ACT 2600  T. 02 6277 7220 | M. 0400 645 779| E. minmedia@health.gov.au



