1/2

Now is the time to move regional minister.infrastructure.gov.au/gee/media-release/now-time-move-regional

Australians are turning the dream of a tree change into reality, with the largest quarterly shift on record of city dwellers making the move to regional Australia.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael McCormack said metropolitan Australians are finally waking up to countless opportunities present in regional, rural in remote Australia that accompany an unparalleled lifestyle.

“Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, regional Australia has been one of the safest places in the world. Couple this with the more than 54,000 job vacancies in the regions and it is completely understandable as to why so many are seeking that tree change,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“Alongside the bustling resource and agricultural industries, regional Australia presents endless opportunities in education, infrastructure, health, defence and so many more engaging and important sectors of the Australian economy.

“When people witness the lifestyle that regional Australia affords them - less hustle, less hassle, big backyards, stronger communities - it does not take long to for them to realise their full potential and relocate.”

Minister for Decentralisation and Regional Education Andrew Gee said recent Australian Bureau of Statistics data showed capital cities had a net loss of 11,200 people from internal migration in the September 2020 quarter, beating last quarters record of 10,500.

“After being stuck inside throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, a lot of Australians are dreaming of a tree change or sea change, and with a suite of Australian Government and industry incentives in place, there’s no better time,” Minister Gee said.

“The Australian Government is working hard to capitalise on this trend. We are partnering with businesses and the tertiary education sector, to remove impediments that prevent people from relocating to the regions and revitalise the Decentralisation Agenda.

“We have made a $41 million commitment under our Regional Decentralisation Agenda in the 2020-21 Budget to drive closer collaboration between businesses and tertiary research organisations, while also delivering practical solutions to enable the growth of important industries for the regions.

“This is in addition to our record $110 billion 10-year regional infrastructure pipeline, which is investing in critical regional road and rail projects and our $1.5 billion Local Roads and Community Infrastructure Program which is supporting thousands of small-scale local priority projects.

The Hon Andrew Gee MP  Minister for Decentralisation and Regional Education

2/2

“Simply put, we are making the decision for businesses and individuals to make the move to regional Australia a ‘no brainer’.

“As corporate companies and industry turn their sights towards the untapped potential of country Australia, it is critical that we have a shared vision that will turbocharge job opportunities and economic prosperity in regional Australia.

“Yesterday, the National Farmers’ Federation (NFF) launched their regionalisation agenda, which will compliment and build upon the Government’s regional development initiatives, while last week, the Regional Australia Institute (RAI) launched a massive $4.6 million campaign to target the one in five people who are thinking about moving regional.

"This increased focus and investment in our regions by key players such as the NFF and RAI is a testament to the opportunities that the bush has to offer.

“The best thing we can do for country Australia is create the right conditions and policy framework for private companies and individuals to make the move and invest in our regions.

“I look forward to working with the NFF and RAI to proactively attract more businesses and more Aussies to the country.

“Our regions are the lifeblood of this nation and with drawcards such as world-unparalleled surroundings, affordable housing and job opportunities, it’s no wonder more people are calling regional Australia home.”

Media Contact:

Deputy Prime Minister - Jo Williamson 0418 475 668 | Dean Shachar 0418 202 860

Minister Gee - Gabi Phipps 0400 917 405

Media release

Wednesday 24 February 2021

Joint Release with

The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Deputy Prime Minister

Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development

Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina





The Hon Andrew Gee MP  Minister for Decentralisation and Regional Education

