SENATOR NITA GREEN

SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

CAIRNS

WEDNESDAY, 3 MARCH 2021



SUBJECTS: JobKeeper; Tourism; Warren Entsch recontesting the next

election.



SENATOR NITA GREEN, LABOR SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND: Thank you

for coming today, my name is Nita Green and I’m a Labor Senator for Queensland

and I understand that Mr Entsch the Member for Leichhardt has made an

announcement today about recontesting the next election. I have a few comments

to make on this announcement.



What Mr Entsch should be doing today is making an announcement about the

support that will be available for tourism businesses when JobKeeper ends. He

shouldn’t be making an announcement today about his own political future. What

Mr Entsch should be doing today is making an announcement about how we are

going to save jobs in Far North Queensland. Not an announcement about his own

job.



Nevertheless Mr Entsch has said that he will be recontesting the next election.

What Far North Queenslanders will be asking Mr Entsch is whether he has

delivered on the promises he made at the last election. He hasn’t.



We know he hasn’t delivered on those promises. We know that Mr Entsch

promised funding for the Captain Cook Highway at the last election, but people in

Cairns are still waiting in traffic on the Captain Cook Highway. We know that he

promised $105 Million for Indigenous housing and those houses have not been

built yet. We know that Mr Entsch has promised to fix the North Queensland

Insurance crisis, but so far not a single solution has been put forward or

implemented by the Government. We know that Mr Entsch as the Special Reef

Envoy has taken no action in regards to climate change which will keep the reef

safe for many generations to come. And right now people in Far North Queensland

need to know what the plan is after Jobkeeper.  Mr Entsch said that it would be a

‘no brainer’ to extend JobKeeper and yet he walked away from that promise.

These are the things the people in Leichhardt will judge Mr Entsch by at the next

election.



Instead of giving himself a pat on the back today, what he should be doing is

getting away from behind the desk, getting on the ground and delivering for the

people in Leichhardt.  Thankyou. I’m happy to take any questions.



JOURNALIST: He’s been pretty adamant he’s the right person to pull Cairns out of

COVID. Do you share that same view?



GREEN: Right now Mr Entsch has the opportunity to make an announcement

about how we are going to make it through COVID. Instead he is making an

announcement about his own political future. And I think that says a lot about the

type of person we need to get us through this crisis. We need to make sure that we

have safe secure jobs for the future.  We need to make sure we have cheaper

childcare and Mr Entsch has not shown any interest in delivering those things for

the community here in Far North Queensland. So I do not think he is the right

person to take us through - but I do know the election isn’t going to be tomorrow.

There are months and months before there will be an election. So right now,

instead of talking about his own political future, what Mr Entsch should be doing is

telling us how he is going to protect jobs in Far North Queensland.



JOURNALIST: He’s been in the seat for quite some time, do you think after

COVID there might need to be a bit of a change in the way things are done up

here?



GREEN: Well Mr Entsch has had a very long time to work with people in Far North

Queensland to diversify the economy here, to make sure when there is a COVID

economic crisis, or a pilot strike or a GFC, that we have jobs spread through many

industries - he has failed to do that. Because we are looking at an economic crisis

in Cairns, the tourism industry is doing it tough. These are people who have

invested time and money and love into their businesses and right now they don’t

know what the government is going to do for them in 22 days’ time. It’s not good

enough that Mr Entsch has left these people hanging and instead is sitting behind

his desk and talking about his own job.



JOURNALIST: Do you think the Labor Candidate - whoever it is, will give him a

good run for his money?



GREEN: Well I think no matter who the Labor Candidate is they will be on the side

of Far North Queenslanders. They will be on the side of Far North Queenslanders

who want secure jobs, they will be on the side of Far North Queenslanders who

want cheaper childcare and they will be on the side of Far North Queenslanders

who want a solution for the tourism industry here. I have been in Parliament over

the past two weeks, asking questions of this Government and their ministers about

what they are going to do to help the tourism industry here and so far we have had

no answers. If Mr Entsch is as influential as he says, as credible as he says and is

as experienced as he says he is, then he would be delivering a solution today

instead of talking about his own political future.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: CAROLYN MACDONALD 0400 564 986



