

STEPHEN JONES MP  SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES AND SUPERANNUATION  MEMBER FOR WHITLAM



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS  FRIDAY, 29 JANUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Shadow Ministry reshuffle; JobKeeper; superannuation.

TOM CONNELL, HOST: Let's get our next guest in the program, Stephen Jones who is taking  on superannuation after the Anthony Albanese reshuffle. Thanks for your time today. This  reshuffle is being pitched as a last roll of the dice for Anthony Albanese as leader. What did  you make of that?

STEPHEN JONES MP, SHADOW ASSISANT TREASURER: I'm pitching it, Tom, as the team  that is going to put jobs and economic recovery front and centre in the political debate between  now and the election, which we expect to be at the end of this year. This is a strong team  which will take the argument up to Scott Morrison and lay out the plan about a better future a  better recovery focused on jobs and economic growth, the concerns of ordinary Australians.  We're not focused on the internals. We're focused on the needs of Australians, what's going on  around households, what's going on in workplace and what we need to do to build back a  better Australia.

CONNELL: Well, you might not be focused on internals, there's briefing outgoing and it’s  impossible to draw the conclusion other than that the two seemingly biggest contenders,  Tanya Plibersek and Jim Chalmers, have had well maybe you'd call them Shadow Ministerial  haircuts.

JONES: Look, I don't agree. Both Jim and Tanya have key roles in our front bench and both  are doing a tremendous job. I work closely with Jim as head of our economic team and Jim's  doing a fantastic job taking the argument up to Josh Frydenberg, pointing out each and every  time where the government's plans have either gone wrong or fallen short of what the  Australian people need. And of course know where will that be more central this year when  we’ll be focusing on the government's plan to break its promise on superannuation and the  government's lack of a plan to build back jobs and to pull the rug out from under businesses,  long before the recovery has got underway by withdrawing JobSeeker support before the  economic growth has bounced back.

CONNELL: On JobSeeker and JobKeeper, let's focus on JobKeeper. What's Labor specifically  calling for, is it a targeted program here? Because the situation isn't the same as when it was  introduced. A lot of economic recovery is going on as evidenced by these loan repayments and

encouraging figures out today.

JONES: Tom, we've been saying for several months now that we can't just yank JobKeeper  out not have something in its place. It needs to be targeted and tapered and ensure that it's  getting to the businesses and regions where it's needed.

CONNELL: Target it where? Where does it need to go?

JONES: Well, let's just deal with international tourism. Up and down the east coast of Australia  there are towns and regions which have been devastated by the lack of international tourism  that is coming in. I'm thinking about far North Queensland as an example. These towns can't  just have JobKeeper ripped out and nothing put in place to substitute it. Health authorities are  telling us, the Government’s telling us that international tourism is unlikely to come back this  year, maybe next year, we don't know yet. We've got [INAUDIBLE] businesses which is just  going to be left hanging, thousands of workers losing their jobs and businesses shutting the  door.

CONNELL: So you said; what about these regional areas? I mean Sydney and Melbourne  some of these cities and tourist attractions are even quieter because domestic Australians  aren't going there. Why just the regions under the plan you outlined?

JONES: I'm saying two things Tom, both industries and regions. Yes, parts of Sydney, parts of  Melbourne, parts of my own area in the Illawarra and South Coast have been hard hit. I picked  a couple of examples where it's obvious, where the vast majority of the economy is based on  international tourism, is having a devastating impact on jobs and businesses in those areas.  So we need both a sectoral and a regional response to fill the gap if they yank JobKeeper out.  We don't care what it's called. We do care that the support is going to workers, to households,  to businesses so they can get through the buffer to have a buffer to get through until the  tourism starts to flow again. That's just one example, there are others as well.

CONNELL: You mentioned a international tourism not starting for a while. First of all, we need  to get Australians back. Apparently only 6 out of the 20 repatriation flights promised to fortnight  ago have been scheduled. Is this hard for the Australian Government as well with what's  happening out of London and UAE and more implications possibly?

JONES: Support the health measures, but frankly the government has done too little and too  late. It has responsibility for quarantine. It's tried to shirk the responsibility to the states but the  Commonwealth has responsibility for quarantine. It has responsibility for airports. It could be  doing much, much more to bring Australians home. It has a constitutional responsibility to be  doing this. I've had to go in to bat for constituents in my area who've had flights booked and  then cancelled not once, not twice, sometimes three and four times. They've been trying to get  themselves and their families back because the government has not done enough. The  Commonwealth Government has not done enough to exercise its responsibility to open up the  quarantine arrangements that it has available to it. These people are left stranded overseas  and are simply not good enough.

CONNELL: And what of the options right now available to the Commonwealth Government on  quarantine?

JONES: Two things the Commonwealth can be doing; use the facilities that it has available.  Whether it's in the Northern Territory or whether it's elsewhere around the country. It's  immigration facilities. They are there, they could lease facilities off the private sector. Yeah. Let

me just wrap this up.

CONNELL: One of the issues has been for quarantine of COVID now, in normal times yes, a  lot of these places could be used but you need separate toilet, bathroom, shower facilities and  these places don't have them. So a lot of those facilities that are there are not actually  appropriate for quarantine. The other issue is whether or not there's a major hospital nearby.  So what remains available facilities that you mentioned there, that would tick those boxes?

JONES: Tom, can I just say I simply don't accept this. This is a government that was able to  stand up an immigration detention facility on Christmas Island after the Medevac legislation  was put through the parliament. It was never used, it was never used, but it was able to stand  that up in three or four weeks. I'm just not going to give them a free pass on this one.

CONNELL: I'm not asking for a free pass. What are the logistics involved in getting an  individual  bathroom, toilet etc facilities for every single either person or group staying there.  That's the unknown.

JONES: Are we something that is beyond the wit and capacity of Scott Morrison and his  ministers to be able to stand up enough portaloos, enough showers and enough beds to house  the Australians who need to come home, who are stranded overseas. He takes credit for  everything, but he cannot stand up enough toilets and showers. Is that really the thing that he's  standing behind and saying this is the reason that we can't get these Australians home  because we haven't got enough done. I mean for God's sake frankly, this is the Prime Minister  of Australia. They have all the resources available to them surely we can do a bit better than  this. They do not get a free pass. They should be bringing those Australians home and be  moving Hell and Earth to ensure they can do it.

CONNELL: I want to ask your finally about superannuation. I know Labor’s talking about the  legislated increase. We have still some of the highest fees in the world, a big chunk of that  administration fees. What's Labor proposing to do about that?

JONES: Well, the first thing we're going to do is ensure that the government doesn't pass  legislation through the parliament which ignores fund under performance and overcharging on  fees and that's precisely what the government is planning to do. They've got a raft of legislation  which pretends to be about improving the performance of superannuation, but it gives a green  light to funds to increase the fees. The second thing we're going to do is going to be calling the  government out on their hypocrisy. Scott Morrison promised before the last election that he  would not cut superannuation, now he plans to do exactly that. He says 9.5% is enough for the  cleaners, the retail workers, the tradies but 15.5% is enough for himself. Did you know this, this  is a really important point, the average Australian is retiring today with a hundred and eighty  thousand dollars in retirement savings while the Australian taxpayer is giving Scott Morrison  more than that every two years for his superannuation. Why is 15.5% enough for Scott  Morrison, but only 9.5% for the person who cleans his office or, the people who are driving our  buses, or serving us in retail centres. We're calling the government out for their hypocrisy.  We're not going to let them get away with it.

CONNELL: We'll leave it there. We might delve into fees next time, bit short on time, but  Stephen Jones, thank you.

JONES: Great to be with you.

ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: TOM IGGULDEN 0448 041 191



