THE HON MELISSA PRICE MP Minister for Defence Industry Member for Durack

MEDIA RELEASE

AUSTRALIAN DEFENCE INDUSTRY BENEFITS FROM LATEST BATCH OF GRANTS

Eight Australian small businesses will share in more than $3.4 million in grants as part of the Morrison Government’s continued push to grow Australia’s sovereign defence industry.

Minister for Defence Industry Melissa Price said the latest round of Sovereign Industrial Capability Priority grants would provide the businesses and the wider Australian economy with a major boost.

“These grants support our bounce back from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and strengthen our sovereign defence industrial base,” Minister Price said.

“Weld Australia, based in NSW, is a great example of how beneficial these grants can be.

“It is bringing a welding accreditation to Australia, developing Australian supply chains for the Land 400 Phase 2 project and beyond, and ensuring we have the skills in Australia to deliver and sustain critical defence capabilities.”

Canberra-based Penten, Australian Performance Vehicles (Campbellfield, Victoria) and Gilmour Space Technologies (Gold Coast) will use their grant funding to upgrade their infrastructure used to test and evaluate emerging technologies and capabilities.

“Gilmour Space Technologies’ testing facility will ensure the safety and reliability of Defence platforms and vehicles across a range of domains, and enhance Australia’s sovereign ability to gain maximum benefit from our capability,” Minister Price said.

“Penten’s grant will support the construction of a secure facility fitted with information communications technology infrastructure.

“I was fortunate enough to visit Penten in Canberra in November and witness first-hand the important work it is doing to help ensure the ADF maintains its capability edge well into the future.”

The Sovereign Industrial Capability Priority grant program supports opportunities to drive Australian innovation, making our small businesses more competitive and our supply chains more secure.

This grant program is a key enabler of the Sovereign Industrial Capability Priorities, which are the capabilities assessed as critical to Defence, and must be developed or supported by Australian industry.

No publication date: received by Parl Library on the 27/01/2021

Grant applications can be made at any time and submitted through the Centre for Defence Industry Capability

The Sovereign Industrial Capability Priority grants announced today:

Company

Grant Amount  Grant Funding Purpose State

Terra Schwartz

$421,432 Purchase of capital equipment and funding of direct labour costs to develop a 100% Australian sovereign cyber-worthiness system.

ACT

Profluid

$110,269 Purchase, integration and commission of specialised machinery required to establish sovereign capabilities for current shipbuilding programs and future sustainment needs.

WA

B.E. Switchcraft

$109,492 Purchase and commission of new capital equipment that will enable additional switchboard manufacturing work to be completed in-house and more efficiently.



SA

Amiga Engineering

$1,000,000 Fund factory improvements and purchase new capital equipment to continue the delivery of 3D printed Defence products.



VIC

Weld Australia

$89,400 Undertaking of the necessary training and activities to become qualified and accredited to deliver DIN2303 certification to the fusion welding of metallic materials.



NSW

Penten

$523,687 Construction of a secure facility fitted with supporting Information Communications Technology (ICT) infrastructure.



ACT

Australian Performance Vehicles

$657,320 Expansion of current commercial testing services to support Australia's Defence industry with specialist engineering, and test and evaluation services.



VIC

No publication date: received by Parl Library on the 27/01/2021

Gilmour Space Technologies

$553,819 Development of a large scale composite and metal alloy structural testing facility, with testing capabilities beyond the scope of existing facilities in Australia.



QLD

Media contacts Ben Spencer (Minister Price’s office): +61 412 754 310 Defence Media: media@defence.gov.au

Authorised by The Hon Melissa Price MP, Minister for Defence Industry, WA, Australia

No publication date: received by Parl Library on the 27/01/2021

