

LUKE GOSLING OAM MP

CHAIR OF THE INDO-PACIFIC TRADE TASKFORCE

MEMBER FOR SOLOMON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RADIO DARWIN

TUESDAY, 6 APRIL 2021



SUBJECT: Flooding and disaster relief in Timor-Leste.



ADAM STEER, HOST: Luke Gosling is the member for Solomon, spent a lot of time over in

Timor-Leste. Will you be organising something so that we can donate to Timor-Leste, Luke

Gosling?



LUKE GOSLING, MEMBER FOR SOLOMON: Yeah, g’day Adam. As Celio the consul-general here in Darwin just mentioned, there are some Go Fund Me pages that have already

been set up so I won't set up another one. But there's been so many calls over the weekend

from people all around Darwin wanting to know how they can assist. Caritas and Vinnie’s -

unsurprisingly two Catholic-linked NGOs, charities, who do work on the ground there - are

seeing what the best thing is for them to do. Obviously, Timor being a mainly Catholic country,

they're very invested there.



But my efforts over the weekend have been talking to the Foreign Minister's office to try and

ascertain what the Federal Government is able to do. And I understand from the Timor

embassy in Canberra that their official request is imminent to ask for that support. But

basically, as Celio was saying, the massive problem there is drinking water and food, because

if you can imagine your own street with a metre of water, muddy water flowing down it, if you

can imagine your own bedroom, half-filled with water, that's sort of what is the reality of people

in Dili at the moment. And obviously complicating this is as they get together, 7,000 people in

Dili in evacuation centres, there's the threat of disease and spread.



STEER: Yeah. And also the spread of COVID at the same time, on top of all of the other

normal diseases that you would face in that situation. Is Australia offering enough support at

the moment? What are you what indication you're getting off the Federal Government?



GOSLING: Australia needs to step up. I've given them some free advice, which is to start

getting assets pre-deployed before heading over to Timor, particularly to help out with fresh

drinking water. Because it takes a while to mobilise that sort of support, you don’t have to wait

to get the official letter from the Timor-Leste Government to know that this is a city in crisis.

Some on the ground that I've known for 20-plus years are saying this could be much worse

than the crisis of 2006, when you had those internally displaced people camps, you had civil

unrest. People are saying it's worse than that.



And part of the reason why is because COVID-19 had already made things really difficult for

people in Dili because they've been shut down. We're talking about a place with no JobKeeper,

no JobSeeker. We're talking about people that have had their livelihoods ruined before all this

water rushed through their town and literally covered everything in mud. So their ability to

bounce back from this is compromised, their ability to get the vaccine out quickly - it’s going to

be difficult.



And that's why I'm really obviously so proud that so many Territorians have stood up and are

ready and willing to help. And we're just hoping that the Federal Government can do

something serious very soon.



STEER: Where are they up to with their vaccine rollout, as far as you understand?



GOSLING: It just arrived.



STEER: Yeah. And then floated away, you were saying.



GOSLING: So the whole - it’s called Samez, and it is in one of the areas, the large

warehouses where all teams, medical equipment, supplies, consumables, and vaccines are

kept. And it was inundated. So they really need some assistance. And I know that that



assistance will come from the general community. Generally as a rule, the aid organisations

always say if you can donate some funds, that allows them to do more on the ground rather

than stockpiling of goods that the people on the ground working find it difficult to get to the

people who need it, if that makes sense. So I would just ask those people who are thinking

about donating clothes, baby goods, just to think about how it's going to get there, who's going

to distribute it on the other end? And always dollars are very, very helpful, and even small

amounts are helpful because, you know, as I say, drinking water and food that can be got

locally, but they're going to need a hand. They're going to need big amounts of drinking water

and big amounts of emergency food.



STEER: Okay, so there is a Go Fund Me page up. There's also your suggestion to donate to

some of those - Caritas or St Vinnie’s, the Catholic organisations who have a presence over in

Timor-Leste.



GOSLING: Yeah, I've worked with Caritas before. They're a great organisation and funds

donated to them will be able to help. Over there in East Timor, the church is such a big part of

the infrastructure, the logistics infrastructure of supporting the community, particularly in times

of crisis. So that will be a very effective way of getting support onto the ground. But also, as

Celio mentioned, Rosa Carrascalao, who's the sister of Jose Ramos-Horta, she's raised over

$10,000 on her Go Fund Me as well. And they are good people. And I know that the former

president, Jose Ramos Horta, will make sure that those funds get onto the ground to help

people in a very practical and direct way.



STEER: Good on you, Luke Gosling, good to hear from you this morning. Appreciate your

time.



GOSLING: Thanks Adam.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: NEDA VANOVAC 0434 395 385



