

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE

CHAIR OF THE SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON COVID-19

SENATOR FOR THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS AFTERNOON EDITION

THURSDAY, 11 MARCH 2021



SUBJECTS: Vaccine Rollout.



KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: Let's bring in the Chair of that COVID Committee now,

Senator Katy Gallagher, also Manager of Opposition Business in the Senate.

Andrew is making the point there that the government's pushing back that goal of

October to have everyone vaccinated. That's basically the upshot of the hearings

today?



KATY GALLAGHER, CHAIR OF THE SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON

COVID-19: Yes. So, it was certainly amazing evidence today from the Head of the

Department of Health. He made it clear, I think, that that end of October timetable

is very unlikely and I think, for the fact that the Prime Minister has linked the

economic recovery to the success of this vaccine rollout, pretty concerning that we

got a lot of I don't know, we don't know, we can't tell you when information out of

the Department of Health today. Clearly, they're walking away from the end of

October, just like they've walked away from the 4 million vaccinated by the end of

March, which they're currently around 3.8 million short of.



GILBERT: So they're not going to get to that 4 million?



GALLAGHER: No way. We're at, we're at about a 125,000 at the moment. So, I

would expect we might have maybe doubled that by the end of March. But it'll be

about 3.8 million short of what the government promised. And, now we're told that

we don't know about the end of October, and it could push out into December or,

indeed, if you're not vaccinated till the end of October, it could push out to next

year. And, I think that is concerning considering the linking of a successful vaccine

with international travel. And more broadly, the economic recovery.



GILBERT: Professor Murphy said we don't know if we'll be able to deliver two

doses by the end of October, does it sound to you like we'll probably have

everyone having one dose? And still, the latest data suggests that that has, I think,

more than 70 per cent efficacy in one dose. That's better than nothing isn't it? To

have that by October?



GALLAGHER: Well, I guess the government set the timetable. This is my point

today. We're holding them to the timetable they set. They're now walking away

from that timetable. And, I think it is dangerous to put out a view that will one shot's

nearly good enough, isn't it? I mean, the whole point is that we were promised that

people would be fully offered the vaccine - to be fully vaccinated. I confirmed this

with the Head of Prime Minister and Cabinet on Tuesday. It's been repeatedly put

out there by the Health Minister, the Treasurer, the Prime Minister that fully

vaccinated by the end of October. Now, that seems to be me moving towards more

like well, we'll offer you one vaccine by October. But, I guess the other thing out of

the hearing today is they've rolled the vaccine rollout into phases - 1A, 1B, 2A, 2B

and then 3 to capture everybody in those categories. But there's no knowledge of

when phase two might start. There's no knowledge of when 1A or 1B might finish.

There's a lot of unknowns for a big program that everyone in Australia is counting

on working. And, I think that was the other concerning part of the evidence we got

today.



GILBERT: Have they given you any indication as to why things are going as slowly

as they are?



GALLAGHER: Well, I think there's a range of reasons they gave - a lot of

uncertainty. This is a big program. We've not done this before. We're seeing other

providers in aged care, for example, make mistakes and errors having to be fixed

and processes having to change. And, I think there's a level of that that's

explainable and acceptable. But, I also think we've had months to plan for this. The

Prime Minister has been promoting it as a very efficient rollout and we're in a great

position. And then today we're learning, well we don't know a lot of information and

a lot of information can't be given to Australians and Australian businesses who

are counting on this vaccine program being rolled out on time and efficiently so

their business can get back up and running to pre COVID time.



GILBERT: Well, as you said, 100,000 is nowhere near 4 million.



GALLAGHER: No.



GILBERT: So they're well, well behind but, let's put that to one side. I know that

your job is to hold them to account on their timetable. But when it comes to the

vaccine itself, are you comfortable that these things are working and that they will

be effective from what you're hearing from the experts?



GALLAGHER: I have no doubt that the vaccine itself in terms of being given, how

it's given by health professionals, the doses, the fact that it is offering protection

from COVID. We have enormous trust in it and trust in the health advice and

people should feel trusting of the vaccination program. We're certainly not here

criticising that or wanting to cast any doubt on the need to get vaccinated. It's really

important people do get vaccinated. But, the flip side of that is people have to have

trust in the program. That it's been run well, that they've got access to good

information and that they know how, when, who, why their vaccine will be

happening and I think there's a lot of uncertainty about that. And, the sooner the

government can answer some of those questions, the better overall for confidence

in the program.



GILBERT: So, the vaccines get the tick and full support from you and from your

colleagues. The question mark is over the logistics around how it is being rolled

out?



GALLAGHER: Absolutely. Exactly, how it's being rolled out. What they know, the

information they're sharing, if they're becoming aware that they're not going to

meet timetable. Are they being upfront with people...



GILBERT: You don't feel they are?



GALLAGHER: I don't think they're being upfront with people. I mean, we had to

draw it out of evidence today. I think the Prime Minister's crab walking away very

carefully from his commitments around end of October. But he hasn't actually

come out and said look, the situation's changed. It's harder than we thought. It's

going to take longer than we thought. None of that has been forthcoming. But

that's the story we got out of the hearing today.





GILBERT: Katy Gallagher, I appreciate your time. Thanks. You are on the COVID

committee and the Manager of Opposition Business in the Senate.



GALLAGHER: Thanks for having me on.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: PATRICK CRONAN 0432 758 224



