

THE HON ANGUS TAYLOR MP  MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND EMISSIONS REDUCTION

MEDIA RELEASE



Thursday, 11 February 2021

HELPING HOTELS LOWER THEIR POWER BILLS

Small and medium hotels are being supported by the Morrison Government to lower  their power bills so they can invest in their business and employ more Australians.

Through the Government’s $10.2 million Hotel Energy Uplift Program, hotels, motels  and serviced apartment complexes with up to 99 rooms will be able to access grants of  up to $25,000 for energy-saving projects, with at least 400 grants on offer.

These grants will help hotels to reduce their energy bills by making upgrades to their air  conditioning or refrigeration, improving their building fabric through measures such as  windows, drapes and insulation, or investing in monitoring systems to better manage  their energy use.

This will reduce energy costs for hotel operators and support the creation of direct and  local jobs, including for electricians, carpenters, engineers, and plumbers.

Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction Angus Taylor said the launch of the grants  program comes at an important time, as the tourism and accommodation sector looks  to get back on its feet.

“With patron limits and other restrictions in place to keep Australians safe, the hotel  industry has been hit particularly hard by the COVID-19 pandemic,” Minister Taylor said.

“Energy costs are one of the biggest overheads for publicans and hotel owners and  these grants will reduce these operating costs and help them reinvest in their business  during this critical time.

“With 80 per cent of small to medium hotels located in regional Australia, these grants  will provide a significant boost to our regions, and the upgrade projects will provide  genuine and lasting energy savings.

“The upgrade projects will provide genuine and lasting energy savings, and will have a  positive flow-on effect for jobs and small businesses.”

The Hotel Energy Uplift Program was announced in the 2020-21 Budget as part of the  Government’s $1.9 billion investment in new energy technologies which will back jobs  now and into the future, reduce emissions and ensure all Australians have access to  reliable and affordable energy.

Applications open on 24 February 2021 and will close on 1 April 2021 (or earlier, if  funding is exhausted). To view the program guidelines, visit:  https://business.gov.au/grants-and-programs/hotel-energy-uplift-program

ENDS

Minister Taylor’s office:                           Liam O’Neil, 0428 113 617

