Media enquiries | Ainsley Koch | 0437 327 127  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania









Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck  Minister for Senior Australians and Aged Care Services   Minister for Sport



31 January 2021

New Chair to shape the future of sport in Australia

Australian businesswoman and President of Australian Women’s Rugby - Josephine Sukkar  AM - has been appointed Chair of the Australian Sports Commission (ASC).

Minister for Sport Richard Colbeck said Ms Sukkar is an outstanding leader who brings thirty  years of business experience to the role, as the co-founder and principal of Buildcorp Group,  as well as a strong understanding of Australian sport.

“For three decades, Ms Sukkar has helped lead a successful Australian family-owned business  through many challenges, including the Global Financial Crisis and most recently COVID-19,”  Minister Colbeck said.

“During this time, she has also been a strong contributor to the national sporting community,  most notably driving increased female participation through her involvement in Australian  Women’s Rugby.

“I am delighted she will now use her experience and passion to lead Australian sport as we  navigate through a COVID-safe world.”

Ms Sukkar is the first female Chair of the ASC and will oversee Sport Australia, which is  responsible for driving the broader sport sector, including participation and the Australian  Institute of Sport, charged with the ongoing improvement of the nation’s high performing sport  sector.

“Sporting clubs and organisations at every level faced the most challenging of circumstances  in 2020. COVID-19 has changed how we all participate in or watch our favourite sports,”  Minister Colbeck said.

“Ms Sukkar will play a vital part in shaping the future of sport and I look forward to working  with her to ensure the sport sector in Australia is prepared, adaptable and resilient.”

Ms Sukkar said she was honoured to be appointed to the position and looks forward to fostering  growth in Australian sport.

Media enquiries | Ainsley Koch | 0437 327 127  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania





“I look forward to engaging with Australian athletes and sports organisations to address their  challenges, particularly those posed by COVID-19,” Ms Sukkar said.

“I also want to help them achieve their goals and build participation in our many sports.”

Applicants for the position of Chair of the ASC were assessed by the newly formed Sport  Appointments Selection Committee.

The appointment of Ms Sukkar is the first recommendation made by the Committee, which  includes Paralympic wheelchair racer and leading coach Louise Sauvage, former Matildas  vice-captain Moya Dodd, former Olympic and Commonwealth Games swimming champion  Samantha Riley, Department of Health Associate Secretary Caroline Edwards, and is Chaired  by former Federal Minister for Sport, the Hon Warwick Smith AO.

Ms Sukkar will begin her new role on 8 February 2021 for a three year term.

Minister Colbeck thanked Acting Chair Steve Moneghetti AM for his leadership following the  retirement of John Wylie AM in November.

