



Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE GOVERNMENT IN THE SENATE  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA

ACTING ATTORNEY-GENERAL  ACTING MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS



MEDIA RELEASE



18 March 2021

GREATER CERTAINTY FOR CASUALS AND SMALL BUSINESS

The Morrison Government has delivered more certainty to Australia’s economy as it recovers  from the COVID-19 pandemic, passing landmark reforms in the Senate today that will  benefit both employees and employers.

Casual workers will have greater opportunity to convert to permanent work, and small and  family businesses will be saved from a potentially devastating $39 billion liability thanks to  the Government’s removal of a ‘double dipping’ loophole.

“This is a significant win for casual workers who perform a regular pattern of work and  deserve the benefits that can flow from permanency, if that is what they wish,” Acting  Minister for Industrial Relations, Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash, said.

“In addition, the Bill passed today protects business from double-dipping back-pay claims for  entitlements they have already paid, which if left unaddressed had the potential to cost jobs  and bankrupt businesses. These measures will protect jobs into the future, a critical move as  Australia moves strongly out of the economic impacts caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.”

“Disappointingly, at a time when the economy is recovering and businesses are hiring more  Australians, Labor and the ACTU were willing to let small and family businesses be hit with  an up to $39 billion double-dipping wage bill, and deny casual employees a pathway to  permanency.

“When it comes to employers and casual employees, clearly Labor is not on your side.”

The Minister said that, whilst the Senate did not support a number of other proposed reforms  in the Bill, the changes relating to casual workers were the most critical elements of the  legislation, as these changes will provide certainty to both Australian workers and businesses  and stronger rights for employees.

“Labor’s hysterical scare campaign, backed by its union mates which pour millions into  Labor’s coffers, has put its own interests ahead of the interests of workers, the businesses that

employ them and the national interest, at the most challenging time our nation has faced in  decades.

“Labor should hang its head in shame.”

“I thank Pauline Hanson’s One Nation party for working co-operatively with the Government  on these proposed reforms, in particular the reform for casual workers, and note the support  of Centre Alliance’s Stirling Griff on these crucial issues.”

Media Contacts:   Minister Cash: Guy Creighton - Guy.Creighton@dese.gov.au - 0438 815 302

