







THE HON KEITH PITT MP

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia  Member for Hinkler

SENATOR DR SAM McMAHON  Senator for Northern Territory

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

4 March 2021

Uncovering new mineral deposits in north-east Australia

The Coalition Government’s $225 million Exploring for the Future program will direct its  focus on new critical mineral deposits across north-eastern Australia as it moves into its next  phase.

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt has announced Geoscience  Australia will carry out scientific drilling, surveying and sampling across Queensland and the  Northern Territory to uncover new sources of minerals, energy and groundwater.

“This project will shed light on potential untapped deposits of zinc, lead and silver, as well as  copper, cobalt and gold in the Barkly-Isa-Georgetown region,” Minister Pitt said.

“We will also try to find new sources of uranium, rare earth elements and critical minerals,  building on the work we did in this area in the first phase of the program.

“And Geoscience Australia will undertake sampling of mine tailings to improve the  understanding of resource potential between the Tennant Creek, Mount Isa and Croydon  mineral provinces.

“They will also assess the potential to recover critical minerals from mine tailings, to support  the development of the growing critical minerals industry in Australia.”

The Barkly-Isa-Georgetown project is one of eight projects that Geoscience Australia will  embark on over the next four years as part of the next phase of the Exploring for the Future  program.



This includes deep-dive projects in the geological regions of Officer-Musgrave in central-west  Australia, Darling-Curnamona-Delamerian in south-east Australia and Barkly-Isa-Georgetown  in the north-east. Based on their geology, Geoscience Australia chose these areas from two  potentially resource-rich corridors identified in the east and west of Australia last year.

Exploring for the Future also includes three continental-scale projects that have national  applications but with a focus in southern Australia; and two program-support projects.

Minister Pitt said these projects will build on the success of the first stage of the Exploring  for the Future program - which delivered a detailed picture of potential resources across  more than three million square kilometres of northern Australia from 2016 to 2020.

“As it has done over the last four years, Exploring for the Future is expected to create short,  medium and long term jobs in the resources sector, and to play a key role in Australia’s gas-fired recovery,” Minister Pitt said.

“We have already seen the value of the geological data from the first stage of the Exploring  for the Future program, with more than 20 resource companies taking up new investments  in over 120,000 square kilometres of exploration acreage across Queensland and the  Northern Territory.

“Unlocking new resource-rich regions will provide ongoing economic and employment  growth to local communities and the nation.”

“Independent analysis of the first stage of the program from ACIL Allen Consulting found it  could drive up to $2.5 billion in economic benefits and jobs in northern Australia,” Minister  Pitt said.

Senator for the Northern Territory Dr Sam McMahon said the resources sector will be one of  the important drivers of the post COVID-19 recovery.

"This second phase of the program is great news because it opens up the opportunity for  hundreds of job opportunities across the territory but particularly for the Barkly region,"  Senator McMahon said.

"The Northern Territory needs to take advantage of its natural resources and this program  will allow that to happen and be of benefit to not just the Top End but the entire country,"  she said.

More information on the Exploring for the Future program, including a map of the new  projects, is available at https://www.ga.gov.au/eftf.

Media contacts:

Minister Pitt - Matt Dunstan 0411 535 072, Marnie Hobson 0407 090 230  Senator McMahon - Kris 0418 220 411

