



SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women



MEDIA RELEASE  QUAD FOREIGN MINISTERS’ MEETING

I joined my counterparts, the US Secretary of State, the Foreign Minister of Japan and  the External Affairs Minister of India, on 18 February for the third Quad Foreign  Ministers’ Meeting. The Quad is a key pillar of Australia’s international agenda, bringing  together four like-minded democracies committed to respecting and upholding  international rules and obligations through positive, practical engagement to protect and  support the sovereignty, prosperity and security of the region.

We reaffirmed our commitment to supporting an open, inclusive and resilient region  where the rights of all countries are respected and disputes are resolved peacefully,  free from coercion, and in accordance with international law.

Underpinning these commitments is our steadfast support for ASEAN centrality and the  principles set out in the ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific. Quad countries work with  ASEAN and through ASEAN-led architecture, particularly the East Asia Summit, to  advance a stable and prosperous region.

We discussed the increasingly complex strategic challenges facing the region, and the  growing pressures on rules, norms and institutions. Despite the significant disruption  COVID-19 is causing, we remain focused on responding to these longer term  challenges.

We reiterated our commitment to deepen Quad cooperation on regional priorities  ranging from the response to the COVID-19 pandemic, maritime security, infrastructure,  supply chain resilience, counter-terrorism, humanitarian assistance and disaster relief,  cyber and critical technologies to countering disinformation. We discussed the  importance of deepening our cooperation to address climate change. We reiterated our  serious concerns about the military coup in Myanmar and affirmed our commitment to  its democratic transition.

Ministers agreed we will continue to collaborate at all levels and look forward to regular  Quad ministerial meetings.

Media Contacts  David Wroe: +61 429 531 143  Melanie Ruiz: +61 427 888 392





