Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, Sydney.













THE HON PAUL FLETCHER MP  Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts

MEDIA RELEASE

11 February 2021

Australian Survivor to film in north-west Queensland

Production of the iconic reality television franchise, Australian Survivor, has been lured to Australia with  $3.9 million in funding from the Morrison Government’s Location Incentive Program.

Previously filmed in Samoa, and most recently in Fiji, Australian Survivor will take advantage of  Australia’s effective management of the COVID-19 pandemic and film its sixth season at Cloncurry in  north-west Queensland. Filming will begin in coming months.

Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, said  the production is expected to inject more than $29 million into regional Australia.

“Australian Survivor was one of the many world-renowned productions jeopardised by the COVID-19  pandemic, which is why we are pleased to provide $3.9 million to get the series back on our screens in  2021,” Minister Fletcher said.

“Local production of the show’s sixth season will support businesses in regional Queensland and create  150 employment opportunities for local crew, providing a major boost to the Australian economy.”

Australian Survivor is produced by Endemol Shine Australia, one of the world's fastest-growing media  production brands, and will feature across the platforms of Network Ten, including 10 Play, later this year.

Beverley McGarvey, Chief Content Officer and EVP of ViacomCBS Australia & New Zealand, said:  “Rich in history, the town with a heart of gold has a lot to offer and we are thrilled we will be able to  showcase Cloncurry and all its natural beauty. With thanks to the Australian Government’s Location  Incentive Program, we look forward to working with the local community to bring Australian Survivor to  life.”

Endemol Shine Australia CEO, Peter Newman said, “We are delighted to be bringing Survivor home onto  Australian soil with the help of the Australian Government’s Location Incentive Program. We look  forward to working with the local community of Cloncurry to bring their unique and stunning landscape to  Australian and international audiences. This is an exciting new chapter for the Australian format.”

The production will work with training institutions, including the Australian Film, Television and Radio  School to provide up and coming screen talent with mentorships and the opportunity to build expertise in  television production.

Australian Survivor is supported under the Australian Government’s $400 million boost to the Location  Incentive, in response to COVID-19, to create a pipeline of large-budget projects, which is generating tens  of thousands of Australian jobs in the screen industry over the next seven years.

Support for this production brings to $190 million the total amount of Location Incentive funding provided  to date, attracting 19 productions to Australia with production budgets totalling $1.47 billion and providing  an estimated 11,800 jobs for Australian cast and crew.

Other productions funded under the Location Incentive which are currently in production include Marvel  Studios’ Thor: Love and Thunder, MGM’s Thirteen Lives and the feature film Blacklight.

The Location Incentive is available for “footloose productions,” defined as those that would not be  expected to film in Australia in the absence of funding support.

For more information on the Location Incentive Program please visit: www.arts.gov.au/what-we-do/screen/australian-screen-production-incentive.

Media contact:  Imre Salusinszky | 0432 535 737 | Imre.salusinszky@communications.gov.au  Christine Byllaardt | 0409 433 357 | Christine.VandenByllaardt@communications.gov.au

ABOUT ENDEMOL SHINE AUSTRALIA   Endemol Shine Australia (ESA) is a part of Banijay, the world’s largest international content producer and  distributor spanning 22 territories with over 120 production companies and a multi-genre catalogue  boasting over 88,000 hours of original standout programming. Based in Sydney and Melbourne, ESA’s  team led by CEO Peter Newman comprises of proven leaders in television and digital production whose  shows have become ratings hits. ESA’s slate represents the most exciting and popular programming on  Australian free-to-air networks and pay TV channels - shows such as MasterChef Australia, Australian  Survivor, Big Brother, LEGO Masters, Australian Ninja Warrior, Married at First Sight, Gogglebox  Australia and International Emmy Award winning Old People’s Home For 4 Year Olds as well as  acclaimed dramas including Offspring, Peter Allen: Not The Boy Next Door, INXS: Never Tear Us  Apart and RFDS (working title) which is due to air in 2021.

