



Senator the Hon Zed Seselja

Assistant Minister for Finance, Charities and

Electoral Matters



Senator for the Australian Capital Territory

Rachel Stephen-Smith MLA

Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander

Affairs

Minister for Families and Community Services

Minister for Health

Member of

Kurrajong



5 March 2021

Construction of ICU expansion begins

Construction of the $13.5 million expansion of the Canberra Hospital’s Intensive Care

Unit is underway and on track to be completed by the end of the year.

The project will increase ICU beds at Canberra Hospital to 39, boosting critical care capacity while

the design and construction of the Canberra Hospital Expansion is underway.

The construction also provides a boost for local jobs and industry during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Senator for the ACT Zed Seselja said with Canberra Hospital ICU treating 2,200 patients annually,

the eight additional beds at Canberra Hospital ICU will support greater access to critical care

facilities for the growing population of Canberra and Greater Southern NSW.

“The commitment of $13.5 million from the Commonwealth Government to expand the ICU here

at Canberra Hospital will make a difference to the sickest and most critical patients in need of

high-level care across our region,” Senator Seselja said.

"Having already more than doubled funding to our hospitals, I am proud of the Commonwealth

Government’s commitment to continue to deliver projects that support access to healthcare for

Canberrans.”

“The expansion forms part of the Commonwealth’s $1.4 billion infrastructure investment bonanza

for Canberra over recent years, alongside significant transport infrastructure investment and

investment in our national institutions,” Senator Seselja said.

ACT Minister for Health Rachel Stephen-Smith said additional ICU beds will provide patients from

Canberra and the surrounding region greater access to lifesaving care and acute medical

treatment.

“A bigger ICU at the Canberra Hospital will ensure our health system is better equipped to meet

the increasing demand for intensive care treatment.

“Additional healthcare workers will be recruited to staff the expanded ICU, providing 24-hour care

to some of the most critical patients at Canberra Hospital.

“Across the Canberra Hospital campus, there are more than 45 projects underway to improve the

facilities and amenities available to staff, patients and their families. The ICU expansion is one

example of how we are working to modernise and future-proof Canberra’s major tertiary hospital.

“This includes delivering the Canberra Hospital Expansion, the new emergency, surgical and

critical healthcare facility which will include 60 ICU beds,” said Minister Stephen-Smith.

This project has been carefully designed so that construction does not cause disruption to the

current operations of the ICU.

Funding for the ICU expansion has been provided through the Commonwealth Community Health

and Hospitals Program.

Statement ends

Media Contact:

Minister Stephen-Smith  - Caitlin Cook 0434 702 827

Senator Seselja - Cassandra Choake 0427 839 164

Zed Seselja, Liberal Party of Australia, Canberra

ACT Legislative Assembly

Phone (02) 6205 0011

Email:

steel@act.gov.au







