

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RN BREAKFAST WITH FRAN KELLY

WEDNESDAY, 17 MARCH 2021



SUBJECTS: Workplace culture in Parliament House; bullying and harassment of MPs

and staff; historic rape allegations against a Cabinet Minister; Christian Porter relieved

of some duties; vaccine rollout; AstraZeneca vaccine; PNG coronavirus crisis.



FRAN KELLY, HOST: The Opposition Leader joins us now. Anthony Albanese, welcome back

to Breakfast.



ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Good morning,

Fran.



KELLY: So you heard Nicolle Flint there. She said that GetUp!, Labor and union supporters

routinely chased, harassed and screamed at her at the last election. She says she’s been

bombarded with sexist slurs, like skank and prostitute, her office has been vandalised more

than once, and she has asked, ‘Where were you and the senior Labor women?’. She has

named Penny Wong and Tanya Plibersek when defending her against this behaviour.



ALBANESE: Well, Nicolle Flint deserved to be safe as a Member of Parliament. And we must

listen to her story and all the stories about women's involvement and, indeed, people's

involvement in politics. We must learn to have disagreements in a civil way. The people who

have been named in articles as being involved in this are organisations like Extinction

Rebellion and some people at GetUp! At the same time, they were, of course, protesting

against Labor MPs in some seats, including mine that was being occupied every week at the

same time. And certainly, the women staff who worked for me, and my electorate office is all

female staff, felt intimidated by occupations of the office. It shouldn't happen. It shouldn't

happen to anyone.



KELLY: But it did happen. I'm sorry to interrupt. The question now is it did happen, it was well

known it happened. And Nicolle Flint describes it as a coordinated sexist campaign, it was

written about during the last campaign, it was pretty well known. And neither you nor your

senior MPs spoke out about it at the time. Labor was after her marginal seat of Boothby.



ALBANESE: That is not right, Fran. Anytime that I get asked about behaviour, and I'm sure

Penny Wong and Tanya Plibersek are exactly the same, we would be consistent that such

behaviour from any one towards a woman or anyone else in politics is completely

inappropriate and should not happen.



KELLY: I understand that. Of course you would make that answer. And I understand that you

would mean that. But during this election campaign, it was hard fought. This political campaign

against Nicolle Flint did happen. Did politics trump the safety of Nicolle Flint and her staff? Is it

as simple as that?



ALBANESE: Well, it shouldn't have happened. Full stop. It shouldn't have happened to

anyone in any campaign. Full stop. I condemn. I can't do more than that. I wasn't visiting

Boothby in those last couple of weeks. Anytime that I got asked about behaviour, I would have

said exactly the same thing. I said the same thing when my office had broken windows every

week. Eventually the person was arrested who engaged in that behaviour. And during this

period of time, I've got to say, the people who answer phones have been subject to a really

difficult period over the last few weeks. We have had to get mental health support for a range

of staff members. I'm sure that applies absolutely across the board. So I stand with Nicolle

Flint. Her story is one that is appalling that that sort of behaviour was directed at her.



KELLY: She told you in that speech last night in the Parliament to get your own house in

order. And there have been dozens of anonymous complaints made by current and former

Labor staffers of unwanted touching, bullying, forced kissing, an older Labor man getting a

young woman drunk before having non-consensual sex. These are the anonymous complaints

on this website, on this Facebook page. Tanya Plibersek says Labor men need to be held to

account. What are you doing as Labor Leader to put a stop to this kind of behaviour, to make

the Labor Party a safe workplace for women?



ALBANESE: Well, what I've done is update, through the ALP National Executive, a

comprehensive plan to stamp out sexual harassment and bullying. We have four policies that

have been adopted. A comprehensive anti-sexual harassment policy, an anti-bullying policy, a

complaints process that provides for independent processes and the code of conduct. And it

applies not just for Members of Parliament, it applies to any activity where the ALP is involved.

For example, any campaign, any function across the board. We need to do better and will

continue to work. That was a policy that was developed under the chairmanship of Sharon

Claydon, the Chair of the Caucus, and was adopted unanimously by the ALP National

Executive.



KELLY: Since it was released a couple of weeks ago, there are some reports that some Labor

women don't believe it gives them still enough confidence and comfort to come forward. I think

women listening now would want to know what you will do if an allegation of bullying or sexual

harassment was made that isn't anonymous, if the perpetrator is named. What action will you

take against that man?



ALBANESE: Well, we'll act, Fran.



KELLY: What does act mean? What would you do? Would you suspend them?



ALBANESE: For example, one of the issues that's been raised publicly was a complaint

against a staff member. And that was made by someone who wasn't a Federal staff member.

That person is no longer employed. It was dealt with in conjunction with the woman who made

the complaint. And action was taken to the satisfaction of the woman involved.



KELLY: Christian Porter, the Attorney-General, will be back at work at the end of the month.

Given the defamation action over the historical rape allegation that the Attorney-General has

brought, the Prime Minister has relieved him of some of his duty. Any functions relating to the

Federal Court or to the ABC, defamation law reform, will be delegated, we understand, to

another minister now. In your view, is that a workable compromise?



ALBANESE: No, it's not. Because there's a whole range of processes, including the

overseeing of the Sex Discrimination Act. There's a range of processes that the Attorney-General has to fulfil. And, in my view, is going to be very difficult for the Attorney-General to

just return to work and to pretend that all of us can unsee and unhear what has been said over

recent weeks.



KELLY: Would Labor be satisfied if Christian Porter returned as the Minister for Industrial

Relations but not as Attorney-General?



ALBANESE: We think that there needs to be a proper examination of the allegations that have

been made. That hasn't been possible by the New South Wales Police due to the

circumstances of the woman taking her own life. But the Prime Minister must satisfy himself

and satisfy the Australian people that Mr Porter is a fit and proper person to serve as a Cabinet

Minister.



KELLY: Would Labor be satisfied if Christian Porter remained in Cabinet as the Industrial

Relations Minister but not the Attorney-General while this is looked at in a defamation case

before a court and potentially a coronial inquest?



ALBANESE: We've said that it needs proper examination, Fran.



KELLY: And do you think that represents proper examination?



ALBANESE: I don't believe that there has been a proper examination. And I think the fact that

you're asking me the question provides the answer, which is that you can't have someone

continuing to sit in the Cabinet who is the subject of the sort of inquiries that you're making

now. That undermines confidence in our system of government. And that confidence in our

system of government is so important. And Christian Porter, of course, oversaw inquiries,

including into Dyson Heydon, into his behaviour or activity as a person who looked into the

Trade Union Royal Commission.



KELLY: Talking about confidence, can I ask you about vaccine rollouts? We've had the

Coalition MP, Matt Canavan, calling for the rollout of the AstraZeneca vaccine to be paused

given the concerns over blood clots now and the fact that 12 European countries have paused

the rollout of Astra Zeneca. You are calling on the Prime Minister to censure Matt Canavan.



But is it better just to ignore these comments, not inflate them, because publicity around these

sorts of comments could undermine the vaccination program?



ALBANESE: What we need is for everyone who's in a position of responsibility to put the

interests of our nation first. And that means supporting the health advice. The health advice is

that these vaccines are safe. We've always said that we have to listen to the TGA. We have a

world-class organisation which we should be proud of. And it shouldn't be undermined by

anyone, be it Craig Kelly or Matt Canavan.



KELLY: And in terms of the rollout of vaccines on the COVID pandemic, we do expect the

Prime Minister will announce today that vaccines will be rushed to PNG to try and combat that

truly alarming outbreak there of the coronavirus. Do you share the Health Minister's concerns

that the high infection rate there poses a clear and present danger to our north? Are you

confident the Government is responding as it should be?



ALBANESE: Look, I welcome the Government's response of an urgent response. There is a

clear and present danger. And I've been to Saibai Island, you can actually see Papua New

Guinea from there. It's a very short ocean trip, about the size of a trip across various parts of

Sydney Harbour. And the fact is that we also have a responsibility as good neighbours to help

out Papua New Guinea and to help out our other Pacific Island nations. This is a moment

where we need to stand up.



KELLY: Anthony Albanese, thank you very much for joining us.



ALBANESE: Thank you very much, Fran.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053



