

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

MEMBER FOR HUNTER

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2HD

WEDNESDAY, 7 APRIL 2021

SUBJECT: Malcolm Turnbull’s Removal from Net-zero Emissions Board;  Upper Hunter By-election; Gas Fired Power Station.

RICHARD KING, HOST: I think certainly not on the invite list to join all sorts of  people in the New South Wales Minerals Council sponsored box at the Voice  for Mining day last Sunday for the game against the St George-Illawarra  Dragons, I don't think Malcolm Turnbull was on the list. But certainly somebody  who was is joining us now, Member for Hunter, Labor's Joel Fitzgibbon, he's on  the line. Good morning, Joel.

SHANNA BULL, HOST: Good morning.

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: Good morning team. How are  you?

BULL: We're well, thank you.

KING: Look, obviously the hot topic at the moment is the fact that Malcolm  Turnbull, who only last week was appointed to chair the New South Wales Net-zero Emissions and Clean Economy Board, was removed from that job  yesterday. A lot of people have had a lot to say about that, including, well, Kate  Washington, who's the New South Wales Shadow Environment Minister said  Malcolm Turnbull should never have been appointed. You also are quoted in  the Herald today saying it's a terrible decision, or it was a terrible decision to  appoint such a high profile, anti-coal advocate to the board. Can we just have a  listen, firstly, to what Malcolm Turnbull had to say after the PM and Angus  Taylor came to Newcastle in September of last year to announce that gas  would lead the economic recovery out of the coronavirus pandemic. This is  what Malcolm Turnbull had to say.

*AUDIO INSERT*

MALCOLM TURNBULL: Seriously, we have got to stop this mad ideology,  ideological approach to energy. It's not a question of whether you're for coal,  against coal, for gas, against gas. They are just physical things. They all have  certain characteristics. Some of them have high emissions, some of them have

low emissions, some of them are variable, some of them are dispatchable, and  you've got to get the right mix. When the government starts saying this fuel is  the one to go with that, honestly, in the energy sector, people are just, they are  punch drunk with these random interventions from government, it's got to stop.  We just need a coherent energy and climate policy. We had that in the NEG.  Sadly, you know, that was blown up in 2018. But really, that's what we need to  get back to. And then I promise you, the market will do its work and we will  have affordable, reliable and lower emissions energy.

KING: That's Malcolm Turnbull, our former PM commenting in September of  last year.

BULL: And Joel, you obviously wouldn't agree with what Malcolm Turnbull had  to say there.

FITZGIBBON: I think they call that hypocrisy and political desperation. Look, I  try very hard to respect the Office of the Prime Minister and all of those who  have occupied it. I think anyone who has taken that position deserves to be  respected. But I'm just dumbfounded both by Malcolm Turnbull's behavior, and  of course, the New South Wales Government's decision to appoint him to this  board. I always look to both sides of any political argument or any political  decision, but I cannot see any sense in that decision by the cabinet, not just  one Minister, by the cabinet, and I'm very pleased they've reversed it because  it's very, very clear that Malcolm Turnbull wants to shut down our coal mining  industry.

KING: Right. Look, the headline in Michael Parris's article in the Newcastle  Herald today - Malcolm Turnbull dumped as rivals tried to out-coal each other in  the Upper Hunter by-election. And it's obviously, you know, a lot of the  statements from Mark Latham are squarely looking at this by-election coming  up in the Upper Hunter. But, out-coal each other, and it would seem that you're  a part of that out-coaling each other, Joel.

FITZGIBBON: No, I don't think that's right. One Nation will be playing a bit of  catch up because they voted in the Senate recently to do over our coal miners  by backing Scott Morrison's IR legislation. But I'd like coal to play a minimum  role in the by-election. It seems to me that all the main players have expressed

very solidly their support for the industry, including the Labor Party, so we  should accept that, set that aside and talk also about the other important issues  that affect that electorate. They are always of course, health, education, Tafe,  some infrastructure projects which they have been talking about. This  Government has been in place in Sydney for 10 years, we still haven't seen a  bulldozer on the sites for the Muswellbrook or Singleton bypasses. There are  big debates about the design of both of those projects. So I think that we can  just all agree - other than the Greens, of course - that the coal mining industry  is critically important to our economy, that we support coal mining jobs, and we  can discuss then the other issues facing the electorate.

BULL: Do you think that ultimately at the end of the day, Joel, this decision by  New South Wales Premier, Gladys Berejiklian, was a decision made basically  just in a bid to try and win the Upper Hunter by-election?

FITZGIBBON: I know, John Barilaro made it very, very clear on Sky News last  night that when they made that decision, they could not have seen the by-election coming. It was almost an admission that Malcolm Turnbull would still  be in the position if it were not for the by-election. But notwithstanding that, I'm  pleased Malcolm has been taken out of the equation because - look, I support  zero-net emissions, and I do believe we can get there by 2050 without doing  any harm to existing traditional jobs. But we don't need people like Malcolm  Turnbull in there showing a heavy bias against the coal mining industry,  muddying up that process.

KING: Right. Back to his comments about gas, we've spoken to you on a  number of occasions about the establishment by the Federal Government of a  gas fired power generator on the old Hydro site at Kurri Kurri. You know, Paul  Broad, the head of Snowy Hydro pretty well. You're of the opinion that we'll go  ahead 100 per cent, you're still of that opinion?

FITZGIBBON: Well, I certainly know Paul is very keen and determined to make  that project happen. I'm a strong supporter, I also hope that AGL will build one  near Tomago Aluminium smelter. And the problem here though, Richard, is that  the government at the moment, Angus Taylor and Scott Morrison, are playing a  funny game. They're trying to garner domestic votes by intervening in the gas

market, threatening to set the price for those who produce gas. Now, that  sounds great. They’re trying to claim that they're bringing prices down for  households and for industry. But if you do that, you send investment running,  and if investment isn't forthcoming, then you end up with supply constraints and  the price doesn't go down, the price actually goes up. So I appeal today for  Scott Morrison to get out of the way. Let us develop sites like Narrabri, get  more gas into the system, more gas pipelines to bring more competition, and  therefore delivering gas to those, hopefully, to be built gas peaking stations and  cheaper energy for our households.

KING: Well, there seems to be, certainly on the part of private enterprise, I  mean, Twiggy Forrest is talking about one down in the Illawarra region, there  seems to be a greater acceptance of gas at the moment than coal, Joel.

FITZGIBBON: Yes, well, gas is far more clean and efficient than is coal. But  the overwhelming majority of our coal goes to export markets, this is the point.  Now when our coal fired electricity generators reach the end of their physical  and economic lives, they'll close and we're not likely to build anymore because  investors aren't interested. But our coal mining exports will go on for decades to  come. As we speak they are building coal generators right throughout Asia.  They're also making lots of steel from metallurgical coal. So, we will be  exporting coal to Asia for the decades to come and I tire of these people who

say, we have to be honest with our coal miners. No. Stop treating coal miners

as if they're stupid. They know the industry as well as anyone, and they know it  has a bright future. And I'm backing that future.

BULL: Hey Joel, look, I need to know this. I'd like to know this. What are you  going to do with all the Malcolm Turnbull posters you collected for the Upper  Hunter by-election?

FITZGIBBON: Well, an old football mate of mine suggested that they had some  new toilets at the local footy ground and suggested they need some directional  signs to show the punters how to get there. So he thought they might be put  into use the other way around.

KING: Right. And finally, a couple of weeks ago you were the feature article on  the Weekend Magazine in the Australian newspaper. I think the headline was  'The Player' and there was a photo of you with - appropriate because we've got  the US Masters kicking off this weekend - you with a golf club standing there in  your plus fours on the golf course. And look, I looked at that and I've spoken to  a number of people about that. And I'm just wondering, it would have been your  call on you know, yep, I'm okay with that photo. What was the image you were  trying to project there? I've looked at that umpteen times and I can't figure it out,  Joel.

FITZGIBBON: No, it's far more innocent than that, Richard. They asked me if  they could take some shots on the golf course and maybe stupidly, I agreed. I  have to say, I look a lot better than I play, you can be sure of that.

KING: Yeah, but you must have given your consent to have that on the front.

FITZGIBBON: Yeah absolutely. You know, you don't want a picture of a bloke  in a suit and tie sitting behind a desk. They said, you know, you play a bit of  golf, can we get a shot of you on the golf course. I said yeah, I'm fine with that.  So, that's me, that's who I am and in part that's not all of who I am, obviously,  it's a once a week proposition for me. But I was happy to do that, no problem.  And on sport and footy and all of that, can I just give a shout out to Cessnock  Council's outdoor staff. Today here in Cessnock, we're opening Bridge's Hill  Park. It is absolutely amazing and it was built by our Council staff and it's  something they should be very, very proud of.



KING: Great.

BULL: Well done. Thank you, Joel.

KING: Okay, we were talking about Greg Norman earlier today. Everybody is  talking about his sort of, the photo his wife took in the shower. Yeah, I should  imagine you're not going to start posting photos of yourself with a golf club and  no clothes on.



FITZGIBBON: Well, some people might say I'm a bit of a media tard and can't  say no to a photo, but you can be pretty confident there'll be no photo of Joel  Fitzgibbon in the shower.

BULL: From the man himself, there we go.

FITZGIBBON: Shanna, it's not something you want to, you know, sorry for  putting that vision in your mind.

KING: Despite the enormous injury toll, you're tipping the Knights to bounce  back this weekend up on the Gold Coast?

FITZGIBBON: You know, I was just talking about the 79' Grand Final when  North Newcastle beat my beloved Goanna's with 12 men, having had a player  sent off early in the game. You know, these things, adversity can lift a team and

I think they will lift on the weekend, at least I hope they do, and I think they're a  red-hot chance and gee, we just need to pray that we get some players back on  the field.

KING: Hear, hear. Well, Kalyn Ponga will be back and hopefully that'll make a  difference. Thank you very much for your time this morning, Joel.

BULL: Thanks, Joel.

FITZGIBBON: Always a pleasure.

KING: Member for Hunter, Joel Fitzgibbon on 2HD.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: FITZGIBBON OFFICE 02 4991 1022





Authorised by Joel Fitzgibbon, ALP, Cessnock, NSW.





