

LINDA BURNEY MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND SOCIAL SERVICES

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AUSTRALIANS

MEMBER FOR BARTON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS AM AGENDA WITH LAURA JAYES

WEDNESDAY, 3 MARCH 2021



SUBJECT: Socio-economic challenges facing Indigenous Australians in remote

communities.



LAURA JAYES, HOST: Linda Burney is the Shadow Minister for Indigenous Affairs. She joins

us live now. Linda Burney, did you know about this?



LINDA BURNEY: Good morning, Laura, how are you? No, I wasn't aware of this. And my

understanding is that the FOI that is being used to base these assumptions on is in fact 95 per

cent redacted. So I'm not quite sure what you can get out of something that has that many

redactions in it and quite frankly …



JAYES: … The anecdotal evidence alone is pretty scary, isn't it? The price of alcohol going up;

the number of cars being sold, and it's all coinciding with this increase in JobSeeker and

access to early super? Should Indigenous Australians in some of these remote communities,

should they have been prevented from doing this? Or what should have happened?



BURNEY: Well, I am pretty sick of people that are disempowered and disenfranchised, getting

the blame for things. If these stories are correct, it seems to me that the focus needs to be on

those people that are doing the grog running; those people that are doing the white shoe

brigade, and going into communities and selling products at very inflated prices. And

particularly if it's correct about the second-hand sales car yards then the focus needs to be on

the people are inflating the cars. The other thing of course, Laura is there aren’t a lot of First

Nations people that have healthy superannuation accounts. And the idea that somehow or

rather the stimulus payments that were part of COVID should be treated in a different way for

First Nations people, in my view, is not appropriate. I’ve spoken to the Shadow Minister

Stephen Jones this morning, who has responsibility in the area of superannuation. And he

advised me that similar things about purchases of alcohol, and gambling increased in the

broader community, when the government may … gave people that capacity to access

superannuation early.



JAYES: Yeah, that's a really good point that it is happening in the broader community as well,

not just in the Northern Territory, which Matt Cunningham has indeed, pointed out. But I guess

the perception, here is the problem, isn't it in many ways, Linda Burney, I mean, the narrative

is that some people in these communities can't be trusted with more money.



JAYES: How do you counter that today?



BURNEY: Well, you know, I am, I'm quite disgusted by it. I mean, I've been to some of these

communities, Laura, and I know that you're very aware of it as well. And the real issue, the

broader issue is the absolute poverty that exists in these communities; the desperation that

people feel about the future of their children. In many of the communities that you're talking

about, if you want to get a secondary education, you actually have to leave your family; leave

your country; and leave your community just to get a secondary education. I'm not talking

about a tertiary education. I'm talking about a secondary education. And the level of poverty;

the level of remoteness; the level of … the health crisis; the fact that people living in homes

where there are three bedrooms and 30 people; and of course, in situations like that, you're

going to have issues around safety of children, and safety of women. None of that's a surprise

to me. But quite frankly, there needs to be a reflection by everyone. And I agree with you about

perception that people who are living in those circumstances, get to a level of desperation and

disempowerment that is enveloping.



JAYES: Well. Linda Burney, we're going to follow this up with Matt Cunningham. He's been

bringing your stories from the Northern Territory. We'll also try and follow up with the minister

to see what can be done. We thank you for your time today.





BURNEY: Thanks, Laura.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DARYL TAN 0422 028 222



