

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

MEMBER FOR HUNTER

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS - FIRST EDITION  TUESDAY, 30 MARCH 2021

SUBJECTS: Liberal and National Parties in the Hunter; The Future of the  Coal Mining Industry; Federal Labor Conference; Labor’s Manufacturing  Policy; Launch of Failures of Command; Peter Dutton as Defence  Minister.

PETER STEFANOVIC, HOST: Well, I've got to get past Joel Fitzgibbon first  and he joins us live now from Canberra. Joel, good to see you, thanks for your  time as always this morning. So they're all on your turf. The Nats are on your  turf at the moment, it's their second or their third visit or tour through the Hunter  Region in the past five months. Are you worried about that or are you  embracing the challenge?

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: Well, two things, Pete - I  always enjoy it when the Liberal Party and the National Party is fighting one  another. You know, that Coalition arrangement is one which I've often  described as a form of constitutionally sanctioned cheating. And second point is  we welcome the attention. And I'm happy that they are in the region looking and  observing the things that we are achieving as local members, despite their  underinvestment in our region. I mean, the coal mining industry is doing very  well, despite COVID-19, our economy is more diverse than ever before. We  have renewable energy projects popping up everywhere, and we're building  manufacturing by building. I mean, when Labor was in power, we built the third  rail track, so we could get more coal to port, more efficiently and more quickly,  we built the Hunter Expressway so we get the workforce to the mines more  efficiently and more safely. We built things like mining schools, so that we could  develop the skills locally and give people an opportunity for that employment.  Now, they've done none of that. Despite them ignoring us for eight years, we  are getting on with the job.

STEFANOVIC: But coal is, it's on the way out for a lot of countries, a lot of  places too and in particular the Hunter Region, you've got what eleven and a  half thousand jobs give or take in the coal industry. Some 2000 have come off  since 2012. So you're losing about 200 a year. What are you doing in that

space? How do you stop that from reducing further given you know, you have  got coal power plants, particularly in Victoria that are shutting up shop early.

FITZGIBBON: It's around 12,000 jobs directly but up to 75,000 jobs indirectly.  But I just reject the proposition which has been constantly pushed by some in  the extreme left that the coal mining industry has a limited future. It's just simply  not true. 95% of the Hunter's coal goes to, not to power generation here in  Australia, but to export markets, mainly in Asia. And everywhere throughout  Asia, they are building new, highly efficient coal generators, including in Japan.  So demand for both our metallurgical coal and our steaming coal will be strong  for decades to come. And we have the highest quality coal in the world. It's  currently attracting a very, very high price and we'll continue to provide it while  ever there is demand for it. And that will be for a long, long time.

STEFANOVIC: Okay, you've got the Labor conference on today, Joel. It's going  to be virtual for the first time, it's going to lack the usual fireworks. I have got to  say, it sounds pretty dull. What are you going to make, how are you going to try  and reverse that?

FITZGIBBON: Well, the best thing, Pete, is that speeches are limited to three  minutes. That'll be somewhat of a relief in some circumstances.

STEFANOVIC: So is that why Labor's policy is down to 100 pages rather than  Bill Shorten 300 pages?

FITZGIBBON: Well, I think it is important that we condense the document into  something far more readable for people in the broader electorate. But the focus  today and tomorrow will unequivocally be on jobs, job security, well paid jobs,  and of course, the personal safety of people and their families. I think they will  be the big issues at the next election. And that's what we'll mainly be talking  about over the next couple of days.

STEFANOVIC: Okay, Albo's already, he's made his pitch. Some of the  information has been released already this morning. It revolves around  manufacturing - a $15 billion plan to boost jobs in manufacturing. The problem  is the reason why so many manufacturing jobs have gone overseas is because  wages are too high. So how are you going to reverse that?

FITZGIBBON: It is true that we've had a decline in manufacturing, not because  energy prices have been so high, but because we lacked scale. It's because of  our geography. And of course, we are a high cost country and so we should be.  We want wages still relatively high and standards of living to be high. So we will  identify those areas of manufacturing that might need some leveraging from  government, we'll do so with a model which brings a high degree of economic  credibility. This is about Labor intervening in a way which gets people over that  investment hurdle and gives us the capability of retaining that expertise here in  Australia, and allows us to continue to make things here in Australia,  particularly those areas which we've seen are so vulnerable when our  international borders have been cut off.





STEFANOVIC: Okay, Joel. Just finally, I know you're launching a book this  afternoon, Hugh Poate's Failures of Command, I look forward to reading this  actually. An important one for you to do.

FITZGIBBON: Oh, very important to me, given my defence background. This is  a heart-rending story about three families who lost their boys in Afghanistan at  the hands of Hekmatullah, a Taliban infiltrator in the Afghan National Army. But  it's about the incident, which was arguably avoidable and the family's frustration  as they sought answers, justice and closure. It's quite a controversial book and  I think that you'll be hearing a bit more about it.

STEFANOVIC: Any words of advice, mind you, for Peter Dutton?

FITZGIBBON: Well, Peter now joins the Defence Ministers club. I wish him  plenty of luck, because he'll need plenty of it.

STEFANOVIC: Alright, Joel Fitzgibbon, we're out of time. Appreciate your time,  though, as always. Talk to you soon.

FITZGIBBON: My pleasure, Pete.

ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: FITZGIBBON OFFICE - 02 4991 1022





Authorised by Joel Fitzgibbon, ALP, Cessnock, NSW.



