



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

The Hon Scott Buchholz MP  Assistant Minister for Road Safety and Freight Transport  Federal Member for Wright



The Hon Michael Ferguson MP  Tasmanian Minister for Finance  Tasmanian Minister for Infrastructure and Transport  Tasmanian Minister for State Growth

Tasmanian Minister for Science and Technology  State Member for Bass



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au



13 February 2021

ROAD SAFETY FUNDING FLOWS TO TASMANIA

New road safety upgrades and improvements will be delivered across Tasmania thanks to funding from  the Australian and Tasmanian Governments.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the additional works under the $2 billion Road Safety Program will commence  immediately, improving safety and supporting jobs right across the country.

“This funding will deliver key lifesaving measures such as shoulder sealing, rumble strips to alert drivers  when they are moving out of their lane, prevention of head-on collisions and barriers to prevent run-off-road crashes,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“The Australian Government takes road safety seriously, which is why we want to start this New Year  with boots on the ground and shovels in the dirt to ensure these additional works are delivered quickly  for Tasmanians.

“A variety of works will be delivered across Tasmania, including installing line marking, signage and  safety barriers on Glenwood Rd in Launceston, to enhance the capacity, safety and accessibility of the  roads.

“This is all about getting Tasmanians home sooner and safer.”

Tasmanian Minister for Infrastructure and Transport Michael Ferguson said the additional funding is  another demonstration of the Tasmanian Government’s commitment to road safety.

“Vital lifesaving improvements are expected to be rolled out right across the state delivering much-needed road upgrades while also providing a boost to local jobs and the economy,” Mr Ferguson said.

“A total of $45.6 million will be delivered across Tasmania to fund road new safety upgrades and  improvements to reduce the number of fatalities and serious injuries occurring on our roads.

“The projects being funded - no matter how big or small - could make the difference in someone  getting home safely to their loved ones, which is why we continue working to move closer to zero  fatalities through these investments.”

Assistant Minister for Road Safety and Freight Transport Scott Buchholz said road safety was a key  priority for the Australian Government and this investment in upgrades would provide a boost to the  economy while saving lives and livelihoods.

“Road safety is a shared responsibility and collaboration between communities and all levels of  government will help us move towards achieving Vision Zero,” Mr Buchholz said.

“Projects are already underway through the $500 million Targeted Road Safety COVID-19 stimulus  package and this additional funding complements that work, resulting in an even greater roll-out of  improved infrastructure and roads right across the nation.”

The Australian Government’s funding for the Road Safety Program is subject to ‘use it or lose it’  provisions and will deliver life-saving treatments on regional roads and to protect vulnerable road users  across Tasmania while also supporting local jobs and providing a welcome boost to local economies.

The ‘use it or lose it’ provisions require states and territories to use their notionally allocated funds  within a timeframe, or the funds can be reallocated to projects in other jurisdictions.

In total for Tranche 1, the Australian Government has committed $33.3 million and the Tasmanian  Government a further $12.3 million to fund the state-wide upgrades.

For more information on the Australian Government’s road safety initiatives, visit  www.officeofroadsafety.gov.au.

Ends.

Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Jo Williamson 0418 475 668 | Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Minister Ferguson - Lucy Langtry 0435 236 359  Assistant Minister Buchholz - Josh Christian 0439 897 926

