Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health and Aged Care



TRANSCRIPT

18 March 2021



INTERVIEW WITH SABRA LANE  ABC AM

E&OE…

Topics: Phase 1B of the vaccine rollout, Securing vaccines for PNG.

SABRA LANE:   Medical experts say, the Federal Government has serious questions to answer over the launch of the  COVID vaccine booking system. Doctors were swamped with inquiries when the system went live  yesterday, with many members of the public describing it as confusing and inefficient.

I’m joined now by the Federal Health Minister, Greg Hunt. Good morning and welcome to AM.

GREG HUNT:  Good morning, Sabra.

SABRA LANE:   GP clinics were absolutely overwhelmed yesterday, over 70s calling for appointments, saying the  Government’s website had alerted to them to it. What went so wrong?

GREG HUNT:  Well, I respectfully disagree with the categorisation. I think what we should be thankful for is that  the public is engaged in the vaccination program. By the end of today, over 240,000 people are

likely to have been vaccinated in over 540 facilities.

SABRA LANE:   Let's talk about the website problems yesterday, because industry sources have told The Guardian  they were told the system wouldn't launch until next week. And certainly, clinics told us yesterday  that they weren't aware the announcement was being made yesterday. What went so wrong?

GREG HUNT:  Well, with great respect, I disagree on both fronts. In fact, Brendan Murphy announced on Sunday,  with the Prime Minister, that the information would be released this week. And that's because next  week, we move to what's known as Phase 1B of the over 80s and the over 70s. And so as we have  more vaccines come online, we're expanding to the general practices.

Every general practice that was included yesterday, had indeed placed its orders. So, I think what  we're seeing is 1,069 practices that were announced yesterday; today, we're announcing over 100  Commonwealth vaccination clinics that will take all comers.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



General practices, some of them are much smaller and they will choose from within their own  patients first and some will expand to others. But the Commonwealth vaccination clinics that are  coming online today will take all patients.

And with over 100 around the country, that's a very important addition. And they'll have, on  average, close to a thousand vaccines a week and so that expands the capacity very significantly.

SABRA LANE:   So each of those clinics will get a thousand doses a week?

GREG HUNT:  Up to and on average, close to a thousand. So these are the larger Commonwealth vaccination  clinics and that's coming online today. That supplements the general practices.



So, next week, we start with over a thousand general practices, that will grow over the course of  April to over 4,000 general practices.

You'll have over 100 Commonwealth vaccination clinics, over 300 indigenous clinics and then state  clinics on top of that.

SABRA LANE:   Let's get back to the website problems, because every media organisation has got a story about this  today because people were inundating media organisations and GP clinics with the claims that they  couldn't get through. They couldn't get make bookings.

Again, what's gone so wrong? Does that information need to be made clearer on the website?  Because people are saying that they just can't find it.

GREG HUNT:  So, look, very simply, there are three things here. Firstly, we have a vaccination information and  location service.

So the eligibility checker had approximately 243,000 people on health.gov.au, check their  eligibility. We had a 98 per cent connection rate, on the advice that we've received from the  booking engine. And then what happens is that you approach your GP, in the vast majority of cases.  Some take online bookings, some take telephone booking.

And in addition to that, the Commonwealth vaccination clinics will link through directly from the  vaccination information and location service. So yesterday, 98 per cent connection, 243,000 people  who checked, 9,000 who actually registered for Phase 2, which is well beyond where we are now.  And so what we’ve seen is a high uptake.

And day one was always going to see a significant initial demand and I'm very pleased about that.

SABRA LANE:   Do clinics deserve an apology here because they say that they were completely inundated?

GREG HUNT:  I think they deserve our thanks. That on day one there was always going to be an initial surge and  initial demand. And every clinic that was listed had actually placed their orders and I want to thank  them for that, thank the public for being aware there.



Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



And I do think a very important point here is this next phase will have 6 million people,  approximately 250,000 vaccines will be made available for the general public next week, with  others for aged care and for health workers.

And so it will take time and patience. And we’d urge everybody to realise we're in a long national  rollout. It's a marathon, not a sprint. And it won’t all happen in one week. But our GPS have been  magnificent and the public have been magnificent.

SABRA LANE:   Two quick points, does the Phase 1B rollout hinge on the TGA approving domestically made  AstraZeneca?

GREG HUNT:  Look, that's always been an important part of it and that's on track.

SABRA LANE:   It's a just yes or no.

GREG HUNT:  Well, by definition, we have to have approval for the AstraZeneca CSL domestically made product,  and my advice is that that remains absolutely on track.

SABRA LANE:   So if that's on track, that approval has to happen by this weekend for the vaccines to be rolling out?

GREG HUNT:  No, we already have 500,000 vaccines available for next week, of which 250,000 would be the  general public. And so all of that is in place and on track.

SABRA LANE:   Europe’s threatening more bans on vaccine exports. If that happens, will that affect our request for  supplies to PNG? Will it affect Australia's supplies?

GREG HUNT:  So it is a matter of concern for Australia. We have not factored in any additional vaccines from  Europe into our doses and rollout.

We have been cautious because 3.8 million were contracted, of which 700,000 have been provided.  And indeed, it's a minor miracle that we've been able to secure that 700,000 so far.

And we are now asking Europe to make available for a humanitarian COVID crisis in PNG, one  million of our Australian vaccines for helping PNG.

SABRA LANE:   Will the ban affect PNG’s supplies?

GREG HUNT:  Well, that is a matter for Europe to now consider. We know that we have approached Europe.

SABRA LANE:   It's a simple yes or no.



Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



GREG HUNT:  Well we don't know the answer as to whether Europe will accept the request to release. We hope  that they do.

We would think that a humanitarian crisis in a developing country, with the need for COVID  vaccines would have to be the highest possible priority. And we'll continue to fight for that. That's  our job. That's our duty. That's our human task.

SABRA LANE:  Minister, we're out of time. Thanks for joining AM this morning.

GREG HUNT:  Thanks, Sabra.

-ENDS-

