



SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women

THE HON PETER DUTTON MP  Minister for Defence

SENATOR THE HON KAREN ANDREWS   Minister for Home Affairs

MEDIA RELEASE

AUSTRALIA’S SECOND NATIONAL ACTION PLAN ON   WOMEN, PEACE AND SECURITY

12 April 2021

The Australian Government has released the second National Action Plan on Women,  Peace and Security, renewing its commitment to the full and equal participation of women  and girls in peace and security arrangements.

The Australian National Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security 2021-2031 builds on  existing efforts to protect and promote the human rights of all women and girls, and increase  the full and meaningful participation of women in peace and security processes.

All women, no matter where they live or what their circumstances, should have the  opportunity to make decisions on policies and programmes that determine their own safety  and security. The Australian Government recognises that women and girls in fragile,  dislocated or conflict-impaired environments are best placed to determine their own needs.

We know that when women are fully included in decision-making, societies are more likely to  prevent and resolve conflict, and establish enduring and resilient peace outcomes.

The first National Action Plan helped guide real and practical outcomes, including more than  100 interventions in the UN Security Council and Human Rights Council, funded initiatives  through the Gender Equality Fund, an increase in the number of women deployed overseas  with the Australian Federal Police and the training of Australian Defence Force gender  advisers who deployed on military, humanitarian, disaster relief and recovery operations.

During COVID-19, we have supported Indo-Pacific partners to continue their  implementations of the Women, Peace and Security agenda, including to tackle pandemic-related increases in gender-based violence.

We want to ensure Australia continues to be a global leader in driving change through the  Women, Peace and Security agenda. This includes strengthening our partnerships with civil  society, building knowledge and capabilities, and increasing women’s leadership and  engagement in the peace and security sector.

The National Action Plan identifies four outcomes that will guide Australia’s international  peace and security efforts, and support coordinated action across government:

1. Supporting women’s meaningful participation and needs in peace processes;  2. Reducing sexual and gender-based violence;  3. Supporting resilience, crisis, and security, law and justice efforts to meet the needs  and rights of all women and girls, and

4. Demonstrating leadership and accountability for Women, Peace and Security.

The Australian Government recognises the contributions of civil society, including the work  of the Women, Peace and Security Coalition, and extends its thanks for their part in  developing the National Action Plan.

We are fully committed to working together with domestic and overseas partners to generate  real change and genuine advances for women and girls around the world.

For more information, please visit: https://www.dfat.gov.au/publications/australias-national-action-plan-on-women-peace-and-security-2021%E2%80%932031



Media Contact  David Wroe (Minister Payne): 0429 531 143  Melanie Ruiz (Minister Payne): 0427 888 392  Nicole Chant (Minister Dutton): 0419 850 222  Keegan Buzza (Minister Andrews): 0447 697 846

