

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

MEMBER FOR HUNTER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2CC   WEDNESDAY,17 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECT: ACCC report on gas prices; getting more gas out of the  ground; the strength of the coal industry; Nuclear energy.

STEPHEN CENATIEMPO, HOST: Time to catch up with our regular contributor on a  Wednesday morning. He is the Labor member for Hunter, Joel Fitzgibbon. Morning  Joel.

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: Great to be with you, Stephen.

CENATIEMPO: Now, I never had the chance to meet your non-gestational parent, but  he was a bit of a legend, the Member of Hunter before you.

FITZGIBBON: Can I just say I thought that it was a bit of a gee up that ANU stuff and,  you know, if I become - if I'm lucky enough to become a grandparent, what will I be?  The non-birthing grandparent? I don't know. And if, if a baby wants to be taught to say,  dad, dad, dad, dad, what will the baby be taught to say now?

CENATIEMPO: Don't put too much thought into this Joel. Oh, goodness me, it does  my head in. The ACCC has issued a report showing gas prices have fallen since the  start of the pandemic which would lead us to believe that supply was - yeah - there  was less demand and a higher supply. But that's not the case.

FITZGIBBON: No, that's not the case. And the ACCC has been very consistent on this  issue over a number of reports now over the last year. They are making it clear that  unless we get more gas into the east coast system, we're going to be short and prices  will rise. And that means getting more gas out of the ground. We have Narrabri  hopefully coming on stream in the not too distant future. But we also need more  interconnection with Queensland where there is an abundance of gas, but where the  gas pipeline is basically full to capacity. So we need what they call the Hunter Gas  Pipeline, for example, coming down from Queensland, and we do need to get that  Narrabri project up and running as quickly as possible, and we need to ensure again  that we're not exporting so much gas in the meantime to international customers that  we're leaving ourselves short here in Australia.

CENATIEMPO: I remember you and I talking about this how the pipeline at least five  years ago, maybe more than that. Is there been any progress on it?

FITZGIBBON: Yes, I think so. These things are always very indeed too slow, but it is  happening, and the approvals is pretty much there. The proponent still negotiating with  landholders because you've got to come across so much land on the way down, but I  think they're inching to some success. And what he will also do in New South Wales is  bring competition in the market because we're dependent on the gas pipeline from  Moomba. So, there's a monopoly there. But if we've got a second source of gas  coming into the state from another pipeline, then there'll be competition in that network.

CENATIEMPO: You've written in the Australian this week - sorry, last week about the  long-term outlook for the coal industry. Now, you say it might be uncertain, but I've  been hearing the term structural decline of the coal industry for at least the past  decade, but it seems to keep bucking the trend.

FITZGIBBON: That's right, Stephen, it's rubbish. Let's look at what's happening in  China in particular, at the moment, they put new electricity - coal fired generation into  the system last year, just in one year, the equivalent of 19 Liddell Power Stations -  that’s the Liddell Power Station in the Hunter Valley, 2000 megawatt hours at capacity.  They are growing and building their coal-fired power generation system and they'll be  demanding quality thermal coal for a long, long time, but still other countries too.  What's happening, Governments of Asia are putting stimulus into their economies in  response to COVID and that's driving demand for both thermal and coking coal and, of  course, our iron ore very happily. So, I believe things are very bright for the coal mining  industry and will be for a long time to come.

CENATIEMPO: Well, I guess that's one of the ironies of our dilemmas with China at  the moment is that BHP shareholders have received record dividends with the price of  iron ore doubling over the past 12 months, and off the back of Chinese expert -  Chinese imports, or Chinese exports, I should say.

FITZGIBBON: That's right. The other part of that equation is that they're still having  difficulty in production of iron ore in Brazil. So, one of our main competitors is largely  out of the out of the system at the moment. So, we're benefiting from that. And of  course, it takes both iron ore and coking coal to make steel. People talk about the  mythical green steel revolution where you'll replace coking coal with hydrogen but gee,  that's a long, long way off.

CENATIEMPO: Now I was looking - I saw you appeared on one of the Sky News  programs the other night with Matt Canavan, and you were talking about this - the  government saying that if the private sector doesn't build gas-fired power station in the  Hunter Valley it will step in and do it. At what point do they say, well, the private sector  is not going to do it?

FITZGIBBON: Well, Scott Morrison is just playing a bit of a game here, Stephen. He  has every intention of building that gas-fired generator. He doesn't - he doesn't want to  say he's given up on the extension of the coal-fired Liddell Power Station, you know,  because he made such a fuss of forcing AGL to extend its life. But we all knew that  that was never going to happen. And she's almost 50 years of age, she never runs to  capacity now, because if you turn her up to too high, the boilers will just blow. So, you  know, he knows that's not going to happen. He just didn't want to say that he'd given



up on the Liddell and coal-fired generation, and then he moved somewhere else. But  it's very clear that we will need a new gas-peaking station in the Hunter Valley, and I  hope we get two of them.

CENATIEMPO: Now you and I have discussed this recently that your position on  uranium has changed and nuclear power in recent times. What do we need to do to  actually put that on the agenda? I mean, what are the logical steps? Because I know at  the moment, it's prohibited, but how do we go about changing that?

FITZGIBBON: Well, you remove the prohibition, and then you test the market. You  see whether anyone comes forward with a proposition, and if they do, you start  assessing community reactions and putting it through an approvals process. And if it  doesn't make it through to the other end, if the community rejects it, well, they reject it  like any other project. But at the moment, we can't even test the proposition because  there's this silly prohibition, a prohibition John Howard put in place as a deal with the  Democrats to get his GST through 22 or so years ago. It's just silly, and back then, of  course, Howard never expected anyone would come forward with one because they  were so expensive, and we had such an abundance of other cheap energy supplies.  But things have changed, including the cost of nuclear generators. We've got these  small nuclear reactors possibly coming to the market. They don't need water, like the  old stations. So, you don't need to put them in heavily populated populations on the  coast. You can actually bury them out in the desert. They're smaller and less  expensive. So, remove the prohibition, see if someone comes forward and ask the  community whether it's acceptable to them. If it's not, well so be it. But at the moment,  we can't even test it.

CENATIEMPO: So, will we say a private member's bill coming from the Member of  Hunter on that in that regard.

FITZGIBBON: No.

CENATIEMPO: Talk the next week, mate.

FITZGIBBON: Good on you, mate.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAVID BULLOCK - 0405 408 871





Authorised by Joel Fitzgibbon, ALP, Cessnock NSW

















