



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

The Hon Scott Buchholz MP  Assistant Minister for Road Safety and Freight Transport  Federal Member for Wright



The Hon Ben Carroll MP  Minister for Roads and Road Safety  Minister for Public Transport  Victorian Member for Niddrie



MEDIA RELEASE





17 February 2021

MORE THAN 100 ROAD PROJECTS SET TO BENEFIT LOCAL  COMMUNITIES IN VICTORIA

More than 100 road safety projects are about to start rolling out across Victoria, in a $245 million  road improvement blitz designed to reduce road trauma and save lives.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack and Victorian Minister for Roads and Road Safety Ben Carroll announced that the first  tranche of the jointly-funded projects would start later this month.

The upgrades will be delivered across Victoria by mid-year, leading to a wide range of safety  improvements such new safety barriers to prevent head-on and run-off-road crashes and as rumble  strip line-marking to alert drivers if they veer from their lane.

The package will also include safety upgrades for pedestrians and cyclists, as well as a number of  intersection upgrades in local communities.

“We are ensuring this road safety package can roll-out quickly, saving lives and reducing injuries,” the  Deputy Prime Minister said.

“These projects were selected based on the safety risk at each of the locations, with the aim of  reducing road trauma in both regional and metropolitan areas - because any death on our roads is  one too many.”

Minister for Roads and Road Safety Ben Carroll said the program would target some of the highest-risk areas in the state.

“This extensive package of projects ranges from smaller-scale improvements to major upgrades, with  crews ready to hit the ground and get started immediately at a number of these sites,” Mr Carroll  said.

“Whether you’re commuting to work, going for a Sunday ride, or dropping the kids off at school -  we’re ensuring that our road network is safer for everyone.”

Assistant Minister for Road Safety and Freight Transport Scott Buchholz said road safety was a key  priority for the Australian Government and this investment in upgrades would provide a boost to the  economy while saving lives and livelihoods.

“Road safety is a shared responsibility and collaboration between communities along with all levels  of government will help us move towards achieving Vision Zero,” Mr Buchholz said.

“Projects are already underway through the $500 million Targeted Road Safety COVID-19 stimulus  package and this additional funding complements that work, resulting in an even greater roll-out of  improved infrastructure and roads right across the nation.”

In regional Victoria, projects will include safety improvements on the Midland Highway between  Daylesford and Guildford, on Portarlington-Queenscliff Road at Portarlington and improving safety  barriers on the Western Highway.

In Melbourne, works will include projects like upgrading traffic signals on Plenty Road in Bundoora  and on Bridge Road near Yarra Boulevard in Richmond.

The $245 million investment includes $183 million of funding from the Australian Government and  $62 million from the Victorian Government.

It builds on the joint $97.2 million investment made by the Australian and Victorian Governments  earlier this year to boost road safety across the state.

Ends.

Media Contacts:  Deputy Prime Minister - Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Minister Carroll - Kieran Jones 0421 031 900  Assistant Minister Buchholz - Josh Christian 0439 897 926

