



DAVEY URGES PREMIERS: PLAN FOR RETURN TO SCHOOL NOW

New South Wales Senator Perin Davey is urging State Governments to start planning now for  students returning to school across State borders in the light of the latest round of COVID  restrictions.

Senator Davey spent much of last year advocating on behalf of border communities and regional  boarding school students to get exemptions to be able to cross borders to attend school.

“Last year it was crazy with students unable to return home or return to school and the  uncertainty causing unnecessary stress on students and families alike,” Senator Davey said.

“We also had the ridiculous scenario where some small regional schools had their operations  thrown into turmoil because they had teachers living on the wrong side of a border - yet less than  50km away.

“We have already seen absolute chaos on the NSW-Victorian border because the closure was put  in place before some Local Government area exemptions and agricultural workers permits were  devised.

“Because of the way the border closure announcement was made we had tourists clear out of  campgrounds which only two days later were declared to be in an exempt zone.

“I heard of a group of grape pickers packing up and leaving their jobs in NSW when just four days  later the Victorian Government announced an agricultural  worker permit.

“We cannot leave the planning for school communities to the last minute.  Families need to know  what they need to do to ensure their children can go to school,” she said.

Senator Davey said a consistent approach across State borders was needed to ensure that all  students, and cross border staff, had a clear process to follow to apply for necessary permits.

“The new school year is less than a month away and while I hope border restrictions will have  eased by then, we must prepare for the worst now and give families time to plan,” she said.

Ends   Media Contact: Sarah Wray 02 9159 9310

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE - 6 JANUARY 2021

