TRANSCRIPT

Monday, 15 March 2021

Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment Dan Tehan interview with Karl  Stefanovic and Allison Langdon, Today Show

SUBJECTS: Travel bubble with Singapore, COVID-19 vaccine rollout, Tourism  and aviation support package, Women’s March 4 Justice

Karl Stefanovic: For more on this we are joined by the Minister for Trade, Tourism and  Investment Dan Tehan in Canberra. Minister, thank you for your time this morning. It does, it  feels like a dream at this point. How close could we get?

Dan Tehan: Oh, look, we want to work on it, Karl, and we think it’s really important. We’ve  obviously put in place arrangements with New Zealand - that’s a one-way bubble at the  moment but Singapore have also expressed an interest, so I put to them that it would be  great if we could extend the bubble between New Zealand, Singapore and Australia. They’re  interested to work on that. I’m hoping to have further discussions when I travel to Singapore  in the next couple of months and if we can continue to get the vaccine rollout right here in  Australia, they continue to do what they’re doing so well there with their vaccine rollout in  Singapore, I’m optimistic that we might be able to get something up and running by the  middle of the year.

Allison Langdon: We’re also seeing too that returning Australians could do their quarantine in  Singapore before coming home. Is that accurate? And, also, this morning, that Fiji’s put up  their hand to be part of this?

Tehan: Well, in the first instance, what we’re looking to do is to get a travel bubble up and  operating. Obviously, as the vaccine rolls out, we take the medical advice as to whether we’ll  need to have people quarantine or not - depending on how well the vaccine goes - and  that’ll be up to the medical advice. But, very much in the first instance, what we’re looking at  is to see whether we can get that travel bubble up and going, if we could, with New Zealand  and Singapore. Then we look at other destinations which are safe, as well, and one of the  keys to this is going, making sure that we can get that vaccine passport validated - we know  that it will stand up to integrity - and if we can get that up and running, as well, hopefully  then we will see the expansion of these travel bubbles - New Zealand, Singapore and then,  if we could with Fiji, that’d be wonderful as well.

Stefanovic: You and I were at a Tourism Australia gathering a couple of weeks ago and one  of the biggest issues, as you know, with tourism operators, is trying to get rid of this two-weeks’ quarantine. The balance between that and keeping Australia safe is pretty significant,  obviously, and it’s a very difficult balance. But, how close are we moving towards that, do  you think, realistically?

Tehan: Well, that’s the hope, Karl, that as we get the vaccine rolled out, globally, we would  be able to move to not having people have to do that two-weeks’ quarantine. Now, we will  take the medical advice on that. Obviously, we’re watching, monitoring and looking at the  vaccine rollout globally to see the impact it’s having, especially on the spread of COVID-19.  But, that’s the dream come true, to be able to get to the stage where we’re able to validate  the people who’ve had the vaccine, and then not have that two-weeks’ quarantine. We’re not  there yet, but that would be a great outcome if we could get there.

Langdon: So, what happens in regards to that, with the passport, and being able to prove  that you’ve been vaccinated? Is that something that’s easy to establish?

Tehan: Well, that’s what we want to work with countries on and we think if we can get that  established and in place with New Zealand, if we can get it established and in place with  Singapore, that we know that people have a valid certificate to say that they have been  vaccinated, that will enable that two-way travel to occur, hopefully without quarantining down  the track. And, that’s what we’re working on at the moment. We really want that digital  vaccination passport up and running, operating, and in a way that we know that we can trust  it.

Stefanovic: Yeah. Operators need it, don’t they? Certainly, right now. Meantime, the half-priced flights program isn’t going down well with some of your own colleagues. I mean,  Barnaby Joyce isn’t happy this morning. He’s like a pebble in a sandshoe, isn’t he, Barnaby  Joyce?

Tehan: Yeah. Look, it’s always easy to be a naysayer on these things but, the thing is, this  was all about building confidence and getting people moving again. And, look, what we’ve  seen is remarkable bookings when it comes to the airlines. They saw, in some instances, a  40 per cent increase in bookings, and this is before the program’s even rolled out at the  beginning of March [sic]. So, Karl, I know you agree, because you were there at that  conference where it was so wonderful to see so many people from the tourism sector  together again. What we need to do is get people moving again, have the confidence to  travel. And, we saw a real boost in people’s want and will to travel after that announcement  last week, and we want people to go to as many destinations as possible. We have the most  wonderful tourism destinations in the globe and, you know, I’ve only begun to partly explore  some of them in my role as Australia’s Tourism Minister but every Australian should be  taking this opportunity over the next four to six months to say, ‘This is where I want to go in  Australia,’ and book, do it. We need people to convert intention into actually doing it — and  what we were doing last week was encouraging people to do that.

Langdon: Well, let’s hope with the case in Brisbane and in Sydney that we saw over the  weekend that we don’t see interstate borders shut again, so that we do have people  travelling. But, before you go, Minister, do you have 10 minutes to go to today’s March 4  Justice rally?

Tehan: Look, it’s an incredibly important march that’s taking place today. I’ve said to my staff  that they all should feel free to go. If there is anyone who’s up from my electorate in Western  Victoria, I’ll do what I normally do and I’m more than happy to meet with them. I haven’t been  approached by anyone yet, but in the next two or three hours, if anyone who’s up from  Western Victoria from my electorate who wants to meet with me, I will do that. My mother  was very much a trailblazer in terms of setting up workplaces, as a lawyer in a small country  town, then as a Member of Parliament. This is something that I take incredibly serious. We  want Parliament House to be an exemplar when it comes to being a safe workplace. I know  all my colleagues want that across the political divide so I’ll be very keen, if there’s anyone  up from my electorate who wants to meet with me, to do so.

Langdon: Good stuff. Alright, Minister. We really appreciate your time this morning, and  we’ve got our fingers and toes crossed that we get the travel bubble up and running in July  too.

Stefanovic: Yeah.

Langdon: Sooner than we were hoping. Thank you.

Stefanovic: Thanks, Dan.

Tehan: Thanks.

