



Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck  Minister for Senior Australians and Aged Care Services  Minister for Sport

The Hon Mark Coulton MP  Minister for Regional Health, Regional Communications   and Local Government





4 January 2021



Supporting the World Transplant Games 2023 in Perth



Perth will host the 2023 World Transplant Games in a major sporting coup for Australia.

The Morrison Government today announces it will provide Transplant Australia with $600,000  towards its preparations for the event which is expected to lure more than 1300 athletes and  thousands more supporters from around the world.

Minister for Sport, Richard Colbeck and Minister for Regional Health, Regional  Communications and Local Government Mark Coulton said securing the World Transplant  Games would significantly boost awareness and provide inspiration for transplant recipients  around the world.

“This will be a spectacular showcase of what can be achieved from transplant athletes who have  had either an organ or bone marrow transplant,” Minister Colbeck said.

“The Games are the world’s largest awareness event promoting the importance of organ and  tissue donation and just how high transplant recipients can aim in their recovery.”

Minister Colbeck said it also marked another major sporting event in the same year Australia  will host the FIFA Women’s World Cup.

“Australia has already proven itself as an enviable host of global sporting events and securing  the World Transplant Games serves to reinforce that reputation,” he said.

It will be the third time Australia has hosted the biennial event. Previous World Transplant  Games were held in Sydney in 1997 and the Gold Coast in 2009.

It will also be a triumphant return for the Games after the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in the  cancellation of the 2020 event in Texas.

Previously Australia has fielded teams in 20 of the 21 games, with competition in core sports  including athletics, 3-on-3 basketball, road racing, cycling, darts, badminton, table tennis,  volleyball, petanque, tennis, squash, tenpin bowling, and sprint triathlon.

Lawn bowls, beach volleyball and football are also under consideration.

Minister for Regional Health, Mark Coulton, said hosting the World Transplant Games  provides an opportunity to celebrate Australia’s success stories.

“The games will highlight the importance of organ and tissue donation and will be a good  chance for Australians to consider registering to become a donor and to discuss their  intentions with their family,” Mr Coulton said.

“The games will see many visitors to Perth and Western Australia, and provide a boost for  local businesses, hospitality and tourism.”

World Transplant Games Federation and Transplant Australia CEO, Chris Thomas, said the  event is living proof that donation can lead to those with chronic organ failure living long and  healthy lives.

“After the challenges of 2020 the world’s transplant population will be looking for a host city  that’s modern, with excellent sporting facilities and first class health care services,” Mr  Thomas said. “Perth will be a beautiful destination.

“Australia’s reputation across the world with how we handled the coronavirus pandemic gives  people confidence they will be able to travel here safely to participate in this inspirational  celebration.”

More information about the 2020-21 MYEFO statement is available online:  www.budget.gov.au

To find out more about Transplant Australia and the World Transplant Games see  www.wtgf.org







Media  Minister Colbeck: Aaron Langmaid 0456 889 018  Minister Coulton: Steph Nicholls 0417 314 920

