



Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra





THE HON DAN TEHAN MP  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment

THE HON WARREN ENTSCH MP  Member for Leichhardt

MEDIA RELEASE

8 February 2021

Supporting the Cairns and Port Douglas tourism industry

The Morrison Government is consulting with Cairns and Port Douglas tourism operators to  help ensure the long-term viability of the Far North Queensland tourism industry.

Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment Dan Tehan is in Far North Queensland to meet  with tourism operators, small businesses and representatives of the local industry.

Mr Tehan and Federal Leichhardt MP Warren Entsch will meet with representatives of  Cairns and Port Douglas tourism businesses, marine park tourism operators and the  hospitality sector, as well as advocacy groups Advance Cairns and the Cairns Chamber of  Commerce.

“I want to listen to local tourist operators and understand how state border closures and the  loss of international tourists are impacting them,” Mr Tehan said.

“The Morrison Government is working with the tourism sector, not only in Far North  Queensland, but across Australia on a post-JobKeeper plan for tourism.

“We have already launched a $5 million advertising blitz to encourage Australians to book a  domestic holiday this year to support local jobs and businesses.

“Our Government has also supported the tourism industry through access to JobKeeper and  the $1 billion COVID-19 Relief and Recovery Fund.

“We are contributing $8 million towards the construction of the Wangetti Trail from the  Mowbray River through to Palm Cove. This will include trail construction, upgrades to  bridges, improved campsites and associated infrastructure facilities to make it a significant  tourist attraction.

“The data indicates that people still want to go on holidays, but they are more cautious than  ever. Border restrictions are now a bigger concern than COVID-19 to Australians who are  planning a holiday.

“The re-opening of the Queensland border to NSW will allow more tourists to return to Far  North Queensland and our Government is working with the states and territories to adopt a





Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

consistent approach to border closures and hotspots that will give certainty to tourist  operators and Australians planning their next holiday.”

Mr Entsch said domestic tourism was worth $100 billion to the Australian economy and more  than $2.2 billion annually to the Cairns and Port Douglas economies.

He said Cairns and Port Douglas didn’t have a tourism problem, it had a confidence problem  due to snap border closures.

“Because of Australia’s strong response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we want tourist  destinations like Cairns and Port Douglas to be ready for an influx of visitors when  international travel resumes after the successful rollout of a vaccine,” Mr Entsch said.

“In the meantime, we want Australians to have the confidence to have their next holiday here  in Far North Queensland to support local businesses and local jobs.

“The Morrison Government has provided $2.2 million to tourism operations in Far North  Queensland, including Cairns Zoom and Wildlife Dome, the Australian Butterfly Sanctuary  and Rainforestation Nature Park through the Zoos and Aquariums Grants program.

“If you’re a tourism operation that exhibits animals then I strongly urge you to check your  eligibility for this grant program and apply for funding.

“Tourism is the lifeblood of Cairns and Far North Queensland and I am working on behalf of  everyone in Leichhardt to support our tourism operators and workers.”



ENDS



Media contact:  Tehan: Byron Vale 02 6277 7420 | minister.tehan-media@dfat.gov.au  Entsch: Adam Davies 0417 010 702

