JULIAN HILL MP

DEPUTY CHAIR, JOINT COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT

MEMBER FOR BRUCE





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2SM MARCUS PAUL IN THE MORNING  WEDNESDAY, 13 JANUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Michael McCormack; Facts do matter; JobKeeper, JobSeeker & Demonising  unemployed people; COVID vaccine rollout.

MARCUS PAUL, HOST: Julian Hill MP. Hello, mate.

JULIAN HILL, DEPUTY CHAIR, JOINT COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT;  FEDERAL MEMBER FOR BRUCE: G’Day, mate. How are you?

PAUL: Alright. I mean seriously, Michael McCormack?

HILL: The last few days have been astounding. It's embarrassing. It's occasionally amusing, but it's  actually serious stuff.

He's been Acting Prime Minister for less than a week, and yesterday's running around the country  telling conservatives, indeed telling Australians that facts don't matter. That it's okay to lie now. That  truth is negotiable. It's like that Trump-world nonsense that we have facts and then we have  alternative facts.

But I mean, you know, I know and your listeners know: it's not okay to lie. That's what we teach our  children.

Facts do matter. They underpin science and our public health response to COVID. Facts are not  contentious. As the saying goes: ‘you're entitled to your own opinion, but you're not entitled to your  own facts.’

But in Michael McCormack world now, something that's clearly false is apparently true or vice versa.

It is actually serious stuff. This is no ordinary time. We've seen the consequences of the dissent to  this madness last week in the U. S. Capitol - the violent insurrection - I couldn't believe the scenes I  was seeing in this bastion of democracy, our greatest ally and partner, descending into this  madness.

And, you know, Michael MacCormack needs to grow up and actually call out this rubbish from  George Christensen and Craig Kelly and the like.

Facts do matter. Truth does matter. We have to have these.

PAUL: Alright. Putting US politics aside for now. Uh, because look, I'm gonna be honest with you,  Julian. I think the vast majority of people listening to you and I at the moment are more concerned  about things like JobKeeper, JobSeeker and the fact that an Acting Prime Minister has the hide and  the audacity to tell basically unemployed Australians - and a lot of people are unemployed through  no fault of their own, because of COVID19.

What's he offered as a solution to their dilemma as the government strip back JobSeeker? Well, just  go bush! Turn off Netflix and Stan and head bush. That's where the job is. I mean it might be  seasonal work, but off you go. He’s in LaLa land, isn't he?

HILL: He's playing to prejudice and stereotype. I mean, I represent an electorate in Melbourne with a  high unemployment rate for a range of reasons. People are desperate for work. The vast majority of  people I meet and I see who are on JobKeeper or JobSeeker are just surviving. They're desperate to  work. They apply for dozens of jobs a week. They can't get them. And, sure, in any group of  humans, there's a few lazy folk at the bottom. But you can't tar the majority was that kind of  stereotype. It's offensive.

PAUL: Well, I think so. It's degrading and the inference is that people who - a lot of them as we point  out through no fault of their own - find themselves on JobKeeper during this pandemic. I mean to  refer to them literally as lounge lizards who do nothing all day but binge on Netflix. I mean, that's just  ridiculous.

HILL: It is ridiculous. And the government's got to take some responsibility. What you just said  before is spot on. A lot of these jobs unfilled in regional Australia, they are critical work - there is a  crisis, no doubt in many sectors - but it's seasonal work.

It is simply not realistic to expect a single mother with a couple of kids who's unemployed to  somehow up from the Melbourne suburbs to drive 2000 kilometres to somewhere where she doesn't  have a house. She's got 500 bucks in the bank if she's lucky, and somehow go fruit picking for four  months. It it's just ridiculous and offensive.

PAUL: I agree. Absolutely alright, mate. Look, I spoke to Albo, the other day - the boss reckons  you're all getting set for perhaps an election year. What's your feeling on this?

HILL: Well, you know, we'll be ready for an election whenever it's called. Whether it's later this year  or the year after. We've used our time under Albo’s leadership well.  We've got policies developed  ready to start rolling out. We've already put big ideas out there on childcare, on rewiring the nation,  shifting to renewable energy and cheaper clean of power, bringing manufacturing back onshore.

We will get in the contest of ideas and we'll be competitive whenever an election is called. But right  now, our job is, quite rightly, to hold the government to account for its failings. Endless  announcements, but not delivering.

And you know, the vaccine is a good example. Scott Morrison's been running around telling us  ‘We're leading the world and we're at the front of the queue’. And ‘we've got enough vaccines - three  times over’. This stuff is just not true. We're way behind, and there's two continents in the world right  now where you can't get a vaccine. That's Australia and Antarctica. They really need to focus on  governing and lifting their game.

PAUL: You're right. I mean, I almost fell over when he [Scott Morrison] said ‘we were at the fore  front in the fight against COVID19’. Look credit where it's due. Obviously, we have been very well so  far as numbers are concerned, but, I agree. We need to get this vaccine rolled out as soon as  possible. And if it's available, then why the hell isn't it here? If the prime minister claims that were at  the you know, the top of the pack quite clearly, we're not.

HILL: Well, Albo called for it to start earlier. Remember a few weeks ago and the Prime Minister was  running around saying we were foolish and dangerous for this? Well, look, a couple of days later, he  started saying, ‘Oh, we need to roll it out earlier’.

I mean, you can't believe anything this bloke says. It's all spin and marketing. But it's serious stuff.  There's quarantine workers, health workers, nurses, doctors. They deserve the most urgent access  we can safely get to a vaccine, and we're behind the rest of the world at the moment.

The Prime Minister's covering up his own failure to plan and organise with this nonsense marketing  spin. So they really need to focus on what matters and actually behave like a government.

PAUL: Julian, I look forward to our chats during 2021. Happy New Year. We will catch up again next  week.

HILL: No worries. Same to you, Marcus.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: CAM GREEN 0406 507 727

