

JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS AM AGENDA

MONDAY, 12 APRIL 2021



SUBJECTS: Morrison’s bungled vaccine rollout and the economic recovery; Deloitte

Access Economics Report; Minimum Wage Freeze.



LAURA JAYES, HOST: Joining me now live is the Shadow Treasurer, Jim Chalmers. Jim

Chalmers. Thanks so much for your time. Do you accept now that there are so many moving

parts in this vaccine rollout that it is difficult for the government to give any kind of target?



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: Good morning, Laura. This has been a shambles

from the beginning, unfortunately, and even worse that it's been a shambles in predictable

ways. We said for some time that the government was too focused on announcements and on

marketing and not focused enough on delivery, on planning and on making sure that we had

enough deals, so that when these sorts of bumps in the road came along, the government

could deal with that. Now we're seeing the fruits of that inability to deliver. We've gone from, in

the usual way, the big over promise to the big under deliver, then we went through the finger

pointing phase, and now the government seems to have abandoned any sense of giving the

Australian people confidence or a plan on how this vaccine will be rolled out. That will have

consequences for people's health, obviously, but also for the economy more broadly.



JAYES: What consequences are you talking about for the economy?



CHALMERS: If you look at that story that you just ran from the UK, there's lots that you can

criticise the UK about when it comes to the handling of the virus, but they are many streets

ahead of Australia when it comes to the deployment of the vaccine. As you can see from that

story, that means that businesses can open up again, and we've said for some time, as has

the government, that the economic recovery depends on getting the vaccine away. You can't

have a first rate economic recovery with a third rate vaccine rollout. It risks more lockdowns for

longer. The government now won't even say that people will get a vaccination this year, which

is pretty extraordinary given the commitments, the promises and the announcements that

they've made before now. So we don't want to see lockdowns for longer than is necessary and

the key to that is the competent rollout of the vaccine. Unfortunately, the government's shown

themselves unwilling to roll it out competently so far.



JAYES: I think many Australians are grateful that the virus hasn't taken hold in Australia like it

has in many other countries, including the UK, but we are it seems still one week away from

lockdowns and we saw that in Brisbane just two weeks ago. Can you ascertain how many

people would need to be vaccinated in Australia for us to at least avoid those lockdowns here

before we even get to starting to thinking about opening up the borders?



CHALMERS: I think those are matters for the experts Laura and I think throughout COVID-19,

what we've tried to be whether it's Anthony Albanese, or Chris Bowen, and now Mark Butler is

as constructive as possible in listening to the advice of the experts. It's up to them to decide

when the vaccine is sufficiently deployed, and broadly enough deployed to prevent some of

these kinds of lockdowns. But in general, it's been clear for some time, that the only way to

eliminate those kinds of lockdowns is to get the vaccine broadly, effectively and safely

deployed. We want the Australian people to have confidence in the deployment of the vaccine.

It's in everybody's interest for us to do that, as a nation. The government's inability to do that

will be costly in terms of confidence, unfortunately, also costly in terms of the economic

recovery and that means costly for jobs.



JAYES: I mean, it's a very difficult path for you to walk though, isn't Jim Chalmers? I mean,

here you are talking down the government's vaccine rollout and I think there are legitimate

criticisms here. But do you have to be careful not to undermine that confidence as well, not just

in the vaccine rollout, but in our economic recovery?



CHALMERS: Our task here is to be constructive and we have been, and to be critical where

that's warranted. Every Australian has an interest in our country deploying the vaccine

effectively. I think it's a matter of public record now that it has been a shambles under this

Morrison Government, we want the government to do better. We want the government to

succeed here because if they do, the country can recover more effectively. Our issue here is

that the government doesn't seem to understand the consequences of pulling support out of

the economy too quickly and rolling the vaccine out too slowly. They're too out of touch to

understand what that means in real communities in terms of not just jabs, but also jobs. Our

job is to keep the government up to the mark. It's not us that made the commitment that the

government fell well short of. It's not us that over promised and under delivered, then pointed

the finger and now has abandoned any sense of a plan or any sense of a target whatsoever. I

think most Australians understand when they look around the world and they read the news

and watch the news that other countries have been so much more successful than Australia

deploying this vaccine. I think the worry in the community is that having done the right thing by

each other to limit the spread of this virus more effectively than most other places on the

planet, that the government risks squandering those advantages by being so hopeless when it

comes to deploying the vaccine itself.



JAYES: I mean, the economy is doing pretty well, under the circumstances. Deloitte is just the

latest to hand down a report today that paints a pretty rosy picture of our economic recovery,

even after JobKeeper has ended. Do you accept that we're at a pretty good position at the

moment and that now was the time to end JobKeeper?



CHALMERS: A few things about that. First of all, we want the economy to recover strongly,

but broadly as well, and we don't want people left behind. That economic recovery that Deloitte

Access Economics is talking about today is expected, it's welcome but it's also patchy. As the

report authors point out, the recovery is hostage to the bungled vaccine rollout, it’s hostage to

the withdrawal of government support, like JobKeeper and its hostage to the government's

approach to wages and incomes. We've had record low wages growth in this country, for much

of the life of this eight year old government. The Deloitte report says that will get worse before

it gets better. It says record low wages growth will actually fall further. That will be devastating

for the economy. So we can acknowledge, there have been some pleasing developments in

the economy. I always acknowledge and welcome when we get a good piece of data that says

that the economy is rebounding. But we need to recognise at the same time that it's not a

recovery in the economy if there's not a recovery in wages. It's not a recovery in the economy,

if people are still being left behind or can't find enough hours to provide for their loved ones.

These are challenges that have been around for much of the last eight years, not just because

of COVID. The report points to those issues as well and issues around business investment

and productivity and the like the list goes on and on and on. So what we say is, yes, we

welcome a recovery in the economy but don't forget, there are 2 million people unemployed or

underemployed and let's try and make the economy stronger after COVID than it was before.



JAYES: Just finally and quickly on wages growth. Of course, the Fair Work Commission sets

the minimum wage. We know wages growth is very slow, we know it has been for years, small

businesses are still struggling, they're going to take a while to recover from COVID. What do

you propose the minimum wage should be?



CHALMERS: As you know, Laura, having asked this question of me and others for a long time

now we put forward an in principle view about wages rather than putting a specific number on

it. We think a wage freeze, which has been advocated for by others, would be devastating for

an economy that desperately needs spending power. Our small businesses desperately need

people to have a wage increase, so that they can spend in their shops and obviously, workers

as well need a pay rise. They deserve it after all that they've been through. We think that there

are other ways to support businesses which are genuinely struggling, we've made our view

clear about parts of the economy which still need JobKeeper support and other kinds of

support. But I think there's a real inconsistency from the government here. The government

always wants to cut wages, that’s what we see in industrial relations and penalty rate cuts, but

their argument seems to be that things are so bad that business can’t afford to give a decent

pay rise at the same time as things are going so well that the economy doesn't need support.

They can't argue both those things simultaneously. We've said that the Fair Work Commission

needs to come up with a balanced view. We said that Australians deserve a pay rise,

particularly low paid Australians who've done so much to help us through COVID-19. We can

say that while recognising that for those small businesses that still need a hand the

government should provide it.



JAYES: Jim Chalmers appreciate your time. Thanks so much.



CHALMERS: Thank you, Laura. Appreciate it.



ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: NATHAN JOHNSTON 0488 176 452



