

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT HOUSE, ACT  WEDNESDAY 17 MARCH 2021



EO&E…

PRIME MINISTER: Good morning, everyone. I'm joined by Minister Payne and Minister Seselja, the  Minister for the Pacific, and of course the Chief Medical Officer, Professor Kelly. I'll just, in advance, I don't  have leave for the Parliament this morning so if the bells ring then you'll, of course, excuse me if I have to  depart.

Throughout the course of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have always been extremely concerned for our  Pacific family, for our neighbours, and over the course of this last year, the Pacific community has done  such an extraordinary job to substantively keep their islands free of COVID-19. But we've known that that  challenge was always going to be too great for Papua New Guinea as time went on. And that, indeed, is  proving to be the case now. Now, I've become in contact with Prime Minister Marape very consistently  over the course of the COVID-19 pandemic and particularly in recent days and the events we're seeing  there are of great concern, great concern for them and the challenges that they now face. But I want to  assure the people of Papua New Guinea and my dear friend James Marape that Australians as always will  stand with them as they meet this challenge and support them in every way that we possibly can.

Now, it is also true that the escalation of issues with the virus in Papua New Guinea presents very real  risks to Australia as well. This is a matter that we've been regularly addressing at National Cabinet and  particularly between Premier Palaszczuk and I, as we've been very conscious of the risks that are present  there. That has included, on medical advice, as well as advice from the Australian Border Force, increasing  our activities in the Torres Strait. It has also included moving forward through the Queensland Department  of Health to already commence vaccinations in the Torres Strait Islands to ensure that we're boosting  protection for that very vulnerable part of Australia and the impact on northern Australia. We've already  taken action to ensure there is pre-departure testing of people coming out of Papua New Guinea into  Australia at 96 hours and in addition to that, we recently suspended flights, charter flights, Ok Tedi Mine  where there has been a high incidence of those working in that mine testing positive.

But we now need to do more and we will do more. On the basis of medical advice and the on the basis of  discussions I've had with Prime Minister Marape over the last few days and with the Premier of  Queensland, we are taking the following actions to support the initiatives in Papua New Guinea and also  to protect Australians from the spread of the virus from Papua New Guinea to Australia, and in particular,

protect Queenslanders. Queenslanders, particularly in North Queensland, are most at risk from this.  We've been very conscious of that and these measures are decided very much with them in mind. Starting  at midnight tonight, we will further reduce the risk of COVID-19 transmission from PNG to Australia by  suspending passenger flights from Papua New Guinea into Cairns. We will do that for a fortnight and  reassess the situation over the next fortnight. Freight, though, I stress, will continue, and be supported to  ensure that necessary supplies are able to get from Cairns to Papua New Guinea. We’ll be suspending all  charter flights from Papua New Guinea to Australia, with limited exemptions for medevac and other  critical flights. We'll be reducing the passenger caps by one-quarter from flights from Port Moresby to  Brisbane, effective at midnight tonight. We'll be suspending all outbound travel exemptions by Australians  to Papua New Guinea, except for essential and critical workers, including humanitarian and medevac-related activity. This will include no general FIFO work. You FI or you FO. If you're there, you stay. If you're  here, you stay. We cannot risk more people going into those areas and then coming back to Australia. We  will work with PNG also over the course of the next fortnight to move as quickly as we can to move from  a 96-hour pre-departure screening to a 24-hour pre-departure screening. We will also be beefing up the  medical support we're providing by gifting essential PPE to PNG. That includes 1 million surgical masks,  200,000 P295 respirator masks, 100,000 gowns, 100,000 goggles, 100,000 pairs of gloves, 100,000 bottles  of sanitiser, 20,000 face shields and 200 non-invasive ventilators.

Our Government will also be moving immediately to gift 8,000 doses of our COVID-19 vaccine stocks from  our domestic stocks to support the vaccination of front front-line health workers in PNG from next week.  With the support of the PNG government, we're making a formal request to AstraZeneca and the  European authorities to access one million doses of our contracted supplies of AstraZeneca not for  Australia, but for PNG, a developing country in desperate need of these vaccines. We've contracted them.  We've paid for them and we want to see those vaccines come here so we can support our nearest  neighbour, PNG, to deal with their urgent needs in our region and we'll be seeking the support of the  European Union and AstraZeneca to achieve that as soon as possible.

With the agreement of PNG government, we are deploying a critical-planning AUSMAT team to PNG next  week to establish and prepare plans for COVID health care needs in PNG and set the grounds for further  deployment of a clinical health care team in coming weeks. We'll also be seeking assistance, pursuant to  the Quad meeting we had last week, from our Quad partners to provide assistance, technical and  otherwise, with the rollout of this program. In the Torres Strait Islands, we will continue as a matter of  urgency to support the efforts of the Queensland Health department in the vaccination of the Torres Strait  and we'll be increasing the visibility of the presence of the Border Force in managing that border. But  importantly, after I think very good discussions with the Queensland Premier last night and I thank her for  her cooperation as we worked out the details of and also in cooperation with the PNG government to  support a vaccine rollout in PNG's western province with a focus on supporting vaccinations in what is  known as the treaty villages. They're the villages that are literally just on the other side of the Torres Strait.  And those treaty villages act as a single community effectively with the communities of the Torres Strait  Island. There is much movement back and forward in that part of the world and we want to extend the  protection net of the vaccinations that are going across the Torres Strait Island into those treaty villages.  In addition to that, I've said to Prime Minister Marape that we're keen to support in the provision of  supplies and other necessities into those villages which would prevent and remove the need for them to  travel to other parts of Papua New Guinea where the COVID virus is more present than it currently is in  those treaty villages. So that work in the vaccinations would be undertaken by the Queensland  Government in the same way that they're currently doing that in the Torres Strait Islanders' communities.  The other vaccines and programs in Port Moresby and other parts of the country, Daru and so on, would  be part of the vaccination plan that I have already referred to. In addition, this builds on the $80 million

contribution that we have made to the COVAX facility for advance market commitment for developing  countries. The COVAX facility has indicated it will deliver some 588,000 vaccines for PNG by June. And  since the beginning of this pandemic, we've already provided well over $60 million in assistance to PNG  to respond to this crisis.

They're our family. They're our friends. They're our neighbours. They're our partners. They have always  stood with us and we will always stand with them. This is in Australia's interests and it is in our region's  interests and it's incumbent on us as Australians both in securing the health of our own citizens but equally  of our PNG family who are so dear to us. I'll ask Professor Kelly to explain more of the medical situation  and the Foreign Minister to speak to the foreign affairs issue.

PROFESSOR PAUL KELLY, CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER: Thanks, PM. So as the PM has outlined, our near  neighbour in Papua New Guinea is extremely close to the northern part of Australia. So from Saibai Island  you can actually see the southern coast of Papua New Guinea, where the treaty villages are. So it's very  close. That first step of rolling out the vaccine in the Torres Strait to anyone in the Torres Strait, including  our ADF workers and others who are up there, is a very important component of this. Just in terms of the  medical rationale for this, of course it's the right thing to do, as the PM mentioned, but it's also in  Australia's interest to work with Papua New Guinea in this time. Over the last couple of weeks, very rapidly  the situation has changed in Papua New Guinea. We’ve seen of the cases that have been diagnosed in  PNG, half of them have been diagnosed in the last couple of weeks from the beginning of the pandemic.  Recognising that they did not have the resources for mass testing like we have in Australia, and so any  number you see out of Papua New Guinea in terms of cases and even deaths will be a major  underestimate. So there is a big outbreak of COVID-19 in Papua New Guinea. We know this from the  places that are able to be dong testing. The PM has mentioned the Ok Tedi Mine, they’ve done mass  testing there and almost half the samples are positive. They are finding the same when people are being  admitted into hospital in Port Moresby, half of women who are coming in due to pregnancy are positive.  We’re seeing a large number of healthcare workers on the front lines in Papua New Guinea now coming  down with COVID-19. These are all signs that there is a major epidemic in the community.

So that’s what’s happening in PNG. We are concerned about that because an uncontrolled pandemic is  how variants of concern come to light. That would be not only a major problem for PNG but also for us  and the region, if there was a PNG strain to develop, for example. We don't have any indication of that at  the moment. The genomics analysis we've done does not show a variant of concern but it is important for  us to assist to get that outbreak under control. More proximately, we've seen an increase in the last couple  of weeks of people coming from PNG into Queensland. In Queensland they have a policy of putting all  positive cases into hospital. They've doubled the number of people in hospital from overseas arrivals in  Queensland just in the last 10 days. So that is the pressure that's going onto the Queensland Health system  and that's why these things make sense to do. There are now, so since 15 March, there have been 32  cases from PNG imported into Australia, into Queensland and 13 are currently being managed in hospitals  in Queensland. So these are the reasons why this has been my advice to the Prime Minister to make these  decisions, to support on the ground assist to turn off the top, if you like, in terms of cases coming from  PNG and all of that assistance will give, it's not only the right thing to do but it will also protect Australia.

PRIME MINISTER: Thank you. Minister Payne?

SENATOR THE HON. MARISE PAYNE, MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIR AND WOMEN: Thanks very much,  Prime Minister. Thank you very much, Dr Kelly. I want to reinforce the Prime Minister's observations about  the focus we have had since the onset of the pandemic on our close partnerships, our work with our

Pacific family on their priorities in terms of COVID-19 response. Firstly, the pivoting of our development  assistance programme in partnerships for recovery. Importantly, our bilateral COVID-19 response plans  and most recently our vaccine commitments in relation to Pacific and of course South-East Asia. With the  Papua New Guinea government in addressing these issues, we've been engaging regularly and in depth  with senior leaders. The Prime Minister, with his counterpart, Prime Minister Marape. I've been speaking  with the Health Minister Jetta Wong, both personally and regularly by message in terms of updates on  their response actions and that engagement has taken place across the Australian Government as well.  Our High Commission in Port Moresby is participating in Papua New Guinea's COVID-19 technical working  group and attending meetings at the most senior levels with the High Commissioner and his senior  Counsel staff. Our Indo-Pacific centre for health security is coordinating our health security response in  the region, including with Papua New Guinea.

I really want to emphasise that the work we are doing and the work we're announcing today is in  partnership with Papua New Guinea, based on their priorities and their needs and we have identified  those four very immediate measures that the Prime Minister has spoken about in terms of the vaccine  response and a number of other supplies - tents, PPE and the AUSMAT team. The AUSMAT team which  will be in country on Monday next week, we expect will also do the ground work for the clinical response  team, which will follow then. The 8,000 doses of vaccines that we have referred to this morning will fill a  critical gap in advance of Papua New Guinea's receipt of its vaccines from the COVAX facility. They are  expected in Papua New Guinea in April and then further doses in May. So this gap for front-line workers  will be absolutely essential for those people to be able to continue to do the job that they are doing. We  are also providing Papua New Guinea through the vaccine program we have announced $144 million to  support their PNG vaccine program and its rollout.

The Prime Minister has referred to the Torres Strait. We're obviously dealing with close family and cultural  connections between those traditional inhabitants of the villages within the Torres Strait protected zone  and therefore paying particular attention to the needs of those treaty villages. I want to acknowledge our  colleague Warren Entsch, the Member for Leichhardt, who has been fundamental in engaging with  communities in the region, engaging with leadership in the region, and being very clear about their  concerns and their needs. I also want to again acknowledge the Queensland Health system for their  undertaking and their engagement with us on addressing these issues in the Torres Strait. This will need  to be a shared vaccination effort.

These measures that we’re announcing today fit well with a carefully coordinated approach that we are  take being other partners, first and foremost in this case our partners in the Papua New Guinea  government. But also other international partners, including recently the Quad leaders meeting  undertaking on vaccines from last Saturday with Australia, India, Japan and the United States. Under the  agreement that was made at the Quad leaders meeting, our four democracies have set out a very  ambitious but very practical and positive agenda on COVID-19 vaccines. That includes an increased $100  million contribution from Australia on top of the over $500 million contribution we announced last year  and as the Prime Minister referred to, our support for the COVAX facility. In Papua New Guinea, that will  mean working with Japan, with India and with the United States in relation to what support we can provide  together. Whether that is technical support, whether that is work through UNICEF, who is one of our key  partners in the delivery of vaccines in the region, those conversations have started and we will continue  those through the centre for regional health security and other officials with our Quad partners. Thanks,  Prime Minister.

PRIME MINISTER: Thank you. Can I also echo my thanks to Warren Entsch. He's been a champion for  people of the Torres Strait, not just on the Australian side of the border but right across the western  province.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, does PNG have enough doctors and nurses to deal with this crisis? Have  they requested Australia’s help in supplying some frontline health workers or is the risk just considered  too great?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, the capacity to manage COVID-19 in a developing country is starkly different to  what it is in an advanced country like Australia. I think that's an understood starting point. One of the key  reasons we are setting up the advance planning team next week is to assess and triage what the potential  needs are to support Papua New Guinea in any further questions it might make. It's an important point,  Mark, that I think you stress - this is Papua New Guinea's initiative. This is their response and we are  seeking to support them with the priorities that they're setting out and so by having that team up there  next week, I think that will greatly assist in framing what those additional needs are.

SENATOR THE HON. MARISE PAYNE, MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIR AND WOMEN: Prime Minister, if I  can also say, mark, there's also about more than half a dozen other actions, specific actions which will be  laid out in our media statement that we're working on on the ground in Port Moresby with the Papua New  Guinea authorities there. We supplied 200,000 face masks for the period of the Somare state services and  funeral burial period. We're working with the WHO on expanding warehouse capacity so we have storage  facilities for that PPE and we can streamline its distribution. We are supplying hospital tent facilities  outside Port Moresby General Hospital for safe triaging and referral and transfer of patients so there's a  better throughput there. Supporting St John's Papua New Guinea and the National Capital District  Provincial Health Authority to establish one of their aquatic centres as an isolation facility for mild to  moderate caseless that has an up to 120 bed capacity. We're also funding support for the reopening of  the Rita Flynn testing and isolation facility which will relieve pressure on Port Moresby General Hospital  and also the St John's Ambulance COVID-19 operations in Port Moresby. This includes patient transport,  COVID-19 testing and PPE distribution. Supporting their COVID-19 national control centre which Prime  Minister Marape visited himself this week and the High Commissioner is closely engaged with. With their  information management, their risk communications, their quarantine management and health financing  and making sure that we're supporting surveillance, testing and clinical care capacity in Port Moresby and  the provinces with known outbreaks, so not just Port Moresby and, of course, testing of samples in  Australia. That sample testing is something we've been doing right through the pandemic.

JOURNALIST: Are there going to be qualified people?

SENATOR THE HON. MARISE PAYNE, MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIR AND WOMEN: So the PNG health  system is supported in its own capacity, obviously. The AUSMAT team will be part of that analysis and  they will do a critical needs analysis when they arrive next week. There are also a significant number of  NGOs, including ISOS, including the WHO, who have presence on the ground and have medical  professionals on the ground as well.

PRIME MINISTER: There will be a clinical team that will be following as well and that's what the advance  team will be preparing for.

JOURNALIST: There's something like 10 million people in Papua New Guinea. We've heard Professor Kelly  talking about the possibility of mutations and PNG strains coming out of there. I think there's a million  COVAX jabs coming. How is this going to be enough?

PRIME MINISTER: This is a significant challenge, there is no doubt about that and we're seeing these  challenges experienced in many developing countries within our region. So our response is twofold. One  is to provide as much support in partnership, whether it's the Quad or other partners in the region. The  second is to ensure that we're protecting Australia's borders, and we’re protecting access into Australia  to prevent any transmission from these areas into Australia and in particular into Queensland. So I think  the forward deployment of vaccinations, particularly into the treaty villages, which is a key point of  interaction, I think, will be a very achievable and very practical way of addressing that immediate need to  effectively provide, and extend the ring of containment beyond the Torres Strait Islands on our side of the  border into those more sensitive parts of the Western Province. But there is no doubt that as time goes  on, we will be increasing further support into Papua New Guinea and we will be doing that in partnership  with them. But our expectations are realistic in working with any developing country. We're seeing this in  many developing countries around the world. I've said consistently going back to the G20 last year when  we first discussed these matters, that we need to be mindful of the severe limitations of developing  countries in addressing this virus. We’re seeing it in Africa and we’re seeing it in other parts of the world  and we need to ensure that we get vaccines to these places. That’s why I'll be appealing to the European  Union to let the vaccines go that we have contracted for, so we can get that help to Papua New Guinea  and every other vaccine we can get out of Europe, that's where I'll send it. I'll send it straight there and to  our other partners in the Pacific to ensure we're doing everything we possibly can. But we need their help  to do it. We need them to lift the block.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, PNG is coming out of a period of mourning for their late Prime Minister  Michael Somare. How much have the ceremonial arrangements affected the timing of this response? And  secondly, PNG shares a land border with Papua, which obviously has strong transport links to the islands  of Indonesia, and very a populous country to our near north. How do you assess the implications for  Indonesia of this outbreak and for the ongoing security implications for Australia should there be a new  outbreak in Indonesia?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, the burial of Sir Michael, which was taking place yesterday, I actually spoke to  James as he was accompanying Sir Michael's body to the site, and so you can understand that this comes  at a time of deep mourning and grief for the people of Papua New Guinea. But this action is not in any  way connected to that action. That is a terribly sad event all of its own. But it is incidental to the support  because we have been working on this now for some days and we've been seeing the escalation in the  case numbers. Now, in terms of the cooperation between Indonesian and Papua New Guinean authorities,  this has been a topic over the past year. That has been a subject of conversations I've had with President  Widodo. Indonesia has its own challenges when it comes to addressing COVID in their own country and I  have no doubt that they'll be observing this very closely and working closely with the Papua New Guinean  government. I mean, the terrain along that border is not like you can compare to, say, the Western  Australia border with South Australia. The geography is a little different. But that's why we, in looking at  particularly the issues in the Western Province, say, from Australia's risk, we understand how the Western  Province and the Torres Strait act as an effective community and this is why I'm very grateful to Warren  Entsch, because he brings that local understanding after 25 years he's been a member of this place and in  many cases, he's been the member for the Western Province in our own Parliament. And I think he's done  a fantastic job alerting us and the medical authorities to these issues and working closely with us on how  we can make this practically work on the ground.



JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you mentioned there will be an increased awareness campaign about  vaccination in the Torres Strait Islands, I think. You talked about awareness as well and perhaps Professor  Kelly as well. How concerned are you about increased vaccine hesitancy, perhaps in those communities  and in the wider Australian communities, as we're seeing European governments decide to pause rollouts  and so on?

PRIME MINISTER: I'll get Professor Kelly to also speak on this. But we've already begun vaccinations in the  Torres Strait and Saibai Island yesterday, I think it was. That's going very well. We are aware that in Papua  New Guinea that there's hesitancy in that community for a range of reasons and we'll seek to support the  Papua New Guinean government in addressing those issues. In terms of the AstraZeneca vaccines,  Professor Kelly and Professor Skerritt have been very clear about the Australian medical experts' view  about that and we're pleased that today, there will be 1,000 GPs signing up. 1,000 GPs signing up to be in  the next phase of this rollout of AstraZeneca across Australia. So critical, so critical for Australia's success  this year in protecting the health of Australians across the country. Paul?

PROFESSOR PAUL KELLY, CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER: So of course we're always concerned about vaccine  hesitancy but as I said very strongly yesterday and I'm not alone in saying this, I have no concern about  the AstraZeneca and specifically the blood clot issue that's emerged in Europe. Overnight, the European  Medical Agency head said the same thing as the WHO and the UK regulator, the TGA here in Australia,  myself and many other experts in these matters, that we should look at the background rate of issues as  we roll out mass vaccination programs like this. Things will happen because they happen. It doesn't mean  that they're related to the vaccine. In terms of the Torres Strait specifically, my understanding is the  update is strong. They understand the threat so they are getting vaccinated.

PRIME MINISTER: Chris?

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I’m just going to ask on another matter, what's your response to Nicolle  Flint's speech last night?

PRIME MINISTER: Look, I'd like to stay on PNG matters to be honest but given I've got to go in a couple of  minutes because I have an international call that I have to attend, I think she's an incredibly brave woman.  I think she's incredibly brave. I know how brave she was because I was there with her as she endured one  of the ugliest campaigns I've ever seen waged against not just a woman but anyone in this country. And  her determination to stand up to that in the face of the most vitriolic of abuse, stalking and threats to her  own public security was just absolutely appalling. And I just am amazed at the Labor Party and the unions  and GetUp just stood by and let that happen. They were aware. They saw it. They were happy to be  advantaged by it and I think she's called it out well and I think she's an incredibly strong woman. We're  very sad she won't be running again at the next election. But I can understand after having gone through  such a traumatic experience that she would form that view. She indicated that to me last year when we  were reshuffling the Cabinet and the ministry, and she asked not to be considered at that time. I think she  would have been an outstanding member of the Executive, to be honest. Sadly, we won’t have that  opportunity. But I think she has blazed a trail for many other women in the Liberal Party to come forward.  Phil?

JOURNALIST: Just back on the vaccination thing, if the Europeans don't come to the party on your request  to send us the vaccine for which we have paid for, will you be prepared to divert some domestic

production to PNG? And how would you respond to the inevitable criticisms about giving vaccines to  foreigners ahead of Australia that will come from that?

PRIME MINISTER: Twofold. I expect and would hope to get the cooperation out of Europe for this. We've  all said that we need to get vaccines where they're needed. This is not Australia seeking to do this for our  own direct benefit, although we've contracted them and you would expect them to be supplied otherwise.  But we're not factoring those into the additional supplies into the vaccination programme that Professor  Murphy and I outlined to you on Sunday. So this would enable us to direct those supplies into Papua New  Guinea and indeed into other parts of the Pacific if needed. Those vaccines and their deployment would  therefore, I think, be following through on the very public statements that have been made in the  European Union about their commitment to ensure that there is no vaccine protectionism and that  vaccines do go to those most in need and that's why we're putting that forward. And on the question of  diverting from Australian supplies, those supplies wouldn't be, but we have already, as I outlined on  Sunday, indicated that we would be doing that. There was a supply of our own produced vaccines that  were already factored into the distribution in the weeks ahead and that will continue. I don't think  Australians have a problem with that. I think when we're talking about our own home, which PNG is part  of, our own family, our Pacific neighbours, I think Australians understand that that is one of our  responsibilities and as an advanced nation that has had such incredible success in managing the impact of  the COVID-19 pandemic, I think they would be generous in spirit. I mean, we all know the Kokoda story.  They were there for us. We will be there for them. Thank you all very much.

[ENDS]

Media Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

Press Office of the Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Prime Minister, Canberra



