

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN



TERRI BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT AND WATER

MEMBER FOR GRIFFITH





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

BRISBANE

THURSDAY, 11 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Visit to Queensland; Labor’s policy agenda; industrial relations; insecure

work; Labor’s Secure Australian Jobs Plan; Cross River Rail; Government’s rorts;

vaccine rollout.



MARK BAILEY, QUEENSLAND MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT AND MAIN ROADS: Look,

it's great to be here. It's a real pleasure to welcome Anthony Albanese, or Albo, as everyone

knows him as. Albo has had a long history backing in the Cross River Rail project. This project

would be built if the LNP government at the time had agreed to the deal offered by the Deputy

Prime Minister, Anthony Albanese. And, unfortunately, we saw that lack of commitment in

infrastructure manifest. So, it was left to a Labor Government to 100 per cent fund this Cross

River Rail project, the Palaszczuk Labor Government getting it done with a peak of 3,000

workers on this project this year, because we got $0 from the Federal Government, no

partnership from the Liberal Party for jobs here in southeast Queensland. He has been a huge

advocate of this project for more than a decade. It's a real pleasure to have Albo here. Not just

here, but also right across Queensland this week where he's been a great friend of this state.

We saw huge increases in Bruce Highway funding when he was the Minister and also the

Deputy Prime Minister. And it is a great pleasure to have you here, Albo. I believe Terri Butler

will speak next. Terri?



TERRI BUTLER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT AND WATER: Thanks,

Minister. And thanks to everyone for being here at Cross River Rail in the electorate of Griffith,

my electorate, wonderful place here on the inner south of Brisbane. I'm so excited to be back

here at Cross River Rail, a site that the Palaszczuk Labor Government has been working on

delivering so well. And it's great to be here with Mark Bailey, who has been an excellent

minister, continuing to live up for our state. And, of course, it's wonderful to be here with Jim

Chalmers and Anthony Albanese. Great to have Anthony back in my electorate again. He's

such a strong supporter of Queenslanders. And if you're looking for someone who will stand up

for jobs, Anthony Albanese and Labor are on your side. I also want to mention to you a story of

the day that is really important because it goes to the question of Morrison Government waste.

Today, the Productivity Commission has issued a scathing indictment on this Government's

capacity to deliver water infrastructure. In fact, they've singled out one project for criticism,

Dungowan Dam, near Tamworth, that's expected to deliver water at $60,000 a megalitre per

year when actually the market price is $1341. That's almost 45 times more than the going rate.

The Morrison Government is absolutely hopeless when it comes to managing your money.

And they're absolutely prone to wasting your money. And I know that if we elect Anthony

Albanese and a Labor Government in the future, we're going to have a much better

Government, one that stands up for Queenslanders, one that stands up for Australians and is

on your side. So I'm just delighted to welcome Anthony. Let's talk to him.



ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Well, thanks very

much, Terri. And this is the sixth day of my visit here in Queensland. And I've got a message

for Queenslanders, which is that I'm on your side. Last night, I delivered a speech speaking

about our plan for job security, our plan for better pay and fair conditions. It's been well

received by workers last night. And it comes from my experience going around, not just this

state, but right around the country, listening to workers about their concerns about growing job

insecurity. We have clear messages for the people of Queensland and for all workers, which is

that our priority is jobs. Not just any job, but good jobs. Jobs that provide security. Security to

get a home loan. Security to plan for your family. And this project here is a great example of

one that ticks all the boxes. As Terri said, when I was Deputy Prime Minister, we had funding

for this project in the Budget. It was ready to go. We had an MOU signed with the Queensland

Government. But Campbell Newman and Tony Abbott, the Coalition Government both

Queensland and federally, walked away from that plan. And the Coalition Government now led

by Scott Morrison took the money that was in the Budget for this project and gave it to toll

roads in New South Wales and Victoria. It ignored Queenslanders at the time. And now we see

how vital this project is for everyone in southeast Queensland. This was the number one

project identified by Infrastructure Australia for a very good reason in its 2012 priority list. And if

it had been not stopped by the Coalition it would be opened today. But as it is, I congratulate

the Palaszczuk Government for getting on with the job even though federally are not offering

any support to people in the suburbs of Brisbane and indeed the Gold Coast and Sunshine

Coast, that this will unlock the congestion. This project injects $4.1 million every day into

Queensland's economy. This project has employed 2,400 workers up to now. But what it will

do is make a difference to Queensland's economy on an ongoing basis. This Government has

presided over a trillion dollars of debt that they don't have legacy projects to show for it at the

end of it all. This is a Government that doesn't have a vision for the country and isn't on the

side of Queenslanders. And I look forward to returning here. If you want to underline how this

Government isn't on the side of Australians, but is on their own side, there have been two

events in the last 24 hours. One, the revelations about Peter Dutton's interference in the

community safety programs. This is just extraordinary. You would think that community safety

should be above party politics. But what we've seen, far from being a community safety

program for Peter Dutton, it's about the safety of Liberal and National Party MPs. It is

outrageous that the independent analysis given to him has been overturned and pork barrelling

when it comes to community safety. Surely, this should be above politics. And this is a clear

breach of ministerial guidelines. As is Greg Hunt's use of the Liberal Party logo when it comes

to vaccines. And attacking the ABC for daring to ask the question about it is just extraordinary.

It shows how out of touch Greg Hunt is that he doesn't know that there's a difference between

taxpayers' money and Liberal Party money. And that goes to a core difference between Labor

and the Coalition. Labor is out there listening to people about what they need to secure their

future. The Government and the Coalition is just about looking after itself.



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: Thanks very much, Albo. And thanks to the team

from Cross River Rail for having us here today. Projects like this one are absolutely central to

making sure that the economy can be stronger after COVID-19 than it was before. These kinds

of projects are absolutely crucial when it comes to creating secure, well-paid jobs for people

here in Queensland. We want to commend Mark and the Premier and others for all of the work

and investment and forethought that goes into a project like this and all of the benefits that it

means for communities, including the one that I represent in the outer suburbs. We want to

work closely with the state government of Queensland to make sure that we're investing in

those secure, well-paid jobs with fairer conditions. We want to work with the business

community to make sure that we can address the very real challenges in the economy which

existed before COVID, at risk of becoming even worse afterwards. We want to make sure that

there's the investment. We want to make sure that there is the skills and training. We want to

make sure that we can address some of the defining challenges in the economy around

insecure work and underemployment and stagnant wages, which have been historically

stagnant under the life of this Government and not just because of the pandemic. We want to

work with business on all of those issues. The Government's industrial relations changes won't

address those very real challenges we have in the economy. If anything, they will make them

worse. And that's why we're opposed to them. That's why Australians do have that choice

between more secure work with better pay and fairer conditions under the plan that Anthony

Albanese and Tony Burke announced last night. They can choose between that or more cuts

to pay, less secure work and more cuts to super, which is what the Coalition under Scott

Morrison is offering. Now, the Morrison Government has a trillion dollars in debt riddled with

rorts. If Cross River Rail was a cheeky little rort in a marginal Coalition seat, the Government

would be throwing money at it. But instead it's about real jobs in real communities and real

benefits in places like Queensland and so it doesn't get a look in. Trillion dollars in debt, riddled

with rorts. They say there's no blank cheque when it comes to projects like this, which support

jobs in places like Brisbane and the surrounding southeast corner. But when it comes to those

cheeky little rorts in marginal Coalition seats, there is a blank cheque. And we've seen that

from Peter Dutton and Scott Morrison as well. I wanted to say about Anthony Albanese's week

in Queensland this week, the reason that Albo has been so well received, from the tropical far

north all the way down to the southeast corner, is because when Anthony Albanese comes to

Queensland, he's focused on jobs and opportunities for Queenslanders. When Scott Morrison

thinks about Queensland, he thinks about votes, he thinks about rorts and he thinks about

taking pot-shots at a Premier who has done and is doing a remarkable job, not just protecting

Queenslanders from the worst spread of the virus but also investing in the jobs and

opportunities that we desperately need as we recover from the worst recession in almost a

century.



ALBANESE: Thanks, Jim. Happy to take questions.



JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).



ALBANESE: What we said was that we would consult. That is what I announced last night.

What we know is that these issues are being dealt with. For example, here in Queensland,

from January 1, the Palaszczuk Government has implemented a plan for portability of long

service leave entitlements for community and social workers. So we know that it can be done.

And last night I announced that we would consult with business and with state governments

about implementing such a plan. We know that it's necessary. And we've had other examples

as well of problems with, for example, sick leave not being a part of processes. And that's

caused problems in the aged care sector. That's why in Victoria the Government has

intervened to ensure that sick leave entitlements are there.



JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).



ALBANESE: I only gave one speech. It was last night.



JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).



ALBANESE: I only gave one speech. I gave it last night. I gave it for everyone. You had this

absurd proposition, I noticed, from Christian Porter yesterday. Before I gave a speech, he

allegedly had this nonsense costing. No wonder this Government got $60 billion wrong when it

came to JobKeeper. I mean, this Government just makes up figures as if they get them out of a

cereal box in the morning. They can't be taken seriously. What should be taken seriously is the

fact that workers are doing it tough. That casualisation in the workforce is an issue. That job

security is an issue. That income security is an issue. Today I note that McDonald's have made

a submission to the inquiry about Christian Porter's industrial relations bill. Now, they made

that submission saying that when you look at whether a worker is better off overall, you should

take into account whether they've had a chicken nugget or a French fry during their meal

break. I mean, seriously? I used to work at Maccas. I used to and I know what it's like to have

a bit of food or a drink during your break. You need to do it. Particularly, I used to work out the

back. It was hot, hard work. It's a good thing that young people work in casual jobs like at

McDonald's. I encouraged my own son to get a casual job. He worked at Woolworths through

school. It is a good thing. It teaches them discipline. But the idea that you take into account

whether someone's better off overall if they have the luxury of actually getting a bit of food and

a soft drink during their break is just quite absurd. And it shows where this Government wants

things to head. You only get rid of the Better Off Overall Test if you don't want workers to be

better off overall.



JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).



ALBANESE: I am not even taking it seriously. It's just a joke. Has the ABC seen the costings?

I suspect not.



JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).



ALBANESE: We have a plan for jobs. We have a plan for Queensland. We are here talking

about good jobs, secure jobs, good pay, pay increases. People know that they're struggling to

keep up with the cost of living. They know that this Government is an arrogant Government

that has taken Queenslanders for granted. We know that Scott Morrison only visited

Queensland when there was a state election on to campaign against the Palaszczuk

Government and to have fundraisers. You can spot where Scott Morrison is going because

there's a fundraiser, as there was in the Hunter Valley during his visit this week.



JOURNALIST: What sort of assurances can you give those people who might have voted for

One Nation in the past?



ALBANESE: Well, we support workers wherever they're in work. And we respect the job that

they do. Labor is the party for working people. For 130 years, we have stood up for the rights

of workers. We know that this Government, when it had a chance, the Coalition implemented

WorkChoices. And as soon as they had an opportunity to make industrial relations changes,

they said they were going to consult, they set up a process between business and unions, and

then out of nowhere came getting rid of the Better Off Overall Test. My challenge to the

Government is this, including to Christian Porter, show me where once last year before you

introduced this legislation you said you needed to get rid of the Better Off Overall Test. They

didn't. It is what Coalition Governments do. At every opportunity, they have a go at workers.

And that contrasts with Labor's approach. My approach is always to consult, not just with

unions, but consult with business. That was the whole Infrastructure Australia model that led to



this project being prioritised. I did it in Government last time. I would do it again in a

Government that I lead.



JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).



ALBANESE: We'll work through those issues. I spoke last night and gave practical examples

in Victoria, in Queensland, of what it means. And I'll refer you to the speech.



Can I make one further comment just about the vaccines because I was asked about it off

camera just before. The fact is that Australia was told by Scott Morrison that we're ahead of the

queue. The truth is that other countries got way ahead of us in signing deals with

pharmaceutical companies to get access to vaccines. They started signing deals way back in

March last year. We started six months later. World's best practices is for six deals. We have

half that. And we know that the good work done here, including by UQ and CSL, didn't work its

way through. And that's why you needed to sign more deals. Now, what we find is the vaccine

is being rolled out around the world, including in Panama and Oman. Australians are still

waiting. The TGA has approved the Pfizer vaccine. We were told that the vaccine would be

rolled out in mid-February. It's now February 11. That's mid-February. And the Government

needs to explain why it is that they didn't put in place the measures that Labor were calling for

last year. Thanks very much.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053



