

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP   SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  4BC BRISBANE DRIVE WITH SCOTT EMERSON  THURSDAY, 11 MARCH 2021

SUBJECTS: Tourism, JobKeeper, Schools.

SCOTT EMERSON, HOST: And the big news obviously today has been, particularly  here in Queensland, this huge news is this $1.2 billion tourism package for  recovery, rescue over Covid for these half-priced airfares to a  variety of  destinations here in Queensland. Including Cairns and the Gold Coast and  Whitsundays, Hamilton Island for instance. That is a significant news here. But  there has been criticism. We just heard Daniel Gschwind saying there needs to be  more, it's not going to replace JobKeeper, some sort of wage subsidy was needed.  But obviously some reaction from North Queensland, from Ken Chapman the head  of Tourism Tropical North Queensland - he says it's great. Tom Tate down the  Gold Coast, the mayor there, he says it's wonderful. I wonder what the opposition  federally is saying about that. Well Tanya Plibersek, I'm sure she's got a view  about that. Tanya, thanks for being on 4BC drive.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION, SHADOW MINISTER FOR  WOMEN: Always a pleasure to join you Scott.

EMERSON: What do you think about this the initial reaction to this package today?  $1.2 billion, it's a lot of money, 800,000 discount tickets. We're getting a bit of flak  from other states saying Queensland's got the lion's share of the destinations. But  as I said, just then Daniel Gschwind from the Queensland Tourism Industry  Council, said that it should have been more.

PLIBERSEK: We definitely have to do something to support our tourism industry,  particularly while borders are closed to international visitors. More than half a  million people have lost jobs in the industry already. 506,000 jobs was the last  estimate I saw of the jobs lost, and another 300,000 at risk right now. So we

definitely need to do something to support those businesses until international  tourism is back to normal. What concerns me about this package - well there's a  couple of things. The first is there's no guarantee that these savings will actually be  passed on to customers. I mean it's a great thing for airlines if they can put their  prices up and get taxpayers to pay half the costs of that. It bypasses travel agents.  You know, if you're in Brisbane, you won't be able to get this help if you wanted to  go to Cairns or Mackay, Proserpine - any of the areas that have attracted the  subsidy. And other parts of Queensland, you're actually going to have to go out of  the state if you want to make use of it. The other part of the package which is the  low interest loans. I think we've had a very, very strong message from people who  work in tourism that they just can't take on more debt, you know, those operators  who have been just...

EMERSON: Tanya, I think that your line is breaking up a bit there so we might just  try to ring you back there and we'll come back to Tanya Plibersek in a moment.  That was the Federal, Shadow Minister of Education and Shadow Minister for  Women, Tanya Plibersek. We're trying to get her back on the line. But give me a  ring one 131873 about this package today. And Tanya Plibersek's obviously saying  that for some places in Queensland, they're not going to get much benefit out of  this if they're not one of those destinations. But also do you think you're going to  take advantage of it? Do you want to go to Launceston? Do you want to go to  Uluru? Is that where you do want to go now? We’ve got Tanya Plibersek back on  the line now. Hey, Tanya, we’ve got you back now?

PLIBERSEK: Yeah, you'd think that NBN would be fixed by now you know.

EMERSON: Yes, it should be better by now indeed.

PLIBERSEK: It should be better.

EMERSON: Well look it is $1.2 billion, Daniel Gschwind said there should have been  some sort of extension of a version of JobKeeper, is that what the opposition would  have done?

PLIBERSEK: Look we've said for some time that we think you will need industry by  industry and region by region extensions of JobKeeper, because we know that  some parts of Australia are doing it very tough indeed. You know Cairns, for  example, very very reliant on international tourism, and we don't see that opening  up anytime soon. So, of course, any help is welcome. But if you're going to spend  $1.2 billion you really do want to be sure that it's going to support those  businesses, keep them open, keep people employed. And some of the feedback  we're getting is that this isn't the best way of doing that.

EMERSON: Now, let me just turn to Education Minister Alan Tudge. You're the  Shadow Minister for Education. Now, the Minister has spoken about school



standards this week. It's a topic that, well people do talk about in some way but  then it kind of drifts away a little bit. What do you think about what Alan Tudge was  talking about this week?

PLIBERSEK: He's quite right to raise the fact that we're going backwards on all of the  international tests. We're falling. We're falling year after year. But sadly, I mean this  Government's been in seven years, and all that time our results have been  declining. In 2013 we actually said we wanted to spend extra money in our schools  and, really importantly, we wanted to have a national plan for school improvement.  We wanted to work school by school wherever there was a gap, a problem,  weakness - we needed a plan from that school to fix that problem. When the  Liberals came in they said that was just red tape, and they got rid of it. So we're  basically where we were seven years ago, with no real advance in our in our  schools. What we need to do is make sure the funding's right, make sure we're  putting enough money into schools. Particularly our public schools, because the  independent and Catholic schools have had school funding increases, and the  public schools haven't. We need to use the evidence of what works. We've got to  stop doing the stuff that doesn't work and do more of the stuff that does. And we  need to attract the best and brightest into teaching and then keep them there. We  need to have great initial teacher education and we need to have really good  continuing professional development. We also, when I talk about keeping them  there - a little bit more respect in the classroom. I think teaching is a very, very  difficult profession. It's always been a difficult profession. But it used to be that the  parents backed the teachers. These days, all too often parents are not really  supporting what's going on in the classroom.

EMERSON: I couldn't agree with you more Tanya Plibersek about that. You want  teachers and the parents getting that support. We'll have to leave it there. Great to  speak to you Tanya Plibersek, we’ll  catch you again next week.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350



