

The Hon Ken Wyatt AM, MP

Minister for Indigenous Australians  Member for Hasluck

MEDIA RELEASE



1 April 2021

GARMA FESTIVAL RETURNS IN 2021 TO EXCITE AND INSPIRE

The annual Garma Festival on Yolngu country in North East Arnhem Land returns in 2021, and  the Australian Government is proud to be providing $816,000 to support the delivery of this  nationally significant event for the next two years.

The Yothu Yindi Foundation are putting strict COVID safety measures in place to protect the  health and safety of those on site and allow the event to proceed.

Minister for Indigenous Australians, the Hon Ken Wyatt AM, MP, said Garma brings together  cultural leaders, senior officials, deep thinkers, and exceptional artists to share, listen and learn.

“Garma is a unique event where people from across Australia come in the spirit of togetherness  to share culture and discuss and debate the most profound issues facing Aboriginal and Torres  Strait Islander people,” Minister Wyatt said.

“It is a big undertaking and this funding will ensure Garma remains a premier celebration of  Indigenous cultural, artistic and ceremonial expression.

“It will provide training and employment opportunities for local Aboriginal and Torres Strait  Islander people with the financial stability required to plan an event of this scale and scope in a  very remote location.

“Garma provides an immersive and culturally safe environment to engage in a meaningful way  on a range of issues and for people to come away inspired and better informed.

“As well as preserving and promoting culture through amazing displays of dance, music, art and  culture, Garma facilitates the discussions that help set priorities and that lead to better decision  making at the local, regional and national level.

“I left the last Garma Festival enthused and excited for the changing way Governments are  working with Indigenous Australians.

“Since then, we have made meaningful progress by agreeing with Aboriginal and Torres Strait  Islander people the new National Agreement on Closing the Gap that will provide greater

transparency and accountability for all parties responsible for improving the lives of Indigenous  Australians.

“And substantive progress has been made on an Indigenous Voice, giving Aboriginal and Torres  Strait Islander people a greater say in policies and laws that affect them, again informed by  some of the discussions held at Garma.

“Garma in 2021 will provide another opportunity to keep pressing ahead with our priority reforms  to deepen formal partnerships and transform the way Governments work to be more responsive  and include more Indigenous knowledge in the process.”

The Garma Festival runs from Friday 30 July to Monday 2 August 2021, with changed  arrangements for attendance and a limit on numbers to keep people safe. Event information and  tickets will soon be available on the Yothu Yindi Foundation website: https://www.yyf.com.au/



Media contact: Lisa Hugg, A/g Senior Media Adviser, 0438 231 687

Authorised by Ken Wyatt AM, MP, Member for Hasluck.

