

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T

Monday 22nd March 2021

Minister Littleproud iv ABC Breakfast with Michael Rowland

MICHAEL ROWLAND: Let's return to the developing flood situation across the east coast.  David Littleproud is the Federal Minister for Agriculture, Drought, and - very importantly -  Emergency Management. He joins us now from Canberra.

Minister, good morning. Based on the latest advice you have; how bad could this flood  situation get?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Very bad. This potentially is a very dangerous situation that  everyone needs to understand the magnitude and gravity of what could become over the  coming 24, 48 hours. The Bureau is not giving us great advice around the potential rainfall  that is coming, and that's obviously very perplexing, considering all the catchments are  soaked at the moment. So anything that we add onto this has got to flow somewhere, and  that's from South East Queensland right down the New South Wales coast. And to put into  perspective some of the gravity of this is the Hawkesbury-Nepean system, that if we get  rainfall potentially in the wrong areas, there's over 54,000 residents that could be  impacted. So this is a very large event that we have to understand a lot is going to have to  happen over the coming 24, 48 hours. We're working closely with New South Wales  around making sure they have any appropriate resources that may be required from a  federal perspective. But I've got to say to both Queensland and South Australia, and  Queensland in particular, despite fighting floods in South East Queensland themselves,  have provided resources to New South Wales, which I think is testimony to our emergency  service system here in Australia.

MICHAEL ROWLAND: So you mentioned those 54,000 people, potentially on the brink in  Sydney, could we potentially be speaking if things get worse, more than 50,000  evacuations, Minister?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: That is if a worst case scenario that we obviously continue to plan  with the New South Wales Government around. Now, we're hoping that that doesn't  happen, but potentially with the rainfall that is predicted and if it falls in the wrong  catchment areas, then potentially this could cause considerable problems for us. And  that's why we're saying the gravity of this situation is severe and people need to  understand that. They need to prepare for it, make sure that they're listening to their local  ABC, and that if they're instructed to do so, they do it, not just for themselves and their  family, but for those men and women who are putting their lives on the line for them today.  This is a very serious situation and it's not going to abate until likely Wednesday. The  Bureau is saying that we've got today and tomorrow of heavy rainfall and if we get that in  the wrong areas, we have a very serious situation.

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T



MICHAEL ROWLAND: What sort of help, what sort of assistance is the Federal  Government offering flood-affected people?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: So as of last night, we initiated 34 Local Government areas to  receive the Disaster Recovery Payment, which is $1000 per adult, $400 per child. And  anyone whose income has been impacted like a casual worker who might be working for a  business that has been closed down, they can get up to 13 weeks of income support to the  level of Austudy and ABSTUDY. And they'll be able to from this morning from 8:00am,  contact Centrelink, and they'll be able to work though with our Centrelink staff to get that in  their bank accounts as quickly as we can. And we just say to people: please don't self-assess. This is about trying to give you some dignity and respect in your hour of need, and  Centrelink is there to support you and work through with you. And in fact, we'll have buses,  Centrelink busses, moving into these flood areas as soon as the water abates as well to  give further support, whether they be in recovery centres or in main streets of communities  right across the impacted area.

MICHAEL ROWLAND: This flooding event, this one in 100-year flooding event on the  north coast, one in 60 years in Sydney, comes a little over 12 months since those  unprecedented Black Summer bushfires. Minister, is climate change going to make these  sort of extreme weather events sadly much more common for Australians?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, that's all about a pattern of weather events and we're seeing  that, and we need to make sure that we're prepared for that, and we're working with the  states. I think one of the things you've got to take out of this is that we planned for this  disaster season meticulously, particularly with the overlay of COVID with it. And to think  that we've pivoted from bushfires to floods, and we're still not out of the cyclone season  just yet, that we're ready to move. And the fact that we've been able to bring emergency  service personnel from other states in a COVID-safe way, just goes to show the world  class, world-leading emergency service system that we have here in this country. We work  together between states and we're continuing planning. So our planning for next season  will start in another month or so, as we get out of the disaster season and we'll be ready to  plan for whatever will come and we'd planned for this season and we'll look for the threats  that will come next season and be ready to pivot towards whatever's required to keep  Australians safe.

MICHAEL ROWLAND: Yeah, but the point I was making, in the age of climate change, this  sort of thing is going to happen on a much more frequent basis.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, and that's why we continue to meticulously plan, and that's  what we've done. And I think we should be damn proud of our emergency services right  across the country. They've come together to make sure we have a nationally coordinated  approach towards this. This is what's keeping Australians safe and saved many lives  during the Black Summer. We sadly lost 34 souls during the Black Summer, but it would  have been a lot worse if it hadn't had been for those men and women on the front line.

MICHAEL ROWLAND: Yeah, doing essential work as always. I was up in Taree late 2019,  covering the bushfires. People knocked the [indistinct] then, then came COVID, now  comes the floods. Your heart breaks, doesn't it, David Littleproud, for these people in  those previously bushfire affected areas? They've suffered badly from the lack of tourism  dollars from COVID, and now this.

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, look, we're a tough bunch. We keep getting thrown at us,  but you just like a reprieve just for a little while. I've got to say, some of the trauma from the  Black Summer hasn't abated and everyone recovers at a different speed and a different  rate. And we've got to respect that and bring them- with them. And unfortunately, this is  just going to add to some of that trauma. What we to do is wrap our arms around them as  a country, and I know that we'll be doing that. And the state and local governments are  doing that on the ground and fellow Australians will be there. And I think we're damn lucky  to live in this country. Yeah, it throws a few upper cuts at us every now and then, but I tell  you what, we keep on getting back and we still live in the best country in the world and we  should be proud of those men and women out there on the front line today, that are  keeping us safe. That's why we live in Australia, it's the best country the world and we  should never forget that.

MICHAEL ROWLAND: Okay. David Littleproud, appreciate your time on a busy morning.  Thanks for joining News Breakfast.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks for having me, mate.

Media contact  0455 448 985

