THE HON JOSH FRYDENBERG MP  Treasurer

MEDIA RELEASE

07 April 2021

IMF SIGNIFICANTLY UPGRADES AUSTRALIA'S ECONOMIC  OUTLOOK

The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has upgraded Australia's economic growth outJook in its latest World  E conomic Outlook. Amid continued " high uncertainty'' globally, the IMF has confirmed our economy is  recovering from the COVID-19 crisis faster and stronger than previously expected.

Australia's economy is forecast to grow by 4.5 per cent in 2021, one percentage point higher than the IMF's  interim o utlook in J anuary. The IMF then expects economic growth to reach 2.8 per cent in 2022, broadly  co nsistent wi th its earlier projection.

In upgrading its outJook, the IMF notes that the "Australian economy continues to show a strong recovery  momentum" and that a "favourable labour market recovery continues to support a strong rebound in private  consumption, added by wealth effects from rising house prices" .

Australia's GDP is "projected to reach the pre-COVID level by the March quarter 2021, limiting scarring effects  of the pandemic" and compares favorably internationally with GDP remaining "significantly below pre­ pandemic trends in most countries" .

These forecasts follow the Morrison Government's unprecedented response to the crisis, prov iding $251 billion  in direct economic support that has belped to keep businesses in business and Australi ans in jobs.

Australia also continues to compare remarkably well to other nations, with the IMF forecasting Japan's economy  to grow b y 3.3 per cent, G ermany by 3.6 per cent and Italy by 4.2 per cent.

E ncouragingly, global growth has also been revised up by 0.5 percentage points to 6.0 per cent in 2021 and by  0. 2 percentage points to 4.4 per cent in 2022.

The next stage of the Government's E conomic Recovery Plan will support private sector activity through a  number of measures including tax cuts, unprecedented business investment incentives, record levels of  investment in skills and training, infrastructure and targeted support for the aviation and tourism sectors.

These household and business incentives will help to unlock the more than $240 billion o f savings accumulated  throughout the pandemic and sitting on private sector balance sheets.

Having o utperformed all major advanced eco nomies o n the economic front in the last 12 months, there is no  other country you wo uld rather be in than Australia.

Ends

Media contact: J oel Labi - Office of the H on J osh Frydenberg MP - 02 6277 7340  The Hon J osh Frydenberg MP I Treasurer I MELBOURNE

