



Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra





THE HON DAN TEHAN MP  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment

GEORGE CHRISTENSEN MP  Member for Dawson

MEDIA RELEASE

9 February 2021

Supporting the Whitsundays tourism industry

Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment Dan Tehan said today the Coalition Government  was working with the tourism sector on a post-JobKeeper plan.

Mr Tehan and Member for Dawson George Christensen will meet with tourism operators in  the Whitsundays and Mackay today to hear firsthand about the local sector’s recovery.

“George invited me to Dawson so I could meet local tourism business owners and workers  and to hear for myself how they have been impacted by state border closures and the loss of  international tourists,” Mr Tehan said.

“Since becoming Minister in December, I have been in regular contact with all levels of the  tourism sector. We are listening to them and collecting data to inform our decision on what  happens post-JobKeeper.

“When international travel resumes, there will be queues of tourists lining up to visit our  amazing tourist destinations, like here on the Whitsundays and surrounding areas.

“To support the sector our Government has provided the JobKeeper program as well as the  $1 billion COVID-19 Relief and Recovery Fund, which included specific support measures  for regional airlines ($308 million), conservation and infrastructure upgrades for national and  world heritage sites ($33.5 million), and $100 million for tourism-related infrastructure  through the Building Better Regions Fund.

“Our Government has also launched a $5 million advertising blitz to encourage Australians  to book a domestic holiday this year to support local jobs and businesses.

“The data indicates that people still want to go on holidays, but they are more cautious than  ever. Border restrictions are now a bigger concern than COVID-19 to Australians who are  planning a holiday.

“The re-opening of the Queensland border to NSW will allow more tourists to return to Far  North Queensland and our Government is working with the states and territories to adopt a  consistent approach to border closures and hotspots that will give certainty to tourist  operators and Australians planning their next holiday.”





Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

Mr Christensen said many tourism businesses stayed afloat and many tourism workers  remained in a job because of the Morrison Liberal National Government supports like  JobKeeper and the business cash flow payment.

“By contrast, the ‘open-shut them’ border routine by the Palaszczuk Labor Government has  certainly not helped the situation many operators and workers find themselves in,”   Mr Christensen said.

“It is great that Trade and Tourism Minister Dan Tehan is here to listen to Whitsunday  tourism operators as it’s critical the Government understands their plight so we make sure  future policies in this space are the right policies for the industry and local jobs.”



ENDS



Media contact:  Tehan: Byron Vale 02 6277 7420 | minister.tehan-media@dfat.gov.au  Christensen: Lynnis Bonanno 0408 773 207 | lynnis.bonanno@aph.gov.au

