

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  SYDNEY  TUESDAY, 22 DECEMBER 2020

SUBJECTS: NSW Northern Beaches coronavirus outbreak; quarantine measures;  stranded Aussies; aged care crisis.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Our thoughts  today are very much with those families who are doing it tough. This outbreak on the  Northern Beaches, which has now spread beyond it, is causing a great deal of distress for  families, with the uncertainty particularly difficult in the period just before Christmas. The  New South Wales Premier must respond to health advice and must ensure that health  comes first before anything else. It's very clear that, when that hasn't happened, then things  have gone wrong. Scott Morrison also has a responsibility to provide more national  leadership. It's not good enough for him to pass off that responsibility every time something  gets difficult. He quite clearly is responsible for our national borders and he is responsible  for national quarantine. And he had a report from Jane Halton that made practical  suggestions about measures that should be put in place, including additional places that  the Commonwealth could organise for quarantine.

The Morrison Government is also clearly responsible for issuing crew visas. For too long,  Scott Morrison has passed off responsibility to the states, being prepared to take credit  whenever something goes right but not being prepared to show the national leadership that  is required. This outbreak is a wake-up call yet again that Scott Morrison needs to show  leadership when it comes to these issues. For too long, Scott Morrison has passed  responsibility for the states. He didn't have a plan for quarantine control, in spite of Jane  Halton’s report. He didn't have a plan for aged care, in spite of the fact that we've had some  685 older Australians lose their life in nursing homes. He doesn't have a plan either to get  Australians home, some 40,000 are still stranded. Scott Morrison needs to show more  responsibility. And it is beyond belief that not a single aged care home has been  sanctioned, in spite of the tragedies that have occurred across the board. And it's also, and  I'll finish with this, the idea that Richard Colbeck has maintained his position with Greg Hunt  overseeing, as he always was, as the senior minister, is quite frankly beyond belief. I don't  know what you've got to do to lose your job under this Government. But it's very clear that  Richard Colbeck is a symbol of the fact that Scott Morrison doesn't believe in accountability  and doesn't believe in taking responsibility either himself or any of his ministers. Happy to  take questions.

JOURNALIST: Were you or anyone from your office or anyone from the Opposition offices  at the Sydney CPO on Thursday the 17th of December from 10:30-10:50AM?

ALBANESE: I wasn't. But I know that my Chief of Staff and my media advisor, who's here  now, were there. They have been tested. They have been found to be negative.

JOURNALIST: And have other people from Opposition offices also tested negative?

ALBANESE: Look, I'm not aware of everyone who was in the building. It's a very big  building. There are more than 20 floors in the building. Everyone in my office who was there  has been tested and been found to be negative.

JOURNALIST: The Transport Minister, Michael McCormack, today said that Australia could  join other nations in banning flights to Britain even though the Chief Medical Officer has  said otherwise. Is there a lack of consistent messaging here that is adding to confusion?

ALBANESE: We need to listen to the medical advice. And what there is here is a lack of  national leadership. We have the idea that the Government continues to say that it's  someone else's responsibility to have control over which planes into Australia or not and  getting Australians home is causing confusion. This Prime Minister said, of course, that he  would have stranded Australians home by Christmas. We know that there's at least 40,000  of them who won't be home. And at least 8000 of those are vulnerable. And many  thousands are those who were on the list to come home well prior to the Prime Minister  making that commitment.

JOURNALIST: Are you comfortable with the Government’s decision not to ban flights from  the UK?

ALBANESE: I think the Government should exercise an abundance of caution and needs  to make sure that wherever there is medical advice that we err on the side of caution, would  be my view. The problem here is that the Government seems to be so determined to not  take responsibility for anything. They also seem to not want to make decisions and pass it  off to someone else. I just wait for Michael McCormack or someone in the Government to  blame Daniel Andrews over whether there are UK flights home or over the Northern  Beaches outbreak.

JOURNALIST: The Government argues that Australia has adequate hotel quarantine  places unlike other countries. Is that a fair assessment?

ALBANESE: Well, the Government should respond to Jane Halton's review. Jane Halton  provided advice about national leadership when it comes to quarantine procedures. And  that advice hasn't been taken up. She identified clear potential venues. There are other  things that could have been done. We asked many, many months ago. We suggested  using the RAAF VIP fleet, which is available, which at the moment, Scott Morrison's not  using his plane. I don’t know whether the Governor General is or not. These are aircraft that  could have been used to bring Australians home. And we know that the only person who's  been able to be brought home on those aircraft is, of course, Mathias Cormann, after  making multiple stops with costs to the taxpayer all around Europe lobbying for a job. I  mean, Australians are entitled to question this Government's priorities when so many  Australians will be sitting around the family dinner table without their loved ones because  they weren't able to get home.





JOURNALIST: So, what action or decision would you want from the Government in terms  of these quarantine measures?

ALBANESE: I want the Government to respond to Jane Halton’s review. I want the  Government to exercise national leadership when it comes to quarantine control. I want the  Government to provide the resources that the Victorian Government, for example, have  said that they need from the Defence Force. I want the Government to actually do more  than just make announcements and then pass off responsibility to someone else.

JOURNALIST: What is the assessment of why the Defence Minister has defended  decisions to not fulfil that request from the Victorian Government? Is that unreasonable?

ALBANESE: Look, it's completely inadequate. We hear consistently from this Government  that it will respond to requests. And the real concern here is that, according to the  Australian Constitution, quarantine is a national responsibility. They've passed off that  responsibility, handballed it to the state like they have blamed the states over the numbers  coming in from overseas. They are all national responsibilities. And it requires national  leadership. And Scott Morrison isn't providing that national leadership. Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053





