

CLARE O’NEIL MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR SENIOR AUSTRALIANS   AND AGED CARE SERVICES   FEDERAL MEMBER FOR HOTHAM



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RN BREAKFAST WITH HAMISH MCDONALD  THURSDAY, 8 APRIL 2021

SUBJECTS: Aged Care Workers; Aged Care Vaccination Rollout.

HAMISH MACDONALD, HOST: The Shadow Minister for Senior Australians and Aged Care  services is Clare O'Neil. She's with us this morning. Good morning to you.

CLARE O’NEIL MP, SHADOW MINISTER FOR SENIOR AUTRALIANS AND AGED CARE  SERVICES: Good morning, Hamish, how are you?

MACDONALD: I'm very well. Are these accounts in line with what the Federal Government  has promised in terms of the vaccine rollout in aged care?

O’NEIL: The Federal Government told us that all aged care residents and workers would be  fully vaccinated by the end of March, and they are catastrophically behind in delivering on that.  I talk to aged care providers, to people who are in aged care and their families, every day, and  the descriptions they’re using are words like ‘disorganised’, ‘chaos’, ‘in a mess’. That is how  they're experiencing the rollout. Something that just staggers me, Hamish, from the package  that you just ran, is the difference between what's actually happening in aged care right now  and the rhetoric of the Government. How is it responsible for Greg Hunt to get up, day after  day, for Scott Morrison to get up, day after day, and pretend that this is all on track? We're  playing with fire here. We know what happens when this gets into aged care. The  consequences can be devastating. We just, simply, have to push the Government to get this  back on track. It's completely unacceptable.

MACDONALD:Is it clear to you what the blockage is?

O’NEIL: I think there's probably many reasons for it and, really, I'd urge you, Hamish, to get  Greg Hunt on your show to explain what has gone so terribly wrong here.

MACDONALD:I should say, believe me, we are trying. We have tried consistently throughout  this week.

O’NEIL: Funny how when things aren't going well there's not a Morrison Government minister  to come on explain what's happened. But from the conversations I have with providers, it's  very many things that are not working for them and if I could just pinpoint one of the key

concerns that I have about this. We know that, very slowly, the Government is moving through  and vaccinating aged care residents but there is no clear plan in place today to vaccinate aged  care workers. We've got in the order of 320,000 people who are working with some of the most  frail and vulnerable people in the community and the Government has not told them how  they're meant to get vaccinated. Initially, the plan was to vaccinate workers as the teams were  coming into aged care homes and the Government's now telling a lot of aged care workers that  they need to get in line and go to their GP, like anyone else in the community, and, you would  know, Hamish, that GP rollout is also not going particularly well. This is this is a very  concerning situation for us and the Government is going to have to fix it as a matter of  urgency.

MACDONALD: On that, we did put questions to Senator Richard Colbeck, who is the Minister  for Aged Care Services, under Greg Hunt. He's told us, in a statement, that aged care workers  can get their COVID shot through their GP, if they choose. Is that a reasonable alternative?

O’NEIL: Absolutely not. Hamish, any Australian right now could tell you that that is not a  sufficient approach when we've got a sector, which collects the frailest and most vulnerable  people in the community, and then has a workforce which we know, highly regrettably, is often  working across multiple facilities. The idea that these workers should be treated just like any  other Australian is ridiculous. There's a major threat to the hard work that we have done as  Australians to protect the community from Covid, here. We saw in the recent outbreak in  Queensland and in Byron Bay that frontline workers are still contracting COVID through  various means. We are just lucky that an aged care worker wasn't amongst those people who  were exposed. And again, I'd say, we have had the bitter and horrible experience in Victoria of  what happens when COVID gets into these homes. We are still in the middle of a pandemic.  We’ve pulled together as a community, we've worked together beautifully, to protect each other  but the threat is still there. My observation, looking at the Government, is that they seem to be  taking their sweet time with making sure that this vaccine is rolled out into aged care and  amongst aged care workers. It's just not acceptable.

MACDONALD:It does seem clear, though, that there is a supply issue around the vaccine and  getting it into Australia which is impacting the rollout. Does that justify the situation in aged  care?

O’NEIL: I don't believe so, Hamish, because no one ever said this was going to be simple.  Vaccinating an entire population is incredibly complicated. What I would point to is the fact that  in the US they're vaccinating, I think, 3 million people a day. In the UK they're vaccinating  750,000 people a day. There are almost 100 other countries around the world who are doing  this better and faster than we are. We all, to some degree, face the same problems but our  Government didn't look ahead, foresee those problems, and plan for them. Instead, they didn't  put in place enough contracts for us to get sufficient vaccines from around the world.  Additionally, Hamish, don't forget, CSL, in Australia, was meant to be domestically providing a  million vaccines a week by the end of March and they haven't been doing that. So there are  multiple issues here and I think the Government, constantly in COVID, has pushed  responsibility onto others. Said “it's not our fault, it's not our problem”. The vaccination program  is their fault, it is their problem and they need to be responsible for fixing it.

MACDONALD:Can I push you for a solution? How would you deal with this? How would you  get this back on track?

O’NEIL: I think it's very important to be constructive here because the most important thing is



that Labor and myself, particularly, really want this program to work. This is key to getting my  constituents back to work and helping us go back to the life that we were living. I don't think it's  fair for us to be pushed for the exact solution but Labor’s spokesperson, Mark Butler, has  made some pretty pointed observations about the differences between the way this is  occurring in Australia versus the rest of the world. Just for example, lots of other countries are  using vaccination hubs to push out the vaccine to as many people as possible. Our  Government has chosen a GP rollout model. I wonder whether there's worth in exploring other  options here… [INTERUPTED]

MACDONALD:That wouldn't be the answer for aged care facilities, though, would it? You're  not going to bus people from aged care homes into sporting stadiums to get the jab?

O’NEIL: No, no, no, I agree with that, although, I think, with the workers there are some  options there perhaps for us. But, can I say again, Hamish, Labor’s not in government. We  don't have, at our disposal, thousands of public servants to help us plan for a better solution.  All I know is… [INTERUPTED]

MACDONALD:It’s reasonable to ask you what the fix is if you're going to criticise them for this  rollout. How would you do it better?

O’NEIL: I think some of the things that have been talked about are getting the CSL production,  up to where it was meant to be. We need to be pushing to get more contracts. We started out  this process without sufficient agreements with providers and vaccines, like Moderna and  Johnson & Johnson, who we don't have current agreements with. And, again, just looking at  how we're rolling out this, around the country. I think there almost 100 countries in the world  that are doing this faster than we are. There are many different ways to run a vaccine rollout  and the approach that's been adopted, here, isn't working at the moment and it does need to  change.

MACDONALD:Clare O’Neil, thank you very much for your time this morning, we appreciate it.

O’NEIL: Thanks so much, Hamish.

MACDONALD:I should stress, we have been approaching Senator Richard Colbeck, the Aged  Care Minister, and, also, the Health Minister, Greg Hunt, for interviews this week. We will  continue to do that. We do think there are some reasonable and fair questions to be put to the  Government around the vaccine and its rollout.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JACOB KAHANE 0422 723 491



