

LINDA BURNEY MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND SOCIAL SERVICES

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AUSTRALIANS

MEMBER FOR BARTON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

THURSDAY, 18 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: JobSeeker; Cashless Debit Card.



LINDA BURNEY: Good morning, I'm just making two brief statements this morning, one in

relation to the proposed end of Jobseeker and the other in relation to the cashless debit card.

Both are important topics at the moment.



I met yesterday and the day before with a number of people who were on the Jobseeker

payment. Two clear messages came across.



Firstly, that the stimulus payment, as a result of Coronavirus, has changed the lives of people

who find themselves, the 1.4 million people in Australia that find themselves on Jobseeker.  It

has meant for the first time that they could actually have three meals a day. It's meant for the

first time in two or three years, they've been able to fill a script. It's meant that they've been

able to house, clothe their children and pay their rent - so they had secure housing. That was

the first message.



The second message was one that I found incredibly disturbing and inconceivable, that the

government does not know what it's going to do in 42 days’ time, which is when Jobseeker

proposes to be finished. People on Jobseeker are incredibly anxious. They're worried. They're



disturbed by the fact that they have no idea where their lives will be in 42 days’ time. They

don't know whether they'll be thrown back into abject poverty.



And, it's not like it's just Labor saying that there should be a permanent increase to Jobseeker.

It's Philip Lowe, it’s ACOSS, it's the BCA, it's Barnaby Joyce, it’s John Howard. And the list

goes on. I have met, as I said, directly with people who are on Jobseeker, and they are the two

strong messages that I took from my discussions.



The second point that I'd like to speak about this morning is the $2.5 million waste of money by

the government on the report from Adelaide University in relation to the cashless debit card. It

is inconclusive. It basically says, if you can draw anything from it, that people are ashamed and

embarrassed to be on the card. Now the remarkable thing about this is, that the Minister is

ostrich policy, put your head in the sand.



The Minister made her decision to extend the four trial sites without any evidence, without

waiting for the outcomes of the $2.5 million Adelaide review.  Labor's position is consistent,

and that is, that we do not believe there should be mandatory universal application of a

cashless debit card because people are on Centrelink benefits. And we do not believe that

there should be any further extension of the trial sites. The $2.5 million Adelaide University

review tells us nothing, and it is a complete waste of money and waste of time, that the

government didn't even wait for it, to make their decisions in relation to the cashless debit card

and the extension of the four trial sites.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DARYL TAN 0422 028 222



