

CLARE O’NEIL MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR SENIOR AUSTRALIANS   AND AGED CARE SERVICES  MEMBER FOR HOTHAM



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TV INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AFTERNOON AGENDA  MONDAY, 22 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECT: Aged Care, Vaccine rollout, Alleged assault and culture in  Parliament.

KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: I’m joined by aged care services spokesperson, Clare  O'Neil, thanks so much for your time. Let's talk through why this campaign, what  do you hope to achieve from it?

CLARE O’NEIL: Thanks, Kieran. You mentioned that the Aged Care Royal  Commission final report will be handed to Government. This follows up on the  interim report that was entitled Neglect. That neglect describes both the position  that many Australians find themselves who are using aged care today, but also the  actions of Government, which has led us to this point. We know that today about  half of the people living in aged care and malnourished, there are endemic  problems with things like wound management, and there's a workforce here that's  being treated very badly. So it's a critical issue for the country and we want to get  as much attention on it as we can. You showed a clip here which was an  Australian person, not a member of a political party, an everyday person whose  family is trying to use that system and has been on a waitlist. We are trying to get  these stories out to Australians because aged care actually affects vastly more  people than many would realise. You've got people in the system itself of course,  but also the baby boomers who are soon going to be users of this system, and  people who are perhaps your age or my age who have got ageing parents and  we're thinking about what's going to happen to mum and dad. So what we're trying  to do is really highlight to Australians this is a core issue for them as people they  love approach retirement, as they approach going into the aged care system. We  want them to really sit up and listen to what's happened to this system.

GILBERT: So it's basically to put it on the radar of Australians who don't think that  this is relevant necessarily. This is going to be one hell of a report when it's

released on Friday. We we've already been shocked by the interim report. It has  been, quite frankly, a nightmare.

O’NEIL: It has been a nightmare, you're absolutely Kieran. Reading that interim  report. Every Australian really should read the first 12 pages of Neglect, the interim  report, because I defy anyone to read that and not to be shocked and disgusted  that things have got to this point.

We know that it's a consequence of eight years of neglect by this government. We  cannot let them get away with this because I don't want a single extra aged care  recipient to be treated this way. So the campaign here is really saying to  Australians that the interim report makes the point that a lot of Australians don't  want to think about their own ageing. A lot of people don't want to consider that  they might have to enter aged care. But what we know is that if you're a woman in  Australia today, even someone my age, you are more than likely to end up in  residential aged care.

The average length of stay is two to three years, it's not several weeks. So this is  actually something that affects every Australian. We want every Australian to be  paying attention over these coming weeks as we debate the issue.  GILBERT: We need to do better. There's absolutely no doubt about it. Such a  wealthy nation that we have, it’s a disgrace. What about the vaccine rollout? Is the  system, the aged care system, up to this rollout and managing it successfully?  Because, as we know, it's starting pretty much as we speak.

O’NEIL: You choose the words ‘aged care system’… The rollout is on the Morrison  Government and that's who's running this and that's who needs to be held  accountable. The aged care vaccines are just starting to roll out around the  country. Important point to say, Labor wants this to work. We want the vaccine  rollout to be successful and we want this country to be able to move on from  COVID.

The government has set some very ambitious targets about this, wanting to get  four million people vaccinated by March. That is going to be very difficult. So we're  just watching to see how that plays out. But the important thing to note is the  vaccine is very crucial for Australians. We want this to work and we're watching  carefully to make sure that it does.

GILBERT: You've written a piece in The Guardian today in relation to the fallout of  the Britney Higgins' scandal. The allegations made rape allegations made by  Britney Higgins, but other women followed on from her. In your piece, you say that  how we define the problem matters. Can you elaborate for our viewers on what  you mean?

O’NEIL: Yes, I think a lot of the discussion about the Britney Higgins criminal

offences - and the related issues of sexual assault that have been talked about  alongside it - is that the discussion is about women and how are we going to make  women feel safe. How are we going to create an environment where women don't  feel vulnerable.

How we define this problem is crucial to how we then end up solving it. The  discussion at the moment is ‘let's set up a hotline so staff can call someone if  they're sexually assaulted by a colleague’. No, that's not the problem here. The  problem here is that we had a person working in Parliament House who held the  belief allegedly that he could rape a woman that is from the Prime Minister's office.  And he was almost right because he was protected by the system, if the  allegations are true for almost two years.

So the problem here is not women and their conduct. It's men who work here and  their conduct.

Now, there are lots of amazing men who work in this building who are so  thoughtful, who are aware of the sort of underlying sexism that pulses through the  corridors around here. But that's the problem we've got to solve and that problem  begins and ends with the leaders of this country actually thinking about what  they've done to contribute to this problem, and that's where I'd like to see a bit  more thoughtful discussion.

GILBERT: And you also referred to a greater sense of entitlement among men in  this building than any other workplace you've worked in. Can you explain how that  permeates through this?

O’NEIL: Well, I've worked in male dominated environments for my entire career.  So to say that this is the most male dominated, it's quite it's quite a statement,  actually. And Kieran these things always really hard to explain. It's a culture that  can't quite be felt and explained really clearly. But all I can just tell you is that the  experience of women working in this Parliament is very different from the  experience of men.

Men not only occupy the most powerful positions, formal and informal, in the  political parties. But also the vast majority of staffing positions that are senior are  held by men. We have a really good discussion about women's representation in  politics, in elected politics. For the staff, their experience is completely different.  There's almost no talk about the fact that women need to be in senior roles in  those staffing positions. So what it creates is this environment in Parliament where  fundamentally the men behave and feel instantly that they belong and the women  feel more cautious.

It's just not an environment which was built and constructed and run for them. So I  get that these are complex issues to understand if you haven't worked in an



environment like this before. But it's really important that we do get to the bottom of  this because I don't want to see this ever happen again in this workplace.

GILBERT: Clare O'Neil, thanks for your time.

O’NEIL: Thanks, Kieran

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JACOB KAHANE 0422 723 491



