

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR NATIONAL RECONSTRUCTION, EMPLOYMENT,

SKILLS AND SMALL BUSINESS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR SCIENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS NEWSDAY

MONDAY, 1 MARCH 2021



SUBJECTS: Household debt in Queensland; Reports to the AFP; Aged Care

Royal Commission Report.



TOM CONNELL, HOST: The end of Jobkeeper will of course change the situation

for a lot of Australians out there. For some there is a concern the increased

personal debt will be harder to pay off. Joining me live now is Deputy Labor Leader

Richard Marles, who joins us from our Brisbane studio. Thanks very much for your

time, again. Queensland in particular, have a higher rate- Queenslanders, a higher

rate of increased personal debt. Do you see a problem here? And if so, is this one

the federal government needs to address?



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR

PARTY: Well, I think there is a problem, Tom, and it's absolutely a matter for the

federal government. I mean, what's being reported today in the Courier-Mail is that

Queenslanders have on average $4,000 in unsecured debt. That's way above the

national average. People are relying on maxing out their credit cards or on using

services where by now pay later. And I think all of this is a function of the recession

that we're going through and the difficulties that we've seen through COVID-19.

But more than that, I think it lays bare the fact that before we hit the coronavirus

crisis, our economy wasn't in great shape. And, and what COVID-19 has put into

stark relief is the difficulties that people are facing and what's really important now

is that as we move beyond COVID-19, that we actually have a plan for our

economy, for building jobs within it, which sees Australia come out of this much

better than we went in.



CONNELL: We've got Jobkeeper of course ending at the end of this month, Labor

has been calling for something, but a sector specific approach to replace it. Now, if

that's the case, people that have racked up this personal debt won't necessarily be

helped right, they’re just right across the economy. So is there any particular

prescription for this issue you're suggesting or not yet?



MARLES: Well, I think there needs to be a plan across the economy for how we

deal with the immediacy of the next month or so but also how we rebuild the

economy going forward. But, you're right in highlighting that the immediate issue

here is that 27 days from now, as things stand, Jobkeeper comes to an end across

the economy. In Queensland, there's something like 240,000 Queenslanders who

rely on Jobkeeper. This is a State where tourism is a huge industry, where the

impact of the necessary closure of our international border is felt very acutely. And

the fact of the matter is that if Jobkeeper does come to an end, and there is

nothing done here, we're going to see thousands of businesses go bust, we're

going to see tens of thousands of Australians lose their job and in the context of

the personal debt that people are experiencing already, that's only going to make

things worse.



CONNELL: Well, can I just clarify then Labor's position? Are you saying Jobkeeper

should continue in some form across the whole economy, or just sector specific?



MARLES: I think there needs to be an answer from the federal government about

how the transition of Jobkeeper is going to be done in a way which takes into

account the reality of the economy that is in front of us right now. There are areas -

and it's for the government to explain that. I mean, there are clearly sectors in the

economy, and tourism is an obvious one where, you know, we're not back to

business as normal by the end of March, where the international border is still

closed, for example. And that's having a really significant impact on a whole lot of

businesses across this State.



CONNELL: Right, and a lot of them are calling out for-



MARLES: There are-



CONNELL: I’m just trying to-



MARLES: No-



CONNELL: I’m just trying to clarify your position. Is it, when Jobkeeper ends are

you saying there should be something right across the board? So Jobkeeper, as

we know it continues even if it might be a smaller amount, or are you saying sector

specific is fair enough from April?



MARLES: What we're saying is that it is for the government to make this

explanation clear about how it is going to transition from Jobkeeper in a way which

is -  takes into account the realities of what's going on in the economy. Mentioned

tourism, in Victoria, you still see a very significant reliance on Jobkeeper as well,

given all the difficulties that have occurred in that State. What we are talking about

is a stark ending to Jobkeeper on the 28th of March as is currently planned, and

that's only 27 days away. Then in lots of areas, we're going to see businesses go

bust and I really, you know, we can talk about whatever ideas we might have. The

fact of the matter is that the people in the driving seat are the government. This is

not a decision -



CONNELL: That's true -



MARLES: - for after the next election, this is a decision about next month. And

they need to make a call on it.



CONNELL: Labor enjoyed saying, it was our idea for a wage subsidy, i.e.,

Jobkeeper, so why not get ahead of the curve this time and tell Australians what

you think the economy needs from April?



MARLES: Well, what we're really making very clear, Tom, is what the economy

does not need is for a stark ending of Jobkeeper across the entire economy, which

will see thousands of businesses go bust and tens of thousands of people lose

their job. And you're right, we do make very clear that when COVID-19 first hit, it

was the Scott Morrison's Government's view that a wage subsidy was going to be

bad for the economy; it was going to be dangerous. And it was actually Labor

which argued for a wage subsidy, which ultimately has come in the form of

Jobkeeper. That was a critical measure, which has got our economy and lots of

people through the hardships of the last 12 months. But we're not at a point in lots

of areas of the economy, where we're back to business as usual. And aviation is

another example, but people can see it plainly, they can certainly see it plainly in

Brisbane. I think that the question of the personal debt issue, which has been

described in the Courier-Mail today just highlights another way in which we can

see how there's been a tremendous impact associated with the recession, and to

see Jobkeeper just end across the board at the end of this month will be

devastating.



CONNELL: I want to get on to another couple of minutes just quickly. The first one

is this troubling one of an historical rape allegation against a Cabinet Minister. It

can't go any further, it won't go all the way through New South Wales Police, for

example, because of the tragic situation that the woman making the complaint did

suicide. But wouldn't any other inquiry that looked into this, be it Parliament,

otherwise, come up against the same issue that the claims can't be fully tested?



MARLES: Well, you know, obviously, I'm in the difficulty of - I’m in the difficult

position of not knowing all the details here. I think all that, you know, I can say, and

we can say as an Opposition is that these matters need to be referred as they

have been to the appropriate authorities, they need to be investigated as much as

they can be. And in saying all of that, you know, the starting point is, is just to

acknowledge the tragedy, which has played out here and, you know, express my

sympathies and thoughts for the family and all of those concerned. I think

ultimately, it is a matter for the Prime Minister then to satisfy himself that the

Cabinet Minister in question is in a position to continue to act while whatever

processes are underway are complete. And really, that's a matter for the Prime

Minister.



CONNELL: We’re due to hear from him today. And finally, the Aged Care Royal

Commission report being released today. Just interesting to read already, though,

a philosophical disagreement between the two Commissioners. One thinks

perhaps government paying more- and that might be hypothecating, you might be

talking about a levy, which is a tax. The other thinking it's about the user paying

more. Where do you sit on this?



MARLES: Well, let's see what the report ultimately says today. But one thing

which is really clear in my mind is you don't need a report to tell you that the



system is broken. And for all of those who are in aged care, for all those who have

a loved one who is in aged care, it is plain to see that this is a system which is not

offering dignity across the board to every elderly Australian. And that has to be the

goal of the system. And however it's done, it is really for the Government to make

clear when the report is handed down how they intend to fix this system so that it

does provide the dignity that older Australians obviously deserve.



CONNELL: Richard Marles, appreciate your time today.



MARLES: Thanks, Tom.



CONNELL: If you or anyone you know is feeling distressed, you can call Lifeline

13 11 14. You can also visit lifeline.org.au



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363



