

TRANSCRIPT  Senator James Paterson

Chair, Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security  Liberal Senator for Victoria



Thursday 11 March 2021

ABC Radio National Breakfast

Subjects: Ted Hui, The Quad, PJCIS universities inquiry



Fran Kelly: Senator James Paterson is chair of the Federal Parliament's Joint Committee  on Intelligence and Security. Today, it holds its first hearing on an inquiry into alleged  Chinese interference in Australian universities. Senator Paterson, welcome back to  breakfast.

Senator James Paterson: Good morning, Fran. Thank you for having me.

Kelly: Can we look at the case of Ted Hui here. He fled Hong Kong in 2019 after he was  charged with national security offences, he's currently in quarantine in Darwin. He flew in  from London and he's the first opposition politician to be granted a travel exemption by the  Morrison government. Is that a deliberate message to Beijing that Australia is prepared to  do what it can to help the pro-democracy campaign in Hong Kong?

Paterson: Well Australia has been very outspoken, rightly, about the way in which the  Chinese government has not lived up to the promises that it made to respect the autonomy  and freedom of Hong Kong and its people. But I don't think we should over interpret or  over-read Australia's decision to welcome Ted Hui as a visitor. And in fact, in some ways,  this perfectly illustrates the problem in the relationship with China that arises from time to  time. What we regard as a purely domestic sovereign issue for Australia, our immigration  policies, and which visitors we choose to welcome or not, the Chinese government and the  Chinese Communist Party regards as interfering in its domestic affairs. I have to say to put  it politely that's a fairly expansive definition of domestic affairs. It's a fairly extraterritorial  definition of domestic affairs. I think any genuinely independent observer who looked at  this would say, why would Australia's immigration policies be a domestic issue for the  Chinese government?

Kelly: I think the Chinese government's talking about its rule of its rule of law, isn't it? It  sees it differently. It says this man was a fugitive from the law. Have we given safe haven  to a to a criminal, that's the way they're saying it.

Paterson: Well, he hasn't actually come to Australia from China or even Hong Kong. He's  come from elsewhere. And why should someone coming from the United Kingdom, for

example, to Australia be a matter for the Chinese government? Why should the Australian  government hand over control over its immigration policy to any foreign government, the  Chinese government included? This is solely a domestic matter for Australia, a sovereign  matter for Australia. And no self respecting government, left or right, Labor or Liberal,  could ever allow a foreign government to dictate to us those sorts of things.

Kelly: Ted Hui says he's going to lobby the government for more support. He'll try to  expand the pro-democracy movement from exile here in Australia. Is he welcome to do  that?

Paterson: Well, any Australian citizen is welcome to campaign on any political issue and  in fact, any visitor to Australia, whether they're a citizen or not, enjoys all the rights and  freedoms that Australians enjoy. They enjoy freedom of speech, freedom of political  campaigning. So he's welcome to do that here, just as any other citizen is welcome to do  that, too. And by the way, citizens or other visitors who have a different view to him are  welcome to put their arguments too and that's the great virtue of a open liberal democracy  like Australia.

Kelly: And the Australian government has helped this man come to Australia. Do you  expect that will signal to other activists in Hong Kong that they are welcome too? Would  you expect more dissidents to apply to come, especially to try and get out before there's -  well, there's a whole raft of new laws coming in, and one of them would give the Hong  Kong government unfettered powers to stop people leaving Hong Kong.

Paterson: Well, because of the broken promises of the Chinese government things have  changed dramatically in Hong Kong. And I think there will be a lot of people in Hong Kong  who'll be looking elsewhere for their future and we welcome those people with open arms  to Australia, not just because we are a place that welcomes people who flee difficult  circumstances, but because, frankly, these people have a lot of value to add to Australia.  They're highly entrepreneurial people. There are many values in common with the people  of Hong Kong and the people of Australia. They have a very strong attachment to many of  the liberal democratic features that we have. So I'd be delighted if many more people from  Hong Kong chose to make their home in Australia.

Kelly: And is Ted Hui now going to be given a permanent visa can apply for political  asylum. What would you expect?

Paterson: He has to go through the normal processes that anyone else who wishes to  achieve that to go through, and they'll be assessed on its merits.

Kelly: On another issue on Saturday, the prime minister will take part with the US  President, Joe Biden, in the first ever leaders meeting of the Quad dialogue, which brings  together Australia, the US, Japan and India. President Xi Jinping is interested in this, and

he is apparently told his military t"o be prepared to respond to difficult situations at any  time." So this is quite an a quite a commentary from the Chinese president and comes  alongside the time that China is noting that the Quad is meeting at a leaders level. Do you  think this is a response to the Quad leaders talks?

Paterson: It's really up to the Chinese government to say whether it is or it isn't. But  Australians should be immensely encouraged at the fact that the Quad has been upgraded  to the leaders level and so quickly under the new Biden administration. The Quad really  got its life and got going under the Trump administration at the foreign minister's level. But

to have a new administration demonstrate its support for the dialogue is really  encouraging. It shows actually how bipartisan the consensus is in Washington D.C. on  Indo-Pacific security issues, and it shows what common values and common interests we  have with India, with Japan and the United States. And, it should be encouraging to all  countries in the region. I know it will be warmly welcomed by many countries in the region  who want to see it to be a stable, secure, prosperous and peaceful region.

Kelly: And the prime minister is situating that way. He said this is another step forward in  how Australia sought to keep Australians safe by ensuring we're working with our partners  and our allies in particular. And then we've got this comment from the from the foreign  ministry. I mean, rather comment from the the Chinese president who's, you know, saying  instructing the military to focus on, quote, combat readiness.

Paterson: There's nothing that we're doing to contemplate any of those sorts of activities.  This is about working together with like-minded countries on a whole range of issues. Yes,  absolutely on maritime security and stability in the region, but also on further working  together to combat Covid-19, transnational crime, drug trafficking, all those sorts of issues,  climate change. I mean, there is a lot that we agree on between these four countries and  that we'll work closely together on.

Kelly: I suppose I'm saying has the conversation publicly starting to take a different turn  here? And how cautious do we need in terms of how far we push China? It's just  announced a seven per cent increase in its defence budget to 270 billion dollars a year.

That utterly dwarfs the forty two billion dollars Australia spends every year, of course. But,  you know, is this do you see this as a change of tone, public tone in the discussion?

Paterson: I understand the point you're making, Fran, but what's the alternative? Should  we allow foreign governments, any foreign government, China included, dictate to us what  our national security policy should be?

Kelly: Or who we meet with, no.

Paterson: No, exactly.

Kelly: No we shouldn't but I'm saying do you suggest this is a change of tone from China?  That's really what I'm asking.

Paterson: Well, I think there's been a change of tone from China over a longer period of  time. I think there's certainly been under Xi Jinping's leadership, a much more muscular,  robust approach to diplomatic affairs. He has pioneered the wolf-warrior school of  diplomacy, which takes a much more aggressive approach to allies. I don't think that's  been the wisest path for China and for the Chinese government, but that is a matter for  them.

Kelly:  On another issue, your joint committee on Intelligence Security today has its first  hearing into the national security risks affecting higher education research. It'll hear from a  number of people, including Mike Burgess, director general of ASIO. Is it possible to  describe how big the threat is that we're facing? And is it mainly coming from China? Is  that what you are expecting to hear today?

Paterson: Well, it's taken very seriously by our security agencies, including ASIO, and  really from voices across the political spectrum. We're going to hear from the young

student from University of Queensland Drew Pavlou today who I think would describe  himself as having a left wing worldview and has encountered these issues on campus.  From Elaine Pearson, who's an academic at the University of New South Wales and the  director of Human Rights Watch in Australia, as well as Alex Joske, formerly at the  Australian Strategic Policy Institute, all of whom agree that this is a very serious problem  and that it poses a real threat to what we want our universities to be, to be open places of  dialogue and debate and discussion where research is conducted with integrity and  transparency, and where things funded by Australian taxpayers are for the value of  Australian taxpayers and not anyone else.

Kelly: And beyond that, is there another element to it? If your committee finds, for  example, that Australian research is being misused to further Chinese military ambitions or  to crack down on minority groups like the Uighurs, would you be recommending an end to

academic cooperation?

Paterson: I think there's great benefits of international academic cooperation, and we  certainly wouldn't want to end all forms of international academic cooperation, but we do  want to make sure that it takes place consistent with Australia's national interest and the  interests of the taxpayers who ultimately fund it. And I think it is fair to say that over the last  five years or so that those risks haven't always been well managed or prudently managed  by universities. And some universities in particular have got themselves into difficulty by  not being sufficiently diligent about these issues. I think that's changing. I hope that's  changing. And we are looking for some good stories out of this as well, the universities that  have taken a leadership role in this regard and are making good progress.

Kelly: Well, it's difficult for them isn't it? Because it will have serious implications for the  financial viability of research at our unis?

Paterson: It may be difficult Fran, but again, what is the alternative? Should we allow  someone funded by an Australian Research Council grant to also be working under a  Chinese government funded Thousand Talents program? Should we allow them to be  filing patents in China for the intellectual property that they generate as an Australian  researcher? There are a lot of things which are difficult, but the alternatives can often be  far worse.

Kelly: Senator Paterson, thank you very much for joining us.

Paterson: Thank you, Fran.

ENDS

