

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  OFFICER, VIC  THURSDAY 11 FEBRUARY 2021



Eo&e…

JASON WOOD: Thanks, everyone. Right to go? My name's Jason Wood I’m the federal member for La  Trobe. It's absolutely fantastic again to have Prime Minister Scott Morrison in La Trobe and here today in  Officer South can I also acknowledge, having read here, the CEO of Simmons Homes and Denita from the  Master Builders Association, and in particular to Thalia and Mitchell, this is your home. Congratulations.  They were here under the or used the HomeBuilder programme. $25,000 dollars to get them in to the  new home owners market.

La Trobe, you may not be aware, is in actual fact the fastest growing federal electorate in the country. For  those who have driven along the Monash Freeway today, that was an announcement when Prime Minister  was Treasurer back in March 2016, $500 million dollars. In actual fact, we've even put more federal  funding into that, extra lanes from Clyde Road locally to Cardinia Road, but also South Gippsland Highway  to Warrigal Road.

There's a lot of new infrastructure obviously going in to La Trobe. From new car parks to keeping people  employed during this COVID pandemic has been something really important for us locally. So it's been  keeping the tradies, especially from areas like Pakenham and some are on site here today. The  HomeBuilder has been really important for us, not only locally, but nationally. And again, that's just  fantastic to have the PM here today. A regular visitor to La Trobe. Thank you so much PM.

PRIME MINISTER: Thanks very much. Well, thank you very much, Jason, and particularly to you, Mitchell  and Thalia, congratulations not only on taking on this wonderful opportunity you have here to build your  first home, but congratulations on your engagement and your wedding next year, which is also  tremendous news. And god bless you with all of that, I hope, you look forward to the preparations, I think  planning a wedding can sometimes can be more difficult than building a house you might find over the  course of the next year. But that's tremendous to be here with you. And to Denita, thank you also for  joining us here today.

Australia's response to the pandemic is working. And it is working, and that is being recognised,  particularly when you compare how Australia's response to the pandemic plays out to the experience of  so many other countries around the world. That pandemic response has, of course, been about the

extraordinary effort and the response that has gone into the health impacts of the pandemic. But it has  also been about the response that we've put in relation to the economy. We said at the outset, save  livelihoods, save lives. And we are doing both of those things. Our responses, the policies we put in place,  the programmes we've put in place, are working and we're seeing the evidence of that. In January, we  saw 100,000 Australians come off JobSeeker. We saw at the end of September, some 2.1 million  Australians come off JobKeeper, some 450,000 businesses back on their feet as the comeback of the  Australian economy continued. It’s lights, camera, jobs when it comes to the support and incentives we've  put in place for our film industry as the rest of the world are seeing Australia's response to the pandemic.  And they're saying that's where we need to be. That's where they're getting it right. And you know,  whether it was JobKeeper or JobSeeker, the cash flow boost or the many other things that has seen  Australia come through this with the strength that we have to date, HomeBuilder was one of those key  projects, one of those key policies. And, you know, when we announced that policy, it had it’s septics, it  had its critics. They said nobody was going to take this on. Not only did they take it on, but they've taken  it on far beyond our expectations. Some, just shy of 82,000 applications. This is a pipeline of work of some  $18 billion dollars, a residential building and construction industry, which you see on display here and so  many places like it around the country was looking at a chasm at the end of September or thereabouts of  last year. And now it is looking at a pipeline of two years at least of new work. That's a product of  confidence. It's a product of the right policy settings. We just saw in the confidence statistics released  yesterday, once again more optimists than pessimists in Australia about our economic future. That's  because of the resilience and great optimism of Australians, no doubt. But backed in by the policies that  they can see are working and are working for them, they're certainly working for Mitchell and Thalia here,  as they can realise their dream of their first home as they move into it later this year. And then they are  married next year. So that's exciting as a Prime Minister, it's exciting as a government to see that when  you design these programmes that they get these types of results. This is what it was intended to do. This  is what it is doing. And I think that is giving Australians great confidence. Now that's not to say there won't  be bumps along the road still, that there are still not challenges, of course there are. But we are taking  them, those challenges. We're dealing with them. There are sectors of the Australian economy that  continue to have real challenges. The aviation sector in particular, as Secretary Kennedy was remarking  earlier today, that's true. But we'll work through those issues and challenges, just like we've worked  through all of the others, getting Australians back into work, getting businesses back on their feet, getting  Australia moving forward strongly again. And that comeback certainly started last year. And I expect over  the course of this year, over the course of this year, we will see that momentum continue. You know,  we're taking Australia out of crisis. We're taking us beyond the crisis. A crisis we want to be behind us.  And I think all Australians feel that way. And our policies are leading us out of crisis and they're leading us  into growth. I'm going to ask Denita to say a few words and then we're happy to take some questions.

DENITA WAWN, CEO MASTER BUILDERS AUSTRALIA: Thank you, Prime Minister. Denita Wawn, CEO  Master Builders Australia. It is no exaggeration to say that the industry was going to fall off a cliff when  we put a proposal to the federal government in April about looking at incentives to try and get people  back into the industry and back building homes. We saw contracts cancelled and sales dry up. When we  announced HomeBuilder and I was thankful to stand there on a frozen, cold Googong morning, we in our  wildest dreams never expected the success that we've had. But what has it meant? It has meant that  we've seen, as the Prime Minister said, 82,000 applications, has resulted in around about $2 billion spent  by the government. But let's look bigger picture. That means $18 billion to $20 billion worth of building  activity. But it goes further, that then equates to $60 billion dollars worth of economic activity in the  community because the residential building industry has a three times multiplier effect of economic  activity, the biggest of any industry. So this is not just saving the jobs of our industry, but it is also saving  the jobs of the building supply companies. It's also saving those guys, selling the bacon and egg and the

coffees at the local store. It has had a significant impact throughout the community and we are very  grateful to the federal government in providing this incentive and secondly, extending it. It is a pipeline of  work that has meant we can keep hundreds of thousands of people in their jobs, but more importantly,  create new jobs. Thank you.

PRIME MINISTER: Thank you. I'm happy to take some questions, Denita is sort of joining us for questions  on this programme. And then we can move to other economic issues, if you'd like, or other issues as you'd  like. Any questions?

JOURNALIST: When will the HomeBuilder programme come to an end or do you intend to keep running  it right throughout this year?

PRIME MINISTER: The programme settings have been finalised now, so it has had a role in getting these  sort of important projects brought forward and happening. And so the settings have now been finalised.  So those opportunities that have been put in place, people have realised them. And the whole point of  these programmes, whether it's JobKeeper, whether it's HomeBuilder, whether it's the COVID supplement  on JobSeeker, all of these were designed as temporary, targeted, proportionate measures to stand in the  gap during the crisis and then enable the economy to stand on its own two feet. We're not looking at  renting an economy in the future. We're looking at having an economy that stands strongly on its own  two feet.

JOURNALIST: Many of those incentives end next month, what's your plan to make sure the economy  doesn’t fall off a cliff after that?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, there's $240 billion dollars, in fact, $251 to be specific more broadly, that has  been pumped into the Australian economy in a record period of time. That money is now sitting on the  balance sheets of households and businesses all around the country. Confidence is what unlocks that and  then takes the Australian economy into the next phase. But the measures we still have in place, very  important ones. The Job Hiring Credit, the JobMaker Job Hiring Credit, the apprenticeship support  initiatives they continue, the instant expensing which continues, which drives the investment, as the  Reserve Bank governor himself has said. The challenge now is about the investment that comes from the  private sector. There is a point of handoff where the private sector stands up and that means the  government sector has done its job. Supports that we provide more generally over time they continue, of  course they do, the social safety net, a strong and effective incentivised tax system, R&D concession, those  sorts of things. They keep the investment flowing. And when you look at particularly our manufacturing  programme, $1.5 billion dollars, investing in critical manufacturing industries, the investment we're  putting into new energy technologies, all of this continue to support what we're doing as an Australian  economy, working together, governments, business, research institutions, scientific community and so  on. So our plan is for the Australian economy to stand on its feet, for the Australian economy to get well  clear of the crisis. You don't run an Australian economy on crisis settings when you’ve got through the  crisis. We still have some challenges ahead of us, but we are certainly moving beyond that.

JOURNALIST: Speaking of the challenges, here in Melbourne are you concerned by the outbreak out of  hotel quarantine, [inaudible] Holiday Inn at the airport. And are you concerned at all by the government's  handling of that, given that they have said repeatedly that Victoria's hotel standard is the gold standard?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I would be here if I wasn't confident. I’ve just flown down from Sydney today.  That's why I'm here, business as usual for me being in Melbourne here today. But I'd say this. Look, I seek

to support every state to be as successful as they possibly can be in what they're doing to manage the  health issues around the COVID pandemic. So, you know, I don't have a favourite in any of this. I'm not  looking to score them. I'm just looking to support them in what they're doing. And that's what Australians  would expect of me. And so, you know, how they talk about each other is up to them. I'll leave that to  them. But what Australians, I think, want to see is us working together. And I've got to say, the states and  territories do, they do work together. They might have the odd state sledge here and there. But honestly,  at the end of the day, that's not something I'm particularly interested in. I'm more interested in how  they're doing things on the ground. We're putting significant support in to support the Victorian  government here, as we did when Victoria hit the wall in the middle of last year and we worked with them  to get Victoria out of that situation. We'll work through them on this situation. But as I said last Friday,  the risk, the risk matrix is changing this year and our responses will change this year. You know we  understand what happens and we learn from it and it gets stronger and stronger and stronger. So I believe  our system is stronger today than it was 3 months ago, than it was 6 months ago, than it was 9 months  ago. And that's why it gives me and I think Australians greater confidence to step forward into 2021. We'll  manage these things along the way. We have, and I suspect that will continue.

JOURNALIST: And the European Union overnight gave approval for vaccines, Pfizer vaccines to be shipped  out, does that now give a clearer timeline for when the first jab will be?

PRIME MINISTER: I'll have a bit more to say about that in the not too distant future.

JOURNALIST: Can’t say it now?

PRIME MINISTER: Not today. I won't be saying that. But I want to thank my ministers in particular,  Ministers Hunt and Minister Payne and all of their teams in the Department of Health and Department of  Foreign Affairs and Trade. We have worked through those issues constructively. We have very good  relationships with the European Union. I, of course, have spoken to Ursula von der Leyen on many  occasions over the course of the pandemic. And, you know, I've spoken to a lot of the European leaders,  too, and I'm very aware of the extreme pressure that has been on them in relation to their access to  vaccines. So I think Australia has done very well to maintain our supply lines here as has been confirmed  by the European Union. So, you know, we're on track.

JOURNALIST: Did you have to intervene to get those ships on the way?

PRIME MINISTER: This is a- no, I wouldn't, no I wouldn't put it in that way. No, I wouldn't. Basically, the  supply lines have been kept open as we expected them to.

JOURNALIST: They did put a ban in place so what got them to-

PRIME MINISTER: Well, that was an interpretation of what that ban meant for Australia. And I think that  was misread.

JOURNALIST: So there wasn't a ban on them heading to Australia?

PRIME MINISTER: Australia wasn't the issue.

JOURNALIST: Is there any discussions around the borders given what’s going on in Victoria?



PRIME MINISTER: With who?

JOURNALIST: The borders, any border closure- any discussions, are you aware of? Given South Australia  has closed their borders to us?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, look, they're matters for states, as you know. And as you know, I've always been  an advocate of the hotspot approach and making that as localised as possible because that's what keeps  Australia open. My objective is to keep Australians safe and to keep Australia as open as possible, because  that's what builds the confidence and unlocks $250 billion dollars that the Commonwealth government  has put in to support and strengthen the economy over the next year and beyond, including with projects  like this programme here with HomeBuilder. And so it is a partnership, I think, with the states to ensure  that we maintain that momentum and the risk tolerance that I think is within the Australian community.  And I should say the risk resilience that has now been built up in states right around the country, has been  on display. We had those shocks earlier this year and the systems passed the test. Now, that's not to say  there won't be the odd issue here in this facility or in that state or in this place or that place. But the, I  think the implications of that, particularly as the year progresses, will change and therefore the responses  will change as well.

JOURNALIST: Is it time for a fundamental change to hotel quarantine?

PRIME MINISTER: No. I mean, the hotel quarantine programme has seen some 211,000 people come  through it. And we're talking about a handful of cases. I mean, this is a system the rest of the world wants  to replicate. And this is a system that has been very effective in protecting Australia. And that's why all  the states and territories agreed last year that this was the right way to go and it has proved itself to be  the right way to go. That doesn't mean there still aren’t challenges now, particularly as we've seen  additional strains. But I applaud the work that's been done, whether it's by the Victorian government here  with the changes that they've made over these last few months in particular, I think they're good changes.  I think the way that they've moved on testing of quarantine workforces, good changes, and that  information has been shared with other states and territories. We've established the National Resilience  Facility at Howard Springs in the Northern Territory, which is what the recommendation was of the review  that we undertook. And we'll consider other options if we think they're viable. But that's the facility that  we've focussed on and that's the one we're expanding and that's the facility we bring the majority of our  charter flights through so as not to put those charter flight pressures on other states and territories. But  the hotel quarantine system has certainly had its shocks along the way. But when you step back and you  look at the scoreboard in terms of how Australia has fared compared to all the other countries in the  world, now, it's good for us to be hard marker's on ourselves. I'm not saying we shouldn't, and we should  try and get to as perfect a situation as we possibly can. But I've got to tell you, Australia's got about as  close to that mark as anyone else has in the world. And the states have done, I think, a tremendous job in  doing that. And of course, you know, I'm grateful to New South Wales for taking the lion's share of that  load.

JOURNALIST: Paul Kelly, did yesterday or the day before announce a review into the hotel quarantine  system. What's that going to achieve though if you’re saying,

PRIME MINISTER: No I wouldn't describe it like that. I mean, there's a constant process going on with the  medical expert panel, a constant process going on as to how they can continue to improve things and  learn the lessons from what's happening. It's not a static process. It's a dynamic process. And it's been

that dynamic process since this began in March, which has seen its constant improvement. So, no, I  wouldn't describe it in that way. I'd just say it's just them doing their job, as they have been doing all along.

JOURNALIST: Just back to Cassie’s point, on the border closures, have you been briefed on the truck crash  that occurred at Serviceton on the South Australian - Victorian border overnight? There’s been some  indications that was-

PRIME MINISTER: No I haven’t had any full briefing on that. I've been in transit obviously since early this  morning, and I haven't had that opportunity. So it wouldn't be appropriate for me to make comment on  that.

JOURNALIST: Just on the economy. Will you commit to lifting the rate of JobSeeker? There are people  who will struggle when that, when the Coronavirus supplement is removed?

PRIME MINISTER: These are matters we're still considering. And when we're in a position to make a  statement on those, then we will.

JOURNALIST: Just on industrial relations, Labor says your changes to the better off overall test will see  workers conditions and wages slashed. How can you guarantee that won’t happen?

PRIME MINISTER: Labor is engaged in massive overreach and their claims are simply untrue. We saw  yesterday the leader of the opposition, we saw Labor demonstrate that they just don't know how to think  things through. I mean, they weren't that flash on policy when they were in government. I think they've  got worse in opposition. They just don't think through the consequences of what they're saying. And then  they would leave you to bear the cost of those consequences because they haven't thought of them. You  know, government requires you to think through those things. And that's what we've done. You know, we  thought through the impacts and the implications of our policies to respond to the pandemic and how it  would all come together, and that's why we set out at the start of the pandemic some really clear  principles to guide us. Temporary, proportionate, using existing delivery mechanisms, engaging and  effective with other arms of policy, monetary policy. We set all this out, and that guided our decision  making. I've got no idea what's guiding the Labor Party, and I don't think the Australian people do either.

Thanks very much, everyone.

[END]

Media Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

