THE HON MELISSA PRICE MP Minister for Defence Industry Member for Durack

MEDIA RELEASE

AUSTRALIAN BUSINESSES CONTINUE TO KICK SOVEREIGN MANUFACTURING GOALS

24 February 2021

The Morrison Government is helping more local Australian companies to build up their sovereign capability in a program that will also help to boost local jobs.

Three small Australian manufacturing businesses have received more than $2 million in support in the latest round of Sovereign Industrial Capability Priority grants.

South Australian companies Axiom Precision Manufacturing and M. & I. Samaras both received grants of $1 million, while NSW company Jehbco Manufacturing received $92,340.

Axiom has contributed to Australia’s COVID-19 response by producing face shields for health and aged care workers, and recently signed a contract for component supply for the Joint Strike Fighter Program.

It is the second Sovereign Industrial Capability Priority grant Axiom has received, and will be used to further develop its precision welding capabilities.

“Axiom boasts an already strong track record and this grant boosts their potential to provide high quality welding capabilities to Australia and our partners,” Minister for Defence Industry Melissa Price said.

“Our other two awardees, M. & I. Samaras and Jehbco Manufacturing, are on their own journey to provide improved quality and precision capabilities to our ADF.

“Australian companies have world-leading capabilities and this program ensures companies like Axiom, M. & I. Samaras and Jehbco Manufacturing can continue to grow, avoiding Australian reliance on foreign companies for crucial Defence technologies and components.

The three companies are the most recent of 73 Australian small and medium businesses to benefit from the SICP grants program, to a combined value of $40 million since November 2018.

Grant applications can be made at any time and submitted through the Centre for Defence Industry

Capability at: https://www.business.gov.au/Grants-and-Programs/Sovereign-Industrial-Capability-Priority-Grants.

The Sovereign Industrial Capability Priority Grants announced today:

Company

Grant Amount Grant Funding Purpose State

Axiom Precision Manufacturing $1,000,000 Development of capability to weld high precision structures, as well as to weld armoured steel whilst maintaining its

mechanical properties.



SA

M. & I. Samaras  (No  3) $1,000,000 Development and installation of a robotic assembly and welding line, designed for heavy engineering, equipped with

advanced manufacturing capabilities as required by the shipbuilding program.



SA

Jehbco Manufacturing $92,340 Purchase and commission of capital equipment, as well as upgrades to overall security, that will facilitate significant

productivity gains through reducing manufacturing time, improving quality and precision.



NSW

Media contacts

Ben Spencer (Minister Price’s office): +61 412 754 310 Steve Kuper (Minister Price’s office) :+61 421 668 874 Defence Media: media@defence.gov.au

Authorised by The Hon Melissa Price MP, Minister for Defence Industry, WA, Australia

