

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RADIO BRISBANE MORNINGS WITH REBECCA LEVINGSTON

MONDAY, 15 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: COVID-19; Friends in Parliament; Polarisation in politics; Approaching the

new parliamentary year; “Upturn: A Better Future After COVID-19"; Working better

together in the future; Visit to Queensland; Election speculation; Fixed parliamentary

terms.



REBECCA LEVINGSTON, HOST: My interview with Tanya Plibersek that was pre-recorded

because she was here on Friday. And yeah, I guess I wasn't quite a my usual mindset of doing

a program. So there's a pretty honest sort of a conversation back and forth. But you know, it's

like it's going to be an election year or something because we're going to have fairly senior

politicians on both sides of politics visiting the Sunshine State pretty regularly, so I thought I'm

going to take the chance and have a decent chat to Tanya Plibersek.



This is ABC. Radio Brisbane with Rebecca Levingston. I'm just going to be honest and say this

is my first interview, Tanya Plibersek since I've been in this building for two months, so hello.



TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION, SHADOW MINISTER FOR

WOMEN: Hello. Welcome back.



LEVINGSTON: Thanks. I'm going to try and remember what a microphone is, how to have a

conversation with a politician, you know, one of my things this year is to try and have more

useful conversations with politicians because I've had this time out away from the media, away

from bad news, away from politics and my God, it has been such a relief. I wonder do you ever

feel like I would like to step away from this and just have some quiet?



PLIBERSEK: I think, like most people, I crave positivity sometimes and optimism. It was a

tough year last year and in our work as local representatives were dealing with a lot of

businesses that were facing closure or that closed down. A lot of people who had lost their

jobs, people who were kept away from people they loved interstate or in nursing homes. There

was a lot of sadness and stress and difficulty last year that we wanted to help our communities

with.



LEVINGSTON: I know and while, that's your job I get that, I'm talking about you personally

because of the two things that I can pick out of political news recently; one is you and Craig

Kelly yelling at each other or him enthusiastically speaking to you in a hallway. And the other is

what happened in America and the insanity of what occurred there. I wonder for you when you

reflect on that, do you think my God? Let's not ever have that happen here or could it?



PLIBERSEK: I absolutely think we are in some ways more polarised than we have been in our

political debate, today. And I think people really finding a tribe in social media really

exacerbates that so people are sort of shouting from the edges of debate and the huge group

of people in the middle are being overlooked and losing their voice. And the way I take refuge

from that - I do seek refuge from it sometimes, the yelling - I feel really lucky all the time that

my home is a real refuge for me. I get home after a week in Canberra, I love cooking, I've got

my kids around me, I sit out in the garden in the evening, and I feel actually grateful all the time

that coming home is really my happy place and my refuge.



LEVINGSTON: But we know that lots of people don't have that happy place. They don't have

that happy refuge. And that's one of the things that's really been highlighted through 2020,

COVID lockdown, I'm more aware of that than ever. One of the things that I've reflected on is:

when we have political leaders yelling, we have a media that focuses on what might be a

snappy grab or whatever, the big picture issues remain, and I wonder: If we don't have a better

quality debate or connection whether it's on one side of politics or on both side of politics, how

can we execute on big ideas and big solutions? Let me - genuinely - do you have friends

across the political divide?



PLIBERSEK: I do. I think people would be surprised at how much work in Parliament actually

gets done across the political aisle, mostly through committee work. I was on the Security and

Intelligence Committee for a number of years and a lot of - the Government would propose

legislation, the Committee would work through it. We would generally agree on a whole series

of amendments that would improve the legislation and the government would generally accept

those amendments.



And I think unless there's a big fight, the media doesn't really pay attention. That hard detailed

work of looking at legislation line-by-line and thinking about its consequences and getting

advice from experts: that mostly goes unnoticed. And I think the other thing that people would

be surprised about are the friendships that happen across the aisle. I've got you know good

friends, people that I really, really like, in other political parties.



LEVINGSTON: Like who?



PLIBERSEK: Well, some of them...



LEVINGSTON: You can name names, Tanya Plibersek.



PLIBERSEK: I'm not sure whether they would like it.



LEVINGSTON: See, but that's the problem right? That's the problem.



PLIBERSEK: It's my bad reputation that I'm worried about, not them.



LEVINGSTON: Why would you even hesitate? Why not say this person has a fantastic mind

and we come together and we talk about ideas like because that's what people want to know is

happening because even though you talk about line-by-line legislation, honestly if people were

listening to the radio right now they'll be like yeah, I don't really know what that means. What

they do know is that we still have a massive problem with domestic violence. Here in

Queensland, we still don't know what to do when it comes to youth crime. Some people are

saying it's a crisis. Some people are saying, you know, it's something that we're dealing with

like those bigger problems still sit and in some cases grow and people going aren't the leaders

of the world paid to discuss and help address these things? And I know they're complicated.



PLIBERSEK: Yes, and I think there are a whole lot of people who do that in in politics. There's

some who aren't, there are some who really seek that division and drive it and feed it for

reasons of their own but a lot of my really good friends are the older Nationals. So Paul Neville

who sadly died a couple of years ago, was a really good friend of mine. I went to his retirement

shindig in the National Party Party room and he was just a gorgeous, lovely, beautiful, kind

man. I would be in his seat campaigning with the Labor candidate against him and it's ‘Let's

catch up for a cup of coffee. I'll take it out take you out to my favourite coffee shop’, just a

beautiful country gentleman.



Bruce Scott is another one that I'm very, very fond of. When Bruce was in the Parliament

during the big floods up here in 2011 his electorate was very badly affected and I had the

Human Services portfolio and I was ringing him to check that the Centrelink staff were where

they needed to be and that they were approachable and available. Because I was ringing him

pretty much every day when he was on the road to all the far-flung parts of his electorate, we

developed a really good practical working relationship and I became very fond of him. Jacqui

Lambie is another one that's still in the Parliament. Jacqui and I disagree on lots of things but I

like her. She's a good, decent, practical person. If I ask her 'will you vote with us on this or that'

and she says, yes, she'll do it. If she says no, she won't do it. It's just simple, it’s uncomplicated

and I really value that relationship.



LEVINGSTON: Could you ever pick up the phone to Scott Morrison?



PLIBERSEK: I've obviously spoken to him in the hallway about different things over the years

but I wouldn't say he's in my column of people that I just ring up for a chat and say, you know,

here's a bit of advice for you Scott. There are people on the other side that I have done that

with. Particularly if someone's a Minister now in a portfolio that I've previously held and I think

they're heading in the wrong direction on something or they've got something right or not quite

right. I would ring them. I would ring up and say, I really think you ought to do that this way or

that way. They don't have to take my advice but more than once I've done that behind the

scenes, just trying to get a better result for people.



LEVINGSTON: You're listening to Tanya Plibersek on ABC Radio Brisbane. Tanya's the

Member for Sydney. She's also the Shadow Minister for Women and Education. You talk about

feeling like things are a little more polarised and this whole concept of left versus right? You

see that exchange between Greg Hunt and Michael Rowland on News 24 a couple of days

ago where he was sort of saying, you know, you're of the left I expected that question with

regards to Liberal Party branding. What went through your mind when you saw that right?



PLIBERSEK: I just thought Greg Hunt thinks anyone who doesn't agree with him is, you know,

opposed to him politically. And we need to learn to disagree better and if we don't, we head

down the same track that we saw in Trump's America, the storming of the Capitol. I don't want

that in Australia. We have to focus on the ideas and disagree civilly when we don't agree.

Debate on the issues before us and just stop with the personal vilification of people.



If you look at some of the conspiracy theories and misinformation that's being peddled about

treatments for COVID-19. There's this sort of subtext to it that our health professionals are on

the take and they're not supporting this particular treatment because there's no money in it for

them and all this kind of stuff that really cheapens a really serious issue. Which is getting the

best health advice to the Australian community. If you start attacking people's motivation and

their morals when really what you're doing is disagreeing with their information, I think that's a

problem.



LEVINGSTON: So how do you feel going into 2021 given the year that the world has gone

through? How are you approaching this Parliamentary year when you do have people across

the political aisle who you're friends with and others who you clearly really disagree with. How

do you make this a productive year for you Tanya Plibersek? And for Australia?



PLIBERSEK: I feel really optimistic actually about 2021. I feel really optimistic because I think

Australians are rightly proud of the way this country has gotten through the pandemic. I think

Australians were prepared to sacrifice a lot for each other. They were prepared to stay home

when they're asked to stay home, wear masks. A lot of us will be queuing up to get the vaccine

as soon as it's available. We have shown that we are prepared to sacrifice for one another,

and a lot has been required of us in 2020.



I think if we can take that phenomenal spirit like getting kids online learning virtually overnight,

getting people to stay home from the pub when really all they want to do is be with their

friends. And having a health response that would really be the envy of most of the rest of the

world. Given that, what can we do in the aftermath of the pandemic? How can we use that

spirit to make things better for the whole country? I think that is an enormous, it's an enormous

source of optimism for me.



Because we showed that we are disciplined, we are kind, we will listen to the experts, we'll

work hard, we'll look after each other, we will sacrifice for one another. We've proved that. If

you take that and apply it to the other big issues that face us as a community. What more can

we achieve? We can achieve so much.



LEVINGSTON: If this is an opportunity, who are the big thinkers in Australia? And are there

any in Canberra?



PLIBERSEK: Well I'm glad you asked that very question because at the end of last year, I

released a book I edited where I asked some of the most interesting people I know to write a

chapter on what comes next. The book's called "Upturn: A Better Future After COVID-19" and I

put this very question to people. So I asked Ross Garnaut, for example, to write on Australia's

renewable energy future. I asked Peter Garrett to write about the environment. I asked

Rebecca Huntley to write about our neighbourhoods and the new connections we've found in

our neighbourhoods when we've been working from home. Annabel Crabb wrote on gender

relationships and men doing more work at home and whether this will change things

permanently.



And the reason I wanted to ask these people 'what comes next?' is because I think we've got a

historic moment to examine how things were going before the pandemic and say that was

going fine; this stuff really needs work; and say okay, this is the time. We're going to put the

work in, to fix our energy crisis, to do something about historic low wages growth,  to improve

our education system, to make sure aged care is working.



This is the time to take on those big tasks. After big changes in our history - think about the

end of the Second World War. We had a population that had sacrificed so much during the

Second World War. When the war ended the government said: “Okay, you've done so much,

you've sacrificed so much, our commitment is to get unemployment down. We're going to aim

for full employment and to get home ownership up.”



And in the years immediately after the Second World War they achieved that. We had

unemployment of around 2 per cent for years and home ownership went through the roof. We

can do that now. We can say to Australians "You've been disciplined. You've looked after each

other. We've come through this together". We see what we can achieve when we work

together to solve the problems that face us. Let's do that. Why wouldn't we do that?



LEVINGSTON: You're listening to Tanya Plibersek, who's done a quick dash up to

Queensland, the Sunshine State. ABC Radio Brisbane. My name is Rebecca Levingston. I

don't to be the Negative Nancy here but, and of course everyone wants aged care once you

know, there to be a revolution virtually in aged care, whether it's education or some of those

others, but let me just take an example that's applicable here in Queensland, but certainly

nationally. We couldn't even organise to get a bunch of people to pick fruit off trees during this

time. That was a problem. That was like a slowly emerging, the fruit's growing, it's ripening. We

couldn't even organise to make that happen. So can you understand why people are going

'Gosh, how are you going to address those bigger picture problems when we can't even, you

know, get the nectarines before they've dropped on the ground?



PLIBERSEK: I absolutely understand why people would look at it in something like that and go

"How hopeless are we?" But that's not just Queensland. That's Queensland, that's New South

Wales, that's Victoria, that's happened right across our country and I think there's a couple of

things that that tells us.



The first is, if you get an early warning of an emerging issue, how about we work with that and

start planning a long way out and not wait for it to become a crisis. And the other thing that I

think is a really important lesson from this, is work with the people who know what's happening

on the ground. So, of course the farmers are the first people that you'd want to talk to about

how we how we deal with this emerging issue.



But if we go a little bit deeper and say, there are examples in some sectors of the agriculture

industry of very low wages and worker exploitation. How do we deal with those issues? So, of

course you work with farmers, but you also work with unions and the other organisations that

have been trying to address those failings.



LEVINGSTON: For a long time, which again brings me back to so like who's executing on

those big ideas, and you know-



PLIBERSEK: Well the Federal Agriculture Minister should be. Like that's the job, right? This is

a this is a nationwide problem. That's the job.



LEVINGSTON: You never actually-



PLIBERSEK: Rebecca, can I just take this little bit further? I agree with you, right. People are

stressed and life is difficult and they think: ‘politic,  what does it matter? They're all the same.’

All the rest of it. I think that sort of cynicism about politics and democracy can be really

dangerous as well, because people aren't all the same and the ideas aren't all the same and

there's a big contest. At the moment we're having a big battle about what industrial relations

law, what work should look like in Australia. Pay and conditions, right? That’s a big deal, and if

you end up with a culture where people go “Oh it really doesn't matter, it doesn't impact on my

life” and pay less and less attention, that's where cynicism and bad decision-making thrives - in

that environment.



So making sure that people pay attention, are interested, argue about the things that matter -

constructively argue - that's part of a really healthy democracy and it really worries me when

sometimes in the media you get that kind of really cynical 'Oh politicians, they're all the same'

because actually we're having big fights about things that will really impact on people's lives.

Not just today and tomorrow, but for a long time. Things that will influence the direction of this

country, in some cases influence the direction of the planet. You've got to take it seriously, and

that's up to us, right?



It's up to us as political leaders to make a case for change and to tell people honestly what we

want to do and why we want to do it, but it needs a really strong media environment too -

holding people to account and not buying into the cynicism.



LEVINGSTON: I agree, which is why we're having this conversation today and I hope people

are still listening to you. Tanya Plibersek, and me, Rebecca Levingston on ABC Radio

Brisbane. Why are you in Queensland at the moment?



PLIBERSEK: I visited a couple of fantastic child care centres yesterday in Taigum and

Robertson. I was meeting with the childcare workers there. I've got the Women's portfolio so I

was talking to them about the big gap in pay between women's work and men's work

generally, and how early childhood educators can get a better deal. So that's something that

we really need to look at through our industrial relations system. And having a look at how

those child care centres are operating, talking to parents about Labor's plan for cheaper

childcare. It's a pretty good, pretty good day.



LEVINGSTON: Anthony Albanese's been here as well. Is there going to be an election in

2021?



PLIBERSEK: Oh it's anyone's guess, I mean-



LEVINGSTON: What's your guess?



PLIBERSEK: I think Scott Morrison will go when he thinks he's got the best chance of winning

an election and that could be as early as August this year, could be some time in 2022. Who

knows? I'm a big fan, I've got to say, of fixed terms. I think all this, you know speculation, we

spend six months speculating about when the election is going to be and then months winding

up to election day. I really, I think it's, you know, I like the fixed terms. I think it really takes one

source of irritation for people off the table.



LEVINGSTON: There's pros and cons on every side. I mean look at America. It's got fixed

terms and they just spend the entire term campaigning for the next election.



PLIBERSEK: That's true.



LEVINGSTON: Thank you for having a longer chat.



PLIBERSEK: It's a pleasure.



LEVINGSTON: I hope I can do this with your colleagues in your party, in the Liberal Party or

the LNP and the Nats as well. And who knows, Jacqui Lambie if she treks up to Queensland.





PLIBERSEK: She's good value. You'll like her.



LEVINGSTON: Thanks so much.



PLIBERSEK: Thank you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350



