

Hon Mark Coulton MP

Minister for Regional Health, Regional Communications and Local Government

Lucinda Barry

Chief Executive Officer, Organ and Tissue Authority



MEDIA RELEASE

9 February 2021

Grants to boost organ donation rate now open

Applications are now open for up to $4 million over four years for national partnerships and up to $450,000 for  community-based initiatives in 2021 to encourage more Australians to say “yes” to organ and tissue donation.

Minister responsible for the Organ and Tissue Authority (OTA), Mark Coulton, said the DonateLife Partnerships  and 2021 Community Awareness Grants offer unique opportunities to increase reach and engagement for  organ and tissue donation with key target audience groups - both at a national and a local level.

“Increasing awareness about organ and tissue donation and encouraging families to talk about donation and  registration, is vital to getting more people to say “yes” to donation,” Mr Coulton said.

“Engaging with a broad suite of national partners and community groups across the country helps drive the  importance of organ donation into more Australian homes, leading to greater registration and increased  donation.”

Organ and Tissue Authority CEO, Lucinda Barry said the coronavirus pandemic has seriously affected  Australia’s national program to increase organ donation, including causing the cancellation of the 2020  Community Awareness Grants round.

“The challenges of 2020 saw a significant drop in both donation and transplantation, making it critical we  engage with partners and community groups in 2021 to raise the profile of organ and tissue donation and  increase consent.”

DonateLife Partnerships provide opportunity for OTA to partner with sporting, corporate and community  organisations who have a national focus to further increase awareness about organ and tissue donation in  Australia.

“OTA is looking to partner with organisations that can demonstrate they have a national focus or national  platform across the sporting, corporate, media, and community and health care sectors,” said Ms Barry.

Up to $450,000 is available for OTA’s Community Awareness Grants to improve awareness and engagement  within the Australian community and strengthen the DonateLife brand.

“This 13th round of grants will support community groups deliver events and innovative digital engagement  activities to support the annual awareness building campaign, DonateLife Week 2021,” said Mr Coulton.

“I encourage all Australians to reflect on the life-changing benefits of organ and tissue donation and to show  your support by registering to become a donor at donatelife.gov.au and have the all-important conversation  with your family, so they know your intentions.”

DonateLife Partnerships and 2021 Community Awareness Grants are provided by the Organ and Tissue  Authority as part of its national Community Awareness and Education Program.

This funding was committed in the October 2020 Budget.

Applications for both grant opportunities open on Tuesday 9 February 2021 and close at   5:00pm AEDT on Sunday 7 March 2021.

For more information about the DonateLife Partnerships and Community Awareness Grants, including the  assessment criteria and the application process, visit www.donatelife.gov.au/grants

Media contacts  Minister Coulton: Douglas Rodgers 0411 658 056  OTA:   Mark Hindle  0403 058 662



