ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT   DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  SYDNEY  FRIDAY, 8 JANUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: The Government’s $1 billion marketing spend, masks on domestic flights,  getting the vaccine jab, dealing with UK passengers, rapid testing for domestic travellers,  Brisbane lockdown, Abu Bakar Bashir’s expected release, Craig Kelly spreading conspiracy  theories.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Thanks for joining me.  Scott Morrison is the billion dollar man. Since the LNP came to government in 2013, the Coalition  has spent $1 billion on political advertising. He’s more promo than ScoMo. More the prime marketer  than the Prime Minister. And it’s about time that this abuse of taxpayer’s funds was stopped. The  fact is that it has now reached $1 billion. So Scott Morrison’s legacy is a billion dollars of political  advertising and a trillion dollars of debt. And this advertising has reached absurd proportions when  he has now employed a former Liberal Party staffer with a contract of $190,000 to produce a video  promoting the Government’s response to bushfires at this time last year. At a time when people on  the south coast of NSW, in Gippsland and in other communities that were impacted by the bushfires,  many of them still struggling to get a home, many of them still living in caravans, in spite of the fact  you have a $4 billion fund established, the Emergency Response Fund, of which the expenditure  hasn’t been made. This is just absurd. And the fact is that this Government has also made further  abuse by using companies that do Liberal Party research, giving them Government contracts, like  Crosby Textor, in order to therefore advise the Government on research that it then doesn’t release  publicly. This is a Government and a Prime Minister that doesn’t understand the difference between  taxpayers’ funds and Liberal Party funds. And today Labor is calling it out and saying enough is  enough. When it comes to 2021, we need to stop this largesse and make sure, given there is $1  trillion as a legacy of this Government, that it stops at the billion dollar figure.

JOURNALIST: How much do you think is reasonable to spend in advertising?

ALBANESE: Look, there are guidelines there. And when there is advertising that's appropriate for  public information campaigns, such as some of the advertising about the need for people to wash  their hands, to wear face masks, to respond appropriately to the pandemic, then that is appropriate.  But what's not appropriate is doing funding which promotes infrastructure which hasn't been built  and still hasn't been started. What isn't appropriate is funding for advertising, of course, for the app  that didn't work. What isn't appropriate is funding this video of the bushfire response when the  bushfire response was poor at the time and the recovery has been inadequate as well. I think when  we're talking about taxpayers’ funds, whether it be sports rorts, whether it be this largesse as well,  then it needs to be examined by a national integrity commission. But whether this represents good  value for money, or whether it's just an abuse of taxpayers funds, quite clearly people know the  difference between advertising which is genuine community information and advertising in which

ministers stand up in Question Time and give the spin that fits in with the spin that's in the  advertising, such as the Government's recovery plan, so-called. It would be better if money was  actually spent on job creation rather than funds being spent on advertising.

JOURNALIST: (inaudible) a figure, a budget for your advertising?

ALBANESE: Well this clearly is just over the top. And there are guidelines that have quite clearly  been abused. And when we have research, then, if it is genuine public information research, then it  should be transparent. What we know is that a billion dollars over the seven years of this  Government, that's a billion dollars that is added to the debt. The debt that was doubled before the  pandemic under this Government. The debt that has now ballooned up to a trillion dollars and will  rise over the next decade, according to the Government's own estimates, to $1.7 trillion. This is a  Government that treats advertising as its priority, that treats an announcement as the end in itself,  rather than the delivery of that announcement. You can't drive on an ad, you can't ride on a public  transport project that's on TV, you've got to actually build the project. And what this Government  does is prioritise that advertising, prioritise that spin, and it's important that it be called out.

JOURNALIST: It’s expected that National Cabinet is going to mandate masks on domestic flights  and airports. Do you support this move?

ALBANESE: I do. And I've been wearing a mask on flights for some time. And I know that flights, for  example, to and from Melbourne, when I was able to travel there last year, were mandated. So I'm  not sure what the rules were around the country. But common sense tells you that given the close  proximity in which people are in on a plane, in an aircraft cabin, they're in a confined space, they're  there for a period of time, then common sense suggests that this should occur. By and large on  flights that I've been on people have been wearing masks, but not everyone has. And it makes  sense to mandate this health measure in accordance with the recommendations of the health  experts.

JOURNALIST: Should having a nationally compulsory mask policy have been prioritised earlier?

ALBANESE: Well it's up to the Government to respond to the health advice. What I know is that  various state governments have responded. Victoria. Tasmania when I flew back from Tasmania in  January certainly there was, in December sorry, certainly there was an announcement made that  everyone should wear a mask. I was wearing one anyway. But that seems to me to be a common  sense arrangement.

JOURNALIST: Are you looking forward to receiving the vaccine and have you been told when you  might be getting that jab?

ALBANESE: No I haven't. I've had no contact from the Government. I've been busy out there  arguing the case, along with Chris Bowen, for the vaccination process to be brought forward. And I'm  pleased that the Government has reluctantly agreed with what Labor’s been saying since last year.  We've been arguing the case that the TGA is an independent body which makes assessment with  regard to the rollout of pharmaceuticals and whether they're ready to go. Once it's approved, it  should be rolled out as soon as possible. If it's the case, I understand that Chris Bowen has had a  discussion with Greg Hunt where Greg Hunt raised the issue of whether himself and myself and  perhaps others might be willing to engage in an early vaccination in order to promote it. I'm certainly  up for that. But no one from the Government has approached me and the Prime Minister hasn't

raised it. So certainly I'm not after any special treatment. But if it assists the process of promoting  vaccination, then I will do whatever I can as a responsible leader to do just that.

JOURNALIST: Do you believe that it's time to shut the border to UK passengers or should any  changes in quarantine arrangements be changed for UK arrivals?

ALBANESE: Well we should listen to the experts here and take advice. Certainly it's common sense  that people have to be tested before they get on planes. I would have thought that was an  arrangement that should have been put in place a long time ago, frankly. I am pleased though, on  the vaccination issue, that there is that change. I note that the rhetoric of the Government was that  somehow Labor's call was dangerous. I note that that's what they said about wage subsidies as well  before they adopted them. This is a Prime Minister who is always following, not leading. So he says  something is bad and not appropriate before he adopts it. And it's about time that, and I hope in the  National Cabinet process today, we actually see some national leadership rather than what has  been occurring which is states going their own way on various issues and then the Prime Minister  announcing them at the end of that process. We need a far more consistent approach. And in order  to achieve that, we need national leadership and we need a Prime Minister who's prepared to put  politics aside, not engage in the selective criticism of Labor state governments, while Coalition state  governments that are doing exactly the same thing are beyond reproach.

JOURNALIST: You mentioned rapid testing for international travellers. Do you support that for  domestic travellers between states here?

ALBANESE: Well, I take medical advice there but I think there is a particular, if we look at where  infections have come from, obviously people coming from Europe or the United States in particular  and nations that have far higher infection rates than us are a greater risk. So what health authorities  should do is make proper assessments of that risk and then have a cautious approach to it. So I  haven't seen suggestions that that would be necessary for domestic travel. There are obviously  restrictions in place, have been put in place, over people travelling. We’re here in Sydney where at  the moment I don't think that there is any state or territory that we’re able to travel to without  receiving exemptions. And that's a response to the level of risk which is there.

JOURNALIST: Many people would have been surprised by this announcement of the three-day  lockdown in Brisbane. Is this something that you believe is necessary?

ALBANESE: Well I think Premier Palaszczuk has done an outstanding job throughout this crisis.  She's shown leadership. She has prioritised keeping Queenslanders safe. This is a measure which  is strict but it's proportionate. Locking down over a weekend. The evidence from Victoria and what  occurred there is that when you have an outbreak it is far easier to get on top of it early with strict  measures and then you can return to a more normal way of, level of activity. And so Premier  Palaszczuk is responding consistent with the way that she's handled the crisis. And I note that her  handling of it was overwhelmingly supported by the people of Queensland just months ago, in spite  of the Coalition in Queensland saying the border should be opened and arguing against the  restrictions and that being backed up by no less than Scott Morrison who prioritised campaigning  against the Palaszczuk Government over holding a National Cabinet meeting last year.

JOURNALIST: On another topic, Abu Bakar Bashir is likely to be released today. Should he be  released?

ALBANESE: I don't want to see this promoter of terrorism and violence released ever. And I think  this will be a difficult day for the families of those who were victims of the Bali bombings and other  activities. I had a number of people affected in my electorate who were involved in, from Dulwich Hill,  young girls, a mother and daughter as well, the Websters, who were killed in that atrocity. And I think  this will be a difficult day and my heart goes out to all those who will be doing it tough today. And I  would hope that the Australian Government, I’m sure, are making strong representations to make  sure that the closest eye is kept on this bloke to make sure that his activities don't further the, quite  frankly, catastrophic human consequences of his ideological position. Thank you very much.

Can I just make one further comment about Craig Kelly. Craig Kelly has put out a tweet overnight  that seeks to support conspiracy theories over what we saw in the United States yesterday. The idea  that a member of the Australian Parliament seeks to legitimise what was an insurrection on the floor  of the Capitol Building of the United States, an important symbol of not just democracy in the United  States but global democracy, is reprehensible. Craig Kelly, has promoted conspiracy theories about  the coronavirus, peddling dangerous comments about that and advice that it's all a conspiracy, and  now we have him justifying and seeking to make excuses for [yesterday’s events in the US], and  indeed just making comments that are just beyond belief. It is my strong view that it is time for Scott  Morrison and the Liberal Party to do something about this bloke in their ranks. He has been  protected on the last two occasions by intervention by Liberal Party prime ministers to ensure his  preselection. His own branch members in Hughes don't want him to be their representative. And yet  Scott Morrison intervened to make him a captain's pick before the 2019 election. I've had a captain's  pick too. Mine was Kristy McBain. Scott Morrison's was Craig Kelly. I stand by mine. He should cut  himself loose from his. It is time that Craig Kelly was disendorsed by the Liberal Party. And it's time, I  think, that at the next election, whether Craig Kelly stands as a Liberal Party member or not, I just  don't think that he brings anything to our national Parliament. And I don't comprehend how someone  who sits in our House of Representatives can justify, which is effectively what he has done, the  storming of the United States Parliament building. Thanks very much.

