



TIM WATTS MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR CYBER SECURITY  MEMBER FOR GELLIBRAND



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  TUESDAY, 2 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: COVID-19 Misinformation; Craig Kelly.

TIM WATTS, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR CYBER SECURITY: Yesterday at the  National Press Club we saw whose side Scott Morrison is really on. When asked to condemn  the medical misinformation being proliferated by the super spreader in his party room, Craig  Kelly, Scott Morrison, the prime minister, laughed it off. He said that Craig Kelly was doing "a  great job".

Unfortunately, we've seen in the United States recently, what happens when political leaders  turn the other cheek and ignore conspiracy theories and extremism online. They become  emboldened. And of course, that's what we've seen from Craig Kelly. Just hours after the  prime minister said that this conspiracy theorist was doing "a great job" we hear that Craig  Kelly has done an interview with Pete Evans. Now Pete Evans, of course, was fined by the  Therapeutic Goods Administration last year for promoting quack COVID cures. Pete Evans is  someone who has been kicked off Facebook. Pete Evans is someone who has been kicked  out of Big W, Target, Coles, Woolworths. These are mainstream Australian institutions that  want nothing to do with a conspiracy theorist like Pete Evans, but apparently Scott Morrison is  very happy for his own MPs to appear in interviews with Pete Evans.

Now a real leader would have dealt with a problem like Craig Kelly, long ago. A real leader  would not have intervened personally to save the preselection of a conspiracy theorist like  Craig Kelly. A real leader would have demanded that Craig Kelly stop spreading this medical  misinformation during a pandemic. A real leader would have stripped Craig Kelly of his  committee assignments in the face of this medical misinformation, including unbelievably,  insultingly, Craig Kelly's position on the Standing Committee on Industry, Innovation, Science



and Resources. A real leader would have stepped in and said that they would have nothing to  do with any MP who is spreading medical misinformation during a pandemic and would have  demanded that Craig Kelly be dis-endorsed by the Liberal Party.

This is not a trivial issue. It's not something that should be laughed off. The Prime Minister likes  to dismiss this as just something that's happening on Facebook, well unfortunately Craig  Kelly's Facebook page was shared 10 times more than the Commonwealth Department of  Health Facebook page since the start of this pandemic.  This is something that is having a real  impact in the community. We know that the vaccination campaign for COVID-19 is the most  important thing happening in this country at the moment. It's the key to our ability to get  through this pandemic and to create jobs in the reconstruction. Indeed Scott Morrison's own  government is spending $24 million promoting the COVID-19 vaccination campaign, and yet  he will do nothing to stop members of his own party room from undermining this vaccination  campaign by spreading medical misinformation.  Scott Morrison has told the social media  platforms that they have to stop medical misinformation about COVID-19 being spread during  this pandemic on their platforms. But Scott Morrison won't do anything to stop medical  misinformation being spread by members of his own party room.

A real leader would be on the side of the Australian people during this pandemic. An Albanese  Labor Party is on the side of the doctors in this pandemic. We're on the side of the nurses.  Were on side of the epidemiologists and the scientists. Because in a pandemic, that's what you  need to do to be on the side of the Australian people. That's where we need Scott Morrison to  be during this pandemic.

JOURNALIST: You mentioned that Morrison intervened to save Craig Kelly's last preselection,  will Labor be disappointed if he does the same again, given that preselections are being  finalised at the moment?

WATTS: It's not a new thing that Craig Kelly is spreading conspiracy theories online. You go  back years. I can remember sitting in the chamber while Craig Kelly told the Australian public  that renewable energy causes cancer. Now that happened before Scott Morrison personally  intervened to save Craig Kelly's preselection. Scott Morrison has said Craig Kelly is someone  that I want to share a party room with, Craig Kelly is someone that I want to stand side by side  with in this parliament. Scott Morrison owns Craig Kelly. It's about time he disowned him.

JOURNALIST: Do you think Facebook and other platforms take a stronger line to his views on  online?

WATTS: Well, I've been very clear that social media platforms have a very special obligation  during this pandemic. They need to crack down to ensure that medical misinformation is not  being spread during this pandemic because it has very significant real-world consequences.  That's why it's a really good thing that Facebook intervened to kick Pete Evans off its platform.  You know, everybody has an obligation during this pandemic to play their part to promote good  quality information for the Australian public. So when is Scott Morrison going to start playing  his part and demand members of his own party room stop undermining the government's own  vaccination campaign, stop spreading medical misinformation online and start being on the  side of the Australian public.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KIERAN INGREY 0432 507 439



