







The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

The Hon Scott Buchholz MP  Assistant Minister for Road Safety and Freight Transport  Federal Member for Wright

Senator Sam McMahon  Senator for Northern Territory











The Hon Eva Lawler MLA  Northern Territory Minister for Infrastructure, Planning and Logistics

MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au



14 January 2021

ROAD SAFETY FUNDING FLOWS TO THE NORTHERN  TERRITORY

New road safety upgrades and improvements will be delivered in the Northern Territory thanks to the  Australian Government which has allocated $33.3 million to the Northern Territory under the first  tranche of the $2 billion Road Safety Program, with a further $13.7 million provided by the Territory  Government.

Acting Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the works under tranche 1 of the $2 billion Road Safety Program will commence this  month and be completed by June 2021, improving safety and supporting jobs right across the country.

“This first tranche of funding will deliver measures that will save lives across 43 projects in the Territory,  resulting in safety upgrades to around 150 kilometres of the Territory’s road network,” the Deputy  Prime Minister said.

“Projects will include upgrades to regional roads, such as shoulder widening, installation of audio tactile  line markings and roadside barriers, intersection safety improvements and construction of rest areas  and truck stop facilities.

“Importantly, this is only the first batch of projects to be approved under the program for the Territory,  with a total of up to $96 million available to the Northern Territory to continue to roll out lifesaving  upgrades across the road network through to June 2022.”

The Australian Government’s funding for the Road Safety Program is subject to “use it or lose it”  provisions and will deliver lifesaving measures on regional roads and to protect vulnerable road users  across the Territory, while also supporting local jobs and providing a welcome boost to local economies.

The ‘use it or lose it’ provisions require states and territories to use their notionally allocated funds  within a timeframe, or the funds can be reallocated to projects in other jurisdictions.

Northern Territory Minister for Infrastructure, Planning and Logistics Eva Lawler said every Territorian  has the right to return home safely - that is why the Northern Territory Government is committing  $13.7 million to multiple road safety packages to deliver on our Towards Zero road safety goals.

“This investment will also create new local jobs across a number of industries, continuing our  Government’s focus on economic development and jobs for Territorians, while also supporting new  infrastructure projects. I am also pleased that funding will enable prepatory works to commence on the  long awaited Tiger Brennan Drive/Berrimah Road overpass, where a number of people have lost their  lives.”

Assistant Minister for Road Safety and Freight Transport Scott Buchholz said road safety was a key  priority for the Australian Government and this investment in road upgrades would provide a boost to  the economy while ensuring Australians can get home sooner and safer.

“Making our roads safer is a critical component of our work to reduce deaths and serious injuries on our  roads and move towards achieving vision zero,” Mr Buchholz said.

“Projects are already underway through the $500 million Targeted Road Safety COVID stimulus package  and this additional funding complements that work, resulting in an even greater roll out of improved  infrastructure and roads right across the nation.”

Senator for Northern Territory Dr Sam McMahon said one of the key projects expected to be rolled out  across the life of the program is the construction of an overpass at the Tiger Brennan Drive/Berrimah  Interchange, which is one of the Territory’s busiest intersections and has been the site of tragic fatal  crashes.

“Through this first tranche of the Road Safety Program we are seeing $5 million to get this critical  project underway, which once finalised will improve traffic flow for commuter and  industrial/commercial traffic and reduce crashes at this intersection,” Dr McMahon said.

“This vital funding is not only providing a much-needed boost to local jobs and the economy, it is  delivering safety measures to ensure road users stay safe on our roads.

“The most important thing we can do for our community is ensure we all get home safely as even one  death or one serious injury crash on our roads is one too many.”

For more information on the Australian Government’s road safety initiatives, visit  www.officeofroadsafety.gov.au.

Ends.

Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Jo Williamson 0418 475 668 | Dean Shachar 0418 202 860

Minister Lawler - Jasmine Roussos 0439 003 248  Assistant Minister Buchholz - Scott O’Connell 0413 424 384  Senator McMahon - Kris Civitarese 0418 220 411

