

T h e  H o n . D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T



Sunday 28th March 2021

Minister Littleproud iv Sky News with Kieran Gilbert

KIERAN GILBERT: Let’s bring in live now in the studio the Federal Emergency Management  Minister, Minister for Drought and Agriculture, as well, David Littleproud. Give us an update on  where the floods are at. What’s happening and has the recovery begun in earnest?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: It has, in fact we’ve already got 540 ADF personnel on the ground out  there, sweeping the streets and helping people clean up. They will continue to probably surge  up to around 700. We’re at the direction of the New South Wales Resilience Services to make  sure that we don’t overstep the mark and we don’t duplicate processes. So, we’re ready to  actually surge more resources when required. But there’s still an unfolding situation in Moree  as that town obviously is now just seeing the water abate, but there’s still major flooding  warnings in some systems. So it’s still important, while the sun is shining, it’s still unsafe to go  near this water. Tragically, we were reminded by that only this week when two souls were lost.  So we need to treat this seriously, we need to listen to emergency services. But we’re starting  that process now, not just with boots on the ground but the money’s starting...

KIERAN GILBERT: And so what sort of money are we talking about? For those watching who  have loved ones in affected areas, what sort of support for businesses and families?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: So we started last week and the first piece is about just putting $1000  per adult, $400 per child into their pockets so they can just- if they’ve had inundation, they are  eligible for that. That’s the initial piece. And then after the Prime Minister and I went down and  had a look through Cowper with Pat Conaghan and David Gillespie in Lyne, we were able to  see that businesses were the ones that were really taking the brunt of this. So there’s now  $75,000 grants for farmers and $50,000 for small businesses to simply repair, to get back up  on their feet. We’ve also looked at the loan process that we’ve done with respect to COVID  and the removal of JobKeeper. So those businesses that, many had come off JobKeeper  previously because things were starting to rebound, are now eligible for those loans of up to  $5 million over 10 years, with 24 months of no repayment.

KIERAN GILBERT: Is there recourse for families and businesses, and I’ve seen a number of  these reports of families, businesses, who think that their insurance is comprehensive but then  they find out it doesn’t cover flood. Is there recourse for that?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, this is the challenge we’ve got with the insurance industry and,  in fact, part of the royal commission recommendations is around the insurance industry being  more transparent. And some are actually doing that. We saw that up in Queensland in the  2011 floods, some of the insurers up there are now making it very specific that you are  covered for floods. It’s in bold writing so everyone knows, and that’s what people need to

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T



understand, they need to have transparency. The insurance industry needs to provide that, not  just for that, but also in terms of how...

KIERAN GILBERT: Should they, in this case, cut people some slack?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, we’d like to think that they’d show a little bit of humanity and  have a social conscience to these people. People enter into these contracts in good faith and  we would expect insurance companies to act in good faith. Obviously contractual law takes  precedence in this country. But we just say to the insurance industry, please, you have an  opportunity to build your reputation here.

KIERAN GILBERT: The government’s copped a bit of flak over its $4 billion emergency  response fund that was set up in April 2019. There’s been not a cent spent on mitigation  against floods. Why is that?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, sadly, this is politicisation of a program that both sides agreed  on. So, there’s a $4 billion fund. There’s $200 million a year set aside, $150 million of that can  be used for catastrophic events where there’s damage and infrastructure that needs to be  repaired. And it can only be used once all other programs have been exhausted. So we...

KIERAN GILBERT: Which program on the floods, in terms of mitigation...

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I’ll get to that. Kieran, it’s important I explain this. This is cheap  politics by the Labor Party when they themselves voted for this legislation. Before that $150  million of the $200 million can go out, other programs have to be exhausted. We created a $2  billion bushfire program that we have now nearly exhausted. So that had to be spent before  we could go anywhere near the 150. The $50 million for mitigation works, those programs will  be announced in the coming weeks. So the money is going out. But we will now look, we will  either use the...

KIERAN GILBERT: Has it been too slow, though? Like, the $50 million you said on mitigation,  it’s been two years where levies could have been built, flood resilience established. Is that  wasted time?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, let me say, we get the fund up and you’ve then got to have the  governments around it. And so that creates- while the legislation might have passed in 19 it  takes some time to get the governments around this to protect Australian taxpayers’ money.  And then there’s this thing called consultation. You should not have mitigation works  determined by a bureaucrat in Canberra. We went to the communities right across the country  and said: what is important to you? And obviously they came back, and this one is around  flood mitigation. We’ll look to the next year in terms of that $50 million. That may go into flood  mitigation again because we’ve done the leg work now to make sure that we have an  understanding of the mitigation work that’s required, and we’ll probably complement that with  even further funding as a result of the royal commission, to our response to that around flood  mitigation...

KIERAN GILBERT: But at the moment in terms of flood mitigation, all we’ve got is a fund, a  fund within a fund?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: The $50 million isn’t necessarily just for flood mitigation. Of the $200  million, the $50 million of that is not necessarily just for flood mitigation, it is for any resilience  mitigation works for any natural disaster. But flood mitigation is one that can be used quite  easily. We may use the 150, we may create another significant fund outside this ERF that we  may use for rebuilding these communities. So we’ll exhaust that before we go to the $150

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T



million. We spent more than $150 million in one electorate alone, in Eden-Monaro there was  over $200 million spent. So, to say that the Federal Government hasn’t been out there and cut  the cheque for these people is cheap politics, and this shouldn’t be about politics, this should  be about people. We’ll just say to the opposition: you actually either didn’t read the legislation  that you supported, or you’re just playing cheap politics. We should be above that.

KIERAN GILBERT: You mentioned the JobKeeper issue. On that, are you worried it might be  too early to withdraw it for some industries?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No, I think we continue to be targeted around our response to this.  The Treasury Secretary was quite clear that it was time for us to transition the economy. We’re  back to over 90 per cent of the jobs that we lost from COVID are now back in the economy. I  think the economy’s on a trajectory where we have to take some of the supports out so it can  continue to evolve as we come out of COVID-19. I think this is a responsible thing, and I think  we’ve been targeted in our responses and been industry-specific in that. That’s the agility  we’ve shown as a government. But this is Australian taxpayers’ money and we’re going to  have to pay it back, but we’ve laid the foundation stones. We haven’t frittered it away like the  GFC on Pink Batts and school halls. We’ve actually invested in money, whether it be  JobKeeper or infrastructure, that will create jobs not just in the building of it, but also in the  operation, building productivity and profitability back into the economy.

KIERAN GILBERT: On the cultural issues and the problems for the government, does the  Prime Minister have to cut Andrew Laming loose?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I think the Prime Minister’s been very clear that his behaviour is  not acceptable, and it’s not. Let’s be clear about that. And he’s been given time to go and  reflect on his actions and his future, and I think it’s important that he takes that time to  seriously consider that.

KIERAN GILBERT: He’s protected isn’t he? Because if he goes it’s a minority government.  That’s the reality, isn’t it?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: With respect, I don’t think that’s the case. This is about making sure  we do the right thing. This whole thing comes back to one word, Kieran, it comes back to  respect, respecting one another and respecting their boundaries. Unfortunately, this hasn’t  happened and we’ve got to put our hand up and say: we have to fix this. It’s important we  show we’ve fixed this and those who have done the wrong thing obviously have to reflect on  their actions and their future.

KIERAN GILBERT: It seems the Nats think they need a bit of behavioural training as well, from  what we heard at the National conference. Why is that?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: What was cited at the National conference was around making sure  that the leadership and the executive had coaching around how to deal with these complaints.  Some of the people that go into executive positions in the National Party are volunteers and  don’t necessarily have the corporate experience nor the professional training to understand  how to deal with these complaints in a professional way, in a satisfactory way. So we all can  learn from how we can do this better. So what we’ve said is: if we get these complaints we’d  like to have a process that is world’s best, and that’s what the National Party is saying. We  need to get back to that simple word of respect.

KIERAN GILBERT: The PM’s speech to staff was leaked to James Massola in the paper  today. Doesn’t that in and of itself show you how morale has plummeted, you’re copping leaks  from staff of the PM?

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T





DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well there’s a lot of hurt. My staff are hurt. There’s a lot of good  people in this building that really feel aggrieved by the actions of a few. We can’t walk past  those actions of a few. But you can’t live and work in an environment like this and not be  disappointed. These are men and women that are professionally and emotionally putting  everything into their jobs to make Australia a better place and they feel let down. We get that  and for that we’re sorry. We’ve got to fix it, and that’s the commitment we’ve got to give now.  Let’s just get on with the job, fix it, and show not only to the staff but to the entire Australian  public that we are going to fix this and we will get it right. We’ll start in Parliament House and  then we’ll work right across this nation. If we work together then we can make significant  change.

KIERAN GILBERT: David Littleproud, Minister for Drought, Agriculture and Emergency  Management. I know you’ve had a busy weekend with the Nationals so we very much  appreciate you coming in early Sunday.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks for having me, mate.

Media contact  0455 448 985

