







The Hon Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology

The Hon Senator Jonno Duniam  Assistant Minister for Industry Development

MEDIA RELEASE

CRACKING DOWN ON DODGY GREENGROCERS THIS EASTER

15 March 2021

The Morrison Government is making sure there are no underweight carrots left out  for the Easter Bunny this year, with a week-long blitz of fruit and vegetable retailers  beginning ahead of the Easter weekend.

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said inspectors from  the National Measurement Institute (NMI) will hop to it from today until 21 March,  auditing 550 greengrocers.

“Whether it’s a bag of carrots for the Easter Bunny or the fresh produce for an Easter  feast - Aussie shoppers should be egg-ceptionally confident that they’re getting what  they pay for at their local fruit and veg shop,” Minister Andrews said.

“A lot of Australians will be keen to make this Easter eggs-tra special after spending  last year in lockdown due to COVID-19, so we want to make sure they’re getting  what they pay for.

“I’m putting retailers on notice. The yolk is on you if you think you can rip off Aussie  customers and get away with it.

“This blitz will target businesses who’ve previously done the wrong thing - so there’ll  be no eggs-cuses for not fixing the problem.

“While I may crack myself up with my Easter puns, this is an issue that our  Government takes very seriously.”

Inspectors will check pre-packaged goods to make sure they contain the right  amount of product and are labelled correctly.





Inspectors will also make ‘secret shopper’ purchases to check that businesses are  following correct trading practices, such as accounting for the weight of packaging  materials when selling over the counter. They’ll also be ensuring scales are working  accurately and that fresh produce is clearly labelled with the price per kilo.

Assistant Minister for Industry Development Jonathan Duniam said the Government  wanted to ensure consumers could spend with confidence this Easter.

“Every-bunny wants to get what they pay for when they’re doing the s-hopping and  we know, particularly around holiday time, every cent counts,” Assistant Minister  Duniam said.

“Where non-compliance is found, NMI can issue infringement notices with fines of  $1,110 per offence. If the case is serious enough for a prosecution, the maximum  fines are $222,000 per offence as a company or $44,400 per offence as an  individual.”

NMI’s inspectors are following strict health protocols when conducting business  audits to ensure COVID safety. This program will not be implemented in any  identified COVID hotspots.

For more information on trade measurement law or to report a suspected breach of  the rules, contact the national helpline on 1300 686 664 or  infotm@measurement.gov.au



Media Contacts:

Minister Andrews’ office: Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846 / Jen Jennings 0435 121 347

Assistant Minister Duniam’s office: Carla Howarth 0499 037 732

Office of the Hon Karen Andrews MP, Member for McPherson, Varsity Lakes, QLD

