

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T

Wednesday 3rd February 2021

Minister Littleproud iv ABC TV Background Briefing

PATRICIA KARVELAS: David Littleproud is the Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency  Management and he joins us this afternoon. David Littleproud, welcome.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks for having me, PK.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: What are your biggest concerns about the bushfire threat facing Perth?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, it's about to unravel from the advice I got just before lunch is that  conditions are expected to deteriorate in respect of winds increasing. We've already lost 71 homes  so it's important that everyone should have a plan and when emergency service personnel ask you  to act on that plan, you do it and understand that that trumps any lockdown orders that are in place  for COVID. There should be no confusion about that. These outtrump any other lockdown orders  that have been given by the Western Australian Government and they too have been very clear on  this. so It's important that everyone is prepared. They owe it to themselves, to their family, but also  to the men and women that are out there trying to protect them, many of whom are volunteers. So I  just say, please, listen to your local ABC, make sure you're aware of the situation because it can  unfold very quickly. A she'll be right attitude is not what will get you through this. This is a very,  very serious situation. You only have to look to what happened during Black Summer, and our  emergency personnel have done an outstanding job in protecting lives so far but they can only do  that with your help.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: What additional assistance could the ADF be called on to provide?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: They already have. They've been asked to take over more fire retardant  and that has been already organised and Western Australia has advised that they have enough  retardant and this will supplement their existing stocks to ensure that we get through this event.  We'll continue to make sure that we- through our national coordination mechanism for our  firefighting. We already had a large aerial tanker based in WA because of the assessment of risk  for this bushfire season. So the coordinator of that decided before the season even started we  needed one there, and then that has been supplemented by an additional one from New South  Wales. And then we're working closely with Western Australia about any other need they may  need from the ADF in moving, whether that be additional firefighters or equipment or gear or even  using ADF bases around Western Australia, that will be provided to them at their request. But from  the last advice I had is that the resources that the WA emergency services have themselves is  sufficient, but we are on stand-by. We are ready to act as soon as we are asked.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: Well you just talked about the sufficiency of those resources. Does WA  have all the resources it needs in terms of water bombing aircraft and firefighting resources?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: They do now, after the additional request for the additional large aerial  tanker that came from New South Wales, and we thank New South Wales for that. And that's how

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

we operate our aerial assets in a nationally coordinated approach between the states, and the fire  commissioners. They planned for that and they decide what assets are required. So we'll continue  to be on stand-by. There is around 159 aircraft that are around the country at the moment. 129 of  those are Australian-owned. So if we need to move more assets, then we will, but the last advice  we had was that there is sufficient, but there is a further meeting of emergency service personnel  this afternoon to make sure that they are appropriately supported and have the appropriate  resources in WA.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: What additional financial assistance could the Federal Government make  available to people who have been affected by the fires? As you say, 71 homes lost and we know  there will be more. That's quite clear here.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, PK. So this afternoon we activated the disaster recovery payments  and that's $1000 per adult and $400 per child, and there is also income support for any businesses  that have been impacted by this. They can qualify for that and apply for that, and I would  encourage them to do that, starting at 8:00am tomorrow through Services Australia. We will be  ready for those people to make application, to be able to get money into their pocket. That's $1000  per adult, $400 per child. That's just to give them some dignity and respect after going through the  trauma. And that is for anybody that's not only had their homes destroyed, but has had physical  damage to either their property or to significant assets on their property. So we just say to those  people, please don't self-assess. This is your hour of need. There should be no stigma that, about  applying for this. Your fellow countrymen are here to support you and they are prepared to put the  money out there to get you through this in the short term, and then further assessments will be  made with Western Australia about what further support. And we need to let them firstly fight the  fires and then when it's safe, get their people in. They've done an outstanding job and I've spoken  to the WA Minister earlier, and just advised that we'll initiate these payments and there could be  other joint payments that Western Australia and the Federal Government initiate. But just at this  time we want to take the pressure off them.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: Okay. So just to be clear, so this is just to start with, a down payment if  you like, that WA and the Federal Government will be advancing talks about more assistance in  the future.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: There is. So this is just a federal payment, but there are longstanding  disaster recovery payments between all the states in around the recovery, the short-term and the  long-term. So we'll obviously make those assessments after it's safe to do so and we leave that in  the hands of the states because they're on the ground. They have the professionals to make those  assessments and then affectively they make application with the Commonwealth and there is no  issue with respect to that. We work collaboratively around that and obviously we trust the Western  Australian Government to make those assessments.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: Minister, can you give me some examples of the sort of information telcos  are failing to provide emergency services with and why this is such a problem?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, it's about the type of assets they have, and it's not necessarily about  mobile phone tower locations These are complementary and more sophisticated  telecommunication assets that provide us with the connectivity that we need, particularly through  these natural disasters. What we've asked the telcos to provide is a location of those and the  significance of them, because the emergency service personnel have to make an assessment  about allocation of resources and protecting it, because they are very, very important to not only  protecting the lives of emergency services personnel, but keeping the continuity of communications  to people around- in those disaster areas through our warning systems. And then obviously, we  always have the fail-safe of the ABC - and we do actually acknowledge the significant contribution  ABC makes to that and I would encourage everyone in those disaster zones to stay tuned to ABC.  But this is a critical tool to our emergency service personnel.

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

As far back as 2019, Telstra advised me that they would rectify this. We don't intend to share the  asset with their competitors. We understand the commercial sensitivity to this, but we need to be  trusted to empower our emergency service personnels to make decisions when they need to and  the allocation of resources. We just need to get this done. In fact, the royal commission itself has a  recommendation around this.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: Yes, what recourse does the Federal Government have if telcos continue  to refuse to provide emergency services with the information they've requested?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Firstly, I would be disappointed if the telcos put profit ahead of people, and  I'm giving them the opportunity again to rectify this.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: So, what time-frame do they have? This is an unfolding situation.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, exactly. That's why I think the telcos now have to come clean. Just  get on with the job. I will leave it for the Telecommunications Minister around any actions that can  be taken, but I don't think really in this day and age that a government should have to act on that.  Where is the moral compass of these companies? They should really understand that this is just  about equipping our emergency service personnel with the tools they need in a modern society to  keep themselves safe and our community safe. So, it can be rectified quickly. We respect their  commercial integrity and we believe that there are ways that we can continue to protect that and  protect their commercial viability around those assets, but this is important to us in keeping our  emergency service personnel and our communities safe.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: Minister, in a related issue, should Australia join the Biden Administration's  efforts to encourage global action to reduce carbon emissions given we're seeing these links- we  know there are links to bushfire disasters. Should Australia participate and sign up to a net zero  target by 2050?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, it's important to understand we already are. And in fact, the United  States…

PATRICIA KARVELAS: But we haven't signed up to a net zero emissions target by 2050?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, if you let me finish, we already are, and in fact the Biden  Administration is just signing up to what Australia has already committed to under the Paris  Agreement. We intend to meet and in fact beat the Paris commitment. When we welcome the  Biden Administration signing up to that and re-joining that and catching up to Australia. So, we'll  continue to work through as part of that Paris Agreement to reaching net zero sometime in the  second half. Our aspiration, as the Prime Minister said, is to achieve that by 2050, but we have to  be honest with the Australian public about how we achieve that and who pays for it. We think that  technology is the answer and the Prime Minister was very clear on that in his answer in Question  Time yesterday.

I think we should back ourselves with that technology, and some of that technology, in fact, that the  Biden Administration is also supporting, I think there is opportunity for us to work with the Biden  Administration in using the best and brightest from Australia in that- and theirs, best and brightest  to make sure that it gives what we're asking for, which at the end of the day is about reducing  emissions.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: Just finally, the Prime Minister has told Parliament he disagrees with his  colleague Craig Kelly, who has been, of course, spreading misinformation about COVID-19, not  based on science and medical advice. Why didn't he do this earlier?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I think the Prime Minister made it clear after conversations with Mr  Kelly that that's not the Government's position, and while we respect free speech, Mr Kelly was on  his own on this one. We have responsibility. The Government has sought the advice of the best

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

and brightest in this country through the Chief Medical Officer and the TGA, and Mr Kelly obviously  needed to have that reminded to him by the Prime Minister. So, I think it was appropriate that  Prime Minister had a conversation with him personally to make sure that that was the case. And Mr  Kelly responded appropriately and put out a statement to that effect.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: Okay. So, now in the Nationals we've got George Christensen doing the  same kind of stuff. Will he be hauled in to a meeting with your leader? Do you think that should  happen?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, that's a question for Michael, but I would just say to…

PATRICIA KARVELAS: But do you think Michael should- Michael McCormack, being the Nationals  Leader - I shouldn't call him by his first name, how impolite - but do you think Michael McCormack  should do that just like Scott Morrison did with Craig Kelly?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I think we all have a responsibility as parliamentarians. While we  have the ability of free speech and we have been granted a very big privilege of being in this place,  we also have a responsibility to use that wisely. And I would just say to- whether they be National,  Liberal or Labor politicians, that we understand the privileged positions we've been given in society  and we should follow the advice of the institutions that have been put in place and that are trusted  by Government and by this Parliament, and I think that's the appropriate thing to do. I would also  say to every Australian, please make sure that you adhere the official advice and seek advice from  your own medical doctor.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: So, just to be clear, you do think Michael McCormack should be sharing  that with your colleague, George Christensen?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I think we should be having that conversation with every  parliamentarian.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: You don't have to have it with all of them, though, because they're not  spreading misinformation.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No, but anyone that makes those comments, I respect their right to do it,  but you've got to understand the privileged position. So, I'd have no issue in having a conversation  with any of my colleagues whether they be National, Liberal…

PATRICIA KARVELAS: So, will you commit to having a conversation then with George  Christensen? Perhaps you already have. Maybe you can tell me something?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, it's not my place. I'll leave that to the leader. I don't want to overstep  the mark. And I know that those conversations- I'm sure Michael would be fully cognisant of what  has been said. I'm not fully cognisant of his total comments, so I'm going only on what you're  reporting to me, so I would have to look at it in entirety. But I think obviously there are many  parliamentarians that want to protect freedom of speech, and we all do, but that comes with  responsibility.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: Yeah, like sticking to the facts. David Littleproud, thanks for coming on.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks for having me on, PK.

PATRICIA KARVELAS: That's the Minister for Agriculture, Drought and Emergency Management,  David Littleproud.

Media contact  0455 448 985

