MEDIA ALERT  PROTEST AGAINST POVERTY

WHAT

Australian Unemployed Workers Union Protest Against Poverty

Senator Rachel Siewert will join unemployed workers and allies at a doorstop

and protest of the Government’s astonishingly cruel decision to condemn 1.5

million people on JobSeeker and Youth Allowance to a payment of just $44 a

day on March 31.

Speakers include:

Senator Rachel Siewert

Andrew Wilkie MP

ACOSS CEO Cassandra Goldie

GetUp! Economic Fairness Campaigns Director Ed Miller

National Council of Single Mothers and Their Children CEO Terese Edwards

Kristin O’Connell (anti poverty activist living on the Disability Support Pension)

Kathryn Wilkes (Cashless Debit Card campaigner and a single mum from

regional Queensland)

Georgette Mouawad (Youth Allowance recipient and National Union of

Students Women’s Officer)

The AUWU will set up 1,400 empty chairs, each representing 1,000 people who

will suffer when the Government cuts the JobSeeker rate by $100 a fortnight on

No publication date: received by Parl Library on the 16/03/2021

March 31.



DATE: Tuesday 16 March 2021

TIME: 11:00am

WHERE:  Parliament House Lawns



"Yesterday thousands of people gathered on the lawns of Parliament House to

say enough is enough. They demanded that this Government stop turning a

blind eye to the epidemic of violence, sexual assault and harassment against

women in this country.



"Today we will gather on the same lawns because we don’t accept that anyone

in a country as wealthy as Australia should live in poverty.



“The Government knows that the JobSeeker “increase” of $25 a week is not

enough. That’s why they chose to lift people out of poverty when the COVID

crisis began.



“They are now choosing to condemn 1.5 million people to just $44 a day in the

middle of a recession due to a global pandemic.



“The community is watching and they do not accept this cruelty.



"The Greens support all unemployed workers and we will be with the Australian

Unemployed Workers Union, and community members on the Parliament lawns

today."



This week the Greens will seek the support of the senate to:

1.    Amend the bill to increase all income support payments to $1115 a

fortnight which is in line with the Henderson Poverty Line.

No publication date: received by Parl Library on the 16/03/2021



2.    Retain the current income free threshold of $300 a fortnight.

3.    Abolish compulsory income management.

4.    Abolish Mutual Obligations.





Media Contact

Lucy Cowcher-Guthrie: 0418 401 180





No publication date: received by Parl Library on the 16/03/2021

