

CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENERGY

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RN DRIVE

THURSDAY, 4 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: U.S. climate policy; coal mining, net zero by 2050; Clean Energy Fund

rules; Pfizer vaccine; hotel quarantine; vaccine rollout.



PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: I'm joined by Labor's new Shadow Minister for Climate

Change and Energy Chris Bowen, Chris Bowen welcome back to the program.



CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR CLIMATE CHANGE AND ENERGY: Thanks PK

and full disclosure I'm hopeless at passwords too so don’t feel embarrassed about needing to

get two new ones today.



KARVELAS: Hopefully no spies are listening going ah Chris Bowen.



BOWEN: They've all got different rules and some have to have numbers and hashtags.



KARVELAS: It's very stressful I’ll tell you. Now, Australia and the United States we know have

a very deep relationship that involves cooperation on many issues. Do you really see climate

change becoming a source of friction?



BOWEN: Well, I certainly hope not but the fact of the matter is that Australia is an outlier at the

moment. We are one of the very few major developed countries not to have committed to zero

net emissions by 2050. More than 120 countries around the world have, and many many have

legislated it as a target for their countries, and we are one of the very, very few that hasn't and

I do think, unless that changes, it will provide ongoing tension, not only with the United States

but with our friends and partners around the world.



KARVELAS: The Prime Minister indicated earlier this week he's open to the zero net

emissions by 2050 target, do you believe the government will ultimately adopt it?



BOWEN: Well look it’s a pretty, frankly, weak crab walking exercise by Scott Morrison, who

clearly is trying to walk the line between what Australia should do, what our obligations are,

what is good policy for creation of jobs and investment, and what he's allowed to do by the

climate change deniers in his political coalition in the Liberal and National Party. There are a

number of people who just simply don't accept the science. So, it is a complicated task for him

but nevertheless, leadership would involve a clear commitment, a very strong commitment to

net zero by 2050 and nothing short of that is acceptable for the Prime Minister.



KARVELAS: Climate change is a politically difficult issue in Australia. Do you think this shift in

the US will help to generate momentum for change here?



BOWEN: Well, it's a factor, it's a factor. Of course we will develop, you know we should as a

sovereign nation have our own policies but of course, Joe Biden has a very strong climate

change policy himself as President. and of course there will be international ramifications of

that, but his focus was on job creation, which is exactly the same focus that we are bringing to

the task. Good climate change policy is good jobs and investment policy and a key tactic, a

central tactic of the Liberal National Party playbook for more than a decade has been to

pretend that good climate change policy destroys jobs, it's just not true. And of course one of

my key focuses will be to argue against that contention and to very strongly put that well

designed will calibrated climate change policy is good for jobs and investment.



KARVELAS: Why is it that Labor hasn't had a well-articulated message for people who rely on

coal for their livelihoods, about their future and where their next job will come from?



BOWEN: Oh look I don't accept the premise of your question but let me make it very clear,

coal mining is good and noble work, and coal mining communities are good communities. And

the Australian economy has very much been built on the back of that work by coal miners

which for many decades has been in many instances dirty and dangerous and difficult, but it is

changing. Regardless of our domestic climate change policies coal mining communities will

come under pressure. Whether it is through automation and fewer and fewer people employed

in mines, whether it's the changing the Chinese economy, or whether it's 70% of our trading

partners having net zero emissions by 2050 targets. These are all going to affect the coal

market and our coal mining communities. Now, we need a government an alternative

government who are prepared to be honest about that. We certainly are. And then the choice

is, do you want a government which invests in coal mining communities and in coal miners and

helps them through that change or a government which ignores that it’s happening, or shrugs

their shoulders and says let the market rip?



KARVELAS: So what are you going to tell voters, how long will coal be in our system?



BOWEN: Well, coal exports will continue for many years but they will come under pressure

and coal mining communities will come under pressure as I said regardless of what



KARVELAS: So when you say many years, quantify that for me.



BOWEN: Well many years Patricia.



KARVELAS: Many years could mean five it could mean 20 it could mean 30 what are you

referring to?



BOWEN: Well I believe that will occur for much more than five years, for many years to the

future. Now, how long, how long that is, we will see, but they will continue



KARVELAS: But you’re going to have to articulate for how long that's central to the debate,



BOWEN: Well the world market will determine that not me or not, government policy the world

market



KARVELAS: But government policy settings have a huge impact on that.



BOWEN: Well with respect Patricia, Australian domestic government policy settings don’t

really determine how long our coal exports will continue, the rest of the world, our trading

partners, determine that. Now, I think what coal mining communities deserve is honesty about

that from their elected leaders, that's what I'm giving you today that honesty to say, look, coal

mining and coal mining communities will come under pressure. The choice is, do we have a

government which has a plan to deal with that, or a government that pretends it doesn't

happen? Certainly, the Labor Party's approach is a plan to help coal mining communities deal

with that change.



KARVELAS: If you're just tuning in this is RN Drive and my guest is Chris Bowen he's the

Shadow Minister for Climate Change and Energy, 0418 226 576 is our text line. I wonder what

you make of this, this ongoing climate debate and the impact that the US president will be

having on our own domestic debate. Labor's opposing plan changes to Clean Energy Fund

rules aimed at fuelling investment in gas power plants, do you see much scope to work with

the government on this issue?



BOWEN: Well I hope so. We'll be moving amendments and I hope the government will accept

those amendments and then we can pass the legislation. I don't believe that the legislation as

it’s currently crafted is fit for purpose and it does need to be changed. I’m very comfortable with

that decision and we'll be moving those amendments as you'd expect. As the Opposition,

seeking their agreement through both Houses of Parliament and if they are agreed then very

happily vote for the legislation, but the amendments would need to be agreed, and it's up to the

government whether they're prepared to work with us on that point.



KARVELAS: I want to change the topic if I can, and it was actually your portfolio pretty

recently so you're going to be able to handle the questions. Do you welcome the additional 10

million doses of the Pfizer vaccine the government says it's secured?



BOWEN: Of course, of course I do, and of course we do. 10 million in extra doses is a good

step, and we've been pointing this out, you know, I'm sure I've argued the same on your show

previously Patricia that we did need more doses. 10 million is not enough, considering their

two dose vaccines so therefore 10 million doses, is enough for 5 million Australians. We did

point out that we did need more, yes AstraZeneca we also have a deal with them. But we've

pointed out consistently for many months that we needed more deals to ensure that

Australians had access to the vaccine, and to the best possible vaccines, and that we needed

more than simply a deal which provided access to 10 million doses so I welcome the additional

doses.



KARVELAS: We know that the, the amount overall will be 150 million doses. Does that kind of

make us a regional hub?



BOWEN: Well, we certainly have a role to play in our region and that's a point of bipartisan

agreement. We've supported the government's efforts through the COVAX facility, we’ve

supported the government's efforts in the last budget to provide an allocation for the Pacific.

It's appropriate that we play a leadership role in the Pacific and I don't think you'll find much

points of partisan difference on that on that element.



KARVELAS: Should the government be trying to bring forward its vaccination timetable or

should we be prioritising poorer countries once we've vaccinated vulnerable groups here?



BOWEN: As I said, we have a role to play with less developed countries in our region, but of

course, we have to ensure that the vaccine is rolled out across the country. Scott Morrison said

we were first in the queue, it wasn't true then and it's not true now, and quite self-evidently now

not first in the queue as millions of  vaccines have occurred around the world. Our position has

been very clear. The TGA should be given the chance to do its job and approve the vaccine

and take as long as it needs. That's certainly happened with our full support, Greg Hunt is not

telling the truth when he says we called for the TGA to somehow cut corners, we very explicitly

didn't. We said once the TGA has done its job, the vaccine should be rolled out expeditiously

and simply, the government has been engaging in the opposite, in operation definitely not warp

speed, because the rollout plans have been very slow.



KARVELAS: What do you make of the COVID breach in hotel quarantine for the Australian

Open or the leakage, are events like this simply too risky?



BOWEN: Well, what I make of it is that quarantine is a federal government responsibility. And

there has been very, very little federal government involvement on the issue of quarantine. I

mean, this is black and white. Some areas are grey, you know, some areas are shared

responsibility and it's not clear whether it's a state or federal responsibility, this isn't one of

them. Quarantine is a Commonwealth responsibility under the Constitution and Scott Morrison

has been AWOL when it comes to that responsibility. He has the Jane Halton review sitting on

his desk, he's had it for months. It lies, unimplemented and unloved and if the federal

government was fair dinkum they’d be saying well we’re seeing breaches of quarantine or



leaks from quarantine more accurately from four separate jurisdictions, maybe five separate

jurisdictions now across the country. They happen because it's a high risk environment, but the

states are doing their best to manage that risk environment, with no or little support from the

federal government.



KARVELAS: Thank you so much for joining us tonight.



BOWEN: Always a pleasure PK.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ELIZA MITCHELL 0413 410 931



