

CLARE O’NEIL MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR SENIOR AUSTRALIANS   AND AGED CARE SERVICES   MEMBER FOR HOTHAM



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS ALAN JONES  THURSDAY, 11 MARCH 2021

SUBJECTS: Aged Care; Aged Care Royal Commission Report.

ALAN JONES, HOST: We welcome back tonight, Clare O'Neil and Senator Concetta  Fierravanti Wells. Tanya Plibersek wanted to be with us, of course, but something she couldn't  avoid clashed with this time. So we welcome again Clare, the Labor Member for Hotham. With  a Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Laws from Monash University and Honours in both. She's  also the Shadow Minister for Aged Care, about which I want to ask some questions. Senator  Concetta Fierravanti-Wells, actually, made a 52 page submission to the Royal Commission  into Aged Care Quality and Safety. And, at 23, she was a founding board member of an aged  care facility in the Illawarra. She spent four years as the Federal Shadow Minister for Ageing  and she's one of millions with personal experience of this aged care crisis. She lost her dad  from dementia and her mother passed away last year in the nursing home that she helped  establish. So thank you both for your time.

Clare, if I could come to you first. So many Royal Commission reports finish up as doorstops.  There are grand noises about reports going to the Governor-General, which is a bit of a  procedural nonsense but after 2 years of work, 23 public hearings, 641 witnesses and 10,000  public submissions, are we any further ahead, Clare?

CLARE O’NEIL MP, SHADOW MINISTER FOR SENIOR AUSTRALIANS AND AGED CARE  SERVICES: Alan, I think we are because we've got a really clear independent report that tells  us that aged care is in national crisis. We know that two thirds of people in aged care today are  either malnourished or at risk of malnourishment. We know there are endemic problems with  basic types of care that you would expect in a nursing home. We know that the home care  waiting lists are an absolute joke. A lot of your viewers would be aware that you're waiting for  years to get the help in the home that you need. I think the real question for us now is that,  we've got a government in Canberra, led by Scott Morrison, that's cut ruthlessly into aged care,  are they going to be the party and the leaders to actually show older Australians respect and  treat them with the appropriate level of credence that they deserve by fixing this system? That  is really what's on my mind at the moment.

JONES: Let me take that point. Concetta, you made a public submission. One of the Royal  Commissioners, Lynelle Briggs, described the system as “broken”. Her co-authored interim  report was titled, awfully, simply, Neglect. Your Government has thrown a couple of hundred

million dollars at the problem but care providers say they'll need $55 billion in the next decade  just on nursing homes and, as Clare said, that's before the home care system is brought up to  scratch. What are your thoughts?

CONCETTA FIERRAVANTI-WELLS, SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES: Well, Alan, the  Royal Commission comes at the end of decades of reviews. We've seen over 20 reviews. I  think what's really important - this is what prompted me to put my submission in given the  unique experience that I had - aged care, regrettably, has always been a low order priority.  We've seen a revolving door of Ministers, we have seen mistakes, but we also see a system  that needs major overhaul. This was the reason why I put forward a blueprint which was based  on the work that I did when I was the Shadow Minister. I'm very, very pleased to see that the  Royal Commission has taken up a lot of my suggestions but the reality is, Alan, that this is not  just an issue about funding. It is an issue that traverses the whole fundamental basis of the  system.

JONES: I know that but, Concetta, I mean - I talked to Catherine McGregor there about the  submarine deal - I mean, it's gone from $23 billion to over $200 billion. Tear that contract up,  buy the submarines off the shelf and we need $7 billion a year for aged care. Clare, I make a  simple question to you: If children were treated like this, wouldn't there be national outrage?

O’NEIL: There would be more than national outrage Alan. We would be marching on the  streets, we would be in the middle of a national strike and that's one of the things that I really  want to pay credit to you, and to Concetta too, for making this issue consistently on the top of  the national agenda.

It is not getting the political attention that it deserves. Now, we know we've got a real  opportunity here, with the Royal Commission report, to say to the Morrison Government: ‘This  matters to every Australian and we demand change and that's going to happen now.’

JONES: Definitely and, Clare, 16% of the voting population now are over 65. 16% - it's a  voting issue. Concetta, a simple question: why can't ageing be a wonderful reward at the end  of your life rather than a punishment?

FIERRAVANTI-WELLS: Well, Alan, it should be. Our aged care system, the ideal aged care  system, should give older Australians and their families the care that they need, wherever they  need it and when they need it but the system, as it is at the moment, is not flexible enough to  deliver that. That's what they need. People want to stay at home but they also know that as the  health waxes and wanes - and this is the wording of the Royal Commission in the interim  report - they need to have a system that provides that care when they need it but they also  have to have a viable system. One of the problems that the system very much has is that the  viability of providers has really been tested and has been very much tested under COVID.

JONES: 60% of the providers are running on a deficit. I mean, Clare, if you're going to solve a  problem, you first have to define it. The problem is that Australians in old age can expect  neglect, malnutrition and abuse. So you have to start by funding more staff, properly trained,  so that these people - they pay a hell of a lot to get in there, by the way. So why do we have a  federal aged care Act but funding at a bare minimum?

O’NEIL: Absolutely. One of the things the Royal Commission talks about is the fact that the  Government has essentially approached this question with “how little can we get away with?  How little can we spend to not getting too much political trouble here?”. That approach has to



end. We've got an ageing population. We've got hundreds of thousands and - in an ongoing  sense - millions of Australians who deserve to be treated with dignity in retirement. Alan, you  really put the nail on the head there with one of your comments about the people that work in  aged care. We have some incredibly caring, wonderful, committed people working in aged  care. There are just not enough of them. I talk to aged care workers all the time and, I'm sure  Connie has the same experience, they are crushed at the end of a lot of their shifts because  they know they can't provide the care that they want to provide. So, it's got to start with this  issue of how many carers we have to look after the people who we should be looking after in  their retirement.

JONES: Let me just say to my viewers, we're talking about Vets because what's happening to  them is a disgrace. What's happening to the aged care community is a disgrace. We'll be  talking about this each week until we get some answers. But I just want a very quick answer  from you, Concetta, because you're in government. Where does the money come from?

FIERRAVANTI-WELLS: Well, the money comes from… it comes out of consolidated revenue.  Now, the Commissioners have agreed that there has to be a major overhaul of governance.  Plus, they both say there has to be an aged care levy but, Alan, can I take you back to the  work…

JONES: Concetta, look, we will leave it here for tonight because I have run out of time. You'll  be with us next week. We will be talking about it again next week. The money issue in  particular and you can argue until the cows come home. We won't do anything unless we  improve the level of staffing and improve the qualifications of those staff and treat them as they  should be treated. They can't be a second rate entity. So, Clare, thank you for your time. We  most probably won't talk to you next week but we will continue this debate next week. It has to  be had. I thank both of you.

O’NEIL: Thanks Alan

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JACOB KAHANE 0422 723 491



