



Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, Sydney.





THE HON PAUL FLETCHER MP

Minister for Communications, Urban  Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts

THE HON COREY WINGARD  MP  South Australian Minister for Infrastructure  and Transport





MEDIA RELEASE

7 April 2021

Shovels hit dirt to remove Ovingham Level Crossing

The Morrison and Marshall governments are fulfilling their commitment to fix one of Adelaide’s most  frustrating traffic bottlenecks, with major works officially getting underway on the $196 million  Ovingham Level Crossing Removal Project.

Torrens Road will be raised over the existing Ovingham level crossing, meaning motorists will no  longer be delayed in traffic waiting for rail services to pass, saving valuable time, improving safety and  supporting around 265 full-time jobs per year during construction.

Federal Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, the Hon Paul Fletcher  MP, said this upgrade will change the way people move around Adelaide, improving both travel times  and traffic flow.

“The boom gates at this location are currently down for approximately 22 per cent of the time during  the combined AM and PM peak periods,” Minister Fletcher said.

“Removing the level crossing will not only improve safety but also cut travel times for the 21,300  vehicles on average that pass through the crossing each day.”

South Australia’s Minister for Infrastructure and Transport, the Hon Corey Wingard MP, said  elevating the road over the rail line will provide the best outcome for the community.

“Out of the options considered, raising the road will improve walkability and create new community  open space, as well as have the least disruption for motorists, residents and local businesses,” Minister  Wingard said.

“The new road can be mostly constructed off-line, assisting to minimise traffic impacts during  construction.

“Out of 127 at-grade level crossings in Adelaide we’ve identified 31 that pose the highest risk to users  and create the greatest disturbances on the network and it’s great the initiative has recently been added  to the Infrastructure Australia priority list. We’re now working to prioritise future projects on the list.”

Senator for South Australia and Minister for Finance, Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, said South  Australia’s COVID-19 economic recovery will be boosted by getting shovels in the ground on critical  local infrastructure projects.



Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, Sydney.

“Over 265 full-time jobs will be supported each year during the construction of the project at  Ovingham, bringing much-needed certainty for local workers and businesses,” Minister Birmingham  said.

“This milestone is yet another demonstration of the Morrison and Marshall governments working  together to support jobs and get South Australians home sooner and safer.”

State Member for Adelaide, Rachel Sanderson MP, said it is fantastic to see the project now underway.

“The Marshall Liberal Government is delivering a long overdue upgrade that will benefit many people  in the local area and surrounds,” Minister Sanderson said.

“This project is not only creating vital jobs, it will save valuable waiting and travel times and improve  green spaces around the intersection.”

The upgrade at Ovingham also involves the elevation of the western end of Churchill Road, which  intersects with Torrens Road approximately 100 metres from the Ovingham Level Crossing heading  towards the city, so that it meets the elevated height of Torrens Road.

Piling works are expected to start in May 2021, with project completion in 2023, weather permitting.

For more information about the project, visit the Ovingham Level Crossing Removal virtual room at  https://dit.sa.gov.au/infrastructure/public_transport_projects/ovingham_level_crossing_removal/virtual _room

Media contact:  Minister Fletcher: Imre Salusinszky | 0432 535 737 | Imre.Salusinszky@communications.gov.au ;  Christine Vanden Byllaardt | 0409 433 357 | Christine.VandenByllaardt@communications.gov.au  Minister Wingard: Gemma Coombe | 0415 175 716 | Gemma.Coombe@sa.gov.au

