

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY

DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES



MARK BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING

MEMBER FOR HINDMARSH





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

THURSDAY, 4 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Vaccines; hotel quarantine; aged care; right-wing extremism; net zero

emissions by 2050.



MARK BUTLER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING: Thanks for coming out,

sorry for the delay. We were waiting for the Prime Minister to finish his press conference.



Can I say at the outset, Labor welcomes the announcement today from the Government that

they have secured an additional 10 million doses of the Pfizer vaccine. This is a highly

effective mNRA vaccine and it's good to see that Australians will have a greater access to it

than we did before the announcement today. So we welcome that announcement.



There are still a number of very serious questions about the rollout of the COVID-19 vaccine

over the course of this year, questions that have still not clearly been answered. Australians

are asking the question, when will these supplies actually land in Australia? We recognise that

this is not entirely within the control of the government but they are questions Australians are

asking. How long will batch testing take? And when will we start to see needles actually in

peoples arms?



Still, there's no detail around the online booking system that Greg Hunt has said will be the

single entry point for people to make arrangements to receive the vaccine, presumably, if

they're not living in residential aged care facilities. We're into February already, and we need to

start to get this detail from the government.



Can I also say at the outset, that all of our thoughts, all of our thoughts here in Parliament

today are with the Western Australian community that are in lockdown as a result of an

outbreak from a hotel quarantine arrangement over in Perth. At the same time, they're

obviously still experiencing and dealing with a very serious fire emergency. So our thoughts

are all of the Western Australian community. And given the announcement late last night in

Victoria, our thoughts are also with the Victorian community that has gone through such an

ordeal over the course of the last 12 months.



All of these outbreaks have flown from the hotel quarantine system. This system has been very

important in terms of allowing Australian citizens to return from overseas back to their home

country. But Australians need greater confidence that these quarantine arrangements are

going to work more effectively to bring people home, but do so in a way that doesn't pose risk

to the broader community and the enormous disruptions that this involves. Outbreaks from

hotel quarantine are the most serious failing in our COVID response right now and they are a

failing for which Scott Morrison is constitutionally and legally responsible. Although the states

have picked up where the Commonwealth was not acting last year and have been

implementing these arrangements it is, as Kristina will outline, the Commonwealth, the Prime

Minister Scott Morrison, who has responsibility for making sure these arrangements work. As

Kristina will outline, they have some very clear recommendations about improving those

systems before them that they have not acted upon.



Before I hand to Kristina, can I also say that overnight we've learned about the obvious other

responsibility that is clearly the Commonwealth's in the COVID response and that is in the

aged care sector. An international report overnight confirmed that fully 75 per cent of all

COVID related deaths in Australia, so far, have taken place in residential aged care facilities.

That is the highest rates in the world. Recognising again that the Commonwealth failed

Australians in aged care, particularly in Victoria last year, and must do better.



Labor is endeavouring to provide every possible support to the government in this COVID

response. That's what the Australian community expects of Labor, but it is important that the

Prime Minister face up to his clear responsibilities, responsibilities like quarantine, like

residential aged care, rather than continuing to duck shove them to the states. Over to Kristina.



SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY, SHADOW HOME AFFAIRS MINISTER: Thank you Mark,

and I thank you for the opportunity to be here today. I want to give an acknowledgement to our

state premiers: in New South Wales, in Queensland, in Victoria, in WA, and right across the

country. Our state and territory leaders have stepped up and provided the leadership that we

needed to ensure that Australians had the information and the tools and the confidence that

we needed to suppress this virus and manage its risks.



Scott Morrison has shoved responsibility for quarantine onto the states. Understand this,

quarantine and our international borders are a federal responsibility. It was only about a year

ago that we had a Commonwealth government that understood that international borders in

quarantine is their responsibility. In fact, they used to boast about their superiority in managing

our borders. But along comes COVID and Scott Morrison goes missing. He's gone missing

because he doesn't want to assume any of the risk. Understand that when the going gets

tough, Scott Morrison goes to ground. He would rather hide behind the state premiers and let

them take over managing our international borders.



It was only recently that Jacinda Ardern, the Prime Minister of New Zealand, expressed her

frustration that she was having to negotiate with individual state premiers when it came to the

so-called “travel corridor” between New Zealand and Australia. Our Commonwealth

Government, this Morison government has gone missing.



Scott Morrison, last year, with some great fanfare, announced a national quarantine review led

by experienced bureaucrat Jane Halton. She first briefed him on the findings of her review last

August. He has had three briefings on the Halton review. The hotel review makes the clear

recommendation that the Commonwealth should set up a national quarantine facility to

manage surge capacity. And she makes this point, it's fundamentally important to do so ahead

of the Northern Hemisphere winter, with 40,000 stranded Australian citizens unable to come

home because of the caps on loggers. Jane Halton’s view is we should be getting those

citizens home but we should do it in a safe way, in a way that manages risk. She makes

another number of other recommendations about facilities that could be used, about

alternatives to hotel quarantine that could be implemented, about implementing a risk

management approach. Scott Morrison's risk management approach is to simply manage his

own political risks and to put that risk onto the state premiers. Is Scott Morrison is on the side

of the Australian people? If he's more interested in helping the Australian people than helping

his own political outcomes he would take the recommendations of this Halton report seriously.

He would be showing national leadership. He should start with the national cabinet, as soon as

possible, to ensure we have a national quarantine system in place. Any questions?



JOURNALIST: Just in terms of the questions about when the vaccine is going to be rolled out,

you have been highly critical of Craig Kelly speaking out, not aligning himself with TGA and

other expert health advice. Why aren't you doing the same in terms of letting those authorities

make the determination of the vaccines safe here in Australia?



BUTLER: No, let’s be very clear, the TGA should take all the time it needs to consider whether

or not to approve the AstraZeneca vaccine. They've obviously already given approval to the

Pfizer vaccine. That's a good thing. We just need the Pfizer vaccine to arrive in Australia and

be able to be distributed and put into people’s arms. The TGA should take all of the time they

require to make sure that the AstraZeneca vaccine, that will also be distributed to Australians

in the coming weeks and months, is safe and is effective.



What I am asking, though, is not at the TGA but at the Minister and the Prime Minister. They

should start as soon as they possibly can to set some clear timelines for when people will start

receiving the jab.



The U.S. Centre for Disease Control and Prevention reported earlier this week that already, as

of early this week, more than 26 million Americans have received the first dose of the vaccine,

6 million have received two doses. That's more than the entire population of Australia. Now, we

understand America is in a different position and took a different approach to approval.



But Australians are starting to ask the question, when will the vaccines rollout here in

Australia? How do I make arrangements to get to a GP practice or a vaccination centre to

receive my vaccine? Still, we don't have any detail about the online entry point that Greg Hunt

has talked about, that Accenture has been contracted to provide about how that will operate.

It's not just me asking these questions, it's patient groups, MSGP groups that are still not clear

about how they are going to manage this extraordinary logistical challenge we have of

probably 50 to 60 million vaccinations over the course of the next six or seven months, if you

take account of the COVID vaccine as well as the flu vaccine.



JOURNALIST: Mark, Labor has called for more doses of the Pfizer vaccine. We’ve now got 20

million, up to 10 million people, is that enough or would you hope that we could keep getting

more?



BUTLER: Well, look, we should diversify our supplies as much as we possibly can and Chris

Bowen made the point a number of times that world's best practice was to get five or six

different vaccine agreements in place. The Pfizer vaccine, as far as all of the analysis shows

around the world, is a highly effective vaccine. It's one of the two mRNA vaccines on the

market right now, which has a real advantage in terms of its adaptability in the future as a

booster vaccine to deal with the variants that are already being seen - the so called UK variant,

the so called South Africa variant.



So we have asked the question how negotiations are proceeding with the Moderna vaccine,

which is the other very highly effective mRNA vaccine, with efficacy rights in the mid 90%

range, and I will continue to ask these questions. I said though, we welcome an additional 10

million doses of the Pfizer vaccine. That means now that 10 million Australians will be able to

receive that vaccine - a highly effective vaccine - over whatever time frame is involved in these

additional doses coming.



JOURNALIST: Kristina, could you explain a bit more why… [INAUDIBLE]



KENEALLY: So Jane Halton looked at the hotel quarantine system after we had the first round

of hotel outbreaks amongst the returning travellers. And what she found is that the current

system is unsustainable. That's actually what they report found. The current approach that has

been taken to require 14 days in a hotel managed by the states is unsustainable. Her point is

this: we need a safe consistent way to bring home stranded citizens and to ensure that people

who are required for one reason or another to come into the country, maybe they are health

personnel coming to assist us, that they we are have people we have a safe way for people to

cross the international border.



Now, Scott Morrison's had this report, since last year. He was first briefed on it in August. What

Jane Holton says is that the Commonwealth needs to step up and take responsibility. There

needs to be a federally run quarantine facility for surge capacity to get the standard Australians

home. She makes the point that you need to take a risk management approach for countries

that have an extremely low community transmission, perhaps only a few days quarantine. She

also makes the point that there should be a more rigorous testing system before people get on

plane and when they land here. And finally she makes the point that the Commonwealth

should consider where people volunteer for home quarantine with monitoring devices.



Scott Morrison has done nothing with this report. He has done nothing and the Premier of WA,

Mark McGowan, belled the cow on this just this week, when he made the point that Western

Australia had to run the quarantine system because Peter Dutton and Scott Morrison are not

doing their constitutional job, which is to manage the borders and manage the quarantine

system.



JOURNALIST: Senator, can I get your response please to Canada and listing the proud boys

as a terrorist organisation and should Australia follow suit?



KENEALLY: Australia is the only 5 Eyes country that has not listed any right-wing extremist

organisations as terrorists. Canada, New Zealand, the United States and the United Kingdom

have all listed right-wing extremist organisations as terrorist groups. Some of the groups that

have been listed have direct links to groups here in Australia.



For months now, in fact, for years, the Scott Morrison government has sought to downplay,

dismiss and ignore the rise in white supremacy and far-right extremism in Australia. Since the

Christchurch terror attacks perpetrated by an Australian right-wing extremists in New Zealand,

Australia has not had a proper conversation about that extent to which that person was

radicalised in this country yet we know the New Zealand Royal Commission found that in fact

he was radicalised by right-wing extremist groups and views in Australia.

Today in the Senate, we saw the government literally white out a motion about right-wing

extremism. They took out the references to white supremacy and white right-wing extremism.

They sought to do a what-about-ism an equivalence with groups like Antifa.



Understand this, ASIO has said that right wing extremism accounts for 40% of their

counterterrorism work that's up from about 10% just a few years ago. The AFP has said in

Senate estimates, that right-wing extremism is a growing threat and accounts for more their

counterterrorism work. Mike Pezzullo, the Director, the Secretary of the Department of Home

Affairs on Sky News this week, said that right-wing extremism is growing threat to Australia.



Yet this morning, Alex Hawke, The Multicultural Minister, the Minister for Multiculturalism, got

up on Sky News and said that they dismiss the hypothesis that right-wing extremism is growing

in Australia. Scott Morrison needs to hold Alex Hawke to account. He needs to haul him into

his office and explain to him he cannot, as a minister in the government contradict the advice

from national security agencies; undermine public safety by dismissing a legitimate and

growing terrorist threat.



Now when it comes to right-wing extremist groups, and when it comes to the proscribing of

terrorist organisations, we currently proscribed 27 groups in Australia. 26 of them are Islamic

extremists. And that's understandable. That has been, and continues to be, a legitimate threat

in our community. And one of those groups is the left-wing PKK. However, however, of those

26, Islamic Islamicist groups, we have groups that have no interest or presence in Australia,

we proscribed them because we send a message about the hatred we reject; we proscribe

them because our allies have done it. But when we have groups that have been proscribed in

the United Kingdom, that have been proscribed in Canada, that have local chapters here or

direct links to two groups here, and we're not proscribing those rates here, what we're sending

is exactly what the right-wing extremists want - a message that we're turning a blind eye and

letting them grow and fester.



A problem like this requires leadership. It requires leadership. Boris Johnson in the United

Kingdom has sent a clear, unequivocal statement that the UK rejects the right-wing extremists

and the hatred and the violence that they promote. Here in Australia. we've got a government

that literally tried to white-out any reference to right-wing extremism today in the Senate.



JOURNALIST: The last time the federal government had a crack at quarantining is when the

planes came back from China and put them in a detention facility...



KENEALLY: This is a great point, just I'll end on this point. Early on, in this COVID pandemic,

the Commonwealth took responsibility. They brought people from Wuhan. They brought

people home from cruise ships, and they put them in federally run facilities. But since that time,

Scott Morrison has decided he doesn't want that political risk. He's not a national leader. He's



only interested in his own political outcomes. He'd rather have a fight with the states that suits

his political outcomes than show national leadership and deliver a plan for quarantine.

Quarantine is a federal responsibility the Commonwealth should run.



JOURNALIST: Just a quick one for you. So you just heard the Prime Minister spoken to

President Biden they discussed the technology the Prime Minister says in relation to climate

change and how they're going to attack it. The Prime Minister says he wasn't pressured to

commit to net zero by 2050. So has Labor got this wrong? Is this now a case where if they've

pick up the phone to each other and it hasn't been at the top of the sheet then...



BUTLER: Well let's see how the next few months roll out as we lead into Joe Biden's Climate

Summit in April. Every single state government, every single business organisation here in

Australia, including the National Farmers Federation, our biggest airline and biggest mining

company, our biggest bank, have all called for a commitment from Scott Morrison for net zero

emissions by 2050. Over the last several months we've not just seen Joe Biden elected with

that commitment. We've seen China, South Korea and Japan make that commitment as well. It

is unambiguous that the world is shifting by net zero emissions commitment by 2050. And that

will shape investment patterns and job opportunities over the coming years. It's time for Scott

Morrison to stop sort of trying to straddle both sides of the fence here and unambiguously

make that commitment.



Thanks, everyone.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACTS:

LUCY CARUSO (BUTLER) 0408 803 428

LUCY BRADLOW (KENEALLY) 0427 280 390



