

SENATOR KIM CARR

CHAIR, SENATE LEGAL AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS REFERENCES

COMMITTEE

SENATOR FOR VICTORIA





PARLIAMENT MUST BE STRENGTHENED TO RESTORE PUBLIC TRUST



Parliamentary processes must be strengthened to rebuild public trust in Australia’s democratic

system, a Senate committee has found.



The Senate’s Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee tabled the report of its

inquiry into Nationhood, National Identity and Democracy last night.



It is not a typical report by a Senate committee. The report’s recommendations take action to

strengthen public trust in democracy.



The committee’s task was to investigate long-term indications that the level of public trust in

government and democracy was in decline. The COVID-19 pandemic has shown a new

confidence among Australians in the ability to follow expert advice, but this remains fragile and

it is yet to be seen whether it will continue beyond the pandemic.



The committee believes that the level of civic engagement in Australia will increase if people

are persuaded that politicians and the Parliament are acting in defence of their living standards

and their rights, liberties and opportunities.



The report calls for a strengthening of civics education, scientific advice to Parliament,

parliamentary accountability and parliamentary committee scrutiny because, through the

committee system, Australians are able to participate in the work of the Parliament.





The inquiry was conducted over 19 months, issued two discussion papers, received 205

written submissions and conducted three public hearings.



The report calls for members of Parliament to be more vigilant in defending democratic

processes and in ensuring adequate scrutiny of legislation. Nearly half of all legislation is now

delegated legislation and some of it cannot be disallowed by Parliament.



The committee’s 18 recommendations also include proposals for engagement with the Uluru

Statement from the Heart, dealing with dual citizens rights, increased public funding of political

parties and candidates and a federal anti-corruption commission.



A full copy of the committee report can be found: HERE



WEDNESDAY, 17 FEBRUARY 2021



MEDIA CONTACT: THOMAS MOORHEAD 0427 126 355



