

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP   SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION   SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  TODAY SHOW  THURSDAY, 4 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Craig Kelly; COVID vaccine roll-out; Pandemic recovery.

ALISON LANGDON HOST: Well, let's bring in Shadow Minister for Education Tanya Plibersek  in Canberra. Tanya, Craig came up right behind you as you called him a 'taxpayer-funded  nong'. Looking at that exchange, I think your face said it all.

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN TANYA  PLIBERSEK: This is really just too important to allow this sort of misinformation to spread in  our community. The Government spending $24 million on an advertising campaign to urge  people to get vaccinated and you've got this bloke out there saying the opposite.

I think it just had to stop. Like I said yesterday, my mum lives in his electorate. I don't want her  going to the shops and being exposed to people who refuse to be vaccinated because their  local MP has told them to think twice about it. Leaders should be speaking with one voice. I  agree with the Prime Minister, with the Health Minister, with the Chief Medical Officer, saying  that people should get vaccinated as soon as it's safe to do so. So that we can get life back to  normal. So we can reopen our businesses, reopen our borders and most importantly keep  people safe.

KARL STEFANOVIC HOST: Do you think the Prime Minister's got a problem with the far right  of the party?

PLIBERSEK: Yeah, I do. I think he allows people like Craig Kelly, George Christensen and  others to- it's the tail wagging the dog, the Liberal Party is really under the thumb of, I think it is  a small group, but a small group of people who identify with the Donald Trump view of the  world. And that's not healthy for our Australian democracy.

LANGDON: I mean I did note yesterday too that there are Coalition members who've come out  in support of Craig Kelly, that he should have the right to say whatever he wants to say. The  fact that he has finally received this dressing down from the Prime Minister, is it too little too  late? Has too much damage being done?

PLIBERSEK: I think two things. I 100% support free speech. What I don't support is taxpayer-funded disinformation, like the wrong facts, the exact opposite of the truth being spread,

effectively on the taxpayer dollar. That's what pays his wages. It pays his communications  budget and that is reaching a lot of people. And if it comes from their local MP, maybe they  think it's true. So he's of course allowed his own opinions, but he's not allowed his own set of  facts.

And I'm very pleased that the Prime Minister did finally call him into line yesterday after earlier  in the week saying he's doing a good job. Because this is too important. The health of  Australians and the reconstruction of our economy depends on Craig Kelly pulling his head in.  He's got a right to his own opinions, but he can't spread these crazy conspiracies about  COVID-19 treatments and vaccines.

STEFANOVIC: Tanya whether it's by design or not, I get the feeling you believe it's your time.  Is it?



PLIBERSERK: It was my turn to tell Craig Kelly to pull his head in yesterday. I think that's all  you can draw from what happened yesterday.

LANGDON: Don't dodge.

STEFANOVIC: You're on a roll right? You're on a roll and you’re making headway. Do you  believe it's your time, and will you have the courage to take Albo on?

PLIBERSEK: People want to see everything in an internal Labor party frame. I'm just not going  to do that. What matters now is the health of our people and the strength of our economy. My  100% focus, Labor's hundred per cent focus, is on making sure that we recover from this  pandemic by getting our community vaccinated and by making sure that there are secure jobs  with decent pay as we come out of this recession. We don't want the effects of this recession  to hurt - particularly our young people - for generations. Which is what normally happens after  a recession - you see years of struggle and poverty afterwards. We need to get the economy  back on its feet with good jobs, decent jobs, secure pay so that people feel confident that they  can take the kids out on a Saturday night to the movies and a pizza. That sort of confidence  creates jobs for other people.

LANGDON: Tanya that is all good and it's a nice diversion from what Karl was asking, but  when you've got Labor power brokers meeting up for secret dinners to talk about the fact that  they're not happy with how Anthony Albanese is going. There are things happening behind the  scenes.

PLIBERSEK: Well, I wasn't invited to any dinner like that. So I don't think it's any remarkable  thing that people who are away from home in Canberra together go out for dinner. I don't think  people ought to read too much into that.

STEFANOVIC: It won't be the first or the last time plotting happens over a Lazy Susan.

PLIBERSEK: Well it won't be the first or last time people have dinner together in Canberra,  like it's not that remarkable.

STEFANOVIC: And it won't be the last time you're asked about that. Tanya always appreciate  you coming on. Thank you for your time.

PLIBERSEK: It's a pleasure.





ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350



