

TRANSCRIPT



Senator James Paterson

Liberal Senator for Victoria



Monday 25 January 2021



Sky News: Summer agenda



Subjects: Vaccine, ABC Australia Day coverage



Tom Connell: Welcome back. Time now for our political panel. James Paterson, Liberal

Party and Kimberley Kitching from the Labor side of things join me now. Look, let's start

with the covid vaccine. It's obviously pretty positive news today. Is it really important we

don't have voices of dissent? Free speech is one thing and it's close to your heart I know

James Paterson, but a government MP, you know the potential for this to be undermined

as well, well, that would be another category altogether, wouldn't it?



Senator James Paterson: Just quickly, Tom, it's hugely encouraging news that the TGA

has approved the vaccine today from Pfizer and that hopefully the AstraZeneca vaccine

will get its approval shortly. Australians can be really encouraged that the TGA has gone

through their normal processes. This is not a rushed approval. It's a proper, thorough, full

approval. And the TGA and the experts like Professor Brendan Murphy and Professor

Kelly are the ones that we should all be listening to. Your reference to my colleagues who

have been commenting about this - I don't think we should seek to prevent them from

doing so. But I would ask them to consider the wisdom of weighing into debates that they

are not expert in. And I would encourage them and everyone else to listen to the people

who are expert.



Connell: So if we think of people such as Craig Kelly, George Christensen, is that the

approach of the party and indeed it seems to be that of the prime minister not seeking to

highlight this, not seeking to admonish, but just pointing to the voices that matter.



Paterson: Well, Tom, I just think it's personally it's just wise to be humble as politicians

about what we are expert in and what we're not expert in. I didn't go to university to study

vaccines and their efficacy. I am not an expert in it. And I don't intend to provide medical

advice to people because I don't have that grounding and expertise. I listen to those who

do, consider what they say and rest on their evidence. And I just encourage all

parliamentarians, whatever party you’re from; government, non-government, crossbench,

whatever, to do the same thing. I think that's appropriate.



Connell: Kimberley, we know people that you know in particular have these sort of

conspiracy views and so on, if people putting them out as silenced, well, it's almost like

waving a red rag to a bull. So is that the right approach? We don't need a prime minister

spending every news conference castigating a few lone voices do we? Is what James says

accurate?



Senator Kimberley Kitching: Well, I'm not I'm actually quite surprised that Craig Kelly

hasn't moved to Mullumbimby because I think that is the anti vaccine capital of the world.

And I think it proves that sometimes the extreme right and the extreme left sometimes

meet, you know, under horseshoe theory, Jean Pierre Faye's theory that, you know, they

meet, they meet at the back, you know. So I think it's actually quite unhelpful for politicians

to be who are not epidemiologists, don't work at CSL, don't work at some of the pharma

companies to be, you know, who don't have that expertise, as James says, to be casting

doubt on this. We actually need Australians to be vaccinated because we have such an

excellent therapeutic goods administration. You know, they are a world class regulator.

They are a world class, they have world class standards and procedures. And because we

have such an expert health team led by Professor Murphy, I think that what we can see is

that this is going to be a vaccine that is absolutely safe and that all Australians should

have no doubt about having.



Connell: So the criticism from Labour has been around how many vaccines the

government has signed up to - it signed up to four. One hit the fence because of the

particular nature of that trial. Three is still going and two are going well. And the

government's pointed out today, yes, it's got access to Pfizer, which right now seems like

possibly the best vaccine. It's certainly the earliest one, but also AstraZeneca, crucially,

with 50 million doses we can make right here, that seems like a reasonable spreading of

bets.



Kitching: Well, the prime minister did promise Australians that we would be first in the

queue, so no ifs, no buts. So, you know, other countries have been able, after their their

equivalent of their TGA has approved a vaccine that those governments so, for example,

in the US, in Canada, the U.K., they've really been able to roll out a week later. And I think

that as the prime minister has said, we'll be first in the queue. We really should be able to

roll this out properly, have those doses and be able to, you know, to administer this in lots

of different you know, Australia is a very large country. We should be able to roll it out,

though. I mean, I note that Israel has very has been probably the most successful country

in the world to roll out a vaccine. They are a very small government.



Connell: - bit more of an urgency there though isn't there?



Kitching: Well, there is an urgency. We we're in the well, we're actually Australia is very

lucky to be in the situation that we we're not in the emergency situation of the UK, for

example finds itself in or the US. You've just interviewed a man who's received a vaccine

in the US. But I think what you know, there's been record numbers of deaths in the last few

days overseas. We are lucky to be in a situation where we are not in an emergency, where

we are not having to import oxygen for example. You know, some of the counties in the

UK have run out of oxygen for patients suffering from coronavirus. We're not in that

situation, but we really need to roll this vaccine out so that life can resume normalcy.



Connell: All right, well I mean we're not in it, it's been for quite some time evident that we

weren't going to be anywhere near those other countries. Look, I want to get to a couple

more topics. The Australian Broadcasting Corporation, an article they've put up using the

changing terms of Australia Day and Invasion Day. Again, I'll start with the premise of a

man very much in favour of free speech. James Paterson. What did you make of this?



Paterson: The problem with this, Tom, is that the ABC has adopted an institutional

position in favour of a highly contentious political campaign. This is not just the case of the

ABC interviewing a guest who has a view that Australia Day should be changed to

invasion day, which, of course, they'd be free to do. But ABC presenters and journalists

being instructed that they can use the terms Australia Day and Invasion Day

interchangeably. That's a highly contentious political issue. There is bipartisan support

between the Liberal and Labor parties nationally for Australia Day to be on the 26th of

January. It's gazetted as a national holiday in every state and territory. So for the ABC to

be adopting quite an extreme minority viewpoint and saying it's a perfectly acceptable one,

I think really compromises the ABC's charter and its need to be impartial and stay out of

those kind of political debates. It should not weigh in in this way.



Connell: Do you think this is a live debate in the community, Kimberley, on January 26,

Australia Day, whether it still should hold up that role in Australian law?



Kitching: Well, I mean, I was out yesterday at a book launch, and then afterwards we

went to a cafe and the staff were wearing Australia Day kerchiefs. There was some of the

waitresses were wearing headbands with the Australian flag on them. There are lots of

cars around Melbourne today with the Australian flag on the car. I don't think I think most

Australians want and should be able to celebrate their nationhood. We are a very

successful country. We are a successful, multicultural and diverse community. We have

been successful in, you know, for example, in bringing lots of Australia, lots of people who

have become Australian citizens here. I note, and I hope the ABC notes that there are a lot

of people who are becoming citizens tomorrow. And that is a fantastic celebration of our

country that people choose to come here and that they want to want to celebrate that and

they become citizens on Australia Day, a day they will never forget in their lives.



Connell: Just going to pause there.



Kitching: But I think the ABC, you know, sometimes extremists.



Connell: Yeah - go on then just finish this before we.



Kitching: Don't believe that people should be able to celebrate. Well, I think that there are

some extremists in the community who don't think that Australians should even be able to

celebrate their own nation and the achievements of that nation. And I think that that's a

shame.



Connell: All right, just pause there we'll see if we can get back to you we do have to go to

South Australian authorities.



ENDS



