

NITA GREEN

SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC BRISBANE  FRIDAY, 29 JANUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Senate hearing into aviation sector; Jobs; Queensland tourism  sector; Remote aviation services; JobKeeper.

CATHIE SCHNITZERLING, HOST: A Senate inquiry is sitting in Brisbane today to examine  the aviation sector. Senator Nita Green, who is based in Cairns, will be one of those  hearing submissions. Good morning Senator.

NITA GREEN, SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND: Good morning Cathie and good morning  to your listeners.

SCHNITZERLING: Who will be making submissions today?

GREEN: We’ve got this hearing in Brisbane today and I have to say this is something I  called for to make sure this hearing came all the way here to Brisbane because we know  that Queensland and places like Cairns really are suffering by those international visitor  tourist numbers being down. So today we will be hearing from Virgin Australia, the new  CEO Jayne Hrdlicka will be there. We’ve got some airports coming along, some workers  will also be there to talk to us about the impacts they are feeling and we will be hearing  from the Queensland Tourism Industry Council, another really important stakeholder in this  conversation about how the industry is going to recover after COVID.

SCHNITZERLING: There is a lot of concentration on airlines when we talk about aviation,  but it’s more than that isn’t it? It’s the airports as well?

GREEN: It’s the airports, it’s the tourism operators, the ground staff, the people in head  office. As you mentioned we know there are people from Virgin - 350 jobs announced  yesterday to be gone from the head office of Virgin. There are a lot of jobs affected by this  impact and we want to make sure that there is a plan to support these jobs into the future  from the Federal Government. Those are the questions we will be putting to the witnesses  today: Is there enough support? What other support do they want to see? And how will we  see this sector recover into the future?

SCHNITZERLING: So apart from the business and tourism I notice one of those making  submissions is the Rural Doctors. How has that affected medical staff and medical supplies  in remote and regional parts of the state?



GREEN: It’s so interesting. There are so many different businesses that rely on airlines that  you wouldn’t necessarily think straight away and one of them is our medical and health  experts - the ones that fly out to remote areas. We know there is some capacity issues  around flying at the moment and there needs to be some support for rural doctors but also  for flights that head out to the Torres Strait delivering teachers and health experts. So we  want an all-round package that will make sure people are connected. A lot of people in  other parts of the country don’t understand how big Queensland is and how important  aviation is to the way that we live and they way that we work. That’s why it’s so important  this first hearing of this inquiry is being held in Queensland today.

SCHNITZERLING: Has there been any Commonwealth help for the aviation industry?

GREEN: Look, there certainly has been some support and it has been directed at the  airlines predominately to support those regional routes. The questions I’m keen to ask  witnesses today is not necessarily has there been enough support but what do they want to  see in the future. We know with some of the support there has been an extension and they  are in there till March, but just like JobKeeper the Federal Government is thinking of pulling  that support away. So the questions really are what happens after March for the support for  airlines and airports and for JobKeeper when it comes to tourism businesses that are still  reliant on international tourists coming back. We know that won’t be happening for a really  long time now.

SCHNITZERLING: Senator Green can people still make submissions to this inquiry?

GREEN: Submissions have actually closed but you can contact the committee directly and  tell them your story. There is a really good website the Senate uses to collect information.  Contact the committee if you do have a personal story that you want to share. I would be  particularly interested in hearing from workers who have been made redundant, whether  they have been able to find new employment in a new sector or what training and skills they  might need to move on to another career. One of the risks that we have is we will lose all of  these people with these great skills and when the international borders do open up - we  won’t have the same sort of workforce that we need to grow and get more tourists to come  back to Queensland. So there are really important stories we need to hear and we would be  keen to hear from anyone who wants to share their story so we can make some really  concrete recommendations to the Federal Government about what they need to do. This is  urgent, this is something that can’t be pushed off into the never-never. We need a solution  now.

SCHNITZERLING: What website would people go to?

GREEN: So we have got a great Senate website and the email address is  rrat.sen@aph.gov.au and if you head on to the parliamentary business committee’s website  you can find the Rural and Regional Affairs Transport Committee website, it will have all the  information there. You can read the submissions of other witnesses and you can reach our  Secretariat directly.

SCHNITZERLING: Senator Green, when will the hearings wrap up and when will you  report?

GREEN: There will be a few more hearings to be held. We certainly want to get around to



as many places in the country that are affected. We are planning on reporting in the first  part of this year, but if we need to extend or make interim recommendations to the  Government so that there can be some urgent action taken we can do that as well. This is a  really important committee that works quite collaboratively and in a bipartisan way. And the  emphasis here really is to get the Government to get how urgent these issues are and they  need to really assess what programs they will put in place until international tourism comes  back.

SCHNITZERLING: Senator Green, thanks for your time this morning and good luck with  your hearings into the aviation industry today.

GREEN: Thanks for your time Cathie.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JACOB WILSON 0457 961 596









