

LINDA BURNEY MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND SOCIAL SERVICES  SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AUSTRALIANS  MEMBER FOR BARTON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT   TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC AFTERNOON BRIEFING WITH PATRICIA KARVELAS   MONDAY, 8 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Vaccine certificates; Racism in Australian sport.

PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: Linda, welcome.

LINDA BURNEY: Hello.

KARVELAS: Now, once a person has a certificate proving that they have been vaccinated,  should it make it easier for them to move around? Is that how Labor would like to see this  used?

BURNEY: I have to say that I'm attracted to the idea of a digital passport, if you like, to  vaccinations. I know there are issues around privacy that need to be considered. The other  thing, of course - and you'd expect me to say this but it is absolutely true - is when there is a  proposal or legislation in front of the Parliament, we'll be looking at it very carefully. I have to  say, Patricia, that the government's record in terms of digital application is really - well, it's not  a good reputation in the sense of Robodebt, in the sense of information about Medicare cards  being available on the black web. You will remember that case as well, of course, with what we  saw the last time, the census was supposedly going to be undertaken. So, there is issues  around the capacity of the government to be able to do this properly. And there are issues  around privacy and issues around whether state government, first ministers, think it's a good  idea. I have heard some of them on the radio today. But it's important that there be - that there  be the capacity for this to take place. I mean, I’ve downloaded the COVID app, but I don't think  it's been that successful in its application.

KARVELAS: So, you're concerned about previous failures and whether they may be repeated  here. What sort of questions will you be asking of the government to ensure this doesn't  happen? Stuart Robert was on radio with my colleague Fran Kelly this morning. He was  questioning about creating a sort of robust system which can't be hacked. Are you confident  after he answered those questions that the government will do that?

BURNEY: I'm not confident in anything Stuart Robert say, which is a proven thing. But I did  hear the interview that you're referring to. The sorts of questions that Fran Kelly put to Stuart  Robert are not dissimilar to the questions Labor would be asking about the efficacy, which is  really important; about the reliability, and as you say, Patricia, about the security of that

information. I mean, it's personal information - personal medical information that this refers to.  And, you know, I have been verydiligent in understanding when I can get the vaccine and what  vaccine it will be, but I have to say that the digital passport has to be secure and the issue of  personal information is probably the first priority that you want to be looking at.

KARVELAS: Given we obviously need to get high rates of vaccination to ensure that this thing  works - I mean, that's the sort of theory behind vaccinations, of course - are you sympathetic to  linking getting a vaccine to access to child care or government benefits? Is that something that  you think should be explored?  BURNEY: Labor has not discussed those issues in any great detail. But there are certainly  issues that need to be discussed. There are some people that - for whatever reason - don't  believe in vaccinations and that's their right. I do believe in vaccinations. And I think that  Australia has an incredibly good track record, particularly in the First Nations community, a  really good track record in terms of vaccinations. I mean, you think about it from an historical  perspective. I mean, I am old enough to remember children in the school that - the primary  school that I went to that had polio or had polio earlier in their life. So, I mean, enormous  changes there. I was 14, I think, when rubella came out to schools. All young women had the  rubella vaccination. It is important but it is personal information. Whether or not having the  vaccination for COVID linking it to childcare and so forth is a discussion that's worth having,  but I do note, Patricia, that in many situations, unless children who are going to kindergarten -  and will remember this as a mum - have had their vaccinations in the little blue book, then  there is a question about whether or not they pose a health risk to children round smallpox or  measles or whatever in that classroom. And I do think it's an important discussion.

KARVELAS: Just finally, and changing the topic, putting your other hat on too as the Shadow  Minister for Indigenous Australians, last week the Collingwood Football Club - well, it didn't  release its report, it was leaked. And then addressed the report. It found systemic racism in the  club. Now, over the weekend more voices have had - added their voice to the calls for Eddie  McGuire, the president, to step down. Do you think he should step down?

BURNEY: I think Eddie McGuire needs to seriously consider his position. I note that he has  made it clear that he wants to stay until the end of I think the 2021 season. It really is a matter  for the club. But there has to be an acceptance, not just from Eddie McGuire, but the whole  leadership of the club. And I would hasten to say the leadership of the AFL, which I think has  done some very good things in this space, to understand the systemic racism is part of  Australia, it's certainly part of Australian sport, and it is part of the AFL. They are the issues  that need to be examined from Eddie McGuire through to Gillon McLachlan and all of the AFL,  in my view.

KARVELAS: You say that you think Eddie McGuire needs to consider his position now, rather  than staying the full year, as he so far intends to. Why is he, in your view, not capable of  overhauling the club's processes to address these issues around systemic racism?

BURNEY: Well, look, he may be capable and, as I say, Patricia, that is absolutely a matter for  the club and a matter for the president of the club. But that report was a serious report. It was  done by serious people. And the issue really is not about Eddie McGuire, it's about making  sure the Collingwood, as a whole, accepts and does something about the culture of the club.  But Collingwood is not the only sporting organisation that needs to consider these important  questions about the way in which we want sport to be reflected in Australia. Australians look up  to sport. It's an important part of Australian culture, and there is no place for racism anywhere  in it.





KARVELAS: Linda Burney, thank you so much for joining us this afternoon.

BURNEY: Thanks Patricia.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DARYL TAN 0422 028 222



