



The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

The Hon. Karen Andrews MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology

The Hon. Keith Pitt MP  Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

Thursday 4 March 2021

USING OUR RESOURCES STRENGTHS TO GROW MANUFACTURING

The Morrison Government is leveraging Australia’s world-leading critical mineral and resources sector to  create more jobs and economic opportunities for manufacturing businesses with the release of a new  ten year plan.

The Resources Technology and Critical Minerals Processing road map shows how businesses can  capitalise on Australia’s access to resources, which will be needed to manufacture many new  technologies.

Applications under the Government’s $1.3 billion Modern Manufacturing Initiative also opened today to  projects in the priority area, to help manufacturers scale-up production, commercialise products and tap  into global supply chains.

Prime Minister Scott Morrison said the Government was focused on continuing to rebuild and grow the  economy, with manufacturing playing a key role in the COVID-19 recovery.

“Yesterday’s national accounts showed the comeback of the Australian economy is well underway and  manufacturing businesses and jobs will be central to our National Economic Recovery Plan as we build  back from the COVID-19 recession,” the Prime Minister said.

“Our $1.5 billion Modern Manufacturing Strategy is at the heart of our JobMaker plan and it’s focused  on growing our entire manufacturing sector.

“Our Modern Manufacturing Initiative will help position Australia as not just a global leader in the  resources sector but also in the manufacturing of the technology used, as well as turning the raw  materials into value-added products.



“Today’s funding will help unlock investment from industry to help build manufacturing capability and  competitiveness in Australia’s resources sector while taking advantage of a significant global growth  sector.

“This investment and this Roadmap will support jobs across Australia, particularly in our resource rich  regions like the Hunter, Western Australia and Central Queensland.”

Minister for Industry, Science and Technology Karen Andrews said the new Roadmap set out a ten-year  vision to build sophisticated manufacturing capability in Australia in the resources sector.

“Opportunities outlined in the Roadmap include turning critical minerals into high value products like  batteries and solar cells, as well as technologies and equipment that makes mining more efficient and  safe,” Minister Andrews said.

“This funding will back businesses to pursue those opportunities and turn innovative ideas into high-value products so we can build on Australia’s competitive advantage and secure greater investment and  market share.”

This Roadmap complements the Government’s initiatives to reduce electricity prices, boost liquid fuels  security and invest in low emissions energy technology through Australia’s Technology Investment  Roadmap.

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt said it also complements the  Government’s Critical Minerals Strategy.

“The Government is committed to bringing on new supplies of critical minerals and developing this  emerging sector to meet growing global demand,” he said.

“Developing our critical minerals processing capability will ensure Australian companies can move down  the value chain, getting greater value out of the products they produce.”

The Roadmap also identifies how we can develop our resources technology to maximise efficiencies in  our high performing resources sector.

“Our focus on resource technology will also support the development of new ideas to improve mine  productivity, process efficiency and safety. As the sector’s productivity grows so does the Australian  economy, benefiting all Australians,” Minister Pitt said.

The road maps in the remaining priority areas will be released in coming weeks to coincide with the  opening of their respective MMI funding rounds.

The remaining road maps are; Food and Beverage, Recycling and Clean Energy, and Defence.

Initial applications will be limited to the Translation and Integration streams of the MMI, with  expressions of interest for the larger Collaboration stream to open in coming months.

For more information on the road maps and available grant funding visit industry.gov.au/manufacturing  .



[END]

Media Contacts:   Prime Minister’s Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  Minister Andrews’ office, Keegan Buzza 0447 697 846  Minister Pitt’s office, Matt Dunstan 0411 535 072  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

Press Office of the Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Prime Minister, Canberra

