

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

MEMBER FOR HUNTER

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2GB WITH DEBORAH KNIGHT   FRIDAY, 12 MARCH 2021

SUBJECT: Subsidised Flights Policy; Lack of Assistance for the  Entertainment Industry; Yallourn Coal-fired Power Station Closure; Chris  Bowen Visit to a Coal Mine; Carbon Tariffs.

DEBORAH KNIGHT, HOST: And joining us as they do every Friday for Friday  Question Time, Angus Taylor, the Energy Minister and Joel Fitzgibbon, Labor's  Member for Hunter. Fella's thanks for joining us. I want to dive straight into the  subsidised flights issue because we know Angus, the government was out in  force yesterday, the PM joined by a gaggle of Ministers - I was asking listeners  what a collective of ministers would be, lots of interesting suggestions - but lots  about out there announcing this $1.2 billion tourism package, half price flights  for specific routes. A lot in the tourist industry aren't happy about it. Margy  Osmand told us yesterday on the show that the package doesn't go far enough,  and the states aren't happy either. New South Wales says Sydney should have  gotten more; Queensland says Brisbane should have gotten more. Was this  policy not thought out as clearly as it should have been?

ANGUS TAYLOR, MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND EMISSIONS REDUCTION:  No, I think it's very clearly thought out, Deb. We need a program where the  benefits flow through the economy and it'll lead to people staying in local hotels,  eating at local restaurants, visiting tourist sites in the hardest hit areas. And this  is the key point, places like Cairns and Broome, Alice Springs, they have been  hit very hard by what's happened particularly to international tourism.  International tourism isn't coming back tomorrow. This will get the airlines going  but it will also get those areas going by getting money flowing through them...

DEBORAH KNIGHT, HOST: ... But cities like Sydney and Brisbane have been  hit hard too and they don't get any subsidised flights.

TAYLOR: Well, of course. But Sydney as an economy is nowhere near as  dependent on international tourism as places like Cairns and Broome. And

that's why we have to prioritise. Now we've said all along, that we're open to  adding locations where it makes sense to do so. But it is critical we prioritise  those areas that have been really hard hit by the loss of international tourism  where that's a big part of that local economy.

KNIGHT: Yeah, and we know that the help is desperately needed in those  parts, no argument there. But Joel, many were quick to point out that the routes  seemed a bit political, seats that the government wants to win or really need to  keep. Is that a fair assessment?

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: Look, I think it is a fair  assessment, Deb. You and your listeners know that I've worked very hard for  the last 12 months on this segment, not politicising COVID and COVID  responses, but this one's really weird. Let’s take one group that I've been  fighting hard for, our travel agents, and we have just shut down their  businesses. And you know that, you know, people book their own domestic  flights, it's the international flights which take them to their travel agent. This  doesn't help travel agents at all. And there are so many examples of that, and  this is somewhat, the whole thing is just weird, Deb. I mean, it's a policy for the  airlines for sure. Not that they'll make much out of it, because they're doing it  tough, but I just don't see that it helps the tourism industry. And you only have  to look at the list of areas nominated, Deb, a list which didn't last 12 hours, by  the way before it was extended...

KNIGHT: ... Well Darwin is now included. There was a bit of confusion over  Darwin actually too.

FITZGIBBON: Well, it's looking more and more like sports rorts and regional  rort grants to me.

KNIGHT: Angus?

TAYLOR: Look, honestly, Joel, the tourism industry needs tourists. Doesn't  need a handout, which is always Labor's preferred approach to these sort of  things. It needs tourists. And what this will do is get tourists going into those  regions that desperately need it. And the idea that they're politicised and we've  got Labor electorates included in this like the Northern Territory, Alice Springs  is one of those places, for instance, and this is absolutely appropriate to get  tourism up and running. And let me tell you, the agents they're being dealt with  in a different program. So that criticism is not warranted.

KNIGHT : What about entertainment...

FITZGIBBON: ... Marginal Labor seats, marginal Labor seats, Deb. I look  forward to someone working out in six months’ time, the cost of, or the return  on each dollar invested out of over a billion dollars, I think it's going to be really  low.

KNIGHT: Alright, well we'll see how that plays out. I wanted to ask though,  Angus, about the entertainment sector and the entertainment industry, because  I know that the government has said that you will look at targeted help for  industries that are doing it tough, but an extension of JobKeeper or a similar  wage subsidy for the live entertainment industry has been ruled out. Why, when  they're doing it so hard?

TAYLOR: Well, because we need targeted programs that actually get things up  and running again. I mean, look, we've got to move on...

KNIGHT: ... But you have got to protect jobs in the meantime, don't you?

TAYLOR: Let me finish, we have got to move on from the handout mentality to  the hand up mentality, which is helping industries get back on their feet. That's  exactly what we're doing here with tourism. We want to get tourists back into

tourism. And that's what will work with entertainment. We want to get audiences  back into entertainment. So, the focus has to be on that. Not on just keeping  people in jobs alone. It's actually getting customers back into business. That's  how businesses prosper and survive. Labor don't seem to understand  customers and business because that is the only way we're going to get these  industries up and running, and you know, these businesspeople, they want to  be in business. They want to be in business, and that's exactly what we're  focused on.

KNIGHT: Yeah, but a lot of them, you know, they're shutting up shop and  they're saying they won't be able to reopen, because they just simply can't  employ people in the meantime, while they wait for the audiences to return.

TAYLOR: Well, and the whole point of this, if you look at what we're doing in  tourism, he's getting customers back. What businesses need to survive is  customers. And that's exactly what we're doing with these programs.



DEBORAH KNIGHT, HOST: Alright, big news on the energy front this week,  the closure of the Yallourn coal-fired plant in Victoria, which supplies about 20  per cent of Victoria's power. But Energy Australia has brought that closure date  forward to 2028 and they plan to build a dirty big battery to replace it. Well, a  clean one they say. But you've spoken a lot, Angus, about unreliable power and  job losses as a result. I guess if we knew that this closure was coming, why

hasn't there been a more detailed transition strategy with industry to avoid  those job losses?

TAYLOR: Well, we've got seven years now. I mean, look, this is bad news for  those workers, 500 workers at Yallourn on there right now. I'm calling from just  outside the Latrobe Valley and I've been in the Latrobe Valley this morning,  Deb, and so it is a tough time for those workers. The good news is we've got  seven years warning. We didn't get that with Hazelwood and that means we  have got time to plan. Now, I'll clarify what you said a moment ago, it is true  that Energy Australia are saying they will build a battery. It's also true that  they're saying there will need to be more. And we agree with that, there will  need to be more. And just as with the closure of Liddell, we've made it very  clear, we want the private sector to step up and replace Liddell with  dispatchable capacity, reliable, affordable energy. And if the private sector  doesn't, we will step in with our own gas generator. And I know that Joel is a  strong supporter of that policy. And, you know, what we need in the case of  Yallourn is we need to see replacement from the private sector, and we'll  certainly be working with the Victorian Government and the private sector to  make sure that there is appropriate replacement for a big loss of 22 per cent of  Victoria's energy. We want to see that properly replaced. There are other  industries that are also growing in the area. And I was at a hydrogen project  development this morning, which is very exciting for workers in the Latrobe  Valley, already around three or 400 workers on that. And there's much more  potential for that, for that industry to grow in that area.

KNIGHT: And what about for you, Joel, because Vales Point, obviously that  power station closer to you in your electorate its set to close in 2029, but  concerns have been raised that it isn't economically viable given the rise of  cheap renewable energy. The market is increasingly turning away from coal  isn't it?

FITZGIBBON: Well, more particularly, Deb, the physical lives of our coal-fired  generation aren’t infinite. I mean, they run out of puff. And in New South Wales  we have about 10 megawatts of installed capacity, 90 per cent of which comes  from coal-fired generators that are 30 years old or more. So, there's no surprise  in any of this. Coal generators can't run forever. And because they can't now  compete, no one's likely to build a new one. So we need to be really energetic  about how we plan for this change. And I welcome the fact that Energy  Australia has given seven years notice at Yallourn. It's only four years earlier  than was anticipated and I welcomed the fact that Liddell rather unusually gave  five years notice. So, you know, I've been happy to work with the government in  the Hunter Valley to make sure that AGL, the operator of Liddell, replaces that

with capacity, replaces it with alternative forms of generation that in themselves  will be employment creating in my region.

KNIGHT: And what's going on with Chris Bowen paying a visit to a coal mine in  Central Queensland? Have you been getting into the ear of your colleagues  have you?

FITZGIBBON: Well, I welcome the visit, Deb, and nothing - it should not be a  newsworthy event when a Labor MP visits a coal mine. I mean we were largely  born to represent the coal miners. We've always supported the coal mining  industry, and always will, but we need to get out there and say it more keenly  and more loudly. So I welcome his visit. And may there be many more.

KNIGHT: And just on the global stage, too, Angus. The European Union has  announced these plans for a carbon tariff on products from countries without a  carbon price, countries like us here in Australia. And we've heard your Trade  Minister Dan Tehan saying he'll fight back. But is this another example of us  here in Australia falling behind the rest of the world on climate policy?

TAYLOR: No, we're meeting and beating our targets unlike many other  countries in the world, including New Zealand and Canada. We are doing  extremely well. We've smashed out Kyoto 2020 targets. We're on track to beat  our 2030 targets. And we should be very proud of those achievements. We've  done it without a carbon tax. That's the, that's the best way to do it. But we're  firmly opposed to the use of taxes or tariffs. We believe in technology, not  taxation, as a way to bring down emissions and create jobs and opportunities at  the same time. So, we think that border adjustments are the wrong way to do it.

But there's a long way to go before the Europeans can get that in place. It's  really, it was just an in principle vote you saw this week.

KNIGHT: All right, we'll see how that goes. And we'll see how your former  colleague Mathias Cormann goes too with that European Union position too. So  it looks like it's very close, the OECD position too. It's a very close-run thing

between, between him and the other contender. So, I wanted to end though  with a bit of nostalgia with the two of you, because the founder of the cassette  tape, Lou Ottens, passed away at the age of 94. Remember that? Cassette  tapes? You've probably got to describe them for some of the younger listeners.  But I wanted to hear from you guys, your first tape that you ever bought. What  was it? Joel?

FITZGIBBON: I'm worried Angus is going to say he's too young. That's a really  easy one for me, Bob Seger and the Silver Bullet Band. Their 1978 album



Stranger in Town is the only tape I had for a while. It was well and truly worn  out in short time. Come on, Angus, you surely - I hope you have an example?

KNIGHT: Angus, you probably did your own mixtape did you?

TAYLOR: No, I had tapes. I absolutely had tapes. In fact, the first one I  remember will was Billy Joel's Greatest Hits, which came out I think it was  about 1985. And it had songs like Piano Man and Say Goodbye to Hollywood.  Fantastic songs of course. And, but sadly, it went the way of so many cassette  tapes, it melted in the car.

KNIGHT: Oh, no, that's bad. Or when the tape just sort of comes out and kind  of spewed out of the tape - the actual cassette tape. It was sad when it when  the actual brown tape...

TAYLOR: This in fact was a double album. So, it was a real meltdown.

FITZGIBBON: Remember, Deb, you had to stick the pencil in it to wind the  tape back in.

KNIGHT: Yes, to wind the tape back. Absolutely. I found an old box of my old  cassette tapes a couple of years ago and yeah, I had had a quite a few. A-ha  was one of mine as well. I had an A-ha cassette tape. So yeah, there you go.  We're revealing all sorts of things about ourselves here tonight, musical tastes.  Good on you, Fellas. We'll talk again next week.

FITZGIBBON: Thanks Team

TAYLOR: Thank you

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAVID BULLOCK 0405 408 871





Authorised by Joel Fitzgibbon, ALP, Cessnock, NSW.









