



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

Senator the Hon Jane Hume  Minister for Superannuation, Financial Services and the Digital Economy  Senator for Victoria

Senator the Hon Bridget McKenzie  Leader of The Nationals in the Senate  Senator for Victoria

Cr Dean Rees  Mayor, Wangaratta Rural City Council



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au



19 March 2021

WANGARATTA’S NEW POOL CREATES A SPLASH

Elite athletes and competitive swimmers will benefit from the redeveloped Wangaratta Indoor Sport  and Aquatic Centre, which opened today in the northern Victorian town.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the new facility was a win for Wangaratta and the people of north-eastern Victoria.

“The new centre can host elite training and major events for competitive swimming, water polo and  other aquatic events,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“The Olympic and Yarrunga pools were ageing and structurally damaged, but this new, high-quality  facility will provide for the community on a local and regional level for many years to come.

“We know our regional communities are reeling from the impacts of COVID-19, which is why the  Australian Government’s ongoing $110 billion infrastructure pipeline is delivering local jobs and  building economies right across the country at a time when it is needed most.”

Senator for Victoria Jane Hume said this was a significant local win for swimmers in Wangaratta.

“Swimming has the third-highest participation rate for recreation activities in Wangaratta, after  walking and cycling,” Senator Hume said.

“The town’s participation rate for swimming, at 20 per cent, is higher than both Victorian and  Australian participation rates of 13 per cent.”

North-east based Nationals Senator for Victoria Bridget McKenzie said the pool meets demand for  more fitness and rehabilitation programs including aquatic therapy for injured, post-operative,  disabled and high-dependency users as well as aqua-fitness.

“The region’s population is ageing and people over 65 years of age, as a percentage of that  population, are expected to rise from 16 per cent in 2014 to over 25 per cent by 2026. This is creating  quite a demand for existing and new programs,” she said.

“It’s fantastic that the Wangaratta and surrounding communities, of all ages, abilities and needs, will  benefit from these facilities.”

Wangaratta Mayor Dean Rees said the aquatic plan would be a transformational project for  Wangaratta.

“We are creating the sporting and events capital for regional Victoria,” Cr Rees said.

“Major swimming events and elite athletes will be attracted to train at this brilliant facility. Our own  community will now have a clear pathway to develop our young swimmers, while also catering for  our ageing population.”

The project was jointly funded, with the Australian Government committing $4.4 million, the  Victorian Government $1.5 million and the Wangaratta Rural City Council $11.02 million.

Ends.

Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Dean Shachar 0418 202 860 | Caitlin Donaldson 0428 389 880  Senator Hume - Electorate Office - (03) 9428 1773  Senator McKenzie - Nicky McMillan - 0439 438 500









