Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, Sydney.





THE HON PAUL FLETCHER MP  Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts

MEDIA RELEASE

12 March 2021

Sustainability funding flows to support Arts organisations

Four leading arts organisations threatened by COVID-19 are set to share in more than $4 million  funding, under the second batch of the Morrison Government’s $35 million COVID-19 Arts  Sustainability Fund.

The Sustainability Fund is designed to assist significant Australian Arts organisations deemed as  facing a risk to their sustainability over the next 12 months due to COVID-19.

At-risk organisations must be considered to have a good prospect of maintaining their viability—and  have a clear plan to do so—with support from the Fund.

The Wheeler Centre, Belvoir Theatre Company, the Australian Brandenburg Orchestra, and the  Queensland Ballet are the latest recipients of the Fund, and will collectively receive more than $4  million to support their continued operations.

Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cites and the Arts, the Hon Paul Fletcher MP,  said the Sustainability Fund provides organisations with financial assistance to plan a pathway for  recovery from the effects of COVID-19.

“These organisations are key employers of artists and art workers and leading presenters of high-quality work to audiences across Australia, which is why this financial support is crucial,” Minister  Fletcher said.

“This funding brings the total pool of allocated funds to more than $13 million to date, reflecting our  significant investment in supporting the arts and cultural sector in continuing its activities, and  rebuilding from this period of severe disruption.”

The funding follows an assessment process administered by the Office for the Arts, with the  Australia Council the Infrastructure and Project Financing Agency.

In January 2021 more than $9 million in funding was announced under Batch One of the Fund, for  National Institute of Dramatic Art, the Melbourne Symphony Orchestra, the Museum of  Contemporary Art, and the Melbourne Art Foundation.

The Sustainability Fund is still open and accepting applications. Applications will close on 31 May  2021 (5:00pm AEST), subject to allocation of funds.

Media contact:  Imre Salusinszky | 0432 535 737 | Imre.Salusinszky@communications.gov.au

