

T h e  H o n . D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T



Tuesday 6th April 2021

Minister Littleproud iv with ABC Country Hour NSW

MICHAEL CONDON: And we're joined now, we've got a very special guest. Joining us  now who's just arrived here at the Sydney Royal Easter show, David Littleproud. Good  afternoon. Welcome to the program.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, thanks for having me.

MICHAEL CONDON: And we've been talking a lot about the $15 million federal  government assistance to have the show, I mean, stay here and survive, very important for  them last year. And obviously you made a commitment that you would be helping them out  through that tough times.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Definitely. I mean they still had their fixed costs coming through,  and we understood that if we didn't help, then effectively they only really get one crack at  this every year. And this wasn't just for the Sydney Royal Shows, it's for all the shows right  across the country. We put $34 million out. But such is the scale and size that it is here in  Sydney that they were able to secure 15.1 million of that. And that's important because it's  also about connecting the city to the bush. And if we don't have these events and we lose  that corporate knowledge that all these men and women put into this show, then we lose  that. If we miss a couple of years and then that's lost, then we lose that connection. And  we've already lost that connection. We've had generations that have lost their connection  with the bush. And so this investment is a small one but a very important one into  maintaining this for generations to come.

MICHAEL CONDON: And I guess it's the place where everyone is looking to in terms of  shows from all around New South Wales. And this is the pinnacle.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: It is. You know, being a proud Queenslander, that's the same up  there. All our little shows, we all emulate to get into the Ekka, but it means so much for the  country people. And I was just talking to Murray, the general manager. He said there were  cockies coming off the back of trucks just in tears with joy about going to the Cattlemen's  bar, having a beer, catching out with mates they hadn't seen for a couple years. It's the  psychological benefit as well. We finally got some rain. We've got something to celebrate  ...



MICHAEL CONDON: Yeah, the end of the droughts. Yep ...

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T



DAVID LITTLEPROUD: ... The very first day it stops raining. But this is something for us to  probably come together and just take it a bit of sweat of our brow and say gee, we've done  a good job as a country. But as regional and rural Australians, we've got something to  celebrate. We're going to come out of COVID-19 better than anyone because we've had a  bit of rain, we've done the hard lifting, commodity prices are going where they need to be.  And you know what? We should be damn proud of what we do and how we do it, and city  people should understand that we produce the best food and fibre in the world and we do  it in the most ethically and sustainable way of anyone else in the world.

MICHAEL CONDON: And I wanted to ask you also about the emergency communications  issue, because I know you're talking about that today as well. So you're basically- you're  saying that there were some failures during the bush fires and we need to really improve it.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Oh there is, and you can't sugar coat it. We've been working with  the telcos for some time, firstly about them identifying where the critical infrastructure is to  our emergency service personnel. So they can protect that, they can deploy resources  where they need to and they've been very slow on that. Telstra, in particular, Andy Penn  has been very slow and he's finally come to putting pen on paper, which is very  disappointing; we're 12 months down the track. And in fact, I saw them before that. But  now what we're trying to do is work with the states around what that technology should  look like, particularly for our emergency service personnel, to make sure ...

MICHAEL CONDON: You don't know yet. You're trying to find the best.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: We're piloting. We're piloting a public safety mobile broadband  system, and we'll do that with emergency services and Victoria has led with that. We- the  federal government has put up over eight million dollars to trial this. But if we can prove  that it works in concept, then we'll roll it across. And I've got to say, all the states have  been very, very enthusiastic about making sure we pull this off, but they want to make sure  it works because we all have to make an investment. But technology will get there, but we  have to make the investment to get it.

MICHAEL CONDON: Because we heard during the bushfire crisis a lot of people saying  they had no phone, no internet, no mobile phone service at all. They had to rely on the  battery-powered radio so they can hear the ABC.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Totally. And if it wasn't for ABC, I have no doubt that they saved  lives during the Black Summer, and we really got to thank the public broadcaster, and  particularly our regional ABC stations that are out there. ...

MICHAEL CONDON: Maybe you should give us some more money.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: You're always getting ...

MICHAEL CONDON: Getting more cuts.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: You're always getting Australian taxpayers' money, and that's a  privilege, and that's a privilege that the ABC should also understand, that it's a privilege to  get Australian taxpayers money. But we'll obviously continue to work with the telcos in  making sure that the infrastructure that they put up is adequate, that'll do the job. But also  the infrastructure that supports that is also provided to emergency service personnel to  know where it is, so that we can protect it. And some of the problems we had was that we

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T



didn't know where those critical linkages were. So emergency service personnel couldn't  be deployed to go and to protect it. And so that actually is a failure of sharing of data. Now  I get there's commercial and confidence information that some of the telcos don't want to  share, but this is giving it to statutory government organisations that are there to save  lives. And I would have thought saving lives is more important than a profit.

MICHAEL CONDON: But there's also problems with tower failures, and those sorts of-  infrastructure failures, and those- maybe you need to be a broadest- I don't know whether  you're looking at a broader telecommunications via satellite or something like that, just in  that emergency situation.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, and that's- those are some of the technologies we look at.  We as a federal government are putting in over 1700 new mobile phone towers across  regional Australia in particular. We'll continue to look at that. I think we need to look at  what the universal service guarantee looks like and whether that should be extended from  just landlines across to those mobile phone towers, because we are seeing the telcos,  particularly where there's not a huge numbers underneath those towers, actually putting  the repairs and maintenance and the maintenance of batteries in to maintain to a level  that's satisfactory. So there's a whole lot of work I think we need to do, and we've got the  universal service guarantee, $270-odd million every year that should go into protecting that  sort of infrastructure, building that infrastructure to keep us safe. But also giving us the  tools of the 21st century that we should have, particularly in regional Australia.

MICHAEL CONDON: Yeah. I thought that the- we sort of kneecapped the universal  service obligation. I thought that wasn't really a universal service obligation anymore, that  they're weaselling their way out of it.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No, well it is. It goes only to landlines because it was instituted  when the privatisation of Telstra. And in those days, the technology was landlines and pay  phones. We've gone from around 80,000 pay phones down to 15,000 pay phones. And of  that $270-odd million, about $44 million of that is in fact going towards maintaining  payphones. So the mix of how we can use that money should change and we should look  to the technology- how technology has changed, how we should protect mobile phone  towers, but also look to satellite technology as well.

MICHAEL CONDON: David Littleproud, appreciate that. We have to go to markets.  Thanks for that.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks for having me.

Media contact  0455 448 985

