

Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE GOVERNMENT IN THE SENATE  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA

MEDIA RELEASE



23 March 2021

HELPING MORE PEOPLE INTO SELF-EMPLOYMENT



With Australia’s economic recovery underway, the Morrison Government are providing even  more opportunities for people to start their own new small business and assisting people  already running a micro-business with more free training and support available.

An additional 1,000 places are being provided under the New Business Assistance with the  New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS) program and an additional 350 places for people to  access an Exploring Being My Own Boss Workshop.

The free Exploring Being My Own Boss Workshops provide valuable  information on what is  involved in starting a new business - helping people decide if self-employment is right for  them. They include practical information about running a business and information on small  business support services available.

The New Business Assistance with NEIS program provides a range of free small business  assistance to people who have a great business idea and need help getting started. This  assistance can include access to free accredited small business training, support to develop  business plans and personalised business mentoring.

Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business, Senator the Hon Michaelia  Cash, says: “Anyone looking for work, people who have part-time or caring responsibilities,  or any micro-business owners or sole traders who have been impacted by COVID-19 can  participate in the New Business Assistance with NEIS program or undertake a Workshop.

“New Business Assistance with NEIS is a highly successful program and has helped over  185,000 people start a new small business since 1985”.

“Small business assistance can provide people with extremely valuable business,  organisational and marketing skills and help people turn their new business ideas into a  reality”.

“Running a small business can be a deeply rewarding experience for many Australians and  are the backbone of communities.

“By expanding the New Business Assistance with the NEIS Program, we are able to assist  more Australians to get their business idea off paper and into reality.”

For more information visit: http://www.dese.gov.au/neis

MEDIA CONTACTS  Guy Creighton - Guy.Creighton@dese.gov.au - 0438 815 302





