

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP   SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION   SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MEMBER FOR SYDNEY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC NEWS RADIO  WEDNESDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Craig Kelly; COVID vaccine roll-out.

HOST: An early confrontation in the corridors of Parliament occurred this morning when  Labor's Tanya Plibersek confronted backbench Liberal MP, Craig Kelly. Plibersek interrupting  a press conference to criticise Mr Kelly who was walking past for spreading misinformation  about COVID-19 and Australia's vaccination roll-out.

(GRAB)

TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION, SHADOW MINISTER FOR  WOMEN: Actually, I’m actually telling them (assembled media) that the PM has to stop you  spreading these crazy conspiracy theories.

CRAIG KELLY, LIBERAL MEMBER FOR HUGHES: Did you hear about Professor Clancy,  you've gotta listen to our most senior, our most senior, our most senior immunologist, Tanya.  Professor Robert Clancy. Listen to him, go and get his stuff, read through what he's saying,  and you'll find out, and then you can come and apologise to us. Okay?

PLIBERSEK: My Mum lives in your electorate and I don't want her exposed to people who are  not going to be vaccinated because of these crazy conspiracy theories that you're spreading.

KELLY: You're the one doing that.

HOST: Liberal MP Craig Kelly, an exchange with the Shadow Education Minister, Tanya  Plibersek, who has spoken since with NewsRadio's Jamie Travers.

PLIBERSEK: I was asked a question about Craig Kelly, and I said that the Prime Minister  ought to pull him into line, and the journalist in front of me said “Well, he's right behind you.  You can tell him yourself”. And that led to a discussion in the corridor between Mr Kelly and  myself about the dangerous misinformation he's spreading when it comes to COVID.

JAMIE TRAVERS, HOST: Why confront him in that way?

PLIBERSEK: I don't know if it was a confrontation, but, I am really worried. He's the local

Member in the area where my Mum lives. She's almost 90 years old, I don't want her going to  the shops and coming into contact with people who refuse to be vaccinated because their local  MP says that there's doubt around the vaccination regime. And, on a more general note, how  terrible is it that right now, we're spending $24 million on a taxpayer funded education  campaign encouraging people to get vaccinated, and at the same time you've got an  MP who’s salary is being paid by the taxpayer who's spreading the exact opposite message. It  really is well past time that the Prime Minister showed some spine and actually pulled this guy  into line.

TRAVERS: You take issue with what Mr Kelly's been saying. I mean, can you give me some  examples?

PLIBERSEK: He's said that he would be cautious about taking the vaccine. He's accused the  Chief Medical Officer of crimes against humanity. He's said that mask-wearing is child abuse.  He's spreading all sorts of crazy medical theories about medicines that don't have the support  of our medical community for use in the Australian context. He's not a doctor. All I'm saying  is: he doesn't need to agree with me, but he should respect the advice of our Chief Medical  Office, our State Chief Medical Officers, the Prime Minister, the Health Minister. He shouldn't  be spreading dangerous misinformation about this virus.

TRAVERS: What would you like to see the Government do in this circumstance with Mr Kelly. I  mean, they will say he's a backbencher, he's entitled to his opinions. He's elected by his  electors to, you know, to raise a voice? Is that not valid?

PLIBERSEK: Just a couple of days ago, the Prime Minister said Craig Kelly's doing a good  job. Yesterday in the Parliament, the Government had the opportunity of voting on a motion  that pulled Craig Kelly into line. They actually voted to defend him. They need to show that  what he is saying is not in line with the Prime Minister's views, the Health Minister's views. The  advice of our medical specialists. They need to pull him into line.

TRAVERS: Is there not concern in, you know, having a barney with Mr Kelly in the corridors of  Parliament House or coming on this radio station to talk about it that we are just inflating him,  and we are inflating the messages that he's hoping to spread.

PLIBERSEK: I do worry about that and I think any time anybody says his name I don't think it  helps matters. But the truth is, he's out there, he's got enormous reach - particularly through  social media. A lot of that reach is basically taxpayer funded and the fact that the Prime  Minister won't call him into line has become a really serious problem. He's got more reach than  the Health Department on his Facebook. That's a problem, and unless the Government's  prepared to pull him into line, he's going to keep spreading these really unhelpful theories.

Now, I want things to get back to normal as quickly as possible. The best way we can do that  is get our population vaccinated as quickly as possible. We don't need MPs sowing doubt in  the community. My Mum lives in Hughes, my Mum lives in Craig Kelly's electorate in the  Sutherland Shire. I don't want her going to the shops and being exposed to people who've  refused to get vaccinated because their local MP's told them that it's dangerous. And in fact,  the shops that she's going to - they're operating at half capacity, the cafes are empty because  we're in the middle of a pandemic. I want things back to normal as quickly as possible, and the  best way to do that is to get our population vaccinated as quickly as it's safe to do so.

TRAVERS: That's the Labor Shadow Education Minister, Tanya Plibersek speaking with



NewsRadio's Jamie Travers and Craig Kelly has since released a statement that says:

"This morning I had a meeting with the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister reinforced the  importance of ensuring public confidence in the Government's vaccine strategy. I agree to  support the Government's vaccine rollout which has been endorsed by medical experts. I have  always sought to support the success of our nation's public health response during the  pandemic. I believe the spread of misinformation can damage the success of our public health  response during the pandemic."

That's the statement from Liberal MP, Craig Kelly.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350



