



The Hon Ken Wyatt AM MP

Minister for Indigenous Australians  Member for Hasluck

The Hon Dan Tehan MP

Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment  Member for Wannon

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

19 February 2021

$40 MILLION INDIGENOUS TOURISM FUND TO ASSIST RECOVERY

The Morrison Government today announced new support for Indigenous tourism through  comprehensive package of business support and grants under the $40 million Indigenous  Tourism Fund.

Minister for Indigenous Australians, the Hon Ken Wyatt AM, MP, said Indigenous tourism  businesses have been hard hit by the combined impact of bushfires and COVID-19.

“The tourism sector was one of the first to be impacted by COVID-19 and will be one of the  last to recover,” Minister Wyatt said.

“This fund delivers on our election commitment, and has been designed in consultation with  the Indigenous tourism sector who have told us clearly what they need to recover and grow  their businesses.”

$10 million from this fund will go towards a National Indigenous Tourism Mentoring Program  to offer businesses individualised support.

Up to $12 million will be available under the Tourism Grants for Indigenous Business  Program to help businesses and community organisations develop new products, and  purchase systems and equipment. Applications for the grant will open on 15 February.

Up to $17 million will be available for States and Territories to co-invest with the  Commonwealth on significant Indigenous tourism projects. This is a real opportunity to  expand the range of Indigenous tourism experiences available across Australia.

To ensure the fund is Indigenous led, $1 million will be provided for the establishment of a  National Indigenous Tourism Advisory Group consisting of successful Indigenous experts  from a variety of fields to advise on priorities for the sector and the implementation of the  fund.

The National Indigenous Tourism Advisory Group will be chaired by Professor Deen  Sanders OAM with Ms Helen Martin as Deputy Chair.

Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment, the Hon Dan Tehan MP, said the package  would support Australia’s diverse tourism market.

“We want tourists to share and enjoy Australia’s rich Indigenous history, culture and  traditions,” Mr Tehan said.

“Our Government is supporting Indigenous tourism operators so they can continue offering  these unique experiences and also provide employment and business opportunities in their  communities.

“Australia’s health and economic success at managing COVID-19 means we are well-placed  to recover and grow our domestic and international tourism sector and we want Indigenous  tourism to be a key part of the Australian visitor experience.”

For more information on the Indigenous Tourism Fund, visit www.niaa.gov.au/ITF



Media contact: Luke Nayna, Senior Media Adviser, 0438 231 687

Authorised by Ken Wyatt AM, MP, Member for Hasluck.





