

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT  PRESS CONFERENCE  AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT HOUSE, ACT  TUESDAY 23 MARCH 2021



EO&E…

PRIME MINISTER: Good morning everyone. I wanted to do two things this morning. I want to address  again the rather disturbing and continuing serious situation with the floods occurring across the eastern  seaboard of Australia and the further reports I’ve received from Emergency Management today. And I  wanted to address, following that, the rather disgusting and shocking reports that were brought to my  attention last night in those reports.

First of all, though, let me address the very serious situation that is being confronted by Australians in  New South Wales but also in South East Queensland and increasingly in other states. I’m advised that the  rain and flood situation does remain dynamic and extremely complex. This is a complex weather event  and becoming more complex. 100mm of rain is forecast across saturated catchments today. Flood and  severe weather warnings have been issued across the country, extending from South East Queensland to  the Victorian border. A trough on the east coast has merged with a trough extending from the Kimberleys  to the east coast, causing heavy rain and inland flooding. This is moving to being not just a coastal event.  Severe weather, high winds, damaging surf and heavy rain is forecast for the east coast today and the  system is causing heavy rain from Batemans Bay to the Victorian border as this storm moves south. The  system is expected to ease by late Wednesday but the floodwaters remain persistent for sometime.  Western New South Wales, north-eastern South Australia, south-western Queensland and east and west  Australia have been affected by inland flooding. Brisbane and the Gold Coast have been impacted by  heavy rain and that is causing flash flooding.

In terms of the response, 1,700 SES volunteers are responding to this event, supported by the New South  Wales Rural Fire Service and Fire and Rescue Services. 18,000 people have been impacted by evacuation  orders. 16 evacuation orders for 24 locations. 20 further evacuation warnings with 18 evacuation centres  operating. I do note that particularly those evacuation centres in the Sydney metropolitan area have not  been used to the extent that New South Wales authorities thought they may. People have largely gone to  be supported by people in their own homes and the evacuation process in New South Wales and support  for those individuals has been working extremely well, and I commend both those who are directly  impacted and those who are helping them in their time of need and the excellent planning that has been  done by New South Wales authorities. I spoke to the Premier again this morning following my updates  from Emergency Management Australia today. As difficult as this issue is, people are remaining calm. We

need to see them continuing to follow the instructions that are out there. If it is flooded, forget it. Don’t  go out for a surf. I say that to people including in my own electorate when I had reports of people going  out there yesterday. Don’t do it. You are putting not only yourself at risk but you are putting those who  would have to come to your assistance at risk also and we urge you to follow the instructions of the local  authorities on all of these matters.

Rainfall is expected to be worse along the south coast, as I said earlier, with isolated falls of 300mm  possible. Rain and associated flooding will begin to cover a wider area of central New South Wales. Initial  moderate warnings for catchments near Bathurst and Dubbo. At this point, I don't have advice that we  are looking at an inland event that were similar to what occurred in North Queensland which destroyed  the North Queensland livestock industry which has taken us the last two years to recover from. But we  are watching that very closely. The potential for major flooding in the Murray Darling Basin catchment is  anticipated and major flooding may continue in the Hawkesbury and Nepean until Friday due to forecast  rainfall and Western Sydney remains the area of greatest concern. Warragamba Dam is expected to spill  over for another seven days at least. Telco impact assessments have not been completed in all areas but  several hundred homes have been flooded, roads damaged, livestock and wildlife lost,  telecommunications and power outages across the flooded areas have been reported. Telcos and power  companies are standing by to re-establish power and communications. New South Wales have requested  assistance for two search and rescue helicopters and that has already been activated from the ADF and  right now they are assisting with evacuations from Colo to RAAF at Richmond. A request for assistance  has also been put in by the New South Wales Government and is currently being assessed and planned  for by Defence which would see somewhere between 500 and 1,000 ADF personnel deployed and  engineering support to assist with the clean-up. The Premier and I discussed this this morning. I am  expecting a CAT-C request to come through today which will be actioned immediately and the Premier  and I will be working on that clean-up effort. We want this clean-up effort to be done swiftly and  effectively to try and get these communities back on their feet as quickly as we possibly can.

No lives, thankfully, to this point have been lost and we pray that will continue to be the situation and we  still have no persons reported missing as well. So amongst all of this terrible tragedy and loss that is there,  thankfully we have not seen that as yet. Resilience NSW is planning for cleanup and early recovery  operations when floodwaters recede, and I am advised that 9,000 insurance claims have been received to  date, and are on standby to start assessments, that is when the insurance industry, when they can get  access to the flooded areas. Services Australia processed 2,579 claims up to 8.00pm last night for financial  support, and already $3.5 million has gone out the door. There are a further more than 1,000 claims that  are being worked on right now. If you are in one of those areas and you acquire that assistance, those are  $1000 payments for eligible adults, $400 payments for eligible children, you can get access to that on 180  22 66. That number again, 180 22 66. Your claim will be processed on the phone, there will not be a need  to fill out all these forms at that point and go through all those administrative processes, just as we did  during the bushfires. You will get access to that as soon as possible. Services Australia have surged their  support in their call centres and other places to ensure they can meet the demand that comes through.

We have very competent agencies in our states. They do an excellent job in these situations. Where they  need additional support, it will come, and it will flow quickly, but I want Australians to feel confident,  particularly those in the affected areas, that the state agencies and authorities who are tasked with these  responsibilities are very, very good at their job. They are world-class. You have the world's best out there  looking after you today, and they will continue to be supported by the world’s best federal agencies to  ensure that you're getting every assistance that is needed. I will be meeting with the Defence planners  today and Emergency Management later this morning to run over the plans for the deployment of those

supporting cleanup operations, so we are in a position to give a swift response to the New South Wales  Government as we possibly can.

Now to the other rather disturbing events of those further reports last night. I am shocked and I am  disgusted. It is shameful. It is just absolutely shameful. I was completely stunned, as I have been on more  than one occasion over the course of this last month. All of this has been shocking, it has been disgraceful.  It has been a month of such reports. Indeed, reports involving the conduct of staff and of Coalition  Government members and ministers, but as you know, reports of equally disgraceful and despicable  activities anonymised of those working in other parties. We must get this house in order. We must put  the politics aside of these things and we must recognise this problem, acknowledge it, and we must fix it.  This has been a very traumatic month. It began with Brittany Higgins and her revelations of what took  place in this very building. I remember that day very well, I was equally shocked and stunned at receiving  that news also. These events have triggered, right across this building, and indeed right across the country,  women who have put up with this rubbish and this crap for their entire lives, as their mothers did, as their  grandmothers did. It has been going on, we have been talking about it in this place for a month, they have  been living with it for their entire lives. And the women listening to me today know that to be true.

So as much as it has been a topic of discussion here, and around the country specifically in relation to  these disgraceful acts, it is something that has been the lived experience of Australian women for a very  long time, and I welcome the spotlight that has now been placed on this. I acknowledge that many have  not liked or appreciated some of my own personal responses to this over the course of the last month,  and I accept that. Whether that was seeking to openly share how I try and deal with such traumatic events,  people mightn’t like the fact that I discuss these with my family. They are the closest people in my world  to me. That is how I deal with things, I always have. I have grown up in a loving and supportive family, and  I discuss these things with my family and those who are closest to me. No offence was intended by me  saying that I discuss these issues with my wife. Equally, that is in no way an indication that these events  had not already dramatically affected me already at that point. Equally, I accept that many were unhappy  with the language that I used on the day of the protests. No offence was intended by that either. I could  have chosen different words. I have already explained those matters in the House.

But what I am even more concerned about, even more importantly, I acknowledge that many Australians,  especially women, believe that I have not heard them, and that greatly distresses me. I have been doing  a lot of listening over this past month, but not for the first time, now is not the time for me to run over  whether as a Minister for Immigration or a Treasurer or a Minister for Social Services, the keen interest I  have shown in these issues. I'm not going to do that today. But particularly on these issues over the last  month, I have been listening carefully. I have had many colleagues, I have had many friends and others  that I have regular contact with, talk with me openly about the issues and the traumatic things that they  have had to deal with over their lifetimes and members of their family. Let me tell you what I have heard.  Women are too afraid to call out bad behaviour for fear of losing a job or being intimidated in the  workplace. That is not OK, and it is not their fault, it is the environment we have allowed to be created.  Women who are afraid to walk to their car from the train, and they carry their keys in their hand like a  knife for fear of being attacked. That is not OK. That is not acceptable that in this country, a country as  great as Australia, women walk daily in that fear. I have heard that women are overlooked, talked over,  by men, whether it is in boardrooms, meetingrooms, staff rooms, in media conferences, in cabinets, or  anywhere else. Overlooked and treated like they have nothing valuable to contribute. I have heard about  being marginalised, women being intimidated, women being belittled, women being diminished, and  women being objectified. That is not OK. I have heard that women, when offered a job, take the salary  offered because they do not feel they can ask for more, whereas the blokes do and they get it. That is not

OK. Whether this is unconscious deafness and blindness, or whether it is wilful malevolence, that is behind  all of this, it must be acknowledged, it must be called out, and it must stop. That is all our job. It is my job,  it is my Minister’s jobs, it is my Members and Senators jobs, it is your job. This is not something that is of  a scale that any government can simply change, it is something we must change as a society because we  know it happens all over this country. But for me and my house, the House I work in here, then we must  take responsibility. It is our problem here, it is our responsibility here, and I'm committed to dealing with  that. We must do better in this place, all of us, and in our country we must do better.

Now, forgive me the indulgence, forgive me this indulgence. I want women to have at least the same  opportunities and the same voice and the same safety as men in this country. I have the deepest of vested  interests. Criticise me if you like, for speaking about my daughters, but they are the centre of my life. My  wife is the centre of my life. My mother, my widowed mother, is the centre of my life. They motivate me  every day on this issue. They have motivated me my entire life, they have taught me the values and the  faith that sustains me every single day in this job, which is why I am here. I owe them everything. And to  them, I say to you girls, I will not let you down. To the many other women who are in this place, who have  shared their stories with me, I thank you for your feedback, your honesty, your support, your counsel, and  your courage. I know there are plenty of women who work in this building today, whether they be  Members or Senators or Ministers, shadow ministers, staff, journalists, who say why should I bother? Why  should I bother? Why shouldn’t I just walk away? There has never been a more important time for women  to stand in this place. I want to see more women in this place. I have done many things to get more women  in this place and I intend to do more. I have put more women in my Cabinet than any other Prime Minister  ever has before, and I look forward to doing more. I need women to stand with me as we go about this,  as we stand together, I need them to stand in this place, I need them to stand right where they are, I need  them to continue to blaze the trail right here this place. I admire their courage and I call on it. Questions?

JOURNALIST: You say it’s your responsibility, that you’re responsible for the culture in this place and  you’re committed to dealing with it. What concrete measures are you actually going to take to try and  address these problems?

PRIME MINISTER: A couple of measures. First of all, you are aware of the changes we’ve already  introduced for the direct counselling support that is available, and I suspect particularly for women in this  building. I’m pleased to know that that support service is already being used by women in this place, and  men in this place, it is also being used by those who are seeking support for how they deal with these  issues, and I think that has been a very useful service that has been put in place and the additional  resources and support. In addition to that, of course the Jenkins review, Kate Jenkins will be speaking in  my party room this morning, and I am looking forward to the multi-party outcomes that come from that  process. But I am not waiting for the report to come back. I have asked for the Deputy Secretary  Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet to come back for me. She is still working on that report and  she has asked for some further time on the report to get it right, and that would be, in particular, putting  in place a more robust and independent complaints mechanism for staff and members and senators to  be able to have access to, to ensure that we can deal with that more fully. I am speaking to all Coalition  staff later today. Good people come and work in this building, you all know that. There are some people  who have done some despicable things in this place. These things are just so foreign to me that I can  hardly process them, as I am sure I would hope that most people would be in a similar situation. And most  people who come to work in this place, I want to assure Australians, do not come here and behave in that  way. But there are people who do and that needs to be addressed, and if people have information on that  conduct then I implore them to come forward as that is the only way that I can deal with those issues. But  it is not just a responsibility for me. I am the leader of the Liberal Party and I'm the Prime Minister of the

country and leader of the Government, but we have many people in this building who have responsibility  for how this place operates. Whether it is the leaders of other parties, and whether it is those who are  presiding officers over these chambers in this place, the many others who support in senior roles the staff  around this building, and indeed in the gallery, yourselves, and the leadership within your own  organisations have responsibilities here in terms of how things occur in this place as well. We all work in  this building, we all have those responsibilities. I am taking mine and I call on others to take theirs.

JOURNALIST: One of the things that would make women feel a lot safer right now would be if you could  make it compulsory for harassment…

PRIME MINISTER: I couldn’t quite hear over the cameras, I’m sorry.

JOURNALIST: ...compulsory harassment and misconduct training for all office staff and MPs in this  building, that is something you can do right now, will you commit to that? And do commit to a zero  tolerance policy with regards to any of the other individuals involved in the report last night that they will  be sacked if they are identified?

PRIME MINISTER: On the latter point I think we have already demonstrated our resolve on that issue and  you can expect us to follow through on it in exactly the same way. That sort of behaviour has no place  here, it has absolutely no place there. It is disgusting. In terms of the other recommendation, that is one  that I entirely expect the Deputy Secretary to come forward with. So I'm not expecting that to take much  longer but I would like to act on all of those recommendations and I anticipate that is one such  recommendation that will come forward in that report and one that I would strongly support.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you say you want more women in this place. This morning Karen Andrews  said that she thinks the Liberal Party should seriously consider quotas. Is that something you would  consider now and if not why?

PRIME MINISTER: My colleagues know that I have been open to that conversation for some time.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, two things. There will be women listening to your comments this morning  wondering why it took you a month to get to their lived reality that they started with on the day where  Brittany Higgins came forward. Can you explain why it took you a month to get to this position? And  another thing, just following on from the 4 Corners report last night, the security guard who was  interviewed on camera said there was no security breach in relation to the staffer who was alleged to  have committed the sexual assault on Brittany Higgins. Now, the Government says that staffer was  terminated for a security breach. What was the security breach?

PRIME MINISTER: I’m happy to take you through that. On the other issue, Katharine, this has been a  terribly difficult month. I was shocked and appalled when I learnt of the situation involving Brittany  Higgins. And I have been shocked and appalled by all of the other matters that have come forward since.  But as the month has progressed and as I have engaged with so many women, what has become the issue,  and rightly, is that this is not just about the terrible things that have happened to one woman in this place.  We moved immediately to start addressing issues around that particular case but this is far bigger than  that and I think that is the voice that has arisen over the course of this past month. This was a shout about  what is happening across Australia, not just the specific events. If we were to just continue to focus on  the events that happen in this place - and we will, and must, as I said - there is something much bigger  here that has been illuminated, thankfully, by these rather traumatic reports that have gone right across

the spectrum here. We are all human beings, Katharine, and what I have sought to do today is just be very  honest with people. Please don't think that these events haven't created great turmoil for me over the  course of the past month. At the same time, as the Prime Minister, when I am dealing with many other  issues at the same time, also very significant, whether it is floods or vaccines or COVID pandemics,  international issues, Australians also expect me to be focusing on those as well. So that is my honest  answer. It is processed, I have heard, I have listened and I will have a lot more to say about this in the next  month about further action. But today is not a day for me to list out a list of further actions. I’ve listed  some in response to direct questions. Today, Australian women in particular, but Australians more broadly  because it is not just Australian women who have identified this over the past month, Australians need to  know that this place has heard them and that I have heard them and I want to assure you that I have.  Sorry, on the other matter. I did see that interview last night. Obviously the security guard in question  doesn't have the full information about this case and other contributing incidents that preceded this case.  Senator Reynolds has previously confirmed to the Senate there was a security breach involving  unauthorised access to her office and I have been advised this followed an earlier security breach by the  male staff member that related to the handling of classified documents in what is clearly a highly sensitive  portfolio area. Consequently, this was considered serious misconduct in relation to the statements of  standards for ministerial staff. So in other words, he had some form when it came to the security issues  regarding that office and this was the final straw. Obviously, the security guard in question would not have  been familiar with those aspects. We are dealing with an office that had and was dealing with quite  sensitive material. It was the Defence Industry Minister’s office at the time and so there was some prior  issues here and this final event was the one that triggered his dismissal.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if you're the boss at a business and there had been an alleged rape on your  watch and this incident we heard about last night on your watch, your job would probably be in a bit of  jeopardy, wouldn't it? Doesn't it look like you have lost control of your ministerial staff?

PRIME MINISTER: I will let you editorialise as you like, Andrew, but if anyone in this room wants to offer  up the standards in their own workplaces by comparison I would invite you to do so.

JOURNALIST: Well, they’re better than these I would suggest, Prime Minister.

PRIME MINISTER: Let me take you up on that. Let me take you up on that. Right now, you would be aware  that in your own organisation that there is a person who has had a complaint made against them for  harassment of a woman in a women's toilet and that matter is being pursued by your own HR  department.

JOURNALIST: I am not aware of it.

PRIME MINISTER: You are not aware of it. So let's not all of us who sit in glass houses here start getting  into that.

JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]

PRIME MINISTER: What I am suggesting to you is that there are serious issues here that no one individual  can be overwatch on every single inch of this place every second of the day and I don't think any Australian  has that reasonable expectation. As far as I'm aware, the incident that was reported last night occurred  long before I was Prime Minister of this place. So it is not a matter that occurred while I was even Prime  Minister. That goes to a long-standing culture of despicable behaviour in this place. So that is not

something that I could be directly held accountable even when I wasn't in the role. What I am held  accountable is what I do now and that is what I am outlining to you today. So you are free to make your  criticisms and to stand on that pedestal but be careful.

JOURNALIST: You said in your opening remarks on this subject about the forces that have been at work  here over the past month and the sort of surge amongst women in Australia and all of these issues raised  by this. Does it change your thinking on your handling of the allegations against Mr Porter in terms of the  there will be no inquiry as to his fitness to remain in the ministry? Or are you still of the view that the way  you’re handling that is correct?

PRIME MINISTER: As I indicated, I was getting advice from the Solicitor-General. I have received that  advice and I am now taking advice through the Department regarding how that sits with the ministerial  standards and I will be making further decisions on that matter and I will alert you to those when they are  made.

JOURNALIST: Do you think that your so-called star chamber needs to improve its vetting of potential staff?  And secondly, have you responded to Russell Broadbent's suggestion of a gathering of representatives of  women's organisations nationally, and if you haven't, what is your thinking?

PRIME MINISTER: On the latter, such a process is already under way. As we go forward to the next  National Action Plan, it is already part of that National Action Plan, and the process for developing it to  bring forward such a summit or gathering or whatever term you would like to use. So that is already an  initiative that is in train and being pursued by the Minister for Women and I am looking forward to that.  So I will have more to say about that in the weeks ahead. So that is another area of activity that is already  happening and what I have noted in the course of this past month, there have been many excellent  suggestions. Some have already been implemented and more will be and I welcome them. I particularly  welcome them from people as experienced as Russell is in this place and I have a great deal of respect for.  Just remind me on the other point, Michelle?

JOURNALIST: The star chamber.

PRIME MINISTER: This is a process in which people might not be aware of this process but when it comes  to appointment of people in ministerial offices, there is a minister and a group of other senior staff  involved in vetting the applications, not unlike what you would see in a HR department or something like  that for important appointments across any corporate. So that is just using that similar process to what  occurs in other workplaces. I think it is a helpful process and in particular I would want to be sure that  when they meet and they consider these things, these very serious matters that have arisen over the  course of the past month, would continue to be included in how they assess these things. I am aware that  as that group has operated in the past, it has acted to ensure that where there have been concerns about  this in the past that those concerns are followed through when considering these appointments. So I see  it, Michelle, I think as a positive contribution to the process to provide further protection.

JOURNALIST: Did the staff member in last night’s report receive termination payments and or references  from your Government?

PRIME MINISTER: I would have to refer you to the Minister on that one. But they have been terminated.  For one termination. I am still not aware of who the other individuals are and we have taken steps to

reach out to the person who allegedly knows who these individuals are and we are very keen to hear from  them.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on that the whistleblower claims that the sacked staffer would be able to  shed a great deal of light on the other staffers, including those currently in the building as well as the  allegations around sex workers being let into the building. Will any effort be made to reach out to the  sacked staffer to see if he is willing to go into some detail about that? And just another one, if I can, is it  accurate that before the last election, you were genuinely interested in the concept of quotas, going back  to that question? Was it something you contemplated as a way to try to increase the number of women  in your ranks, not just in your ministry, and if so or even if not, is it time to look at that?

PRIME MINISTER: On the second point, I will give you the same answer. My colleagues know well that I  am very open to these questions. I have had some frustrations about trying to get women preselected  and running for the Liberal Party to come into this place. I have had those frustrations for many years  going back to the times when I was a state director where I actively sought to recruit female candidates,  whether it was for state or Federal Parliament. I remember one who got preselected during my time and  she has gone on to do a pretty amazing job leading the state of New South Wales right now at a time of a  crisis. There are many others that I have sought to encourage into this place and I was greatly supported  by an amazing female president in the Liberal Party NSW, Christine McDiven, who went on to become  federal president, who I know of no greater champion for women in the Liberal Party at an organisational  level than Chris. She blazed a trail and I am looking for others in the organisation, Danielle Blain over in  Western Australia I know is doing an amazing job to do the same thing. I want to give them every support  I can. But I am making it pretty clear that when it comes that issue, I don't hold the same reservations that  others do. Why? And I think many Liberals have been coming to this view over time. We tried it the other  way and it isn't getting us the results we would like to see so I would like to see us do better on that front.  On the other issue, yes of course, we will seek to gain as much information about that matter by those  who know about it, as much as possible. I would ask given the sensitivity of this issue, and I know you  understand this, Peter, that these are very traumatic events and we have people at the moment you are  on a close watch for their own personal safety and so I would just simply ask for people to be aware of  that. You all have your normal protocols for how you report these things and how you include in your  stories the appropriate call numbers and things like that. So I am not making a criticism, I want to be clear  about that, but I would just ask people that it is a very sensitive time here in this building. This place has  seen events, before my time, under pressure, Mark, you will remember them, as will others experienced  in the gallery, Michelle, and others, Chris. Let's just be careful in the weeks ahead. We are going to deal  with this but we want to make sure we do things as carefully and sensitively as we can.

JOURNALIST: The statements you have made today, Prime Minister, is this the speech you should have  given in front of the women who rallied in front of Parliament last Monday?

PRIME MINISTER: I believe I provided the opportunity to meet with those who had come on that day. I  applaud, as I said on the day, it was right to come and right to do that and I was right to provide the  opportunity to meet with me. It is not my habit, as you know, to go out to rallies and things like that that  come to Parliament House. In the course of my programme, I am very happy to provide an opportunity  for people to come in that way and come and meet with me. I have met with numerous groups. On that  very day I was meeting with people in the entertainment sector who were happy to meet with me and  talk about the issues. I have been very open about those sorts of things. What I am saying and I have said  it before today, I acknowledge that there have been people who haven't been happy with how I have  responded in every single way to this over the course of the last month. I acknowledge that absolutely. I

am setting about to put that right. Those issues that people have had concerns about, they occurred in  good faith, in the best of faith. But you learn a lot from all of that.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I ask you about your comments last week about Phil Gaetjens…

JOURNALIST: If I can just finish my question, Andrew. In terms of the concrete steps that you can take,  you have said you might introduce quotas, which is fascinating and there is a lot of focus on women in  this building. But what about women outside this building in regional Australia, in outer suburban areas,  would you give any consideration to putting more money into rape crisis centres so women get the  counselling they need, are you interested in the idea of more consent education in schools, what concrete  steps are you rolling around in your head?

PRIME MINISTER: All of the above, and more, and if you go across the fourth national action plan and as  Social Services Minister I had responsibility for earlier national action plans, and they include all of these  things. Is important to remember that these action plans are done together with the states and territories  and many of the services delivered are also delivered by the states. So this is something we genuinely  have to do together, and we have been doing together. Today I am not going through a shopping list of  the additional measures particularly that will be needed to provide further protection for women against  violence, against them and their children. But we will be, as we have in the past, over $1 billion committed,  almost half of that in the last year or so, much of that going into during the COVID period when we were  very worried about the increase in the incidence of domestic violence that would occur during the COVID  period. Again, we put in additional resources, hundreds of millions, to support particularly women and  families in those difficult times. So there has been no hesitation on that, Sam, and there will not be going  forward. But I would urge that the path we have to go down is one that we have to go down together.  This is not an issue that should be the subject of partisan contest, it really shouldn’t. That will slow us  down, that will not get the outcomes that I want to see, and I'm sure every member of this Parliament  wants to see, and I think it is time to get focused on those things, Sam, deal with the issues in our House  here. Outside of this House, there are plenty of other houses that need to be fixed up, and I'm sure  Australians will take proper responsibility for those. But this issue goes far beyond what happens here,  but I acknowledge what is happening here and the need for us to deal with things that are happening  here.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I just want to pick up on what you said to Andrew before. How is it that you  did not know about the alleged rape of Brittany Higgins in Linda Reynolds office, yet you know about some  incident that has happened in the media or among journalists, and have aired that publicly despite the  maybe being against the wishes of the victim, we don’t know?

PRIME MINISTER: That was brought to my attention late last night, and the issue of Brittany Higgins was  only brought to my attention on 15 February as I have said. The suggestion was made by a member of the  press gallery that things like this do not happen in the media and I think that would be unfair.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I ask you about the comments that you made about Phil Gaetjens report  yesterday. Do you concede that you misled Parliament by omission when you said you had not received  an update when in fact, you had more than received an update, you had received an email through the  PMO, he had spoken to you personally about the fact that he was putting his inquiry on ice, and what  efforts have you made personally to work out what five or six of your members of staff actually knew?

PRIME MINISTER: Two things, first of all, you have mischaracterised what I said in the House, and that is  why I don’t agree with your assessment. I said that I hadn’t been updated on when I had received the  report, and I hadn’t been updated when I had received the report, and I said subsequently…

JOURNALIST: But you had been.

PRIME MINISTER: No I had not. There was no finishing date provided to me by the Secretary, because he  could not provide me with one. I was asked in the House about when I would receive it, and that is what  I responded to. I also made it clear that it was the Secretary that was undertaking this at arms length, it is  the Secretary that is undertaking that at arms length, and I know that there were further interviews being  conducted even at that point. What he was referring to is that he was not in a position to finalise the  report, and provided to me, based on the advice that he had received from the Commissioner of Federal  Police which was also clarified yesterday. So what I would ask is that these statements not be  mischaracterised. I expect my political opponents to do that, that is politics, that is part and parcel of this  process. I will deal with those matters as I have appropriately in the House, but no, I don’t accept that,  that is a mischaracterisation of what has occurred, and so I don’t accept that. Finally, Chris.

JOURNALIST: PM, you started by talking about your daughters. After the last month, what would you tell  them about a life in the public service, what pitch would you make to any young girl in Australia about  why they would want to be in federal politics?

PRIME MINISTER: Because they want things to be better, and they have something to contribute to that.  I believe in my girls, I believe in all the women of Australia. Thank you very much.

[ENDS]

Media Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

