



KRISTY McBAIN

LABOR CANDIDATE FOR EDEN-MONARO



E&EO TRANSCRIPT

ABC RADIO NATIONAL BREAKFAST

INTERVIEW WITH Norman Swan

JUNE 30, 2020



SUBJECTS: Eden-Monaro by-election, extending JobKeeper until December, small

business and jobs losses, preferences, campaigning during COVID-19 pandemic



NORMAN SWAN, HOST: Kristy McBain is the former Bega Mayor and the Labor

candidate Eden-Monaro. Welcome back to Breakfast.



KRISTY MCBAIN, LABOR CANDIDATE FOR EDEN-MONARO: Good morning.



SWAN: You hold the seat by 1,600 votes, you don't have much room for error. How do you

think it's going to go?



MCBAIN: It's obviously always a marginal seat in Eden-Monaro. And it'll go down to the

wire. It'll be a line ball call for many people. But we'll keep campaigning right to the end

because every vote will count in this election. And every vote matters regardless of the

size of your community. And that's the one thing we've been talking about with so many

people across the electorate that regardless of the size of your community, you matter.

And your vote should count, and your issue should be heard.



SWAN: I mean, it was considered a bellwether electorate, nationally. The retired Labor

MP, Mike Kelly, held the seat by under 1 per cent last election, and his personal vote was

believed to be worth about 3 per cent. That puts you a fair way behind, doesn't it?



MCBAIN: Look, well, it's going to be a difficult seat to win. But the thing that I know is that

I've got a community that's really hurting at the moment. You know, we've had drought,

bushfire and COVID-19. And I've spoken to so many business owners, so many residents.

Everybody is really concerned about the future of their work, the future of their jobs. And

they actually want someone that's going to go into bat for them long-term. Not someone

that just shows up during a by-election, but someone who's already got their runs on the

board in terms of advocacy and working with different levels of government and different

persuasions of politicians to make sure that there's outcomes for their community. And I've

done that as the Mayor of Bega Valley. And I want to continue to do that for the wider

region.



SWAN: What's the single issue? Is jobs the single issue that's driving the community, or

the economy in general, or recovery? What's the single issue that needs to be focused on?



MCBAIN: Look, there are probably a couple of issues that people want to focus on during

this by-election. And one is obviously jobs. We've had a pretty tough time of it of late, as I

said, there's probably been no other electorate hit harder than Eden-Monaro, with over a

million hectares of land being burned, a whole range of tourist evacuations. So, we've got

businesses that haven't seen much traffic at all in 2020. Reg in Thredbo has used his

EFTPOS machine twice in 2020. He has a retail business that's really suffering on the back

of evacuations, COVID, and now the reduction in the ski season. Yesterday I was in

Queanbeyan and speaking with a local travel agent who employs locals who is really

worried about the future of JobKeeper. And her industry has been hit really hard. And it's a

husband and wife run team where only one of them is eligible for JobKeeper. There are a

whole range of small businesses out there that are really concerned about what the future

holds for them. And we know a review has been done, which is great. But we have a whole

range of businesses on their knees screaming out for some certainty about what's going to

happen after September.



SWAN: But Labor has been playing at national politics with Eden-Monaro and they're

arguing that the review of JobKeeper should be released before polling day on Saturday.

But there is some certainty that it is going to go until September. Why is it so important that

the voters know this week what happens after September?



MCBAIN: Look, there around 5,000 businesses across Eden-Monaro which employ

around 18,000 workers that are at risk if JobKeeper is withdrawn too early. The one thing

that I know from having spoken to many businesses is that they want it extended until at

least December to try to get them through to the next summer holidays, to see that they

can keep going. And many people have said to me that they believe they'll be right if they

can just get through to the next busy period. If we withdraw JobKeeper too early, that's a

whole range of businesses in Eden-Monaro that aren't going to know exactly what their

future looks like, and a whole range of workers that are potentially out of jobs. We know

that this pandemic has impacted young people. But it's also impacted a whole range of

workers between 51 and 65 that are out of work. And for them to retrain and find another

job is going to be hard.



SWAN: What's the balance between sacking and rehiring?



MCBAIN: Look, I guess the problem is that so many people are telling me that they're not

sure that there'll be any chance to rehire employees at all.



SWAN: So, the issue of JobSeeker, that the Prime Minister's raised about people not

wanting to go back because it's too high level of payment, that would be a luxury in Eden-Monaro because people aren't hiring, is that what you are saying?



MCBAIN: That's exactly right. I mean, we've got industries that are on their knees based

on what happened at the bushfire crisis. We know that our forestry industry is doing it

really tough. We know that a whole range of different agricultural pursuits are doing it really

tough. We don't even know what the future of the public service is for Queanbeyan and

surrounds because so many of those people are in the public service working in and

around Canberra. And there is no certainty for a whole range of different businesses. And

I'm not sure of any of them that are actually looking to hire at the moment.



SWAN: You're on the Victorian borders, big electorate and of course a relationship with

Victoria in Eden-Monaro, mud sticks. Is the branch stalking scandal in Victoria sticking mud

on you?



MCBAIN: Look, I haven't had that issue raised with me by one person on the ground in

Eden-Monaro because it does not affect their daily lives. People want a politician to stand

up for them. They want somebody that is going to put them first unapologetically. And

that's what I've done as Mayor of the Bega Valley. And that's what I want to continue to do,

because it's the issues that matter to their daily lives that are crucial. Not things that are

going on around them or things that don't impact them at all. And I think we have to

remember that this by-election is about local issues. It's about people in Eden-Monaro who

are doing it really tough.



SWAN: Speaking of which, you've done a deal with the Greens and the Shooters and

Fishers Party for their preferences. What deal have you struck with the Shooters and

Fishers? What are they going to get out of you, should you win the electorate? Are you

going to water-down Australia's gun laws? Support that?



MCBAIN: We have not done any deal with the Greens or any other party. There has been

no preference deals. I'm out there campaigning to get people's number one preference and

that's what really matters. How people vote when they're in polling booths is entirely up to

them. They can give their preferences to whomever they wish. I'm after their number one

preference because I want to represent them in Canberra.



SWAN: The Prime Minister's popularity is at an all-time high. He announced an $86 million

package for the forestry industry, wine producers, apple growers, who all have been very

hard hit by the bushfires. And he made the point that voters are better voting for Fiona

Kotvojs, the Liberal candidate. I mean, he's got a point, hasn't he? That if you win, you're

going to be struggling to achieve much from Opposition?



MCBAIN: Look, I mean, whilst I welcome those announcements, it's taken a by-election for

them to be made. I met with orchardists back in May, who had at that stage two months

earlier, already given the Government a full submission on what it would take to bring their

industry up to scratch. They're going to get an apple tree and they're not going to see any

return on that investment for five to seven years. I've met with different people in the

forestry industry, we had a round table in Tumut on Friday. Whilst the announcement is

welcome, they've been asking the Government for months now to come in and have a

discussion with them. And it's not about short-term fixes. It's about long-term planning.

What's the long-term future of forestry? What's the long-term future of agriculture? And

there is no planning going on. And I think it's pretty rough of the Prime Minister to say,

'Vote for my team, and we'll get things done'. And if you don't, what? He won't get things

done for the region? I mean, this is a particularly hard-hit region. And when you're elected

to govern, you are elected to govern for everybody, not just the people that voted for you.

And I've said that all along is that I will listen to everybody in this electorate because

everybody matters.



SWAN: Very briefly, there's only a few seconds left. I take it there's been no door-knocking

or baby kissing this campaign? Your first COVID campaign?



MCBAIN: No door-knocking, no baby kissing. It's obviously been a little bit harder with

COVID-19. But our team has made thousands of phone calls, I've made hundreds myself.

We've done a lot of one-on-one meetings, a lot of Zoom meetings, a lot of visits to people.

We had the first ever online campaign launch. Things have been different, but I think

people have appreciated that more personal touch to the campaign.



SWAN: Thanks for joining us.



MCBAIN: Thank you very much



SWAN: Labor candidate for Eden-Monaro, Kristy McBain.



ENDS



JUNE 30, 2020



MEDIA CONTACTS:



LACHLAN POULTER: 0423 937 655

KATH CUMMINS: 0422 366 037









