

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT

INTERVIEW WITH TONY JONES, 3AW  TUESDAY 5 JANUARY 2021



EO&E…

TONY JONES: The Prime Minister of Australia, Scott Morrison. Good morning to you.

PRIME MINISTER: Good morning, Tony.

JONES: Happy New Year.

PRIME MINISTER: Happy New Year to you and to everybody in Melbourne and across Victoria. And thanks  again for the tremendous spirit Victorians displayed, particularly in that second half of the year when it  was incredibly tough.

JONES: Yeah, and I guess, as you would have heard me saying in the intro, there's another group of  Victorians, more than 2,000, who are again having to display some sort of, you know, sort of resilience  with the fact that they're stranded.

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah.

JONES: Are we doing enough as a state? Is the government doing enough to show compassion here?

PRIME MINISTER: Look, I spoke to the Premier last night and we talked about a number of issues, and  that was one of them. And he’s having a discussion today, I understand, with our Chief Medical Officer  regarding the situation in New South Wales. The waste water testing in New South Wales had no positive  results for COVID outside of, you know, the Sydney metropolitan area and those specific areas identified  like Wollongong. So for all of regional and rural New South Wales, it remains as rural and regional Victoria  does, and indeed metropolitan Melbourne substantially. And so, look, that's an opportunity, I think, for  the Victorian government to continue to work through those issues there. They're matters for them. And  so happy to talk to the Premier about that and provide what support we can to see if we can get a better  pathway home for Victoria as soon as possible.

JONES: So, I mean, obviously, without giving too much away of your private phone call, did you did you  get a sense that there might be relief on the way for those stranded Victorians?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I'll leave that to the Premier and the Victorian government. I mean, they're  working through their issues and the border arrangements that they put in place. So one thing I've always  tried to do throughout this pandemic is respect the decisions that are made by states and states in turn  respect the decisions that are made by the Commonwealth. And we seek to support states in the decisions  they make to try and make them as painless as possible for them for their own public.

JONES: One of your ministers, Darren Chester, who is an MP here in Victoria, is dead set against the hard  lockdown of the border. Is that a view that most cabinet members share?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, look, the Cabinet hasn't met about this issue because it's a state government  decision and it's the state governments to make their rules on public health. I should be really clear about  that. I mean, the Federal Government has no power over states when it comes to their public health  orders of this nature and so that means state governments have to be transparent and explain those  decisions and they have to weigh up the risks, together with the costs and the impact and the disruption.  And so that's a matter for them. And I certainly understand Darren’s frustration. I mean, much of his  community has been affected by this, particularly those who are in the single economy that effectively  operates over the Victorian and New South Wales border in that corner, as it does right across the Murray  more broadly when it comes to the Victoria-New South Wales border. So obviously, you know, that'd be  great to see these things move in the other direction sooner, particularly given the success that is being  had in both New South Wales and in Victoria. I think what we've seen in relation to both of these  outbreaks, when you compare it to what happened earlier in the year, then, you know, they're getting on  top of this. The systems are working. Of course, we need to remain vigilant. It's still fragile, but I think  we're making great progress in both. So that should hopefully mean that we can restore settings to where  they were before the outbreak as soon as possible.

JONES: Now, Prime Minister, please don't take this as a cheap shot because it's not intended to be, but  you found yourself at the centre of a controversy 12 months ago for being on holidays when Australia was  in crisis. Should Daniel Andrews be back from holidays?

PRIME MINISTER: Look, people need to take their breaks. And I spoke to Dan last night, so it's not like  he's not close to what's going on in Victoria and he's focussing on those issues. And so, you know, he's  always been available to me and just as I was at that time last year. But that's not an issue that certainly  I've raised.

JONES: Ok. There has been an urgent call, and I guess this is something, again, that you spoke with the  Premier about yesterday, an urgent call for the National Cabinet to be recalled on the back of this terrible  strain which is now taking hold of the UK. Where are you at with that?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I'm not sure where this call has come from. I spoke to the Premier last night and  he didn't ask for one. So I'm not sure how that, where that reporting has come from. I mean, the health  ministers are meeting this week. The medical experts through the AHPPC meet every single day. The  director generals of the Departments of Premier and Cabinet and Prime Minister and Cabinet, they've  been in constant contact. I've been speaking to both premiers, particularly where in New South Wales it's  been running for longer, quite regularly. There is nothing… we spoke about the UK strain last night. And  look, it is a great concern to us and it already has been the subject of a paper that's been published by the  medical expert panel. They're meeting again today. But they are not recommending any actions at this  point that the National Cabinet would have to action. So, you know, the minute they are in that position,  then I would have no hesitation and probably wouldn't even require a National Cabinet meeting to action

that advice. But we've got to be driven by, you know, the medical experts on what they think the response  is. None of us as premiers or prime ministers are doctors out of the best of my knowledge and as a result,  when if they and I spoke again contacted this morning the Chief Medical Officer about this issue. And, you  know, it's a serious issue, but it's one that is being managed appropriately through quarantine and if any  further measures are required, then certainly they would trigger that and they recommend that then, of  course, if necessary, we would need to action it. But I suspect we could action it even without that.

JONES: See, I think a lot of people listening at the moment, Prime Minister, would be a little confused as  to how in the blink of an eye we can shut down borders and turn economies upside down. And yet a  simple, a seemingly simple thing like pre-testing people coming from the UK to Australia still doesn't seem  to be on the agenda.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, it is happening. I mean, most of the airlines do it anyway. And on all the flights  that we're bringing back to Australia directly as a Commonwealth, we're doing it. But we should stress  that that doesn't change the risk. I mean, because in some cases the argument is that it can be can  accentuated, it can highlight it because people can be asymptomatic or have not contracted or the virus  has manifested itself yet at the time of travelling and that can create a complacency on the other side.  Whoever's coming to Australia must quarantine for 14 days. They must. And so it doesn't change any of  the actions that occurs on the other side. But increasingly, that testing is occurring before people come  and it's certainly occurring at our mandate for all of those who are coming on the facilitated flights back  to Australia. So I think there's a bit of a misunderstanding about the degree to which this is already  occurring.

JONES: Yeah, but I mean, you shouldn't it just be a blanket rule, though?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, as I said, the airlines are largely doing it. But my point is this. Let's say someone  gets, I mean, one of the problems we've had and it hasn't been widespread, but there have been instances  of it where there's been complacency by some who have returned. If they've had a test before they come  and they all of a sudden think that they're not at risk because they've had a test, then their behaviours  might change. Now, we want everybody who has come back to behave as if they've got it, because that  way they won't take any risks regarding their own behaviours when they return and that's the attitude  we need them to take so we don't want to create any false sense of confidence. It is not a guarantee of  people coming to Australia with the virus. It can't guarantee against them.

JONES: Alright. What about the rollout of the vaccine? How much longer will we have to wait for that? I  mean, we're seeing, you know, countries like Israel, for example, saying that they're not far away from  having everyone, every member of their population tested. We’re seeing within the United States, the  UK. When's our turn?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, there were 58,000 cases of COVID in the UK just yesterday, and Israel has gone  through another emergency situation and Israel is a very small country compared in Australia. But if you  look at the United Kingdom and other countries, they're in the very early phases of that and they've had  quite a few problems and they're doing it on an emergency basis. They're not testing batches of vaccines  before they're disseminated across the population, is my understanding. They're the processes that we  follow here in Australia. Now, we have our scheduled timetable and that's why all our health officials are  here in Canberra, where I am, the Health Minister working for Melbourne, to ensure that we are moving  this as swiftly as it safely can be done. But Australia is not in an emergency situation like the United  Kingdom. So we don't have to cut corners. We don't have to take unnecessary risks. And we're learning a

lot from some of the issues that are presenting themselves and the confusion, in particular, that is there  about doses and distribution and administering of the vaccines. But they are in a position where they have  no other choice because of the terrible situation they find themselves in. Now, in Australia, we're not in  that situation, and so it's important that Australians have total confidence in this vaccine and that requires  all the proper processes to be followed. And those processes don't just end when the Therapeutic Goods  Administration approves the vaccine. You then need to go and test the batches that are coming in that  will be administered at across the country, and so these suggestions that I've heard about trying to rush  this process I think can be very dangerous. We should let the health officials do their jobs here and do it  as swiftly as I know they are doing and as safely as Australians would expect. I mean, I don't think  Australians want us just willy-nilly sending out vials of vaccine that haven't had their batches tested, which  is the normal process that occurs with any TGA approved vaccine.

JONES: PM, got another few minutes?

PRIME MINISTER: Sure.

JONES: Terrific. There's a few other issues I want to ask you about. Sport always obviously plays such a  large part in, you know, the Australian social fabric. But we are a bit brittle at the moment. The Sydney  Test, two questions here, are you surprised it is going ahead? And B, are you going?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I'm in Canberra. I'm still here working in Canberra this week and because of the  rules between the ACT and Sydney, if I go to Sydney, I can't return to Canberra. So I've remained here.  Most of my family have gone back to Sydney and so I won't be there. I'll be watching it on the on the  screen, I suspect, in the corner of the room while poring over paperwork like some other people,  particularly health officials over this break. And Justin Langer and Tim Paine told me they're going to  bounce back. So I'm looking forward to seeing that happen. But in terms of the Test, look, New South  Wales has done well again. Victoria are doing incredibly well managing the outbreak and we've seen the  great improvement in the testing, I think it was 35,000 people were tested in Victoria yesterday. That's  fantastic. I just thank Victorians and Melburnians in particular first, but also call on them that if you're,  you know, if you've been in a place where or had contact with anyone that you've been advised may  present a risk, then please go and get tested today and ensure you can do that. That's been key to also  keeping things under control in New South Wales. So they've reduced the number of people who can go.  It's a very big stadium. It's at 25 percent and it's an outdoor venue. So the health officials have made their  recommendation and the government is acting in accordance with that. And it should be it should be  another way of just demonstrating that life can continue, even when we're managing difficult issues like  this.

JONES: The Australian Tennis Open is obviously being pushed back. There's a ripple of nervousness with  the amount of people coming out for the Australian Open. You still comfortable with that going ahead?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah, I do. Look, the Premier and I discussed that also last night and the arrangements  we've got around that and how the quarantine is being managed and, you know, they've got a very good  plan for that. And, you know, it's changing the timing. I think that was wise. I also agree strongly with the  decision that they took, the stance that they had regarding the Formula One. I think, you know, that that  was the way that those events operate could have been very risky for Australia and so I think that was a  good call and we supported the Victorian government very strongly in that. We’ve just got to look at each  of these cases and manage them well and just like with the Sydney Test, which was going to be a 50  percent attendance, then it got changed to a 25 percent. You work off the most recent information. You

look at the risk, you manage it appropriately. You put the controls and the mitigations in place. And then  and then you move on. That's what living with COVID looks like, managing these issues in this way, and as  we get it through the first quarter of this year, then on the other side of that we will obviously be well into  the vaccine by then. As I said, we're working very hard over the summer break to ensure that that vaccine  goes as quickly and as safely as possible. And that will include, of course, making sure that Australians are  well informed about the vaccine and how to access it and have good information so people can make their  own decisions about their own health care.

JONES: Alright. So assuming, you know, we roll out the vaccine in the latter half of the year, that means  we'll all be able to do with some degree of confidence, turn up to the voting booths perhaps, and get our  sausage sizzle and vote for either you or Anthony Albanese.

PRIME MINISTER: I’ve seen that speculation. But honestly, it's just Canberra speculation. You know, the  bubble likes to speculate about these things. I have only one priority this year and that is the getting  Australia continually through this pandemic and ensuring the economic recovery is achieved. And what  we've already got over 80 percent of those jobs back, which is fantastic, thanks to the amazing work of  Australians and then particularly for small and medium sized businesses, a big shout out to them. I know  that, you know, they continue to deal with uncertainty. That's sadly what goes along with a pandemic. But  they're getting through. They got through the second half of this last year in Victoria and they're emerging  out the other side, you know, and it's over 730,000 jobs created over six months now coming back into  the economy. So my focus is getting through this pandemic, ensuring that we get that economy moving  again and Australians back into jobs. But there are many other issues, of course, that we haven't lost pace  on. Mental health has been a big focus for us as a Government, suicide prevention. We've got a lot of  work to do there. Now, this year, our response on aged care we’ll be making some major investments  there. And of course, you know, the work on the recycling economy continues. So there's a lot of work to  do over the course of this next 12 months and an election isn't a due till 2022.

JONES: OK, your rugby league team would be very proud of the way you just deflected the ball then, Prime  Minister. So can I ask you, are you ruling out an election this year? Are you staying true to your word from  last year?

PRIME MINISTER: My view hasn’t changed, Tony, and so that's why I'm not distracted by the question.  The election is not due until 2022, so I've got enough to do in 2021 and so does the rest of the country.  And, you know, the reason Australia has got through this past year, I think, has been because of the  tremendous tenacity, forbearance, patience and good spirit of the Australian people. You know, they've  just put their heads down and they've just pushed through to get through and we're still in that situation  and that's where my focus is. That's where my Government's focus is. That's where the state premiers  and their governments, their focus is and seeking to work together as best we can. But, you know, we're  a Federation. That doesn't mean we're always going to agree. But in a Federation like we are in Australia,  you know, we've got to respect each other's decisions and each of us have to take responsibility for those  decisions.

JONES: OK, well, we've stolen probably 10 minutes more than what you allocated us. So there were a  couple of other issues, JobKeeper extensions perhaps, and also Julian Assange. Can I get a quick one on  Julian Assange?

PRIME MINISTER: Yeah, well, I note the decision overnight. And like any other Australian, I mean, I  understand that’s subject to appeal. I mean, we're obviously not parties to that sort of proceedings. But,

you know, assuming that if that all turns out, then he's like any other Australian. He'd be free to return  home if he wished and he's going through those processes. Consular support has consistently been  offered to Mr Assange. So that would be a matter for him but when those proceedings and those  processes end.

JONES: Alright. Well, we're going to let you go now. I know that, you know, you're a regular on Neil  Mitchell's programme, and we certainly look forward to hearing you on a regular basis again through  2021.

PRIME MINISTER: Well, thank you. Thank you again, Tony. And happy New  Year to everyone. And let's  hope that Tim Paine and the boys can come back at the Sydney Test and we look forward to that. And I  hope everyone has a safe and summer over these next few weeks, but still a lot to get through. So thank  you, everyone, for your tremendous good efforts over the past year and a lot more ahead of us. All the  best.

JONES: Alright. Thank you. Prime Minister Scott Morrison joining us there live from Canberra.

[END]

Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

