TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2GB DRIVE WITH JIM WILSON

TUESDAY, 26 JANUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Australia Day; Australian of the Year; COVID-19 vaccine



JIM WILSON, HOST: Let's bring on our Tuesday political influencer and

heavyweight, Federal Shadow Education Minister Tanya Plibersek. Happy

Australia Day Tanya.



TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING:

You too, Jim.



WILSON: How have you spent the day?



PLIBERSEK: I've been trying to stay out of the heat, but this afternoon I'm down at

a citizenship ceremony at the [inaudible] beautiful Circular Quay - [inaudible] at its

best and get to welcome some new Australian citizens, which I love doing. I really

love doing that.



WILSON: Well, that would be very, very special. I mean we are so lucky in this

country. And as we honour some great Australians, I reckon we got the Australian

of the Year right. Grace Tame is an inspired choice and a very impressive woman.



PLIBERSEK: She is fantastic. And it's so good that we are giving voice to victims

of sexual assault. She's done amazing work to highlight the issues around sexual

assault and it's up to all of us now, as a community, to make sure we get the

extraordinary rates of sexual violence in our community down.



WILSON: There's been multiple arrests in Sydney this afternoon at the Invasion

Day rally. Protesters have ignored public orders relating to numbers at that protest.

Do you think it should have gone ahead in the current environment?



PLIBERSEK: I think for most of this rally, people followed the instructions from

NSW Health and police. I think in a democracy it's important that people have the

ability to express political opinions, but you have to use some common sense and

you have to follow the instructions of NSW Health and the police - particularly at a

time like this during a pandemic. It’s a shame when a few idiots go too far and

ignore what they're being asked to do by authorities who are trying to keep us all

safe.



WILSON: The ABC copped it yesterday for promoting Invasion Day rallies around

the country. I don't like the name. I don't like the words. What do you think of

them?



PLIBERSEK: It's really important that when we celebrate the fantastic things in

Australian history, we also take a moment to reflect on the things that we did

wrong, that we got wrong. And it is important to acknowledge that we've got 65,000

years of continuous Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander history here in Australia.

We should be proud of that. We should celebrate it. But there were frontier

conflicts here, and there was a lot of pain, and there's still a lot of heartache

amongst Indigenous Australians. We are big enough to include all of these stories

in our great Australian story. We should do that.



WILSON: And I suppose the bottom line as far as this day goes - it is a chance to

come together. And yes, we need to have these conversations about First Nations.

I get that but today's about - there are so many positives today about a celebration

of our wonderful country.



PLIBERSEK: Look it's a fantastic country. I am grateful every single day that my

parents came here in the 1950s, that I was born in Australia. I feel like I have won

life’s lottery. And my parents taught me to be grateful every single day to this

country for the opportunities that it's given our family. But we also need to

acknowledge that there are things in our history that we are not proud of. Part of

being clear-eyed and loving your country is also saying these are the challenges

that are still before us. And making sure that a proper acknowledgement and

celebration of 65,000 years of Indigenous culture - making sure that that's part of

our national story is a really important challenge we've still got for our future.



WILSON: I really liked your piece in today's Daily Telegraph pushing for our kids to

learn about our citizenship pledge in school. It makes a lot of sense.



PLIBERSEK: It really does, because our citizenship pledge is about the loyalty

and respect we show each other as Australian citizens. We don't pledge loyalty to

the royal family in England. We don't pledge loyalty to a political party, or a political

system, or the parliament, or our government. We pledge our loyalty to Australia

and its people whose democratic beliefs we share, whose rights and liberties we

respect, whose laws we uphold and obey. It's such a neat encapsulation of what it

is to be an Australian citizen, and we have seen that in spades this year as people

have looked after each other.



And I guess what I was saying is, as political leaders, we need to be worthy of the

sacrifices that people have made this year. So yes, our kids need to learn more

about Australian citizenship. But we as leaders need to model what it takes to be a

good citizen by - sure, disagreeing, but disagreeing better, being able to listen to

each other, showing how we can disagree courteously.



And I think I think our leaders need to be worthy of the sacrifices our people have

made.



WILSON: It's the same one as new Australians recite when they become citizens.

It's a commitment to each other as you say. Right now, it couldn't be more timely.



PLIBERSEK: It couldn't be more timely. And we've seen that this year. Honestly, if

you had said a year ago, we're going to ask Australians to stay home from the

beach and the pub, what answer do you think you would have got?



And yet, people have sacrificed. We've had frontline health workers, we've had

truckies driving supplies all over Australia, we’ve had people stacking shelves in

Woolies. We've had people risking their own health to keep doing their jobs. We've

had people who've lost their jobs because of the shutdowns and worst of all, we've

had hundreds of people of course lose their lives. But we've shown that when we

look after each other, actually we come through these crises better than most other

countries on earth.



WILSON: Just one final one. Do you agree with a lot of our listeners who have

criticised sporting organizations for trying to jump the queue and be made priorities

when the vaccine is rolled out next month?



PLIBERSEK: I think the priorities have to be our health workers, our other frontline

workers, and vulnerable populations like people in nursing homes. No question.



WILSON: And sports stars could be well down the list.





PLIBERSEK: Sports stars play an important role in keeping our spirits up, but

they're not the top of the list of frontline people during a pandemic, that’s for sure.



WILSON: Just following- your article in the Telegraph said how lucky we are in this

country. So you also made the point though, that luck on its own isn't enough.



PLIBERSEK: Luck on its own is not enough. We are lucky country. You can't look

at our beautiful natural environment or think about how prosperous and peaceful

we are without feeling lucky. But part of staying lucky is making sure we're putting

the effort in. That we've got jobs for people with decent pay and conditions, we’ve

got a good health system, a good education system. We've got to keep looking

after each other - that's how we stay lucky.



WILSON: Thanks for the chat this afternoon and enjoy the citizenship ceremony

later, and we'll do it all again next Tuesday, Tanya.



PLIBERSEK: Looking forward to it, Jim.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350



