

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

MEMBER FOR HUNTER

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2GB WITH DEBORAH KNIGHT   FRIDAY, 19 MARCH 2021

SUBJECT: Snowy Hydro 2.0; IR Bill Failure; The end of JobKeeper; March  4 Justice; Nicolle Flint’s speeches on harassment.

DEBORAH KNIGHT, HOST: And it has been another big week in Canberra  and joining us as they do every Friday, Angus Taylor, the Energy Minister and  Joel Fitzgibbon, the Labor MP for the Hunter. Fella’s, good to talk. Thanks so  much for joining us again on this Friday. Angus, hello.

ANGUS TAYLOR, MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND EMISSIONS REDUCTION:  G’day Deb. Thanks for having me.

KNIGHT: And hello to you, Joel.

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: G’day Deb. I have a complaint.

KNIGHT: Oh.

FITZGIBBON: A complaint to raise with the Energy Minister. We have no  power here in Cessnock and I want to know what he's going to do about it.

KNIGHT: The storm did that. You can't blame the Energy Minister for the  storm, can you?

FITZGIBBON: No the standard opposition position is to blame the government  for everything.

KNIGHT: I'll let you off on that one. Angus, can you fix it? Can you fix it for  him?

TAYLOR: I don’t know about that one. The first I’ve heard of it but I'm sure we  can sort it out afterwards, Joel.

KNIGHT: Yeah, alright. Okay. We’ll let that one go through to the keeper. But  Angus, you're in the snowy mountains today, lucky you, and you're unveiling

this giant boring machine for the Snowy Hydro 2.0. This has got a personal link  for you, hasn’t it.

FITZGIBBON: Very well.

TAYLOR: I’m sitting in Cabramurra, highest town in Australia, right now, we've  been just done with the commissioning of this giant boring machine. Over 100  meters long, Deb, over 2000 tonnes. And it's boring a massive tunnel into the  snowy mountains, which of course will be about firming up our electricity,  making sure we've got the lights and we can turn the lights on when the sun  goes down. Of course turning the lights on, as Joel discovered now, it's critical  that when you flick the switch, the lights do go on. And that's what this project is  all about. And these tunnel boring machines are fantastic. It has been named  after lady Eileen Hudson, who was a force to be reckoned with on the scheme  many years ago, very strong woman who also happen to have been my  grandmother so that, as a member of the Taylor family, we feel very privileged  that her role in this scheme many years ago has been recognised.

KNIGHT: It is wonderful to have that that recognition for a very strong woman.  That's great. Good to see. Now I want to get into the IR bill, pretty messy in the  senate yesterday, Angus and the debate over the government IR Bill - 10  months of negotiations and all you got was one of five key provisions, pretty  disappointing.

TAYLOR: Well, I think Labor has played politics with this. The good news is  that what we got through was reforms which ensure that employees can  choose between casual and full time work. And that choice is very much in their  hands, and it’s a sensible choice. And employers aren't going to be charged  twice, as was the risk with some court cases that went through a little while  back. So this is cleaning up a problem that needed to be cleaned out. We're  glad that Labor joined us on that. But sadly, Labor opposed really critical  reforms...

KNIGHT: ... But it wasn't just Labor, it was the cross party, as well, and the  independents.

TAYLOR: Labor is the opposition, and at the end of the day, they opposed  provisions which were cracking down on wage theft. Of all things, wage theft,  and they opposed it. Frankly, I just don't understand it. It’s insane. When Labor  is not supporting dealing with wage theft, Joel is absolutely right, it's time to put  labour back into the Labor Party because it's not there when they take that sort  of position.

KNIGHT: Were you playing politics, Joel? I mean, what was happening in 10  months of negotiations? I thought that the unions were actually helping out here  and trying to ensure that there was a positive outcome.

FITZGIBBON: Deb, that's the key point, isn’t it? You know, in the middle of  COVID, the government said, look, we might need to do some things here to

get the economy back on track. And he convened a number of meetings with  the unions and the unions sat down with him and employer groups and  Kumbaya and they agreed on many principles. But for some reason, when the  draft bill came to the parliament, it had all these changes, which both Labor and  the unions believed were anti-worker. I mean, this whole proposition, Deb,  remember that - you fix the economy by going undermining wages and  conditions is not an acceptable one to the Labor Party, or the union movement.  And, of course, we oppose wage theft, we’ve said far more about it than the  government. But you know, they throw this into one omnibus bill, giving us only  two choices - vote for all of it all, or vote for none of it.

KNIGHT: And in the end, only one of the five elements actually come through.  Will the government give it another go, Angus, or is it scrapped altogether?

TAYLOR: Well, I mean, the question really sits with the Labor Party. Are they  prepared to back in provisions like the ones that were cracking down on wage  theft, or are they not? I'm sure if they want to work with us on that, then we'll  work through it as quickly as we possibly can. But ultimately, the ball is in their  court on whether they are prepared to do things that are going to make sure  that we've got fair wages in this country, but also that we've got job  opportunities for everybody, which we desperately need, of course, coming out  of COVID.

KNIGHT: Well, they’re clearly not happy with the bills as they were presented.  So will you go back to the drawing board?

TAYLOR: Well, I mean, we've been working it through with them. The question  is, are they prepared to come back to the table on sensible provisions like what  I've just talked about. That’s a question for Labor, not for us.

KNIGHT: Will you, Joel? Will Labor come back to the table?

FITZGIBBON: We will and always have supported sensible propositions. And,  you know, we supported elements of this bill, but we weren't prepared to  support parts of it which were only designed to make it easier for employers to  cut the wages of workers in the name of COVID. That's just not fair.

KNIGHT: Alright. Well, we'll see, we'll see where it goes with the IR bill. But on  the jobs front, good news for the government this week, though, Angus. That is  for sure, the unemployment going down again. But the Treasurer, as he said  himself, Josh Frydenberg, that we're in for a pretty rough ride once Jobkeeper  ends, just nine days away now. Is it really the time to be cutting Jobkeeper?

TAYLOR: Well, it was always intended to be temporary and targeted. It has  been and it's clear, when you have got an unemployment rate of 5.8 per cent  which is close to or in line with what it was before COVID, you're in an  extraordinary position where a very expensive program, which unsustainable  over the longer term, obviously, it's time to take it off. Now, inevitably, when you  stop spending money, there needs to be adjustment, that is the nature of it...



KNIGHT: ... So do you expect we’ll see the unemployment figure go up?

TAYLOR: Well, that's ultimately not something I'm going to predict. But what is  clear, is that we have a very low unemployment rate now. I mean, it’s  extraordinary. You cannot find another country in the world the size of Australia  or larger that has anything like the kind of job market we've got.

KNIGHT: Yeah, it’s been an extraordinary turn around, you’re right.

TAYLOR: Absolutely extraordinary. So now is the time to stop the very, very  expensive, but very successful program that has been Jobkeeper, get the  budget back into order. We are strong economic managers as a government.  That's how we've always been. We've had to do this. It's important to do this,  but now is the time to bring it off and to get people back into work. And clearly  our policies are working because 5.8 per cent unemployment says people are  going back to work.

KNIGHT: It's also been revealed that Qantas is providing international flight  staff $500 a week as part of the government's aviation package announced last  week, which I know Joel, you're not a fan of and it did raise a lot of questions  from other industries, hospitality, small tourism, entertainment as well, why the  big airlines are getting extra support when no one else is. What's your view,  Joel? Should there be more help coming?

FITZGIBBON: He’s a pretty good lobbyist that Alan Joyce at Qantas, isn’t he,  Deb. He gets all the cookies. I’m not saying they don’t need support. They do,  but it's rather passing strange, I mean these cut price tickets for domestic  tourism were farcical and weren’t helped by Michael McCormack’s attempt, the  Deputy Prime Minister's attempt to explain them. This is right out of the John  Howard textbook. I mean, those numbers were good this week and we all  welcome that, and like all of us, all Australians have played a part in our strong  recovery. But out of the John Howard playbook, the government says, oh  there’s nothing to worry about here, we can withdraw this funding now, because  they know that people will be sceptical about borrowing and spending money  forever. But then they keep rolling out these new programs, almost on a daily  basis, doing exactly what we've been asking them to do. And that is to target  industries that haven't recovered. The problem is it’s became very hodgepodge  and ad hoc in its roll out and it appears to be all over the place.

KNIGHT: Yeah well, we will see what other help that might be forthcoming.  Now, it's been quite extraordinary scenes across the country with the March 4  Justice rallies and hundreds of thousands of women turning out in every capital  city and in many regional centers. And we've seen liberal MP Nicolle Flint  speaking very passionately about the abuse, the awful abuse that she copped  while in Parliament. She's not going to recontest the next election largely  because of that. And she's called out senior Labor MPs, senior Labor female  MPs for turning a blind eye. Is that fair criticism, Joel.

FITZGIBBON: That's just not right, Deb. The people who gave her a really hard  time were Extinction Rebellion people, Get Up for example, I don't know that  Labor was involved in that.

KNIGHT: But are you saying that senior Labor female MPs were not aware of  the abuse that she was copping?

FITZGIBBON: I have no idea, Deb, but I will say this, I think Nicolle has given  into them. I would have liked to have seen her stand her ground and I, in turn,  all of us in the parliament looking for and putting in place new robust measures  to support people like her. Because it could be me tomorrow, who find  themselves unfairly targeted by these groups.

KNIGHT: It's good to see that the government, Angus, has come to the fore,  ensuring and guaranteeing that the privacy provisions for sexual assault  complaints in parliament will be protected from these Freedom of Information  requests, because I think that's a really important move for this independent  inquiry. But will that be enough, do you think? Because I mean, women from  across the political spectrum are now joining forces to create this parliamentary  friends group, which is a positive step. But was it a missed opportunity, do you  think, Angus, that the Prime Minister and the Minister for Women didn't turn out  to the marches in Canberra to listen?

TAYLOR: Look, they offered the opportunity for the marchers to come and  speak to the Prime Minister, which is the way these things typically work and  that opportunity wasn't taken up. But can I say, Deb, look, I do want to make a  comment about Nicolle, I mean, incredibly brave speeches in the parliament,  and she made the simple point that there were senior MPs who walked past  what clearly was a form of harassment of her during the last election. She is a  great woman who has made an enormous contribution and you've seen the  quality of the contributions just in the last few days. And it’s important all across  the whole parliament work to address this issue. The Kate Jenkins review, the  sex discrimination conditions review will make a series of recommendations, no  doubt, and we need to work jointly to address those issues.

KNIGHT: Yeah well, no disagreement for me there. We need some positive  change to come as a result of it. And just finally, it is world sleep day today. And  I know being very busy people and being very busy politicians getting enough  sleep is probably a challenge for you guys. But what's the secret? What's the  secret? And have you got a secret spot where you like to catch a few Z’s?  Joel?

FITZGIBBON: Well, I'm betting Angus will say he counts sheep. That’s my  punt. What I like to do, Deb is listen to reruns of select Senate speeches,  usually from Greens senators who are the most repetitious.

KNIGHT: Yeah, that's a good tip actually. That would do the trick. Well, actually  listening to either Houses of Parliament I would argue with some of the debate  that goes on would be enough to put anyone to sleep. What about you, Angus?





TAYLOR: You stole my thunder there. My own experience is that when my  head hits the pillow, I go to sleep. It's been a long standing benefit i have.

KNIGHT: Lucky you.

TAYLOR: Although, sadly as I get older, I find I wake up at three o'clock in the  morning more. But I was going to say look, the speeches that really send me to  sleep are Albo's speeches in the parliament. Parliament speeches are definitely  right up there. I agree with Joel on that.

KNIGHT: Well, that was a bit of a free kick for both of you, I guess. But good on  you. You never put us to sleep, so that is great. We'll talk again next week.



ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAVID BULLOCK 0405 408 871





Authorised by Joel Fitzgibbon, ALP, Cessnock, NSW.





