



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au

TRANSCRIPT

MOVE TO MORE CAMPAIGN LAUNCH ADDRESS  17 March 2021





8:17AM

E&OE

Subjects: The Regional Australia Institute’s Move To More Campaign Launch;

LIZ RITCHIE

It is now my duty to welcome the Deputy Prime Minister to officially launch our new campaign,  Move to More. Thank you.

MICHAEL McCORMACK

Thank you Liz and I too acknowledge that we’re on Ngunnawal territory. I’m getting a nod - Wally  says I’ve pronounced it right. Thank you, Wally, thank you for your moving Welcome to Country.

I acknowledge Mark Vaile, my great, great friend and former Deputy Prime Minister and I  acknowledge each and every one of you. Life is run by those who turn up and you’ve turned up  today. You’ve turned up to support this wonderful initiative. You’ve turned up because you care.  You’ve turned up because you believe in regional Australia.

Just picture this, its 1993, Harden, a little racetrack. There’s a bloke who is about to ride his first ever  race. His name is Scott Spackman. The horse is called Money Road, it’s the Harden Cup. He gets on  board, he wins the race. He retires. One out of one. You can’t beat that - 100 per cent. This Saturday  that same Scott Spackman will travel to Rosehill. He’d saddle up a horse called Rocket Tiger. Most of  you probably wouldn’t have heard of it. It’s going to be running in the Golden Slipper. The punters  say it’s got no chance, a complete outsider - one in 16 chance. But it’s in the race. It is a chance. It’s  from Wagga Wagga, from my hometown. And I hope it wins. Because people in regional Australia  and horses in regional Australia can do whatever they want to do. And I say Money Road, I recited  that story because there is a money road and at the moment it leads straight to regional Australia.  There is money to be made in regional Australia. And you can make good money. You can have a  well-paying job and not just in agriculture, not just in mining, but in any area of endeavour that you  so wish to choose.





Because the opportunities are limitless. The opportunities are there. The opportunities are right now  awaiting those people, those punters, those opportunists, those believers who want to go to  regional Australia.

The RAI, great organisation, has been around since 2012. I was at the foundation meetings. They  have done so much good for regional Australia to promote, to advocate, to fight for, to believe in  regional Australia. They have identified 54,000 jobs in regional Australia right now. I spoke to Peter  Rodney yesterday. He’s one of the local businessmen. He’s got any number of jobs that he could fill.  He owns a transport company. Unfortunately, he’s got 11 trucks backed up against the fence  because he just can’t fill those jobs - just can’t fill those opportunities. And it’s not just the transport  companies, it’s the law firms, it’s the accountancy practices, it’s in hospitality, it’s in health. And for  those people who choose to Move to More, they will have a lifestyle like no other. They will come to  a community that is big enough in which to get a good cup of coffee - and that’s important - yet  small enough to still care. Now whether they’re the large regional capitals or whether they’re  indeed, the small little vibrant towns that might have had their main street upgraded under some  Government initiative, they are ready and willing and open and embracing for those city dwellers to  come out.

Now 7,782 Sydneysiders who chose to come to the regions - mostly regional New South Wales but  indeed, other regions as well - they can’t be wrong. That was the September quarter. They chose to  make the move and if coronavirus has taught us just a couple of things, they are these. First of all,  you can have a great lifestyle and a safe lifestyle in regional Australia because coronavirus has - yes,  there’s been a few little cases in regional Australia but mostly they’ve been COVID-free. And that’s  because regional Australians have been their best selves, taking the best medical advice but also  doing what Premiers in far-off cities told them to do - social distancing and all those sort of things  and they’ve kept their communities largely COVID-free and I say to them thanks. Thank you. A heart-felt thank you on behalf of the Commonwealth Government.

But the other thing too, is you can be in your lounge room, your kitchen, your bedroom and wearing  a shirt and maybe shorts and whatever else and you can be in a boardroom in whatever capital city  in Australia and still be contributing. Because one of the buzz words - one of those dreaded words -  was Zoom. Probably nobody had even known the app or what it meant 18 months ago, but I tell you  what, you all do now. For a politician, there’s no escape. Everybody thinks you’re available every  minute they want. They snap their fingers, you’ve got to be available because they’ll go to do it on  Zoom. But it’s great because it actually connected us to anyone anywhere in Australia, indeed, in the  world. I thank NBEN, I know we have NBN representatives here today so thank you. And we also  thank our other great clients, Nutrien Ag Solutions. It’s one of the big supporters. And you’ve got to  support your supporters, so thank you to those two organisations in particular. But thank you to  each and every one of you for coming out this morning because this is an important initiative. Yes,  we’ve contributed some millions of dollars towards it, but I tell you what - if I was looking at a  billboard and I was stuck in traffic in my daily commute of an hour and a half or perhaps even longer,  stuck in capital city congestion, I tell you what, if I saw a billboard that said move to regional  Australia where you’re seven minutes from anywhere and still get a good cup of coffee, I’d think  about it. I’d go to movetomore.com.au and see what was available for me. Because the regions are  there, they’re enticing, they’re fantastic. The communities are very friendly and you all know that  because you’re here this morning.

So I do thank you for turning up. I do thank you for being present because, as I say, life is run by  those who turn up. Over the next two days you’re going to have some fantastic deliberations. You’re  going to be talking the talk and walking the walk about what’s great about regional Australia. As a  regional MP that means a lot to me. And I’m sure I’m going to hear from Liz because once you give





Liz your mobile number you know she’s going to use it. She’s going to tell me all about what’s going  on, what you’ve said and what you’ve discussed and what you’ve determined.

I look forward to catching up tonight at your gala dinner. I’m really excited about this. How good is  this that we’re all actually in the one room at the one time? Thank you to Wendy King, I mention her  because she’s the event organiser, give her a clap.

[Applause]

Now I’m going to attempt something. I’m going to attempt something that’s going to be really  exciting. Now apparently we’re going to have a bit of technology. What could possibly go wrong? So  I think we’re going to be actually cutting the ribbon, the artificial figurative ribbon. So have we got -  let’s all join in. Ready. Come on, you can do this. Ready, one, two, three - snip. Well done, each and  every one of you. Move to More.

ENDS 7:25AM

Media contacts:  Caitlin Donaldson, 0428 389 880  Dean Shachar, 0418 202 860



