

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP   SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW   THE PROJECT  WEDNESDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: COVID misinformation; Craig Kelly; Industrial relations; Labor’s focus.

CARRIE BICKMORE, CO-HOST: Tanya joins us now, we've heard there the PM has given  Craig Kelly a dressing down on this. Are you surprised that it took so long?

TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION, SHADOW MINISTER FOR  WOMEN: I'm pleased that it's finally happened. I think it's really important when an issue as  serious as COVID-19 is facing our community that leaders speak with one voice. And it really  wasn't very helpful to have, on the one hand, a $24 million taxpayer-funded advertising  campaign telling people to get vaccinated - on the other hand, Craig Kelly, telling people that  they should think twice about that.

WALEED ALY, CO-HOST: I completely understand your concern and also your argument  about the contradiction of, you know, the advertising campaign and then a backbencher who's  speaking in the other direction. It becomes then a question of what really is the best way to  handle it. Partisan positions aside, what do you make of the idea that people like Matt  Canavan have put forward that you need to challenge these ideas with debate rather than  shutting down via authority. That that won't actually fix the problem - might make it worse?

PLIBERSEK: It really wouldn't matter to me who was saying this. If this was one of my  colleagues from the Labor Party, I'd be saying the same thing to them - which is, 'pull your  head in and get with the program.'

We've got the Prime Minister, the Health Minister, the Chief Medical Officer, the State Chief  Medical Officers, all of our health experts giving us one set of advice; and we've got Craig Kelly  saying something different. I think it's really important not to let this disinformation get hold in  our community - to call it out. I think it is really important to call it out.

ALY: I suppose by calling it out, do you in the end not persuade the people who might believe  and just think, 'well, he's been silenced;' and that doesn't help the situation?

PLIBERSEK: I think the problem, Waleed, is that this misinformation is so widespread already.  Craig Kelly's got this enormous reach on social media. He's in the mainstream media a lot; and  unless people stand up and say, 'he's wrong and he has to be called out for being wrong,' I



think this stuff can get a real life of its own. And that's why I am pleased that the Prime Minister  has finally called him out on it today.

RACHEL CORBETT, CO-HOST: Tanya, politicians talk crap about each other all the time. But  how often does the person the person you're talking crap about turn up behind you?

PLIBERSEK: Yes, well that's a bit awkward isn't it. I was actually talking about university job  losses and I was asked a question by a journalist about Craig Kelly and I said the Prime  Minister should pull him into line, and they said, 'well you can do that, he's right behind you.' I  mean, that's how it happened.

CORBETT: It's got a real pantomime vibe to it, Tanya. 'He's behind you!'

TOMMY LITTLE, CO-HOST: Tanya, I'm guessing from what you've been saying that you're  not going to be appearing on Pete Evans' podcast anytime soon?

PLIBERSEK: I haven't actually been invited. I'm sure you'll be shocked to know I haven't been  invited.

LITTLE: Finally, Tanya just on another topic. If I was to ask you a question - and I assume  you've been asked it a bit. But if I was to ask you a question that elicited a response like you  saying, 'I don't know, my leader has my full support.' Something like that. Do you know what  the question would be?

PLIBERSEK: Do you know what, Parliament's just come back and our whole focus as the  Labor party is making sure we get through this pandemic, through the health challenge and  then through the economic recovery - and that means secure jobs with decent pay and  conditions. We've got industrial relations legislation in the Parliament at the moment which cuts  pay and makes it easier to sack people. That's my focus. That's the focus of all of us.

LITTLE: That was one of my sentences I had here. One of the other responses was going to  be, 'there are more important things to focus on.'

PLIBERSEK: It's lucky I'm focusing on them then isn't it?

BICKMORE: Who knew you knew pollie speak?

ALY: You didn't even get your question out. After all that, you never asked her.

LITTLE: Perfect.

BICKMORE: Tanya, thanks so much for your time tonight.

PLIBERSEK: It's a pleasure.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350



