







TRANSCRIPT

SKYNEWS INTERVIEW - TOM CONNELL WITH  SENATOR ANDREW BRAGG  9 | February | 2021

Tom Connell:  We're live now with Liberal Senator Andrew Bragg, thanks very much  for your time. I know you like following superannuation and, well,  some interesting policies in this and interesting debates of late, but  we've got the figures on this government policy to allow people to  access super, particularly during COVID. More than half of those that  access the money had no net income drop. So wasn't actually needed  by these people, was it?



Andrew Bragg: Well, Tom, I think as the history books will show, the superannuation  release scheme was one of the most successful policies of the  pandemic because it allowed people to access their own money. And  the bulk of the money that was taken out was used to pay down debts,  for example, like mortgages to improve people's personal balance  sheets. So I think that was very empowering and it helped a lot of  people get through the pandemic, which otherwise would have been a  lot more stressful.



Tom Connell:  What did you make of the people that gambled with it, maybe bought  a big TV and plonked it on the wall to watch the footy?

Andrew Bragg:  But as I say, the vast bulk of the money went in to improve people's  personal balance sheets, mortgages, debts, credit cards, and about  30 percent of that money went into savings. So the vast bulk of it, I  think you could say, was very well spent. And for the remaining  components, that is really a judgement for the people. It is actually  their money. And I have to say that I think the super trustees who  charge their super high fees necessarily do such a great job with the  people's money.

Tom Connell:  So when you say the vast bulk, I mean, how much was spent on what  you're saying, they're paying down debt and mortgages?

Andrew Bragg:  60 percent, according to the ABS, went into people's personal balance  sheets.

Tom Connell:  So that's a lot of money, though, isn't it?





Andrew Bragg:  Well, it is, after all, their money, I mean, we underwrite Australians  with a pension scheme, the whole idea of the super is to try and  improve people's retirements. But we've had a one in a century  recession where the idea that super wouldn't be deployed to help the  country get through this is ridiculous. Would have been absurd.

Tom Connell:  Let me just ask you finally, because I know that you're right in this  debate as to whether we increase super, the compulsory super  contributions. Is it at least something the Coalition, if it were looking at  not going ahead with legislated increases that you should take to an  election given last time, there was no hint of changing your mind on  this?



Andrew Bragg:  I mean, we've had a very serious economic event called the  coronavirus recession, and I think as part of that, the superannuation  release scheme has been very popular. Three million people have  used it. It's been very engaging. I think it has imbued a sense in  people that this is real money. It's not monopoly money that falls out of  the sky, it's part of their wages, part of their salary, which is exactly  what the Reserve Bank Governor, Philip Lowe, has said in testimony  to the parliament. So there is a real trade off between super and  wages. And that is real,so that is a judgement that we need to make  as a government as to how to make a final judgement.

Tom Connell:  I just want to ask you about the retirement.

Andrew Bragg: Yeah.

Tom Connell:  Yeah, sorry I just want to ask about Net Zero. Finally, Senator, some  Nationals MPs, pushing back against this even before well we have a  commitment to plan anything, really. What have you made of some of  the contributions?



Andrew Bragg:  Well, when we need to put forward a plan for our country, a country  that takes climate change seriously and it needs to be a complete  offering that we will take to Glasgow. Now, if there is a case for  additional assistance for regional Australia or particular industries, and  I think you look at that as a secondary issue. I don't think you start this  issue looking at it from the perspective of what you can carve out,  because, of course, our objective is to get the best deal possible for  the planet.



Tom Connell:  All right.

MEDIA | John Mangos | 0401 392 624



