

MARK BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING  MEMBER FOR HINDMARSH





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  ADELAIDE  FRIDAY, 12 MARCH 2021

SUBJECTS: Vaccine rollout; Australian car industry, Linda Reynolds.

MARK BUTLER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING: As of last night, around  the world 334 million COVID vaccines had been administered. As of last night over  100 million Americans have received their vaccine and President Biden has  committed that by the end of May the entire population will be vaccinated. As of  last night, about half of the adult population in the UK, about 25 million people have  received their vaccination - equivalent to the entire adult and children population of  Australia, other countries are doing even better than these two. Here in Australia,  though, at the end of the third week of the vaccine rollout that started significantly  later than the rest of the world, we've only administered 150,000 of the first doses  of the vaccine. More than 99 per cent of Australians have not even received their  first dose.

Prime Minister Scott Morrison quite famously, along with Greg Hunt, committed to  4 million vaccinations by the end of March. Now I acknowledge that they then let  that slip to mid-April. Then after that, they said no 4 million will be perhaps by late  or the end of April. Now they've dropped that commitment entirely. They've also  said that the vaccinations will be complete by the end of October. Scott Morrison  said that on Sunrise yesterday, he said “we will get this done by October, as we  said we would.” This is critically important not just for the health of Australians, but  also for our ability to get that economic recovery going. By opening up the  economy and being confident in the event of any outbreaks or what's happening  around the world with variants.

Only yesterday afternoon, in spite of the Prime Minister making that commitment  again yesterday morning on Sunrise, his own officials said that it was more likely  that the vaccinations would be complete towards the end of 2021 or even into  2022. The Australian Medical Association has said there's no way it's going to be

done by the end of October. New South Wales premier Gladys Berejiklian has said  we're likely to run months behind schedule. Many experts saying that the  vaccination rollout will run into 2022.

The systems that the Commonwealth Government is responsible for putting in  place are still in disarray. We know that the National Booking System that surely  should have been ready to go as soon as the vaccines were approved is still some  weeks away. It's still being built. We've seen report after report of general  practitioners, who are ready to start their vaccinations the week after next for  phase 1b being told in spite of the fact that they've got the capacity to do as many  as 1,000 vaccinations per week, they're only going to receive 50 doses.

This strategy is fast becoming a complete mess. The Prime Minister has to do  better because the health of Australians depends on a successful vaccine rollout.  Our ability to open up the economy also depends on that success. The Prime  Minister has got to do a lot better than this and he could start by coming clean with  Australians. When will Australia finally be protected by this vaccine?

JOURNALIST: What confidence can Australians have in this vaccine program that's  been delayed by two months already in just the first three weeks?

BUTLER: The first three weeks have not been a good signal. We're running well  behind schedule already. And the systems that the Commonwealth should have  had up and running ready to go as soon as the vaccines were approved are still  weeks away. People don't know how they're going to be able to book to get a  vaccine. GPs are being told even when they've done the hard work to get ready to  deliver the vaccines, that they'll only get 50 doses per week when they might be  able to deliver as many as 1,000 per week. This is critically important, particularly  as we see variants start to emerge around the rest of the world. Australian  business groups have been saying we need to be vaccinated. We need the whole  community vaccinated so we can start to open up the economy and yet this is  becoming a complete mess.

JOURNALIST: Shadow Minister what specifically, you mentioned the economy, what  areas specifically do you fear for if this vaccination program is delayed and  delayed?

BUTLER: I'm looking at comments from the Australian Industry Group this morning,  from the Chamber of Commerce and Industry. There are particular industries like  international education, international tourism, that are dependent upon the ability to  open up our borders as the vaccine is spread through the rest of the world. The  Australian Industry Group this morning said that Australia runs the risk of falling  behind the rest of the world, as economies around the world start to open up  because their population is fully vaccinated. This is not only just about the health of  Australians, although that's the primary interest, it's also about the health of our

economy.

JOURNALIST: The reasonable excuse to say that Australia has done extremely well,  it's causing a situation we have very few cases compared to other places around  the world. Is that at all an excuse to delay this program?

BUTLER: I think it was reasonable for the Therapeutic Goods Administration taking  longer than their equivalents in the US and the UK did to approve the vaccines. But  the Pfizer vaccine was approved in January here in Australia, around the rest of  the world, vaccines started rolling out within a few days of the vaccine being  approved by their medicines authority. Yet we're now almost seven weeks since  the Pfizer vaccine was approved by the TGA. We've only given 150,00 first doses  of the vaccine to Australian people. So yes, there was good reason for us to take  our time with the TGA approval but by the time that approval was given, we should  have been scaling up very quickly, the system should have been in place. The  Australian Government under Scott Morrison has let the Australian people down.

JOURNALIST: Since the TGA approved the vaccine, do you see glaring gaps  specifically, or perhaps even foresaw any gaps, in the government’s rollout?

BUTLER: We were saying ,even before the approval, that the Australian  Government should have had in place as soon as the approval was given a  booking system that Australian people and Australian GPs and pharmacists  understood so that people could quite easily book where to get their  vaccination. The training system should have been in place, and fault free and a  whole range of other systems to make sure that this vaccine rollout could happen  as quickly and effectively and safely as possible. We're seeing that happen around  the world, millions of doses are being delivered around the world every single day.  And yet here, we can only manage about 50,000 every week at the moment, that's  simply not good enough. The Australian Government has got to do much better.

JOURNALIST: How concerned are you by the Astra Zeneca vaccine and the  Scandinavian countries identifying that maybe they're causing blood clots? Is that  something we should be worried about in Australia?

BUTLER: I have very strong confidence in the ability of the TGA, the Therapeutic  Goods Administration, to monitor any reports about potential adverse events, to  monitor them to examine them and to give advice to the Australian people and to  Australian governments.

JOURNALIST: You don't think we should follow suit?

BUTLER: I think the TGA is well equipped to consider that and make a decision  accordingly.



JOURNALIST: Do you think there's any possibility that this Government might have  been distracted by things that have been going on internally?

BUTLER: This should be the primary focus of the Australian Government. This  pandemic is not only a threat to the health of Australians, it is holding our economy  back and costing Australians jobs. These systems should havebeen in preparation  late last year ready to go as soon as the approval was given for the TGA. It  beggars belief why we don't have a National Booking System in place right now,  that it's still weeks away. It beggars belief that GPs and pharmacists don't know  how they're going to be able to connect with their patients and their customers to  make sure they get the vaccine as soon as possible.

JOURNALIST: Do you welcome the Government's new car manufacturers  announcement and will it save future dealers or is it too late given  Holdens has already abandoned the country?

BUTLER: We just can't trust this Government when it comes to the car industry. For  years we've been calling, and the industry has been calling, and Australian dealers  have been calling for a fair industry code that would protect Australian motorists  and Australian car dealers from the big global car manufacturers and  this Government has done nothing for years. There was a unanimous  parliamentary committee report delivered back in 2019 that the Government could  have acted upon again, they did nothing. This just a pattern of behaviour from  a Government that has never done the right thing by Australian motorists. The best  example of that is when they chased Holden and Toyota out of the country costing  tens of thousands of jobs.

JOURNALIST: And this has just come in, Shadow Minister. The Defence Minister  says she wants to retract her ‘lying cow’ comment about Brittany Higgins, is this  too little too late? Does she still need to face repercussions?

BUTLER: We just think her position is completely untenable given those comments  and those circumstances so that's obviously now a matter between her and Ms  Higgins, I imagine, and their legal representatives. But I think as a Minister of the  Crown to say those sorts of things I think makes her position untenable.

JOURNALIST: You think the fact that it's now been retracted just isn't good enough?

BUTLER: It’s just too little, too late, I think. But ultimately that’s a matter for Ms  Higgins.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LUCY CARUSO 0408 803 428



