THE HON MELISSA PRICE MP Minister for Defence Industry Member for Durack

MEDIA RELEASE

NEW STIMULUS PROGRAM AIMS TO GROW SHIPBUILDING WORKFORCE

18 March 2021

Workers whose employment has been impacted by COVID-19 will be provided with pathways into exciting and sustainable careers in the naval shipbuilding sector under a $5 million program to be delivered by the Morrison Government.

The new program is part of the Government’s $1 billion investment package to boost Australia’s defence industry workforce to 70,000 and support thousands of jobs across the country.

Minister for Defence Industry Melissa Price said while the COVID-19 pandemic had impacted many Australians, the Morrison Government was growing the defence industry workforce to further support small and medium sized enterprises across the country.

“The new Naval Shipbuilding Training and Upskilling program is aimed at connecting displaced workers with tailored case management and linking potential candidates with appropriate training plans and job placements,” Minister Price said.

“The Naval Shipbuilding Training and Upskilling program will be delivered by education and training providers and coordinated by the Naval Shipbuilding College.

“Since it was established by the Coalition Government in 2018, the Naval Shipbuilding College has assisted thousands of workers to prepare for and become ready to enter into the booming naval shipbuilding sector.

“Through this new program the Naval Shipbuilding College will identify cohorts of workers who have been displaced by the pandemic and provide them with the information and resources necessary to upskill and enter into this exciting sector.

“We are committed to working with the College to grow Australia’s shipbuilding workforce.

“We need 15,000 workers to carry out the Morrison Government’s continuous naval shipbuilding program.”

Workers who have been adversely impacted by the pandemic or are looking to step into a secure and sustainable career in Australia’s growing shipbuilding sector can receive tailored advice by registering at www.navalshipbuildingcollege.com.au.

Media Contacts Ben Spencer (Minister Price’s office): +61 412 751 310

Steve Kuper (Minister Price’s office): +61 421 668 874 Defence Media: media@defence.gov.au

