

SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE

Minister for Foreign Affairs Minister for Women Acting Minister for Defence

THE HONOURABLE ALATOI ISHMAEL KALSAKAU Deputy Prime Minister Minister of Internal Affairs Republic of Vanuatu

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

ENHANCED INFRASTRUCTURE FOR  THE VANUATU POLICE FORCE

11 March 2021

Construction has commenced in Port Vila under the Cook and Tiroas Barracks Redevelopment project, a joint initiative of the Governments of Australia and Vanuatu.

The large-scale infrastructure partnership will deliver enhanced resilient facilities at Cook and Tiroas Barracks to support the Vanuatu Police Force’s growth and capability development.

Upgrades at Cook Barracks will include engineer and vehicle workshops, accommodation and training facilities, essential services and a medical centre.

Australian Acting Minister for Defence, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Women, Senator the Hon Marise Payne said Australia is proud to work with Vanuatu to support its security priorities.

“Australia greatly values our strong and enduring security partnership with Vanuatu, and we are committed to deepening our cooperation through tailored and sustainable support to the Vanuatu

Police Force,” Minister Payne said.

“Our security forces have worked closely together on the design and delivery of this project since it was announced in January 2019. I am pleased to see construction commence; a particularly significant milestone given the COVID-19 environment.”

Vanuatu’s Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Internal Affairs, the Honourable Alatoi Ishmael Kalsakau, said this project is expected to create more than 200 jobs annually during the construction period, and inject more than 4.5 billion vatu into Vanuatu’s economy.

“This is very reassuring especially as it will provide a boost to our economy in this time when the country is working hard to overcome the impacts of COVID-19.”

This is a testament to the strength of Vanuatu’s able partner to stand alongside Vanuatu, as Vanuatu takes its infant steps into developing country status. It is a welcome boost to Vanuatu’s efforts to tackle climate change and respond to natural disasters.”

“Vanuatu humbly offers its sincere gratitude to the generosity of the People and Government of Australia” said the Deputy Prime Minister.

Construction will commence in October 2021 at Tiroas Barracks, Luganville, where new facilities including a medical centre and armoury, will be built.

Defence has stringent measures and protocols in place to minimise the risk of transmitting COVID-19 to the Pacific. All Australian Defence Force personnel and contractors entering Vanuatu are in strict compliance with Australia and Vanuatu’s COVID-19 protocols and measures.

Media Contacts David Wroe (Minister Payne): 0429531143 Melanie Ruiz (Minister Payne): 0427888392 Defence Media: media@defence.gov.au

