

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T

Monday 15th February 2021

Minister Littleproud media conference Press Gallery  Parliament House Canberra



DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Morning guys. How are we? Back for another couple of weeks. And  look, this week and this fortnight is really just about our rolling out the vaccine, making sure  that our transition out of JobKeeper and looking at JobSeeker. We're taking an [indistinct], this  is the new beginning after COVID, a year of COVID-19. And the Government's done this  calmly and methodically, worked through this on a health front and an economic front.

I've got to say, with the vaccine beginning in Australia in the next couple of days, and then  we'll be rolling it all out. We've done this better than anyone else in the world. We haven't had  to rush this, we haven't had to jump in and take it back, saying we weren't sure about it. We've  let it be tested, we've let the authorities look at it, we've done it in a way that should give the  Australian public confidence in what we've done.

And for the Labor Party to sit there and say there's 160 million people around the world that  have got this. Well, let me say, we weren't signing up to the Chinese vaccine, we weren't  signing up to a Russian vaccine. So, the Labor Party's either saying we put Australian lives at  risk by jumping the gun and taking a vaccine that hadn't gone through the appropriate  authority, authority of approvals. Or we could do the right thing, which is what we've done in a  calm way that's made sure we're going to keep Australians safe.

And this has also played out in how the economy is now rebounding. We're seeing 90 per cent  of the jobs that were lost in COVID-19 coming back because of the economic stewardship of  this Government. And we'll obviously continue to be agile in how we treat JobSeeker, and as  we dismount the JobKeeper pony. But we have to do that. The Australian economy is getting  back to where it needs to be, and we've supported them as best we can, and now it's time for  that transition. And the Australian public is responding, they're responding and businesses are  responding. And I think as Australians, we should be damn proud of the job that we've done.  And the fact that you live here in Australia compared to anywhere else the world, again, we're  more than a lucky country, we're a bloody good country.

QUESTION: Minister, where are Australia's doses of the Pfizer vaccine?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, obviously Minister Hunt has been working through that and  bringing them in, and they'll be hitting the country in the next couple of days. And then  obviously, we'll be working through with the TGA and a roll out of that. We've got the  infrastructure in place for that to be rolled out in strategic places around the country. The  AstraZeneca will then obviously be rolled out further.

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

We haven't had to rush this, because we haven't had the health problems that other nations  around the world have had. So, I think Australians, I think Joe Blow out in the street, is pretty  calm about the roll out of these vaccines. The only ones that are getting upset about it is the  Labor Party, and that just shows the reckless nature in which they're prepared to act for a  headline. This is about keeping Australians safe. We've done everything we should to make  sure we get the right approvals of this. We haven't had to take a Chinese vaccine, haven't had  to take a Russian vaccine. We've done this calmly to make sure we're keeping them safe.

And I think that we need to give them that confidence, otherwise we won't get the take up of  those going to take the vaccine. And that's what we've done all the way through this. I think  Australians out in the street are pretty cool with this. They just want to make sure that they  keep working through this, and they have confidence when they go and get the jab.

QUESTION: You've spoken about this transition off JobKeeper and JobSeeker or the future of  that. When are people going to have some certainty as to what that looks like? It's six weeks  away, and some people are wondering whether they're going to get a pay check.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, there's plenty of certainty around JobKeeper. That pony has to  be dismounted and we're working through that. Now, we're obviously working with those  industries that are still impacted, and we've been pragmatic in showing the agility of being able  to act swiftly when we needed to as there's been changing circumstances. The JobSeeker  piece is one that we've been continuing to work through as a government, and obviously we're  coming very close to a solution about what that'll look like. And I think Australians will have  confidence in that, well in advance of knowing when we get to the end of March what will  happen.

But effectively, we've got 90 per cent of those jobs that were lost from COVID back in the  economy now. And in fact, Treasury were saying we wouldn't get them back until probably  sometime towards the end of this year. So, that's how well the Australian economy has  responded to this health crisis. And again, we will continue to tradition- transition, I should say,  the economy as the health situation evolves.

QUESTION: Do you have an answer on JobSeeker, though? Obviously, people who receive  JobSeeker need to be budgeting for the future, like, they don't know what's happening in six  weeks.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I think you'll find that the Government is getting close to a  position on that. We want to make sure we get it right, we get the balance right, and obviously,  taking into account the changing circumstances with the health across the country. I mean,  we've got a lockdown in Victoria and it started on the weekend, we've got to play that into the  equation as well. So, we're working through a multiple layer of factors. And I think the  Australian public's been very accommodating and understanding that this has been fast  moving and it's been fluid in the circumstances, and the Government has responded  appropriately as those circumstances are presented to us.

QUESTION: Minister, what are some of the industries in your electorate that you think might  need that kind of industry specific support after JobKeeper?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Look, I'm pretty fortunate. I was out at Longreach at the Bird Cage  Hotel in January, having a beer with a publican. And he, when the lockdowns first came,  thought he was going to have to close his business for good and he was going to go broke.  And when JobKeeper came in in April, he said it saved him. And he actually asked his  accountant to stop taking the payments by July because there were that many people floating  around Western Queensland having a look.

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T



So, I've got to say, the electorate of Maranoa is doing okay. And I say to everybody, you're not  going overseas this year, so hitch the caravan up or go and run out to the outback. Spend a  quid out there, because we're ready for you and we're ready to take a few dollars off you. So,  Maranoa's going okay.

QUESTION: Minister, just on the JobSeeker issue. You, with some of the National Party  colleagues, have been saying for weeks now and months to get people - lounge lizards, I think  it was described as one point - to get them off the couches and cities out in the bush. Are you  comfortable with the increase in JobSeeker?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, we haven't finalised our position on that. But, you know, we've  got to understand that there are a significant number of jobs, not just seasonal jobs out in  regional Australia at the moment, a lot of skilled jobs - there's a skills shortage. In fact, in a lot  of parts of regional Australia, we've got shires with unemployment rates with a two and three in  front of them. So, it- and I think that's already happening organically. I mean, in a lot of parts in  my electorate in Dalby and Warwick, there's a housing shortage now because we've seen a lot  of people from Victoria had a gutful of being locked up, decided to come up to Queensland  and live in regional Australia, where we haven't had a case.

So, let me tell you, it's organically happening, and we're seeing now that housing's a problem.  But there's a lot of entrepreneurs out in regional Australia - that'll be fixed shortly. But there are  a lot of jobs out there, and I think what Australians have seen from this pandemic is that the  cities aren't always the best lifestyle in this country. We've got the best of both worlds out  there, and I think we'll see those jobs continue to be taken up, but it's not going to happen  overnight.

QUESTION: Minister, you mentioned Victoria. Are you comfortable with the Victorian Premier  calling for a conversation about dramatically reducing the number of Australians coming back  to Australia?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, and that's his prerogative. Each state sets their caps, and if the  Victorian Government believes that they need to reduce them because they don't have the  capacity to handle what they've got at the moment, well, that's a sensible thing to do. I'd say  that Dan Andrews will- that it probably is the right thing, considering history, showing that  we've had two or three outbreaks from their quarantine arrangements at the moment, that  they're having trouble keeping up with their tracing. So, I'd say that's probably a sensible thing  for them to do. Other states haven't had the problems, and I think we can continue to work with  those states who have got it under control. But if Dan Andrews is of that mind, I think he's  doing the right thing.

QUESTION: So, you think it's an admission they haven't got the capability to be able to  quarantine and trace?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I'll let Dan Andrews explain that, because obviously each state  has different circumstances and different capabilities, and Dan Andrews will explain that to the  Victorian people.

Thanks, guys.



Media contact  0455 448 985

