



THE HON JOSH FRYDENBERG MP

Treasurer

Address to the COTA Australia  National Policy Forum on Retirement Income

26 February 2021

Canberra

***CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY***

Thank you Ian and the Council on the Aging (COTA) for hosting today’s national  policy forum on retirement income.

I would like to acknowledge the constructive role that COTA has played - both prior  to the Review being commissioned and since its completion.  I especially want to  recognise that COTA approaches these issues in a calm and considered manner - not  seeking to sensationalise but rather seeking a balanced discussion based on the facts.

I also want to acknowledge that the Royal Commission into Aged Care Quality and  Safety is due to be released imminently and it too will make an important contribution  to policy development in this area.

Australia’s population is ageing.

We are living and working longer.

And the nature of retirement is changing.

It was against this backdrop that I commissioned the first holistic review of the  retirement income system since the early 90s.

The Review was conducted over a 10 month period by an independent panel: Mr  Michael Callaghan, Ms Carolyn Kay, and Dr Deborah Ralston.

It received more than 430 submissions and produced a report in excess of 600 pages.

I want to thank the panel for their comprehensive assessment of our retirement  income system.  It is a body of work that will inform policy direction in this area for  years to come.

I also note that the next Intergenerational Report will be released in the middle of this  year.  With the last IGR having been handed down in 2015, this year’s IGR will be  especially important in highlighting the wider impacts of COVID-19.  No doubt it will  also contribute to our continued assessment of the effectiveness and sustainability of  our retirement income system.

Today, however, I want to outline my perspective on the Review:

first, the significance of the Review and why it matters;

second, the Review’s evidence base and what it found; and

third, the challenging policy trade-offs the Review identified as being at the core of  the system and which we must get right if we are to improve Australians’ quality  of

life - not just during their retirement.

As many in this room will know, the Review examined the three pillars of the  retirement income system: the Age Pension; compulsory superannuation; and  voluntary savings, including home ownership.

It looked at each pillar individually and at the system collectively.  In doing so it has  provided a comprehensive assessment of the system and the outcomes it is delivering  for all Australians.

This is vital because it has allowed proper consideration of each pillar within the  context of the wider retirement income system. Until now, each pillar was typically  assessed in its own right and without consideration of the contribution being made by  the other pillars of the system.

It means questions such as adequacy and sustainability can correctly be considered in  the context of the system as a whole rather than looked at in isolation.



Establishing a fact base - what did the review find?

The core task of the Review was to establish a fact base of the current retirement  income system to improve understanding of its operation and the outcomes it is  delivering for Australians.

What then did the Review find?

1 - The system achieves adequate retirement outcomes.

The Review found the three pillars of the system, the Age Pension, compulsory  superannuation and voluntary savings deliver adequate incomes in retirement for most  Australians and will be viable for generations to come.

In measuring the adequacy of retirement incomes the system delivers, the Review  considered that income in retirement should “replace” around 65 per cent to 75 per  cent of disposable working life income. This balances living standards over a person’s  lifetime, and is in line with the standard used around the world, including by the  OECD.

The Review’s evidence suggests that current retirees meet this benchmark, and that  future retirees are also projected to meet it - and in many cases exceed it.

The results are consistent across men and women, different incomes, different work  patterns and different savings behaviours. The current retirement income system  provides an adequate retirement for a wide range of people.

This is a key finding that should reassure the vast majority of Australians that our  retirement income system is working to ensure that their living standards in retirement  will broadly reflect their living standards pre-retirement.

In the words of the Review: “Most recent retirees are estimated to have adequate  retirement incomes”, and for future retirees, “replacement rates are projected to  exceed or meet the [adequacy benchmark] for all income levels when considering  employees regardless of relationship status or gender.”

2 - The Age Pension is central to our system and is working effectively.

The Review also found that the Age Pension plays a central role in our retirement  income system.  It is both a safety-net and a supplement. It allows Australians to more  confidently use their own savings during their retirement in the knowledge that that  Age Pension is there as a back-stop later in life as their savings are drawn down.

Importantly, the Review also finds the Age Pension plays an important role in  improving equity by reducing income inequality among retirees, as low-income  retirees receive the largest Age Pension payments.

In adequacy terms, the Review finds that 11 per cent of retirees are in financial stress,  lower than the working-age average.  To quote the Review, “the Age Pension  combined with other support provided to retirees, is effective in ensuring most

Australians achieve a minimum standard of living in retirement in line with  community standards.”

Notwithstanding the strong endorsement by the Review of the vital role played by the  Age Pension, research commissioned by the Review shows that most young people  do not think the Age Pension will be there when they retire.

Clearly we must do more to reassure all Australians that this concern is  unfounded.  The Review’s findings could not be clearer.  The Age Pension is well  targeted and sustainable and will remain a key pillar of our system for generations to  come.

This leads me to the next key finding of the review which is that the retirement  income system is both sustainable and robust.

3 - The retirement income system is sustainable and robust.

In the words of the Review, “the Australian retirement income system is effective,  sound and its costs are broadly sustainable."

The cost of the Age Pension is projected to decline from 2.5 per cent of GDP in 2020  to 2.3 per cent of GDP in 2060. And while the cost of superannuation tax  concessions will grow from 2 per cent of GDP to 2.6 per cent over that time, the  overall cost of the retirement income system will continue to be relatively low by  international standards.

This is remarkable given our ageing population. But the cost-effectiveness of our  system is not an accident. It is the product of sound design and prior reforms that  have enhanced its sustainability. That includes this Government’s reforms to the Age  Pension assets test and the introduction of the transfer balance cap for  superannuation.

This means, unlike a lot of other countries around the world, we have a retirement  income system that is both sustainable today and well into the future.

Along with being sustainable, the Review also showed that our system is  resilient.  That is, it can continue to provide adequate outcomes for retirees through  economic shocks and downturns - including COVID-19.

By way of example, the Review found that even if the market fell by 25 per cent just  before they retire, the income for the median earner would only drop one per cent  across their retirement, because the Age Pension is available to support them when  they need it.

4 - Superannuation plays an important role in the system.

Evidence commissioned by the Review shows compulsory superannuation has  increased total household savings. Without compulsory superannuation, many  Australians would not save enough for retirement.

The superannuation system also gives people the flexibility to save more if they can.  Voluntary contributions to superannuation also provide those outside the compulsory  system with an opportunity to contribute, such as the self-employed and people with  interrupted work. Around a quarter of Australians make these voluntary contributions  to superannuation.

The benefits of superannuation will grow as the system matures. Median balances for  people entering retirement today are around $140,000 but by 2060 are projected to be  around $450,000, in real terms adjusted for changes in living standards.

With effective use of those savings, Australians will be increasingly well-placed to  achieve financial security in retirement.

5 - Home ownership is critical to quality of life in retirement.

The Review found home ownership was the most important factor for avoiding  hardship in retirement. For example, 6 per cent of couples that are homeowners in  retirement report being in financial stress. This compares with 34 per cent for couples  that rent.

Home ownership lowers living costs and provides financial security in retirement. The  Review also found that the home makes up the largest share of wealth for older  Australians. This wealth gives retirees peace of mind, and can help retirees cope with  spending pressures that they may face.

The Government recognises the importance of home ownership to the financial  security and wellbeing of Australians in retirement. To that end, we are continuing to  deliver measures that will allow more Australians to buy their first home sooner,  including through the First Home Loan Deposit Scheme, First Home Super Saver  Scheme and HomeBuilder Scheme.

We are also leveraging the retirement income system to improve supply through the  downsizer contribution, which allows people aged over 65 to contribute up to  $300,000 to superannuation if they sell their home.

6 - The system is complex and we all need to do more to help Australians make  better decisions

While these key findings are overwhelmingly positive, the Review also found that  complexity, low financial literacy and limited guidance means too many Australians  don’t plan for their retirement or make the most of their savings when in retirement.

Further, many are also not aware of the extensive support they receive from  Governments once in retirement, such as through health and aged care services.

The Review considers these factors to be a driver of conservative spending  behaviours and misconceptions around how much savings Australians need in  retirement to sustain their standard of living.

Improving retirees’ understanding of the retirement income system can assist them to  make better use of their retirement savings and improve their living standards in  retirement - without sacrificing their living standards during their working life.

This will continue to be an area of focus for the Government.

This is also why the Government’s Retirement Income Covenant is an important  reform to the system. The Covenant will establish a requirement for superannuation  trustees to develop a retirement income strategy for members.  In doing so, the  Covenant will require superannuation funds to consider the retirement income needs  of their members and how they can assist them to get the most out of their  accumulated savings over the course of their retirement.



It is a system that must carefully weigh a series of trade offs  While the Review’s key findings should rightly give us all confidence about the  outcomes that the system is delivering as a whole, it also makes clear the difficult  trade-offs that are at the core of the system.

These trade-offs represent the key choices that both individuals and Governments  must make.  And like all trade-offs, there are competing interests that need to be  weighed.

The retirement income system is by definition, designed to provide retirement  incomes. But the system cannot solely be about maximising income in  retirement.  Were it to seek to do so, it would clearly come at considerable expense to  individuals during their working lives.

The Review rightly outlined that the system should help people balance their lifetime  income. This means balancing the trade-offs between income in someone’s working  life and in retirement.

In this respect, the Review highlighted the trade-off between the superannuation  guarantee and wages.

Drawing on overwhelming international and Australian evidence including  independent analysis from the ANU, the Grattan Institute and the RBA, the review  conclusively stated that a higher superannuation guarantee means lower wages for  employees.

Specifically, the Review stated “the weight of evidence suggests the majority of  increases in the superannuation guarantee come at the expense of growth in wages.”

No-one should be surprised by this or find it controversial. It was part of the original  policy design of the superannuation system.

As I have said previously, this is not rocket science, anybody who denies that there is  a trade-off is effectively a “flat-earther”.

The Review found that increases to the superannuation guarantee boost retirement  income, but that this comes at the expense of working-life income.

For a median earner, increasing the superannuation guarantee could increase their  retirement income by $33,000, but lower their working-life income by around  $32,000.

Given the compulsory nature of superannuation, this is a trade-off that the system  imposes, not one which individuals can choose for themselves.

Were it not for compulsion, it would be a matter for each individual to decide how  much of today’s income they are prepared to save for their retirement.

It is simply not true, as some would have us believe, that there is virtually no limit to  how high the superannuation guarantee can be increased in the name of delivering  ever higher retirement incomes.

Indeed, for some, there isn’t a problem that cannot be solved through a higher rate of  compulsory superannuation.

These myths do nothing to help Australians plan for retirement, to feel more  confident or to be more secure in their retirement.

Indeed, as the Review noted, the people most affected by high default settings are not  the most-well off: “People with lower incomes are particularly vulnerable when  compulsory savings rates are set too high”, noting that it “could increase pressure on  lower-income earners during working life through lower incomes”.

This important observation sits alongside a key finding of the Review with respect to  superannuation, which is that “If people efficiently use their assets, then with the SG  rate remaining at 9.5 per cent, most could achieve adequate retirement incomes when  combined with the Age Pension. They could achieve a better balance between their  working life and retirement incomes.”

This is why, as the Prime Minister and I have said, we must rightly carefully consider  the implications of the legislated increase to the superannuation guarantee before 1  July this year - even more so at a time when our economy is recovering from the  largest economic shock since the Great Depression.

The Review also identified the trade-off between flexibility and compulsion.

The Review noted that our system has considerable flexibility if you want to save  more for your retirement. But there is very limited flexibility if a person needs to save  less to maintain their quality of life today.

The COVID-19 early release of superannuation scheme was an example of how  greater flexibility can benefit those that need it.

Recognising the trade-offs, we gave Australians the choice of increased flexibility,  allowing them to access their savings when they needed them most.

And the scheme improved their lives. The ABS Household Impact survey showed  that for around 80 per cent of people, the main use of the funds was to pay for bills,  mortgages or add to savings.

Early release of superannuation in many cases allowed people to stay in their homes,  keep their kids in school and provide for their families during an exceptionally  challenging period in their lives.

And, as the Review found, because of our robust multi-pillar system even a person  who accessed the maximum $20,000 today will still have an adequate income in  retirement.

While compulsion will remain an important part of our system, providing Australians  with more flexibility should not be seen as an attempt to undermine the system  overall. Far from it.

The earlier Australians interact with the system the more engaged they will be and the  more ownership they will feel over their own savings.

More flexibility also means better accommodating the many different circumstances  Australians finds themselves over the course of their lives - whether it be their

working patterns, taking time off to raise children or deciding to make catch up  contributions at a time that their financial circumstances allow.

This is why we have introduced several changes over recent years to provide greater  flexibility and allow Australians to make the most of their circumstances and better  balance their working life income and their retirement income.

These changes have included allowing Australians with balances under $500,000 to  make ‘catch-up’ contributions, enabling the self-employed and others to claim tax  deductions for their personal superannuation contributions, and allowing Australians  aged 65 and 66 to make voluntary superannuation contributions without meeting the  Work Test.

The Government will always be very sceptical of those who, in pursuit of their own  self-interest, would seek to restrict the legitimate choices Australians should have  about how they choose to save for their own retirement.



Better use of superannuation savings critical to higher retirement incomes

The Review made clear that how retirees use their superannuation savings in  retirement has a significant impact on their retirement income and therefore their  quality of life in retirement.

Overwhelmingly, retirees currently do not spend all their superannuation before they  die.  This is despite the fact that retirees today have not benefitted from a mature  superannuation system their whole working life.

The Review shows that if nothing changes, by 2060, one in every three dollars paid  out of superannuation will be part of a bequest.  This raises the question as to  whether the answer to lifting the retirement incomes of Australians is more  superannuation savings or better guidance about how to maximise their  superannuation savings during their retirement.

This question is all the more important given the trade-offs from higher contributions  I have outlined above.

Drawing from the analysis in the Review, Treasury has estimated that at the current  superannuation guarantee rate, using superannuation efficiently could increase the  median person’s income in retirement by over $100,000 compared to how people  typically draw down on their superannuation now.

To illustrate how significant this finding is, the Review also assessed the impact on  retirement incomes of the superannuation guarantee rate increasing to 12 per cent,  but the same median income earner only drawing down on their superannuation at  the current typical rates.  In this scenario, the person would only receive $7,000 in  additional retirement income over their retirement despite having foregone more of  their working life income.

It is clear that giving more confidence and guidance to retirees to assist them in  drawing down on their superannuation savings more effectively is critically important.

This is perhaps the key challenge that the Review has highlighted and which we must  collectively solve.  There are few more effective ways to improve the quality of life for  Australians in retirement than to help them make better financial decisions.  This is an  area that the Government will look to do more and I look forward to engaging with  all of you on this critical task.



Continued superannuation reform key to higher retirement incomes

The efficiency of the superannuation system is vital to the retirement outcomes it  delivers Australians.  Under a compulsory system supported by important tax  incentives, it is incumbent on the Government to ensure that members and taxpayers  are getting value for money from the system.

The Government has successfully implemented major reforms to the system over  recent years that will see substantial savings flow to Australians.

These reforms have included fee caps on low balance superannuation accounts,  banning exit fees and requiring insurance to be offered on an opt-in basis in certain  circumstances where it would otherwise result in an unwarranted erosion of member  balances.

The Government has also legislated reforms to allow the ATO to proactively reunite  lost and unclaimed super balances held by the ATO with an individual’s current active  account.  As of December 2020, the ATO has proactively consolidated $3.7 billion  held in unintended multiple accounts on behalf of almost two million Australians.

As the Review highlights, adequate retirement outcomes are also a product of the  returns Australians earn on their savings.  Those returns are a function of the  performance their superannuation fund delivers and the costs of delivering that  performance.

That is why the Government is focussed on ensuring Australians’ hard earned  superannuation savings are working harder for them.  As many in this room will be  aware, the Your Future, Your Super reforms announced in the Budget stand to boost  the retirement savings of millions of Australians, with Treasury estimating a total  benefit to members of $17.9 billion over 10 years.

Treasury estimates young workers entering the workforce could be up to $98,000  better off at retirement because of these reforms.

Eliminating expenditure that is not in the best financial interests of members,  preventing the creation of unintended multiple accounts, driving down fees and  holding funds to account for poor performance represents the only “free lunch”  when it comes to increasing the retirement incomes of all Australians.



Closing remarks

To conclude, the comprehensive review of Australia’s retirement income system tells  us that we have much to celebrate.

Our system produces adequate retirement incomes for the vast majority of  Australians, and it does so in a way that is fiscally sustainable in the long term.

As our population ages, as we live longer and our retirement patterns change, I am  confident that the pillars of the system will continue to provide effective support to  Australian retirees.

But as the Review highlights, there is scope to improve the system and to continue to  challenge ourselves with respect to the key trade-offs at the core of the system.

The work of the Review now provides the evidence base to have these discussions  and to consider what more we need to do to improve the system and ultimately help  more Australians more effectively balance their lifetime incomes.

Ends.

