





THE HON MELISSA PRICE MP  Minister for Defence Industry  Member for Durack



MEDIA RELEASE



PERTH BRAKING BUSINESS WINS SUPERCHARGED EXPORT GRANT



25 February 2021



Ground-breaking brake technology developed by a Perth business is set to increase in  prominence on the world stage after the Morrison Government awarded the company a  $240,000 grant aimed at boosting its export capability.

Minister for Defence Industry Melissa Price today announced Advanced Braking  Technology (ABT), based in Wangara, as the recipient of a Defence Global  Competitiveness Grant.

The company is the first to receive a Defence Global Competitiveness Grant since the  Government increased its value from $150,000 to $240,000 and reduced an applicant’s  co-contribution rate from 50 per cent to 20 per cent.

The increase was part of the Government’s support to defence industry as it navigated  the COVID-19 pandemic and is evidence of the Government’s continued backing of  Australian defence industry to pursue opportunities in global markets.

“Advanced Braking Technology is a global and trusted provider of braking technologies  in the mining, civil construction, and most recently the defence sectors,” Minister Price  said.

“Its Australian designed, developed, and manufactured system, Failsafe, is a market  and technology leader.”

The company’s recent work with Thales on the Hawkei Protected Mobility Vehicle has  provided an opportunity for it to diversify outside the mining and resource industries.

The $240,000 grant will be used by ABT to purchase a specialised computer-controlled  machine, known as a CNC machine, to manufacture heavy vehicle brake mechanism  components.

This will provide ABT with an opportunity to compete globally following changes to  international standards in brake mechanisms.

“ABT here in Perth is one of the great success stories of advanced manufacturing,  delivering cutting edge capability to the ADF and delivering jobs for Australia,” Minister  Price said.

“This grant will allow ABT to pursue international defence sector opportunities,  particularly with NATO countries.”

The Defence Global Competitiveness Grant Program has supported more than 40  Australian small and medium businesses pursue opportunities in global markets and  boost their export capability.

“This program is a key part of the Morrison Government’s plan to increase export  opportunities and grow Australia’s defence industry and economy,” Minister Price said.

“We recognise that export success is a win for industry, a win for Defence and a win for  the Australian economy.”

Companies can apply for the program at any time through www.business.gov.au/dgc.



Media contacts  Ben Spencer (Minister Price’s office): +61 412 754 310  Steve Kuper (Minister Price’s office): +61 421 668 874  Defence Media: media@defence.gov.au

