

STEPHEN JONES MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES AND SUPERANNUATION

MEMBER FOR WHITLAM





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

MICHAEL J BAILEY SHOW, 4RO ROCKHAMPTON

FRIDAY, 19 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECT: The silent crisis facing older workers.



MICHAEL BAILEY, HOST: The silent crisis facing older workers, it’s just ridiculous. Twenty

percent of older workers are jobless. That's one in every five workers. And it's discrimination at

its worst. Because I mentioned this earlier on this morning, and I'm pleased to announce that

we’ve got Stephen Jones because here's the Shadow Assistant Treasurer and Shadow Super

Minister. He's online, good morning to you Stephen. How are you mate?



STEPHEN JONES, SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER: Really good to be with you mate,

really good.



BAILEY: Yeah look, the silent crisis facing older workers. And it's pretty sad that when job

networks aren't working for the older people, are they? Because you know why? They're full of

young kids and they're looking for young kids. They just give the over 50s the flick. Why is

that?



JONES: It really does for them like the system’s stacked against older workers. It seems like

once they hit their mid 50s, early 60s, they’re seen to be redundant. They’re the first out the

door when there's a downturn. It takes them twice as long to get another job, if I can find

another job at all. And I think we've got to break this cycle. The first step is putting a spotlight

on the problem. One in five Australians aged 55 to 64 is jobless. We need to look right across

every area of government policy, but also deal with discrimination, deal with the fact that these

people are being discriminated against in the workplace and in the labour market. We're got to

break through. We can't be throwing people on the scrap heap once they hit that dangerous

zone of 55 to 64. We've got to do something about. It it's a huge waste of skills and

experience.



BAILEY: And you know what it's not just the males, it's also the females. And I'm surprised

you're saying fifty upwards. Because I know of so many people around this region, once they

hit 40, it's so hard. They're doing 2,000 job applications, and they're still being knocked back

because of these job networks, you know. It's as though you shouldn't put your age down

because soon as you do, they just put you in the too hard basket.



JONES: Yeah, I think that's right. I've been talking to people around the country telling me

exactly the same story. Ss soon as they put their age down, they stop getting any inquiries.



They don't put their age down and the year they left school on job applications because they

know it will work against them. And I think the first step we've got to do here is send a

message to employers, to business, that old doesn't mean redundant. It means experienced. It

means skilled. It means you've got a wealth of life experience. You're probably good at

managing your time. You're certainly not going to have your head turned by what's happening

next Saturday night out. You’re more likely to be a long-serving loyal employee, and all of

those assets that come with being an older worker need to be considered. But there's a job of

work for Government here as well.



BAILEY: Yeah, well, this is what I'm going to say to you Stephen Jones. Are you talking hot air

or have you actually got a plan to make it compulsory? That older people have a crack at jobs

and you know, especially with these job networks?



JONES: Look I think there's a bunch of things we need to do. Let's just look at the immediate.

In about a month's time the Government’s going to bounce everybody on JobSeeker payments

back to $40 a day. The reason they are saying they're doing that, the crisis is over. I say it not.

And they say that people are on unemployment benefits only for a short period of time until

they get the job, the next job. The fact is if you're an older worker, you're unemployed for twice

as long as a younger worker, if you're able to get back into the workforce at all. $40 a day is

not enough.



Second thing, drop this idea of cutting people’s super. It's just crazy. That's, if people are going

to be retired for longer, they need more money. Now, let's look at what we can do to get people

into jobs. We're going to overhaul the Job Network to ensure that it's working and there are

more specialist providers for older workers. There's a job of work for Government, which is a

significant employer as well. They should be a model employer when it comes to older workers

and ensuring that they are leading by example, ensuring that they're not giving the older

workers in their workplace to flick, that they're not the first out the door whenever there's a

restructure and we've seen that many, many times. But I'll tell you what, there is another thing

that came to my attention a couple weeks ago when I was talking to some workers about this.

They said they work in the care services, they are working in social services area. Typically

their job, the Government tenders for two years. Their job comes up every two years. And they

found that so often when their job was re-rendered, they didn't get picked up by the new

employer. Same job. Same work. But they didn't get picked up, somebody younger than them

got picked up when the Government Tender was put out again. There's got to be something

we can do in that area as well.



BAILEY: You got to scratch your head when that's having on front of your eyes and you can't

change anything. Look at the end of the day, you know for people who are looking for work,

maybe they should come to Central Queensland because our vacancy rate in houses and

units is 0.2. And there are businesses screaming, try and get a plumber try and get an

electrician.  And there are so many roadworks coming our way. There's going to be a lot of,

you know, new people coming into town. And I've got a feeling we're going to see people be

living in caravans and back streets because there's just no vacancies around this great region

of ours. I mean, it's a real boom and bust at the moment, isn't it?



JONES: It is. I tell you what, I live in a regional area too. I spent a few years down in the big

smoke in Sydney, but I wouldn't go back. It’s a great place to visit, but I don't want to live there,

I love living in regional areas. And yeah there are great opportunities there, there's no doubt

about that. I know that a lot of people in this age group aren't as mobile perhaps as a younger

worker might be. They might have a house and it’s half paid off, or they may have a house

that's fully paid off and a partner, a husband or a wife, who is tied to where they live because of

work or they might have caring responsibilities. Here’s something that surprised me, a



significant group in that one and five have had to leave work early because they're caring for a

partner who's had a tragic accident, or they’ve had a health crisis or something like that.



BAILEY: I hear it time and time again, Stephen. I hear it time and time again. And I hear that a

lot of other the older generation are taking in boarders just to survive, to pay their rates. It's just

a crazy what's happening in one of the luckiest countries in the world. Covid free. Jobs galore,

but we still have this poverty that's sort of in the back room picking out all the time. Mate, I wish

you all the best of luck. I don't know what you're going to do. I mean you just have to push

forward don't you?



JONES: You do, and I want to thank you for helping us put a spotlight on it. Because if we

don't talk about it, everybody think the problem doesn't exist. So we've got to talk about it.

That's the first step to getting the solutions in place.



BAILEY: Okay. Well, I hope you and your team can actually sit down and give us some

solutions. I think we've been talking about it for far too long, Would you not agree?



JONES: Yeah, I agree. we actually need to get some of these issues but into place. And I’ve

put forward about five suggestions this morning. Let’s start working on them.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: TOM IGGULDEN 0448 081 191



