





ED HUSIC MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDUSTRY AND INNOVATION

MEMBER FOR CHIFLEY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS

THURSDAY, 28 JANUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Labor’s Shadow Ministry reshuffle.



KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: Let's go live to Sydney now and the newly appointed

Shadow Minister for Industry and Innovation Ed Husic. Thanks for your time Ed

Husic. Were you pleased with the change? You welcomed it?



ED HUSIC, SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDUSTRY AND INNOVATION: Thanks

Kieran. It's a huge change and I'm very grateful for the chance to be in an area that

I have had a very long-term interest in. It's all about jobs, not just for now, but

getting ready for the jobs that we think will emerge in the future. Strengthening the

ways that businesses operate again not just now but looking down the track. We

always need businesses to move with the times and be able to grow and provide

even more employment for people.



So industry and innovation has got a big role to play there. But it is with a degree of

sadness, leaving the agriculture and resources portfolios, because I absolutely

loved my time, albeit a very short period of time in those areas. Because I have

massive respect for the contribution that both agriculture and resources make to

the nation and to its economy. I've been so grateful for the warmth that was

extended to me by stakeholders in those industries. I think it's good for

parliamentarians across the board to learn more about these vital sectors. I was

super grateful for the chance to be able to spend some time with some terrific

contributors to our economy.



GILBERT: When you look at this, your portfolio, the Shadow Minister for Industry

and Innovation and Richard Marles Shadow Minister for Reconstruction, Science

and Jobs, there's a fair bit of overlap. How does that work in your mind?



HUSIC: I think if you look at the course of the last 12 months and the massive

pressure that COVID has put on the economy. The fact that we've got 2 million

people either unemployed or underemployed in the country, the fact that we need

to rethink the way that we obtain products, goods and services. We've been

relying, as people have observed, on just a few countries providing us with a lot of

the goods that we require. What can we do in terms of boosting manufacturing and

in particular, high end advanced manufacturing in this country? How much can we

produce on Australian shores rather than offshoring a lot of economic activity and

business activity?



So we do need a number of people across portfolios working together and so I

welcome the chance to be able to do that. Particularly in terms of industry and

applying new ways of doing things, and obviously, the innovation side of things has

got an important role to play there. So it's a good chance to be able to connect with

a number of people and work with a common view as to how we think the economy

should shape itself up into the future and the type of jobs that we can generate.

Secure and better paying jobs longer term.



GILBERT: Does it also risk overlapping responsibilities here as well, in terms of

say you look at Richard Marles, it's very much economic focused. Does it dilute the

authority of the Shadow Treasurer for example?



HUSIC: Not at all. I think if you see what Jim's doing in the Shadow Treasurer role

in terms of not just holding the government to account but encouraging them to

think differently about the way that they shape up economic policy. Especially with

respect to the critical elements of the recovery process and the supports that have

been put in place through the course of the pandemic, specifically JobKeeper.

You've seen the type of work that Jim has undertaken there to make sure that the

government doesn't arbitrarily remove a key support like JobKeeper just for the

sake of meeting a headline as is the want of this government.



They'd rather chase the headlines than do the hard policy yards and ensure that

there are supports there that keep the economy in a better or stronger position

than prematurely withdrawing those supports. I think you've got Jim in that role and

you've got a number of us thinking about what we can do to support industry now

and into the future. It's not just in terms of the economy or industry, it's trade as

well. All these have got to work together very closely and synchronise. I think

you've got that opportunity there in the way that Anthony has thought through

putting people on the front line working together. Because it is going to take a team

approach given the challenge and the impact that COVID has had on our economy

and also economies overseas that we trade and deal with.



GILBERT: Now I know you've just taken on this role, but as you mentioned earlier

in the interview you've had a long-standing interest in the tech front.



HUSIC: Yeah.



GILBERT: So when it comes to these challenges with Google and Facebook, but

Google today with the ACCC releasing this report on its advertising dominance.

How do you see the way to sort of level the playing field here with these tech

giants not just in news media but more broadly advertising as we see today?



HUSIC: I think the big thing that drives them and the reason they grow is because

of their access to data and the way that's used. So I think everyday people are

becoming a lot more alive and alerted to the fact that their data and the way that

it's used, the way it's obtained, the way it might go to third parties and the way that

it's forced or encouraged and accelerated the growth of these firms, that's a big

issue. The way that the firm's might basically snuff out competition as well by

acquiring them, that's a big issue in terms of competition law. Obviously in the area

of the media and its long-term survival, that's very important. Though I've got some

concerns about the way that the government's shaped up its response to this

issue.



I think tech does a lot of great things in terms of enabling us to do things differently.

But it's got a massive deflationary impact and it's probably had a big impact in

terms of keeping wages low longer term and automation and the role of jobs. So

there's a whole stack of things here that need to be thought of longer term. We

want the benefits of tech, but not at the expense of the broader economy and

being able to find the midway point is very crucial.



GILBERT: Indeed and I guess that's the whole issue about the next generation of

jobs as well, that so many of our students today, universities and certainly those

younger, will be entering fields that aren't even in existence yet.



HUSIC: Yes, I'm deeply concerned about the fact that we need to have very strong

support for research and development in this country, because it's going to think

through the new ways businesses operate into the future. So making sure that we

have that support there is important and fortunately the government backed down

on its insane proposal to get rid of the way in which the R&D tax incentive operated

in this country. We do need to make sure that people are skilled up for work into

the future as well. I am concerned that Australian Business relative to overseas

counterparts don't invest in technology to the same level and we can't afford to be

left behind. I am concerned that we don't have a national approach for emerging

technologies like artificial intelligence, that really are going to generate an

economic bonanza for a lot of other countries.



They've understood full well Kieran that they need to invest in this space and we

are just dragging our feet there. I mean, there are all these pieces that we do need

to think through and we need to look after people that are affected by technological

change in work right now. We need businesses and governments to think through

that stuff as well and just not leave it as an afterthought as to what impact

technology has on employment. There's a whole stack of stuff there that we do

need to have a much broader and much more cohesive approach to the way that

we deal with technology in the economy. I think that'll be a big focus, apart from

the fact of what we do with respect to the impact of COVID on our economy. These

are the type of things we need to think deeply about.



GILBERT: With the shift of Mark Butler to health and Chris Bowen of the right

faction into climate and emissions, are you worried that will see voters, traditional

Labor voters included, think that Labor has lost its commitment to dealing with

climate change?



HUSIC: Absolutely not. I think someone like Chris Bowen, who thinks deeply about

these issues, who recognises the importance and recognises the challenge, having

been in an economic portfolio in times past, recognises the importance of us

having a climate change response that not only deals with emissions, but

generates jobs as well. This can be a jobs bonanza for the country if we get this

right. It can also, by ensuring that we have some sort of coherent energy policy,

which we don't have right now. Frankly we've had a government that has

attempted over 20 times to bring in an energy policy.



Manufacturers need access to efficiently generated, competitively priced energy

and Chris Bowen will get that. As Anthony described in his press conference, when

you look at Mark Butler's background and the fact that he's thought deeply about it.

Either he's been in the mental health portfolio previously, written extensively and

thought extensively about the impact of ageing on Australian society in the

economy and the fact that he will be able to move into that health portfolio quite

easily is very important. I think the other thing, I might make this observation too

Kieran, politicos who will look at this in very minute detail, compare and contrast.



The Morrison Government talked up that they'd do a big shuffle and it was a

pipsqueaks reshuffle being very minor. People would have suggested that Anthony

Albanese either mirror that or not take on big moves because reshuffles are very

difficult to pull off and complicated things to manage. He has moved forward with

confidence, with certainty and a determination to ensure that we've got a

frontbench that can take it up to the government in what is being widely considered

as a potential election year. I think the contrasts are pretty big and Albo's basically

said nah we're going to put forward a team that we think will put us in a good place

and will take the fight up to the government. So I think that reflects a lot on his

confidence and strength in being able to put forward the reshuffle in the way that

he has.



GILBERT: The newly appointed Shadow Minister for Industry and Innovation, Ed

Husic. Thank you talk to you soon.



HUSIC: Good on ya KG.



ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: RYAN MAHON 0498 380 627





