

The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

The Hon Barnaby Joyce MP  Federal Member for New England



The Hon Melinda Pavey MP  NSW Minister for Water, Property and Housing

The Hon Kevin Anderson MP  State Member for Tamworth



MEDIA RELEASE

The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au



Friday, 5 February 2021

CONTRACT AWARDED FOR NEXT STAGE IN CRITICAL PEEL  WATER SECURITY PROJECT

The Australian and New South Wales Governments are taking the next step in safeguarding the water  security of the Tamworth region, with the formal awarding of a contract to undertake the detailed  design and construction of a new replacement pipeline link between Dungowan village and Tamworth.

The pipeline is part of a large program of work the two governments are carrying out to upgrade and  build new infrastructure to boost water supply in rural and regional areas that were devastated during  the 2019-20 drought.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack welcomed the announcement.

“The replacement of the Dungowan pipeline is an essential piece of early infrastructure that is critical  to Tamworth’s current water supply network,” Mr McCormack said.

“Importantly, it will also eventually be part of the network to transport water from the proposed new  Dungowan Dam to the city of Tamworth.

“If built, these projects will increase the resilience of local water supplies and the capacity to meet the  demands of Tamworth and the Peel Valley’s agricultural industries.”

New South Wales Minister for Water, Property and Housing Melinda Pavey said the contract had been  awarded to MPC Kinetic, an accomplished water infrastructure deliverer that successfully constructed  the new 18.2-kilometre pipeline from Chaffey Dam to Dungowan village.

“Despite recent rainfalls providing some relief to these regions, the need to plan for future drought  events remains paramount,” Mrs Pavey said.

“The Tamworth community and farm families along the Peel River have not forgotten the pain they  experienced due to the prolonged drought and severe water insecurity endured in the years up to the  end of the summer of 2019-20, when Chaffey dam fell as low as 13 per cent capacity.

“It is critical that we use the time we have now to plan for and build the infrastructure needed to  ensure that these communities have a more secure and reliable water supply and have better  protection for future drought events.”

Federal Member for New England Barnaby Joyce said securing the services of a firm familiar with the  region, its water network and local communities will help ensure the economic benefits from the  project are realised more quickly.

”I’ve been driving this project forward and am pleased it is taking its next step,” Mr Joyce said.

“Around 30 local businesses are expected to be engaged by MPC Kinetic to help deliver these works  and we anticipate up to 70 local jobs will be created throughout the project

“This will provide much-needed employment and a boost to the local economy as it continues to  recover from the impact of drought and COVID-19.”

New South Wales Member for Tamworth Kevin Anderson said the preliminary design of the new  pipeline has begun, while the detailed design is expected to be completed in parallel with the  finalisation of the business case for the proposed Dungowan dam, in late 2021.

“The new pipeline is an example of the works at Dungowan that can proceed while the dam proposal  is being assessed for approval by the NSW and Commonwealth governments,” Mr Anderson said.

“These early works are required in their own right - and will also serve as a critical foundation building  block to enable streamlined delivery of the major construction phases once the dam project is  approved.”

The pipeline is part of the New Dungowan Dam project, which is being jointly funded by the Australian  and NSW Governments.

Ends.

Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Jo Williamson 0418 475 668 | Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Minister Pavey - Jessica Cole 0437 399 849



