JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

HOBART

MONDAY, 18 JANUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Home Care Package Waitlist; Morrison Government’s aged care failures.



JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS: In October 2019 the

Royal Commission went to the trouble of making three interim recommendations. The very first

recommendation was for the Government to fix the home care waiting list. The fact that there

are still 100,000 older Australians, including 2,600 Tasmanians, waiting for care that they need

now, that they have been approved for, is simply outrageous. It's clear this Government hasn't

done enough.



When we see over 100,000 older Australians waiting for home care, more than a year after the

Royal Commission's recommendation, what faith, what trust does it give us in the current

Government about when the Royal Commission’s final recommendations come down at the

end of February?



I think all Tasmanians, and indeed all Australians, will be very concerned about whether or not

the Federal Government is taking its own Royal Commission into Aged Care seriously when

you've got 100,000 older Australians still waiting for care. And we know the impact that it has.

We know the impact it has on them, their loved ones, it means they can't plan. It means that

you're telling people in their 90s with a terminal illness they have to wait two years for a home

care package. It is simply not tenable.



The Government needs to do more, and it needs to do it quickly. It cannot continue to wait for

the Royal Commission’s final recommendations at the end of February. It should be doing

everything it can now to ensure that older Australians are getting the care they need when they

need it. 30,000 older Australians died waiting for care in three years. Another 30,000 went into

residential care or into hospital when they didn't need to or they didn’t want to because they

could not get the care they need at home.



JOURNALIST: Is this a clear failure by the Government?



COLLINS: It’s absolutely a very clear failure by the Government. What we get is flashy

announcements. A bit of splash, you know, the government pretending that it's done

something but we've had over 100,000 older Australians now waiting for care consistently for

two years. For more than two years. The fact that the Royal Commission's recommendation,

interim recommendation, was to fix the home care waitlist and here we are more than a year

later with still 100,000 older Australians waiting is not good enough.



JOURNALIST: Should the Government fast track the home care packages? And if so how do

how do they do that?



COLLINS: What the Federal Government needs to do is to take this crisis seriously. We've

sadly seen 685 older Australians die in residential care, we know the demand for home care is

going continue to grow. We know that older Australians prefer to stay at home, that has

become very apparent. The Government needs to have a solution to deal with this demand. It

clearly is not looking at it seriously. And drip feeding 10,000 packages here and there, which is

essentially just a bring forward from the forward estimates is not good enough.



JOURNALIST: What does Labor think is the solution?



COLLINS: They are in government. They've been in government for nearly eight years. This

wait list has blown out under the current Government. The current Government called a Royal

Commission. The very first recommendation was to fix this and more than a year later it has

not. It is a monumental failure by this Government and Prime Minister Morrison that they have

not fixed it.



JOURNALIST: So what should they do now? What should the Government be doing right

now?



COLLINS: It needs a comprehensive plan to deal with the home care waitlist. We have more

than a billion dollars of unspent funds. That is people that already have a package that are not

utilising it. We have 100,000 older Australians waiting for care that need it. They’re going into

residential care, which is more expensive or hospital, which is more expensive still, rather than

getting their home care. It needs to be fixed.



JOURNALIST: So we've got people who have been approved, but aren't able to access the

package. So where's the problem there?



COLLINS: Well, it's about the Federal Government not having a comprehensive plan to roll out

enough packages fast enough.



JOURNALIST: So are we talking about bureaucracy? Are we I mean, what is your

understanding of why it's not being rolled out fast enough, and what in material terms, what's

the holdup?



COLLINS: The holdup is that the Federal Government hasn't done enough work on workforce

to make sure that there are enough workers to deliver this and they haven't funded enough

packages.



JOURNALIST: So it's a question then of funding the workforce rather than packages?



COLLINS: It should have done both. It has a report on its desk about workforce that's two

years old. And not one of the recommendations has been fully completed. Not one.



JOURNALIST: And how important is care in the home you know, as opposed to residential

care or hospital care? What sort of a difference can that make to older Australians?



COLLINS: Well older Australians are clearly making a decision to stay at home. They want to

be in their local communities, they want to be where their friends are, where their family are,

where their networks are, where they're close to their pharmacy and their GP and the people

who are providing their care. People are clearly making a decision that they prefer to receive

care at home wherever that is possible. Now, clearly, that's not possible for all Australians. But

for those that it is possible for those that want to stay at home should be able to stay at home.





JOURNALIST: Just looking at aged care generally and in residential aged care, given some of

the evidence that we heard during the Royal Commission hearings about cost cutting,

particularly around areas like food. Do you think that it's really quite clear that aged care needs

to be run by states, needs to be run by the government rather than in the hands of private

companies who are really there to create a profit? Do you think that fundamentally, you can't

have private companies running age care effectively?



COLLINS: I think the first thing we need with aged care, and the Royal Commission is for the

Government to listen to the Royal Commission. The Royal Commission said the Government

didn't have a proper plan for COVID in April, it clearly didn’t and it pretended it did. The Royal

Commission has told the Federal Government to fix the home care waitlist, its first interim

recommendation. It has not done that more than a year later. When the Royal Commission

makes its final report in February, the Federal Government needs to listen to its Royal

Commission. They have spent a lot of time and energy talking to local people, talking to

experts about how the system should be fixed and the Federal Government needs to listen to

its Royal Commission.



JOURNALIST: I'm just wondering, I mean, schools aren't run by companies and hospitals

aren't run by companies or the public ones certainly aren't. So is it time that aged care goes

back into the responsibility of the state?



COLLINS: Well I think firstly, what we need to see is a lot more transparency and we've been

saying for a long time there's not enough transparency around where taxpayer funds go. We

need more transparency about where the money has been spent and that it's actually going to

provide care of older Australians. When you’re talking more than $20 billion a year goes

towards aged care, clearly we need more transparency about where those funds are going and

then I think we’ll have a better idea about what the system needs.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119

