



The Hon Stuart Robert MP  Minister for the National Disability Insurance Scheme  Minister for Government Services

MEDIA RELEASE





Authorised by S. Robert MP, Canberra

Wednesday, 3 February 2021

Support available for Western Australia bushfire affected regions

Disaster Recovery Payments have been declared for eligible people severely affected by bushfires  currently burning in Western Australia. This includes the Shire of Mundaring and the City of Swan.

The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) provides a one-off lump sum of  $1,000 for eligible adults and $400 for each eligible child under the age of 16.

AGDRP is available to eligible people whose homes have been severely damaged, or destroyed or who  have been seriously injured as a direct result of the fires.

People can also claim Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA), which is a short-term payment to help  those who have lost income as a direct result of a declared disaster. This is available for up to 13  weeks, starting from the date you lose income.

Minister for Government Services Stuart Robert encouraged affected residents to lodge a claim for  assistance from 8:00am AWST, Thursday 4 February 2021, by calling 180 22 66.

‘The fastest way to claim is over the phone by calling the Australian Government Emergency  Information Line on 180 22 66,’ Minister Robert said.

‘We know these communities are continuing to respond to the bushfire threat and want to reiterate that  there is no need to visit a service centre; please stay in a safe place and save time by claiming over the  phone.

‘I have directed Services Australia staff to be ready to begin processing claims as quickly as possible  to ensure people have money available to meet their immediate needs, we can provide all assistance  over the phone and in most cases we can make payments within minutes.

‘Given Western Australia is currently under tighter coronavirus restrictions, please do not visit  Services Australia service centres unless it is absolutely essential, call 180 22 66 to claim instead.’

The agency’s phone lines are open 8:00am to 5:00pm, local time Monday to Friday.

For more information on support available visit www.servicesaustralia.gov.au/disaster

[ENDS]  Media contact:  Minister Robert: Liam Jones - 0448 763 351

