









THE HON. CHRISTIAN PORTER MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Industrial Relations  Leader of the House



Media Release   Tuesday, 16th February, 2021  Government agrees to crossbench requests to amend IR Bill  As a result of ongoing consultation with members of the Senate crossbench, the Morrison Government will remove a proposed change to s189 of the Fair Work Act from its industrial relations reform Bill.  Attorney-General and Minister for Industrial Relations, Christian Porter, said the relevant amendment to the Fair Work Amendment (Supporting Australia’s Jobs and Economic Recovery) Bill, 2020, would be moved in the House of Representatives when debate resumes this week.  “This decision demonstrates the Government’s continued willingness to listen and work constructively with all members of the crossbench in order to negotiate a passage through the Senate for the very important changes in the five key reform areas contained within the Bill,” Mr Porter said.  “Removing the modest amendment to the s189 provision - a provision that Labor placed in the Fair Work Act in 2009 - also blows away the smokescreen that Labor has been hiding behind to justify its opposition to the wider package of reforms, including measures it knows will deliver greater protections for workers, help to re-grow jobs and drive up wage growth.  “What Anthony Albanese has demonstrated by his refusal to even talk to the Government about the Bill is that he is only concerned about protecting one job - his own.  “Why else would he oppose criminal penalties for wage theft; a clearer and stronger pathway for casuals to convert to permanent positions; giving part-time workers access to more hours, creating a small claims mechanism for workers to recover wage underpayments and; fixing the broken enterprise bargaining system - something even Paul Keating says is long overdue.  “Labor must now explain why it will oppose these common sense measures, which they have previously expressed public support for.”  The modest change to s189 would have potentially helped a very small number of businesses badly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic to work with their employees on restructuring arrangements to save both the business and jobs.









“Such agreements would have been subject to precisely the same safeguards that Labor placed in the  Fair Work Act when it gave the Fair Work Commission the ability to approve enterprise agreements  that do not meet the Better Off Overall Test in exceptional circumstances,” Mr Porter said.

“The reality is that the provision has only ever been used in very limited circumstances and where the  changes were genuinely agreed to by employees.

“Those agreements were also subject to the ultimate safeguard that the Fair Work Commission, as the  independent umpire, had to consider that approval was not against the public interest.

“The Government had merely sought to clarify Labor’s provision to ensure that the adverse impacts of  COVID-19 could be recognised as an exceptional circumstance.

“While we continue to believe this was a sensible and proportionate proposal in light of the current  challenges our economy is facing, we also understand that this measure had the potential to distract  from other elements of the package which will help employers and employees recover from the  economic impacts of the pandemic.

“It’s now time for Anthony Albanese to get on board with the Government and put the interests of  Australians ahead of his own political games and ambition.”

The Government’s amendment can be viewed here. It does not impact on the existing s189 provision  introduced by Labor, which will remain in the Fair Work Act.













Authorised by Christian Porter, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

