

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP  LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER

ALICIA PAYNE MP  MEMBER FOR CANBERRA



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  CANBERRA  THURSDAY, 28 JANUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Labor’s affordable childcare policy; importance of out-of-school-hours  care; Shadow Cabinet reshuffle; climate change; COVID vaccine roll-out; importance  of media organisations reaching the regions.

ALICIA PAYNE, MEMBER FOR CANBERRA: Good morning, everyone. My name is Alicia  Payne, the Member for Canberra. It is my great pleasure this morning to welcome our  Leader, Anthony Albanese, to the electorate and to the Majura Park Primary holiday  program run by the YWCA. We have just been having a fantastic game of pool noodle  hockey, not sure what the final result was but both sides played very well. We are here  today to talk about Labor’s plan to make child care more affordable for 97 per cent of  Australian families. Now this is a plan that is good for families, good for the economy and  good for our youngest Australians. Our plan will mean that as our economy recovers from  the pandemic, people will not be stopped from returning to work because of the cost of child  care. Here in Canberra we have the highest childcare fees in the country. And this is  something that my constituents talk to me about a lot, the fact that the decision to go back  to work, particularly for women, let’s face it, is often dominated by the high cost of child  care. This will mean that more women can go back to the workforce not constrained by that  choice. And it will make those conversations within families around the kitchen table a lot  easier when that high expense is taken out of it. It's also great for our youngest Australians  who benefit from the fantastic quality early childhood education and care that's offered  including in this program here by the YWCA, which is a holiday program, which would be  included in this scheme. So, it's my great pleasure to hand over to Anthony to talk more  about childcare. Thank you.

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Well, thanks  very much, Alicia. And it is great to be here at Majura Park. And I want to thank the YWCA  for hosting us here this morning. They do a great job, not just here in Canberra, but around  the country. And what we know as we near the end of school holidays is that vacation care  is so important for working families. And our childcare boost will assist those people not just  in early childhood learning centres, it will help those people who access out-of-school-hours

care. It will help those who access vacation care. The childcare subsidy is available for all  those who have children under the age of 13. And so this is a subsidy that will apply across  the board. And our proposal for cheaper childcare will assist parents, whether they be  working parents working for a five-day week, removing that disincentive to work the fourth  or fifth day which is in there. But it will also help those parents who access out-of-school-hours care. I know from personal experience it is so important. But it will also help here in  vocational care. There are some 355,000 families who use out-of-school-hours services.  Ninety-seven per cent of families will benefit from the policies that we have put forward. It's  a policy of economic reform. It's about boosting productivity. It's about boosting workforce  participation for women. It's also about assisting young people themselves. If we're going to  invest in education, there's nowhere better than in the under-fives. Because the human  brain development, 95 per cent of it occurs once children reach the age of five. So, we  know that investment in those early years is absolutely critical. I want to conclude with two  things. One is, thanks to my teammates in the pool noodle hockey this morning. I'm not  sure that you're allowed to use your feet, but there was no penalty called when the goal  was scored. And in terms of the people who work in centres like this, they deserve to be  valued. And during the pandemic, of course, we know that has been particularly important.  Happy to take questions on this issue. I will be holding another press conference later today  to deal with issues relating to the reshuffle. Happy to take questions.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).

ALBANESE: Well, I'll be talking about all of those issues later today. You'll have an  opportunity to ask questions there. This morning I want to talk about our early childhood  reforms. What this is was the centrepiece of our Budget Reply. I understand the  impatience, all of those questions will be answered. I've been the climate change  spokesperson. Can I say this? I regard it as an economic portfolio and therefore someone  who has been the Treasurer of Australia is eminently qualified to fill that role.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).

ALBANESE: No, absolutely. I'm absolutely committed to strong action on climate change.  I've been committed for a very long period of time. This is an issue that I raised. I wrote the  policy that Labor put in place from 2007 when we were in Government. I've been a climate  change and environment spokesperson. What we need is strong action on climate change,  which will be good for jobs, good for lowering emissions, and also good for lowering energy  prices.

JOURNALIST: Who will you be replacing Mark Butler within the portfolio?

ALBANESE: I will be making an announcement at an appropriate time later today in  Parliament House. You'll have every opportunity to ask every question. I am not going to  comment on speculation that is there. What you'll have is a full announcement of our  reshuffle.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).

ALBANESE: Well, I've been asked that many times. I've given the same answer. I refer  you to previous answers. We have a target of net zero emissions by 2050. I think that we  should have an ambitious policy when it comes to climate change. I think we can be a  renewable energy superpower. I think good climate change action is consistent with the

growth of jobs, as well as transforming our economy. I think that Australia at the moment is  isolated with the election of the Biden administration. And I think you'll see further changes  from the Government during the year. And that impacts, of course, because we won't be in  Government between now and the next few months. We will see what the Government's  response is to the actions of the Biden administration and their demand that their  international partners take stronger action on climate change.

JOURNALIST: The Party has been divided over the last 18 months over its climate and  energy policy. Is it time to send a clear message to your constituents about how Labor's  energy policy will work for both cities and regions?

ALBANESE: Well the fact is that, with a couple of exceptions, the Party isn't divided. The  Labor Party is a party that believes in action on climate change. We put that into practice  when we were in Government. We have a very consistent view across the board that  climate change is real. The Party that's divided on climate change is the other side. We saw  the National Party yesterday out there saying that there'd be new coal-fired power stations.  No-one in the Labor Party, no-one, is arguing there'll be new coal-fired power stations. No-one in the Labor Party doesn't understand that renewables are our future.

JOURNALIST: On the COVID vaccine, would you support Olympic athletes (inaudible)?

ALBANESE: My concern, and I had a briefing, and I thank the Head of the Department of  Health and the Acting Chief Medical Officer, I have been in a briefing this morning along  with Chris Bowen, our Health Shadow Minister, we had an extensive briefing, some of  which, when you have briefings like this on behalf of the Government, things that are  private stay private, that's the nature of the things. But it was very constructive. Can I say  this? That the priority has to be people who are vulnerable in our community rather than  athletes. The priority has to be people in aged care, people who are susceptible and  particularly vulnerable. That would be my priority, my first priority.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).

ALBANESE: Well, the relevant officials are confident that it won't. I certainly hope that's the  case. But one of the things that I raised and will continue to raise is the fact that world's  best practice is for five or six vaccines. In Australia we have three. And I again reiterate a  view that I've put, and Chris Bowen has put, that we need to be continuing to negotiate and  try and get access to vaccines such as Moderna. This is absolutely critical. We can't afford  to have all our eggs in too few baskets. We need to do that. And that's something that  we've said publicly, and we've said privately as well.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).

ALBANESE: We do need to address it. I value the work that you people as journalists do.  There's a real challenge to keep journalism going. I met with, for example, the WIN TV  executives down in the Illawarra at the end of the last year. I think it's a tragedy that my  local paper has disappeared, that regional papers have disappeared. The idea that you  wouldn't get specific news broadcasting, for example, in the regional communities is a real  issue. And of course, the media organisations need advertising revenue in order to do so.  We of course also support increased funding for the ABC and the restoration of their  funding in recognition of the important role that they play.



JOURNALIST: (Inaudible).

ALBANESE: Joel Fitzgibbon's comments are wrong. He's a backbencher. He's got a right  as a backbencher to make comments. But they don't reflect the overwhelming view of  people in the Labor Party. The overwhelming view of people in the Labor Party is that we  need strong action on climate change. That strong action is good for jobs, it's good for  lowering emissions, and it's also good for lowering energy prices. And what we've seen  from this Government is more than 20 policies, none of which have been implemented, they  don't seem to last too long. And what we have at the moment is a campaign within the  Coalition to change that policy again, and to say that the public sector taxpayers should be  subsidising coal-fired power stations. Because the markets have spoken. The markets are  saying the cheapest form of new energy investment overwhelmingly is renewables   and  that's where we expect it to go. Thanks very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053





