

THE HON KEN WYATT AM MP

Minister for Indigenous Australians  Member for Hasluck

TRANSCRIPT

6PR

1 February 2021



Topics: WA Covid Lockdown

E&OE…

Liam Bartlett Minister, good morning.

Ken Wyatt Good morning Liam, how are you?

Liam Bartlett I'm okay. Are you lonesome this morning? How many are in your shoes?

Ken Wyatt Actually all of our members and all of our staff, although we're working to have  our staff returned. So there's discussions occurring with the state government to get them  back so that they're not isolated and they can be isolated at home.

Liam Bartlett Fly them, fly them back to the west.

Ken Wyatt Yeah.

Liam Bartlett But how long will this go on for, Ken? What's the word?

Ken Wyatt Well, we've been told Friday night, nine o'clock is the time in which we will be free  to return. I've already had a test this morning early this morning, somebody came to my unit,  has done the COVID test and we then await the results. But there's ongoing discussions that  Michaelia Cash and the whips are having in terms of the circumstances that we can be  considered essential workers. Where we go direct to our office and have no interaction with  people, do our job and then come directly home.

Liam Bartlett Well, that's essentially what we're doing. Pardon the pun. I mean, I would have  thought you would have been in that boat anyway.

Ken Wyatt Yeah we are, because it's the English strain which makes it more virulent and  more of the concern. The state government's made the right decision. But for us, we were  mid-flight when I became interested in the using Sky News through Wi-Fi on the plane to  watch the presser that the Premier did. It's a pity we didn't know earlier because I wouldn't  have taken staff with me. I would have let them in Perth.

Liam Bartlett But well, the state government would have known late on Saturday night.

Ken Wyatt They would have. And they certainly gave that indication. I listened to Chris  Dawson this morning on 6PR, I use your app while I'm away and I heard Chris's comments

and the potential of 60 contacts by the individual concerned. So, but I'm confident with our  health system. I worked in W.A. Health and I worked with some outstanding colleagues who  work in public health was at the forefront. So I hope that it's effectively safe now.

Liam Bartlett Have any of your party, I say party, any of the other MPs had any contact with  the hot spots that have been announced?

Ken Wyatt Well, we all come. Most of us come from Perth or via Perth, and it was interesting  watching Patrick Dodson being interviewed yesterday. He said, had he have known he would  not have travelled from Broome to Canberra? He would have made the decision to stay at  home. I probably would have done the same. Had I known earlier.

Liam Bartlett But do you know if any of the other MPs have had particular hotspot contacts  in those areas around Maylands and the casino and that sort of thing?

Ken Wyatt No, look, I think most colleagues have sort of been around their electorates in  areas that I don't think the individual has gone to. But if they have, then they certainly would  have declared it to the people who are testing us this morning.

Liam Bartlett So it's interesting, isn't it? This is what hundreds of travellers have  experienced in the past months, except the other way round if they've found the rules  changed while they were in the air coming this way.

Ken Wyatt Yeah, they have. And I think the other thing that's hard is for those who will have  to self-isolate in capital cities that they've landed at their own expense for the 14 days. And  that becomes a challenge financially for people. So let's hope we get better systems in the  future where we can get information early and then make decisions or having the Premier  say to us, don't travel because we're about to make a major announcement, which is a  serious concern. It would have helped.

Liam Bartlett It would have helped enormously. It would have been different. Yeah. It's  interesting, isn't it, that timeline from Saturday night until the press conference yesterday,  which is around about 12.45,  quarter to 1:00 in the afternoon, so Minister just quickly, so  what will happen with federal parliament? You'll all get seconds with you or?

Ken Wyatt I'm not sure. We just waiting to see what is being negotiated. Sky News was  saying that arrangements have been made where we will be considered and deemed  essential workers, which means if that is the case, then we'll be in the same situation as you.  We will travel directly from our apartments or places of abode to the House, straight to our  office using the stairs and then, not meeting anybody at all, doing our work and then coming  home at the end of the day, directly back to our places of accommodation.

Liam Bartlett Right. Okay, I'm amazed that hasn't happened yet, but thanks very much for  having a chat to us this morning. We appreciate it.

Ken Wyatt You're welcome. And let's hope that we get on top of this as a state because  we've enjoyed a very privileged position and the freedoms that we have had.

Liam Bartlett We certainly have quite.



[ENDS]

Authorised by K. Wyatt, Member for Hasluck

