

CLARE O’NEIL MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR SENIOR AUSTRALIANS

AND AGED CARE SERVICES

FEDERAL MEMBER FOR HOTHAM





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

MELBOURNE, VICTORIA

MONDAY, 1 MARCH 2021



SUBJECTS: Aged Care Royal Commission Report; Reports to the AFP.



CLARE O’NEIL MP, SHADOW MINISTER FOR SENIOR AUSTRALIANS AND AGED CARE

SERVICES: The Aged Care Royal Commission Final Report, released by the Government

today, confirms to us that we have a system in national crisis. We heard today, from the Royal

Commission, that a third of people who are receiving services in aged care have received

substandard care at some stage. We heard that more than two thirds of residents today, in

residential aged care, are either malnourished or at risk of being malnourished. And, we know

that the frailest people living at home today are waiting the longest for the aged care packages

that they need.





Labor is really proud of its record on aged care. It's part of our DNA to care for Australians and

that's the approach that we take to these issues. We'll consider this final report really, really

carefully. And, on behalf of Labor, I want to thank the Commissioners for their public service

and their hard work for laying out, essentially, a roadmap for reform, for all of us.





I’m really concerned about what the Morrison Government is going to do with this report.

They’re very good at saying all the right things about how they respect older Australians and

then they go into a Cabinet Room and they slash and cut funding from this critical sector and

then look surprised when things go wrong. I find that very disingenuous. I'm really worried that

this will join the other 21 major reports that the Government has received during their time in

office. [Reports] which have told them some variation of the themes that came out in the final

report today.



What I would like to hear is less from Scott Morrison about his experience as a son of a person

receiving aged care services and more about the Prime Minister and what he is going to do

about this problem and, importantly, what he has done about this problem over the last five

years. The Interim Report title was ‘Neglect’ and it told us about the neglect of people in the

aged care system and the neglect of the Government of this crucial system.



Now, there are millions of Australians that rely on this system and there are millions more to

come. This Royal Commission final report does provide us a pathway forward, I am just very

concerned that the Morison Government is going to do what it's done so many other times -

put this on the shelf and make it look like they're doing something but not really actually

changing anything.



I want to say something briefly about the workers in this sector. There are 300,000 incredible

people, today, who are working in aged care. It is a predominantly female workforce and

speaking to these workers is a real experience. So many of these people went into aged care

because they want to care for others. And, I can tell you, it is emotionally harrowing for them to

have to go to work on many days and know that they cannot provide the care that they want to

because of the resource constraints around them. So, I want to say to those workers - this

report is a wake up call for the Government, they cannot continue to treat you like this and we

are calling for better. Happy to take any questions.



JOURNALIST: Just on the staff. I guess one of the recommendations was that staff have a

minimum level of training in line. What do you think about that?



O’NEIL:  Unfortunately, the Morison Government did not do the Opposition the courtesy of

providing us with this report before they essentially made a media announcement about it. So

I'm not going to comment today on the specifics of the report, other than to say that this is

something that we'll take really seriously and we need some time to digest what is an

enormous piece of work from the commissioners. So, I'll reserve comments on the specifics

until later.



JOURNALIST: Do you think there needs to be minimum nurse to patient ratios in the aged

care sector like there is the Victoria's public aged care sector?



O’NEIL: Again, we did not have the Royal Commission Report before the Prime Minister stood

up this afternoon. I understand the media are in the same position and, I think, just as

frustrated as we are. I would have liked to come out today and provided a bit more detail about

our response but, unfortunately, I'm not able to do that because of the choice the Government

has made about the timing of this report. What I will say is that we take this really seriously.

Aged care is part of our DNA in the Labor Party and we do want to see this sector fixed. And I

think you'll be able to trust Labor to do that.



JOURNALIST: But some of these themes about minimum nurse to patient ratios and also a

minimum staffing training has been an issue and has been raised over multiple years. What's

Labor's position on these?



O’NEIL: Again, I won’t repeat myself, for the good of the people watching, but I just can't

comment on the specifics of the Report. We literally just got a copy of it and so I was waiting to

have a chance to digest it I responded to it.



JOURNALIST: Is it disappointing to you that you haven't got it? That copies are just being

made of it?



O’NEIL: The Prime Minister's made a particular set of decisions about how he would release

the Report today, to do it late in the afternoon, to not give the Opposition the courtesy of a look

at the report before, which would normally be facilitated in some way. I'm really disappointed

about that. We want to have an actually constructive debate here and, instead, it looks like

playing politics again. So, I just really ask the Government, from here on in, if they're serious

about actually fixing this sector, it's got to be something that engages with everyone. That's not

the way they've conducted themselves today.



JOURNALIST: Greg Hunt has, I guess he's conceded that there is conflicting advice or

conflicting recommendations in the Report, are you worried that gives an out to the

Government on implementing some of the recommendations?





O’NEIL: It’s not for me to comment on why the Commissioners reached different

recommendations other than we've got two very esteemed people, who’ve looked at this over

a period of three years, and have come to different conclusions. I would be so angry if the

Government used that as some sort of excuse not to engage in proper reform and that would

be just continuing their record. So, what I really want to do is just ask the Government - you’ve

used many excuses in the past, please don't use them again and we've got a report here,

you've got a chance to make amends for eight years of funding cuts and neglect. We really

want to see the Government take that chance.



JOURNALIST: The Council on the Ageing described the evidence as overwhelming and

Morrison’s noted a five year timeframe to implement these recommendations from the findings.

Is there a danger here, in your view, that this will be delayed or that we'll have to wait for for

many of these things to take place?



O’NEIL: I think the the Commissioners have laid out a reform exercise, which is obviously

going to take a lot of time but I'd just say again to the Government, they've been in power now

for almost eight years, they've had plenty of chances to get this right. And, in fact, this is the

22nd report that the Government has had that has told us that this system is in national crisis.

The 22nd report. So, what I would say is enough of the excuses. We actually need to see

better standards of care and better outcomes for older Australians. That's the very least that

they deserve.



JOURNALIST: Do you think this is a bit of a tipping point for reform in the aged care industry

given, I guess, the COVID pandemic has affected a lot of people, but particularly in Victoria,

we saw the disproportionate impact on aged care residents, do you think this is the time when

governments will finally realise that the sector needs to be truly reformed?



O'NEIL: I hope, with all my heart, that the Government actually sees this as an opportunity to

do the right thing. After eight years of neglecting this sector, cutting $1.7 billion out of it, having

commissioned so many reports, and then not followed all of the recommendations, I think

there's a chance here for us to do the right thing and actually fix the problem. But, what I heard

from Scott Morrison today didn't give me, honestly, a lot of hope about this. I think he's said all



the right things about it but, remember, this is the person that cut funding to the sector and

then turned around, surprised, when standards slipped. So, I'm hopeful that things will change

but I’m watching very carefully of the Government's commitment to it.



JOURNALIST: Victoria’s Aged Care Minister, Luke Donnellan, this morning, said that, I guess,

the monetisation of aged care is essentially incompatible with high quality care. Do you think

the sector needs to be removed, that it no longer needs to be privatised and brought back into

the public sector?



O’NEIL: So, again, the Commissioners have touched on that in their final Report but Labor

needs some time and we take this really seriously. We're not going to get a report of literally

1000s of pages and then come out and respond an hour later. We do need time to take the

recommendations, to digest them, and really think about this carefully. So happy to respond to

that down the track.



JOURNALIST: I just had a final question. Different matter. Sarah Henderson said that she had

received a letter regarding, I guess, sexual assault allegations against a Labor MP. Have you

received similar complaints? And, do you think that particular Shadow Cabinet Minister needs

to step aside?



O’NEIL: I don't have any information about the complaint. I understand that Sarah Henderson

has referred this to police, as she should have done, but I'm not going to provide a comment

about a matter of which I have no knowledge.



JOURNALIST: Do you think he needs to be stood aside?



O’NEIL: I don't have any knowledge of this particular matter and I don't think that a rape claim

is something that someone should be commenting on if I don't have knowledge of the contents

of the letter. It wasn't sent to me. Sarah Henderson has sent it to police, as she ought to have

done.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JACOB KAHANE 0422 723 491



