

ED HUSIC MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES

MEMBER FOR CHIFLEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS

WEDNESDAY, 13 JANUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: China; Seasonal workers.



JULIE SNOOK, HOST: I'm now joined by Shadow Resources and Agriculture

Minister Ed Husic. Strong words there from Beijing, is this a good move by the

Government?



ED HUSIC, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE AND RESOURCES: Hi

Julie. Well, clearly we have flagged for some time that we'll be taking as a nation, a

closer look at foreign investment proposals, particularly through the course of the

pandemic so that we didn't have distressed assets as it were being swiped up by

overseas companies. So, that has been on the books for a while, but it's got to be

managed carefully. This is the whole thing overall about the relationship with

China, the Government has got to be - in making its moves - ensure that it is quite

open, transparent about the way that it's going about these things. Otherwise, it will

provoke the type of reactions that we get. But having said that, we are a sovereign

nation entitled to make decisions on foreign investment that we think work best in

the nation's interests.



SNOOK: $300 million is a big bid.



HUSIC: Yes, it was and when you look at it in terms of foreign investment itself, a

lot of the foreign investment that it happens to be of a big nature, big scale like this.

So, it's not surprising. But again, we need to think through the way in which these

things are done and to ensure that there is very little room for people who

suggested anything other than national interest drove our decision making.



SNOOK: Farmers now are calling for international borders to open to seasonal

workers saying they've already lost $38 million as a result of labour shortages.

Now the Federal Government said in August, it would bring in 22,000 workers from

the Pacific Islands, but industry bodies claim a lot of them are stuck in bottlenecks

trying to get through State and Territory quarantine. So, what's going wrong here?



HUSIC: The lack of labour, the shortages that are being experienced by the

agriculture sector, are very serious and it’s estimated 26,000 seasonal workers are

needed by March. The Federal Government - the Coalition - has been saying for

ages that they would fix it in response to calls by the agriculture sector to get this

sorted out. They said they'd bring in a National Agricultural Workforce Strategy.

Hasn't happened. They put forward the idea of an agriculture visa, that didn't get

off the ground. They said that they would, for instance, bring in a workers’ code

that will allow for free movement of agricultural workers across state borders. That

didn't stack up, the Chief Health Officers said it was unsafe and it went nowhere.



Finally, we were told that there are 22,000 Pacific Island workers that could come

in, they haven't come in and all we've seen out of David Littleproud, the Agriculture

Minister, is not problem solving but blame shifting. Pointing fingers at the States

and the States have, from what I understand, been concerned about the risk

assessments given that David Littleproud has not had a good record in making

sure that the health concerns line up with the ability to provide labour, and I think

this is a real problem. It is definitely something that is as a result largely of David

Littleproud being unable or unwilling to work with his state and territory

counterparts, regardless of their political background.



SNOOK: Should the Government be doing more to facilitate worker bubbles then?



HUSIC: Absolutely, the Government should be sorting this out. The state and

territory ministers wanted to talk with David Littleproud at length in December,

Julie, to get through with David Littleproud how they could sort these things out.

David Littleproud hardly dedicated the time to workforce issues, then slagged off all

those state and territory ministers, Coalition and Labor alike, slammed them as

petulant children and has refused to work cooperatively with them.



As I said, they see that David Littleproud is the sticking point. He is the person that

is failing to get this done. All he's good at is pointing the fingers at the states, he's

not there as a problem solver, because he's got no idea no clue how to sort this

out.



SNOOK: A lot of farmers say they pay well, but Australians don't want the jobs.

Why do Aussies not want these jobs especially now, given the current climate?



HUSIC: There's been some effort to try and improve the image and the work

conditions on the ground by some farmers. I think there is a great opportunity here

for industry bodies to take a leadership role even further. There is the Fair Farms

proposal that has got some farms registered saying that they will ensure that they

crack down on things like exploitation. Unfortunately, the take up rate on that has

been very low. Only 30 farms from what I understand, 30 operations have taken up

the challenge to be able to demonstrate that this is the case. I think there is a

concern that has to be confronted that exploitation does exist. It's not on all farms,

there are a lot of farms that work well.



But there are a lot of labour hire firms that are cutting corners, taking shortcuts, not

doing the right thing by their workers and it is giving the sector a bad name. It

needs to be tackled and again, I think this is something that not only industry can

take leadership on, but the Federal Government can as well. That will probably

provide one of the biggest incentives for Australians to go work on farms and to

prevent what we're seeing at the moment, which is produce just lying on the

ground rotting because there's no one around to pick it up.



SNOOK: Well, that's the thing. What are the repercussions for Australians at the

checkout then? Because this has a flow on effect, we will be feeling this very, very

soon, if not already.



HUSIC: That's a good point and that is very much a concern that if there isn't

enough supply, then you know what happens if the demand is there and the supply

is low, you'll see prices increase. It'll also impact on our ability to earn export

dollars as well, because we do export basically 75% of what is produced in this

country. So, it's important not only for local consumers to get the prices and the

quality that they're used to, but also ensure that we get the export dollars flowing.



Again, this comes back to the Federal Government cannot just think it's only role is

to blame states and territories. David Littleproud today should be calling for a

meeting with all his state and territory counterparts, not doing megaphone

diplomacy through the media. He should be convening a meeting with all these

counterparts, sitting down with them and trying to sort through these issues,

because farmers cannot afford to lose so much of their income because the

Federal Government thinks that blame shifting or problem solving is their biggest

thing right now.





SNOOK: We have to leave it there. Before I do let you go though, Ed Husic, I've

got to say I have bookshelf envy. That's quite impressive what's happening behind

you there.



HUSIC: It was a COVID project I can tell you that. But I get a lot of reactions from

people, who don't like the idea of lining everything up in colour code.



SNOOK: All for it.



HUSIC: Okay, I'm with you.



SNOOK: Shadow Resources and Agriculture Minister Ed Husic. Thanks so much

for your time.



HUSIC: All the best.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE BOYD 0438 881 997



