



Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra





THE HON DAN TEHAN MP  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment

THE HON KAREN ANDREWS MP  Minister for Industry, Science and Technology  Member for McPherson

THE HON STUART ROBERT MP  Minister for the National Disability Insurance Scheme  Minister for Government Services  Member for Fadden



ANGIE BELL MP  Member for Moncrieff

MEDIA RELEASE

12 March 2021

Gold Coast a winner from Government’s tourism package

The Gold Coast will be one of the big winners from the Morrison Government’s new $1.2  billion tourism package offering 800,000 half-price airfares and extended support for local  wildlife attractions and business events.

Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment Dan Tehan said the support package would  kickstart tourism in regions most impacted by international border closures by driving  domestic tourism.

“The best thing we can do to support our tourism sector is to bring the tourists and business  travel back, and while international borders remain closed that means getting more  Australians to book a holiday or attend a business event in Australia,” Mr Tehan said.

“We want Australians to take advantage of the 800,000 discounted airfares to rediscover the  many wonderful tourist destinations in Australia.

“So do yourself a favour and do our economy a favour by visiting your travel agent, booking  a discounted airfare and taking a holiday anywhere in Australia, like the beautiful Gold  Coast.”

As part of the tourism package, the Government has also extended the COVID-19  Consumer Travel Support Program. An additional $130 million is provided to help give  eligible travel agents additional breathing space to facilitate customer refunds, follow up  travel credits and process consumer refunds. Several adjustments will be made to the





Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

program as a result of industry feedback. The Government will continue to consult with the  industry to finalise the conditions of the program extension.

Founder & CEO of Crooked Compass Lisa Pagotto said receiving funding through the  Consumer Travel Support Program had been a lifeline for her company.

“The scale of detriment COVID-19 had on the travel industry is something even the best  leadership or business skills couldn’t prepare for,” Ms Pagotto said.

“I have great appreciation for government support to help keep Australian businesses afloat.”

The program provides eligible travel agents and tour arranging service operators with a one  off payment ranging from $1,500 to $100,000 to assist with their legal obligations to credit  and refund Australian consumers who are unable to travel due to COVID-19.

Mr Tehan visited the Currumbin Wildlife Sanctuary today with Karen Andrews, the MP for  McPherson, Stuart Robert, the MP for Fadden, and Angie Bell, the MP for Moncrieff, to  promote the Gold Coast as a tourist destination.

Minister Andrews said it was no secret the southern Gold Coast had borne the brunt of travel  restrictions and welcomed the extension of the Zoo and Aquarium program - which would  benefit the iconic Currumbin Wildlife Sanctuary and Hospital.

“Last year - for the first time in decades - Currumbin Wildlife Sanctuary was forced to close  its doors to tourists, while a record number of sick and injured animals were delivered to the  Hospital,” Minister Andrews said.

“This money helps cover the cost of animal welfare, including feed, enclosure, health and  other specialised care expenses, and utilities directly related to the housing and caring for  animals.

“Our vibrant wildlife attractions are another reason the Gold Coast is bracing for an influx of  tourists thanks to our Government’s 800,000 half-price airfares.”

Mr Robert said while the Gold Coast had been hit hard by COVID-19 Gold Coasters were  getting back on their feet.

“The Gold Coast is where Australians come to make memories and Gold Coasters love  being able to offer people an opportunity to get away from it all but COVID-19 saw our  restaurants closed and bars shuttered - this package will keep the momentum up on the GC  as we come back strong,” Mr Robert said.

Ms Bell said the Gold Coast business events sector would also benefit from an extension of  the Business Events Grants program to cover events up to 31 March 2022.

The Business Events Grants program provides grants up to $250,000 to support Australian  businesses participating at pre-approved business to business events as buyers or sellers.

“The Gold Coast is a premier destination for business events and the extension of this  program will mean more Australians will receive support to travel to the Gold Coast to take  part in an event, trade show or exhibition,” Ms Bell said.

“When people come to the Gold Coast for a business event, they spend money on a hotel  room, they eat at restaurants, take tours and go shopping which gives our local economy a  boost and helps people in jobs and businesses get up and running.”





Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

Currumbin Wildlife Sanctuary General Manager Michael Kelly said: “Currumbin Wildlife  Sanctuary thanks the Federal Government on the announcement of the extension of the Zoo  and Aquarium Support Funding. This funding has allowed the Sanctuary to continue to  provide the high level of care to all of our animals that call the Sanctuary home, along with  providing that lifesaving care to those animals admitted through our Wildlife Hospital.

“This type of funding greatly assists us to maintain our operations whilst the tourism  economy continues to recover. We will continue to work with all levels of government in  readiness to welcome back visitors from all over the world to this amazing destination.”



ENDS





Media contact:  Tehan: Byron Vale 02 6277 7420 | minister.tehan-media@dfat.gov.au  Andrews: Rachel Junge 0409 416 861  Robert: Liam Jones 0448 763 351  Bell: Ken King 0417 100 170

