1/2

Expressions of interest now open to build iconic new Causeway Bridge minister.infrastructure.gov.au/fletcher/media-release/expressions-interest-now-open-build-iconic-new-causeway-bridge

Expressions of Interest for contractors to build the iconic new Causeway Pedestrian and Cyclist Bridge across the Swan River are now open.

The project will construct two bridge sections, with the shorter 140-metre section connecting the City of Perth to Heirisson Island and a longer 250-metre section completing the pedestrian and cycle pathway from the island into the Town of Victoria Park.

Federal Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, said the Causeway Bridge was a key feature of the $1.5 billion Perth City Deal.

"The new Causeway Pedestrian and Cyclist Bridge forms part of the Perth City Deal's CBD Transport Plan and will play a major role in promoting active transport in Perth," Minister Fletcher said.

"We are investing in the vibrancy of the Perth CBD while creating a legacy of public infrastructure."

Western Australian Minister for Transport and Planning, the Hon Rita Saffioti MLA, said the current Causeway Bridge was one of the busiest connections into central Perth but the current path was too narrow to accommodate demand from people walking, running and riding.

"The new Causeway Bridge will become another iconic structure across the Swan River, joining the WA-built Matagarup Bridge as another major attraction," Minister Saffioti said.

"The bridge and associated paths will see an investment of $50 million and support 350 jobs, assisting the State's post-COVID recovery.

"We've invested over $250 million across four years to upgrade and increase cycling infrastructure across Western Australia."

State Member for Perth, John Carey MLA, said the bridge would be a significant future tourism asset while delivering much needed cycling and walking infrastructure between Perth's CBD and Victoria Park.

"This forms part of a whole range of cycling improvements we are undertaking throughout the Perth CBD as part of our record cycling investment," Mr Carey said.

2/2

"Great liveable cities around the world encourage cycling and walking: it encourages healthier communities, creates activated streets and builds vibrant neighbourhoods.

"A signature project of the Perth CBD Transport Plan is a pedestrian and cyclist bridge to be constructed alongside the heritage-listed Causeway bridges across the Swan River - a major bottleneck for CBD commuters.

"The new Causeway Pedestrian and Cyclist Bridge will deliver a safer, more connected crossing for all kinds of cyclists and pedestrians. It's a project that's been talked about for years so we're getting on with building it."

More than 1,400 cyclists and 1,900 pedestrians funnel through the existing two-metre-wide Causeway path each day, equalling 500,000 bike trips a year.

The bridge will become a new attraction on Perth's Swan River, introducing another tourism experience for visitors and providing safer, better access for pedestrians and cyclists travelling between the Perth CBD and Victoria Park.

The design of the bridge's structural elements will be inspired by Aboriginal history and culture, including two feature pylons reaching 35 to 40 metres high.

Consultation with key stakeholders, including representatives from Aboriginal groups, has played a major role in the development of early concepts for the bridge.

It is expected the contract for the bridge will be awarded later this year with construction to start in 2022.

The project is jointly funded with the Australian and Western Australian Governments each committing $25 million.

Media release

Friday 29 January 2021

Joint Release with

The Hon Rita Saffioti MLA

Western Australian Minister for Transport and Planning

John Carey MLA

State Member for Perth

