

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T

Monday 22nd March 2021

Minister Littleproud Media Conference Press Gallery  Parliament House Canberra

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, morning everybody, and look, can I say that today as it  unfolds, we are potentially going into a very, very dangerous situation. Our catchments are  soaked. There is no nothing more that can be taken up, and we are predicting more rain,  severe rain from Queensland right down into New South Wales. And we need to be ready  and prepared for that. Obviously, we've seen significant damage to date. We actually are  very concerned with the fact that even if you look at the Nepean and Hawkesbury  catchment and their systems, potentially, if we get the wrong amount of rainfall in the  wrong catchment, there's over 50,000 residents that could be impacted. We obviously  have contingencies with respect to that with the New South Wales government. We're  hoping it won't be that bad. But obviously every contingency has been looked at at the  moment and we'll continue to support the New South Wales government. They are waiting  to make further assessments as to whether they require any further federal assistance,  whether that be in terms of ADF support. But we continue to keep very close links with  David Elliott and Shane Fitzsimmons.

The federal government last night has now extended to 34 local government areas - our  federal support, which is $1000 per adult and $400 per child for anyone who has sustained  damage from these floods. And anyone who has lost income as a result of these floods  can also receive potentially up to 13 weeks of income support at ABSTUDY or Austudy  rates. We are simply saying to people, please do not self-assess. It's important you contact  Centrelink. Those lines open for you today at 8am and they stay open from 8am to 8pm  every day. It's a dedicated line just for those flood victims and we intend to make sure that  we get that money out of our pockets and into yours as quickly as we can to give you  some dignity and respect.

And I simply have to say, this is our initial support and we'll continue to provide further  support as we make further assessments with the New South Wales government. But that  can only happen when the water abates and we can get their people in safe and sound.

QUESTION: Minister, can you please just reiterate the importance of staying safe in these  conditions? I mean, this is a very, very serious situation we're facing in New South Wales.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, look, this has just been sheer luck no one has been injured  or lost their lives. The number of rescues that have had to take place by the New South  Wales Emergency Services is just confirming the fact that we have been damn lucky that  no one has lost their life. This is a very dangerous situation, and it shouldn't be a she'll be

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

right attitude to this. We've all got a responsibility to play in this, not just emergency service  personnel, but each and every one of us. You should have a plan. You should have an  evacuation plan. You should be listening to make sure that once you are given  instructions, you adhere to it and you do it to the letter. Otherwise, you're not just putting  yourself at risk, you are putting your family at risk. And those men and women who are  putting their lives on the line for you today, many of whom are volunteers, have their own  families. They do not need to go in and undertake an emergency that was unnecessary.  Just some common sense is all are asking for for the next 36 hours to make sure we get  through this event, we get through this safely. There's no need to go out and take photos.  There's plenty of media out there, they'll take photos for you. You simply need to stay  away from the flood waters. You need to allow the professionals to get on with their job to  evacuate those who are sadly going to lose their homes and just let the professionals do  their job. But don't add to their stress and anguish at the moment.

QUESTION: Do you have a sense of the number of livestock lost?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Now look, initial assessments haven't been made, and obviously  we won't be able to do that till the waters abate, and we can only do that when it's safe.  Obviously, we'll be working with the New South Wales government who made those  assessments, but they'll be sending people in from Resilience New South Wales as soon  as the water abates and obviously working with New South Wales farmers to get an  appreciation of that. But when we get those sort of assessments, then obviously we'll be  tailoring our response at a federal and state level in terms of recovery, and not just for  primary producers, but for small businesses and individuals impacted by this event.

QUESTION: Minister, this time last year, some of these same communities that are now  under water were on fire or were having 50 degree celcius days. Is there a conversation  we need to have around how and where people build their homes, where developments  are approved, where shops and apartments and buildings are actually allowed to be built  as we deal with these 100 year events?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yes, we do. And in fact, as part of the Natural Disaster Royal  Commission, there was clear recommendations around that, around planning and making  sure that particularly state and local governments get this planning right. We can't keep  putting people in harm's way. We just need to use this thing called common sense. And so  part of those recommendations out of the royal commission is to look at planning and  looking at how federal and state governments can work with local governments to get that  right. Local government is a product of state government, and we think that there's a real  opportunity for the states to own this and make sure that proper planning laws are put in  place. That's a tough conversation, but it's one that I think we owe not only those 34 lives  that were lost from the Black Summer, but for natural disasters in the future, that we- we  leave a legacy. We fix this. And there's 80 recommendations that the federal government  has accepted from the royal commission. We will continue to work through those. In fact,  we are updating monthly the progress of those recommendations. And so what we are  saying to the states, some states that in fact, have not even responded to those  recommendations, it is time for us to all commit. This cannot become another one of 240  reports that are sitting in someone's top drawer around the country from natural disasters  since 1920. We have to do something. We have to do it together. The Federal  Government said we'll do it and we intend to work through those 80 recommendations with  the states, local government, planning authorities to get it right, because the Australian  taxpayer has only got a finite amount of resources and we cannot continue to be the  insurer of last resort.

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T



QUESTION: So, would you like to see a royal commission into veteran suicides?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I think that's one of the options that we should seriously  consider, and I think you'll find that after consultation with the veterans community and  those veterans that are in this place, I think we will get to a juncture where serious  consideration will be given to starting a royal commission but also a commission that will  be ongoing. I think the royal commission will look to the past, but it's important we have a  structure that also looks to the future, that protects our vets into the future to make sure  that they get the very best that they deserve after serving our nation. So, I think you'll find  that the consultation that's taken place with many groups will see the right response, and I  know the Prime Minister continues to work with the veteran community and also the  members here in this place to make sure we get that right.

QUESTION: So personally, do you think that there should be a royal commission and the  existing proposal the Government has put forward?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I think if that achieves both outcomes of not just looking at  the past, but looking to the future, then, yes.

QUESTION: If it comes to a vote, how would you vote on that motion in the House today?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I think the Government will work through that as a whole  because we understand this issue needs to be addressed. We are making sure that we  get those parameters right. This isn't about politics. This is about just making sure we put  the right environment around our veterans, making sure that they have the best support  they require. Now, that's not just looking in the past, that's making sure we have a  structure for the future so we're not having another royal commission in 10 years' time  because we haven't acted on a previous report. I think it's important that we get the  settings right and this is the opportunity that this place should tackle this week, and I'm  sure we will.

QUESTION: Potentially, your colleagues may vote for it or abstain or something like that.  How would you vote?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, obviously, I'll have to see what the options are, but as a  government, I think we're working through this constructively. And I think as a government,  we continue to work through the solutions that are available and I think we'll have a  practical solution that gives the best outcome, not about who votes where. I always want  the right outcomes for our veterans and I'll be working with the Government, as a member  of the Government, to make sure we get those settings right. That's my responsibility as a  member of this government, and I think we have an opportunity to do that over the coming  24, 48 hours.

QUESTION: Just quick, just really quickly, back on the floods. The vaccine rollout Phase  1B begins today. Do you have any information or any updated information as to what's  happening with getting those deliveries to those GPs and those clinics in New South  Wales?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, obviously, in the flood affected areas, they won't be going.  There are roads cut. Our primary responsibility at the moment is to keep people safe from  the floodwater. We are in a very unique but a great position in this country with respect to

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

COVID, that we are better placed than anyone not to have to rush this, not to have to rush  the jab, and so that we can take our time to get this right, to keep people safe during this  flood event, and we will. And then as soon as the floodwaters abate, then the jabs will flow  out. There's over 4000 medical clinics that have signed up to this. We only thought there'd  be 2000. A thousand have had their deliveries. So, the 1B will roll out and we'll get those  six million jabs out.

And you've got to understand, put this in perspective. This time last year, we rolled out six  million vaccinations for the flu during COVID-19 across this country in six months. So, the  targets the GPs and the Government have set themselves are realistic. They've been  achieved before. And I think Australians just want the comfort of knowing, one, we do the  vaccine right but, two, over the coming 24, 48 hours, we just keep everyone safe,  particularly in those flood areas.

Thanks guys.

QUESTION: Minister, just one quick question.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Last one.

QUESTION: Will this extreme flooding event prompt the Coalition to consider more  ambitious climate action?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I've got to say, let's put this in perspective. We are one of  the very few countries in the world that will meet and beat its 2030 commitment. There are  130 nations that have signed up to net zero emissions by 2050. Only 16 of them can tell us  how they're going to get there. The Australian Government would prefer to be honest, not  put a platitude out there, and that's what we'll work through. And as a member of the  National Party, obviously we want to know how we get there and who pays for it before we  make any significant commitment. I think the Australian public deserve that. In fact, the  Australian public demanded that at the last federal election when Labor committed to it but  couldn't tell anyone how they were going to get there or who was going to pay for it. This is  about doing the right thing, not only at international level, but also here domestically, and  being honest with the Australian public. We've got a great record and this self-loathing that  we continue to knock ourselves around and saying we don't do enough. Let me tell you,  there are- out of the EU, 27 EU states, only 21 of them will meet their 2030 commitment.

So, let's just put this in perspective. Australia has a proud record, a strong record. We  should be damn proud of it. And if we do make a commitment to 2050, then it'll be one that  not only the Australian public can believe, but internationally, people around the world will  believe. Thanks.

Media contact  0455 448 985

