



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

The Hon Mark Coulton MP

Minister for Regional Health, Regional Communications and Local Government  Federal Member for Parkes

MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au



11 January 2021

MINISTERS INSPECT SITE OF RECENTLY ANNOUNCED  $44 MILLION UPGRADE FOR NARRABRI TO TURRAWAN LINE

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack and local MP and Minister for Regional Health, Regional Communications and Local  Government Mark Coulton have today inspected the site of the recently announced Narrabri to  Turrawan line upgrade.

Mr McCormack said the Australian Government last month committed $44.7 million for the  Australian Rail Track Corporation to upgrade 35 kilometres of the Narrabri to Turrawan Line between  the Hunter Valley Coal Network and Inland Rail.

“We are investing in this project to greatly improve the quality and capacity of this crucial rail  connection, better linking northern New South Wales, Inland Rail and the Port of Newcastle,” the  Deputy Prime Minister said.

“This upgrade will allow longer and heavier freight trains from Northern NSW - transporting food  and fibre - to access the Newcastle and Sydney Ports.

“Greater volumes of freight moved on each train will reduce transport costs and make Australian  exports more competitive.

“The project will replace steel and timber sleepers with heavy-duty concrete ones, upgrade critical  level crossings and improve the rail quality on the Narrabri Coal Junction to Turrawan section, as well  as the Turrawan to Narrabri North section.

“Our strong investments in region-defining rail projects such as this are all about getting our farmers’  world-leading produce to market.

“The Australian Government remains focused on creating jobs, backing businesses and driving our  nation’s economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic by continuing to get funding flowing and  shovels in the ground on road and rail projects under our record $110 billion infrastructure plan.

“This project will do that by fostering further economic growth, delivering the confidence producers  and businesses need to expand and diversify, creating jobs and encouraging local investment to  provide an ongoing boost to local communities and the economy.”

Federal Member for Parkes and Minister for Regional Health, Regional Communications and Local  Government Mark Coulton said the project will enhance the region’s supply chain and support local  industries.

“The new load specifications are directly compatible with Inland Rail, meaning the Narrabri to  Turrawan Line upgrade will provide a boost for the local farming community and other businesses  using the rail line,” Minister Coulton said.

“During my recent visit to the Port of Newcastle, it was clear to see the many benefits of our freight  rail investments, so it’s with great excitement we inspect the upgrade site in Narrabri today.

“I’m proud to be part of a Government that is investing in regional communities and creating the  environment for regions to grow and prosper, including the North West.”

The project will deliver an improved corridor capable of 25 Tonne Axle Load (TAL) trains going at  80 km/h to replace the current ageing, 20.5 TAL track.

Ends.

Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Jo Williamson 0418 475 668 | Dean Shachar 0418 202 860   Minister Coulton - Anna Conn 0491 135 852





