

RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY  SHADOW MINISTER FOR NATIONAL RECONSTRUCTION, EMPLOYMENT,  SKILLS AND SMALL BUSINESS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR SCIENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2HD BREAKFAST  THURSDAY, 4 MARCH 2021

SUBJECTS: AFL; energy; Visit to Newcastle; Aged Care RC, historic  allegations of sexual assault; Vaccine rollout.

RICHARD KING, HOST: Not stumbling in but he will be visiting our neck of the  woods today- and it gives us great pleasure to actually say very good morning to  the Deputy Opposition Leader who will be visiting our neck of the woods. Richard  Marles, who's on the line. Good morning, Richard.

SHANNA BULL, HOST: Good morning.

RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR  PARTY: Good morning Richard and Shanna. How are you?

KING: Very well, indeed. And look, just having a little look at your background, I  suddenly realised that your dad was the principal of the school that I went to as a  young tacker. Trinity Grammar.

MARLES: Wow. What vintage are you, Richard?

KING: Oh, well, we're going back to the sixties. And in fact, I bordered there for a  couple of terms.

MARLES: There you go.

KING: Yeah.

BULL: Something in common.



KING: We have a connection. But I'm a Demon’s supporter, I’m not a Geelong  supporter, Richard.

MARLES: Well, I am sorry to hear that. Well, dad would have been there a bit after  you. But there you go. It reminds us all how small the world we're living in.

KING: Too right. It certainly does.

BULL: Okay, Minister, firstly, what's the purpose of your visit to the region today?

MARLES: Well, one of the real challenges we have as a, as a country, actually, is  turning science into jobs. It's something that ,that we do as badly as any country in  the OECD. And what - I'm going to be visiting University of Newcastle today and  having a look at what's going on there, really from the, from the view of how this  challenge is being met in Newcastle. Because I think one of the great stories of  Newcastle is that it's, you know, a city which has a history in heavy industry, but  has also been able to remake itself. And today, Newcastle really is known around  the country for being a centre of innovation and technology. And it's really looking  at the way in which companies in Newcastle- the University of Newcastle- is  fundamentally doing that challenge of turning science into jobs. So I'm very excited  about it, actually. I think there's a lot to learn from that which we can apply to the  whole nation.

KING: Our government seems to have this obsession at the moment with building  a gas fuelled generator here at Kurri Kurri. Your thoughts on that? I mean, the big  question for me is where the hell the gas is going to come from in the first place,  but as to whether or not we need it. And I know, several people in Opposition have  said - well including a former Prime Minister, Malcolm Turnbull reckons the  government's bonkers heading down this track.

MARLES: I mean, I think ultimately, the question of power generation is one which  needs to be, in a sense dealt with by the private sector- it's a question of what  stacks up commercially. So the only point we've really been making all along is not  one about being when it comes to power generation in favour of one form of  energy or another, it's just letting the market go in the direction that it has. And  where the market has gone around the country is to be looking at new forms of  power generation. And what doesn't make sense is for the government to be  subsidising you know, particular forms of power generation in the context of a gas  fired power station. So, I think that's our issue. Our issue is about the idea that  public money is going to go in there kind of distorting what would be a market  decision. Fundamentally this is a question for the, for the market.

KING: You don't think the government should be spending ratepayers money on  building new generators?



MARLES: Well, that is right. And in this instance, the proposition is to spend that  money on building a new gas fired power generator. If it looks and stacks up  commercially, that's fine. But at the end of the day, it should be a matter for the  private sector.

BULL: Now, the Hunter has a long history of manufacturing. But over the years,  sadly, we know it has disappeared. Do you think it's imperative we continue to try  to push to make manufacturing a priority here in this region, once again?

MARLES: Definitely. And in a way, I think the story of the Hunter and Newcastle is  the story of the nation. You’re right; there was more manufacturing in Newcastle as  there was more manufacturing in Australia, going back ten years, but going back  30 years. But one of the things that you look at when you, when you see the most  modern and prosperous countries and economies in the world is they've all  managed to hang on to manufacturing. And the way they've done that is to be  doing it at the high value end- high-tech manufacturing, climbing the technological  ladder. Which comes back to the point I made earlier; it's the ability to turn our  science into jobs. And it's something- we do science okay, but that next step of  turning it into a commercial venture we do as badly as any country in the  developed world. But having said that, it's not, you know, there are examples  around the country where you can find people that have done it- it’s not a complete  desert. And one of the things I'm really looking forward to today, in coming to  Newcastle and the Hunter is to look at the ways in which that's happening. And I  think there actually is a bright future for manufacturing, for high-tech manufacturing  in Newcastle and the Hunter Valley, for cities which have a history of  manufacturing, but doing it in a new way. But what's really critical, and this kind of  a link, it's going to be the University of Newcastle and organisation's like that which  are the key to unlocking a manufacturing future of a place like Newcastle. And  that's why I'm really keen to have that conversation and go to the university and  see what they're doing.

BULL: Look, I must ask you the findings of the Royal Commission into the Aged  Care report that was released earlier this week. Do you think we need to see  action taken straight away by the government in regards to implementing all of  these recommendations?

MARLES: Yeah, we do, Shanna. And it's just appalling reading. And it ultimately is  an indictment on all of us - the way in which we are treating our aged is, is what's  described in the Royal Commission. And, you know, we've seen this government  cut billions of dollars out of aged care, obviously, that doesn't help. What we need  to do, though, is get to a point where we look at this Royal Commission as a shock  and a wake-up call for the entire nation, and the steps are taken immediately to  rectify matters so that Australians can look forward to their old age as a time where  their dignity is preserved. And right now, that is not something which we can say is

happening in Australia, given what is detailed in the Royal Commission. So, this is  is not an optional extra. This is not something we can think about next month or  next year. It's something that must happen and it must happen today.

KING: Right now to the red hot topic of conversation; Attorney General Christian  Porter revealed he is the Cabinet Minister at the centre of an historical rape  allegation. Do you think he's continued role as Australia's Attorney General is  untenable?

MARLES: Firstly, it's another issue where, you know, that was very difficult  viewing yesterday, and I can't help but feel for the family of the victim, this just  must be terrible for them. Looking at the attention that's going to this and watching  this all play out on our screens. And so, you know, I'm really today thinking mostly  about them, firstly, about them, and, you know, remembering their daughter. I think  there are a couple of issues and the first starts there really, that the allegations that  are being made by victims generally, and in this case, this this person, have to be  taken seriously. And I think there is a question at the moment about, to what extent  has there been a process which has allowed those allegations to be looked at and  taken seriously in that way? And then I think you get to the question you just asked  Richard, which is, you know, that it's obviously a very difficult situation, actually, for  the nation, that this is, this is hanging over the first law officer of the country- over  the nation's Attorney General, and it's hard for me to see how this - the matter just  lies here. And so I think from both perspectives, it's now a matter for the Prime  Minister to look at both those issues- and the balls really in his court to come up  with some solution which resolves that.

BULL: On a lighter note, have you had the COVID-19 jab yet?

MARLES: I have not. And I'm not exactly sure when that's going to occur. My  boss, Anthony Albanese has had the first of his two- as has been widely  publicised. I can report that he got through that, okay. He was complaining the next  day that his shoulder was a bit sore, but he's still looking alright, when I saw him  last night. And he's got a second one coming up in a couple of weeks. But yeah,  look, I'm not, I mean, I think that in all seriousness, I think that was an important  step for both him and the Prime Minister and our national leaders to take the jab to  give a sense of confidence that, that people should be vaccinated. I think for the  rest of us in politics, you know, we need to take our turn in the queue, and I'm not  sure when that, that will happen. But it really matters obviously, for the nation that  this rollout happens, obviously as safely but as quickly as possible.

KING: And you're obviously as a mad keen Geelong Cats supporter, hoping that  your team goes one better than they did last year.

MARLES: This is true. And we, you know, there's a lot of hope. I think for your  listeners, there's some, there's a little bit of affinity, I think between Geelong and



Newcastle. So we probably- the Cats probably play into the AFL a bit like the  Knights do into the NRL, and, and so I think all your listeners will understand the  fanaticism that goes with supporting a football club, particularly when you're from a  region like Newcastle. And we are, you know, March is an optimistic time. Every  March I know we're going to win the flag. The rest of the winter kind of disillusions  me. But on this day, nothing bad yet has happened. So, I’m full of hope!

BULL: Yes.

KING: Go the Cats, go the Knights. And thank you very much for having a chat  with us this morning.

BULL: Thank you.

MARLES: It's a pleasure.

KING: And enjoy your stay in our neck of the woods. Richard Marles Deputy  Opposition Leader on 2HD.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363



