



RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR NATIONAL RECONSTRUCTION, EMPLOYMENT,

SKILLS AND SMALL BUSINESS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR SCIENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





ADDRESS TO THE NATIONAL PRESS CLUB



THE RACE FOR THE JOBS OF THE FUTURE



NATIONAL PRESS CLUB

CANBERRA



WEDNESAY, 24 MARCH 2021



*** CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY ***



Can I thank the National Press Club for hosting me today and thank all of you for coming

along.



Let me start by acknowledging the traditional owners of this land, the Ngunnawal and Ngambri

peoples, and I pay my respects to their elders past and present.



And in doing so, I reaffirm Labor’s longstanding support for an Indigenous Voice to Parliament,

written into - and protected by - our Constitution.



About two months ago, Anthony Albanese gave me some new responsibilities.



The portfolios amount to a pretty long title - but it really just means focusing on two priorities:

jobs, and the future.



So, over these past couple of months I’ve been meeting as many Australians as I can - in their

workplaces, their small businesses, their places of learning and going to the heart of our skills

sector - our TAFEs.



I have seen the ingenuity we have, the determination and talent of Australians on show in so

many places.



With Kate Thwaites I met Lovitt Technologies, a firm making world-leading components for the

world’s biggest aerospace companies - employing 80 skilled Australians in suburban

Melbourne.



In Newcastle, Tim Ayres, Sharon Claydon and I saw how workers at one of Australia’s last

remaining steel manufacturing sites - Molycop - were using cutting-edge innovation to stay

competitive.



And it’s not just the technology, Peta Murphy and I spoke to plumbing apprentices at Chisholm

TAFE, proud, nervous and excited about leaping into a career on the tools: the value of a trade

now no longer something people settle for but rather go for.



But that’s not the full picture of what is happening in our country. I’ve also stood with workers

at ExxonMobil in Altona, on the day they were told that after more than 70 years of operation,

the oil refinery will be closing. When it does close, there will be just two refineries left in

Australia.



What I’ve seen speaks to our potential, but we are not a chance at fulfilling that as a nation if

we don’t course correct right now on how we think about jobs, skills and science.



Over the last twelve months the coronavirus has written the story of 2020 and it is rewriting the

story of our future. It has been the number one issue, the number one consideration, for all of

us.



By and large, Australians feel proud of our success during this pandemic - as they should.





Yes, there have been setbacks here, and yes, there have been tragedies. But compared with

much of the world, Australia has done a remarkable job. And people feel the fortune of being

an Australian in these times.



But in all my conversations across the country in recent weeks no one, no one has said to me

that they want Australia to go back to the way we were.



Scott Morrison likes to talk about Australia’s comeback. But ‘coming back’ cannot mean going

back.



Because the way our nation was before COVID is not the way it ought to be after COVID.



For Labor, reconstruction does not mean returning to the pre-COVID world. Recovery from the

COVID-19 crisis must be only the first step in our nation’s reconstruction of a better country on

a better path.



Australia is being presented with the most significant chance to re-imagine our future that we

have had since the end of World War II. And this is a moment that we simply have to grasp.



Because the reality is that Australia’s economy was drifting before we entered this crisis, and

we cannot afford to drift out of it.



Let’s remember where Australia was about a year ago. The economy was experiencing lower-than-average growth. We had about two million Australians unemployed or under-employed.

That means we had two million Australians looking for work. We were in a productivity

paralysis. And Australian workers were facing a trifecta of challenges:



Â·        An insecure jobs market;

Â·        Flat wages; and

Â·        Falling living standards.



Ross Garnaut has called it “the dog days”, where, in his words, “Australia drifted to the back of

a slow-moving pack.”



When Australians talk to me about the challenges they face day-to-day - not enough hours at

work, no pay rises, higher bills, the sense that they are being stretched to do more and more

with less and less - these are actually not complaints. They are just an honest assessment of

what’s happening today in our economy.



And really, it’s not even their own circumstances that worries them. It’s what they don’t know

about the future, the horizons that they cannot see, which keeps them up at night. Because

there is a growing anxiety that parents everywhere across our country now have about the kind

of future that is waiting for their kids.



Australia has always had an unwritten contract between the current generation and the next:

that we hand on a better deal than we inherited. Whether it is as a parent, or as a political

leader - that is our mission.



And so are we confident that our kids will be better off than we are?



This, I believe, is the key question for all of us in positions of influence, as we step out of the

COVID crisis and into recovery. And it should be the central contest for the next federal

election. Will this generation fulfil our end of the bargain, for the next generation?



If the opportunity for the reconstruction, for the re-imagination of Australia which COVID

presents, is not seized, then for the first time in more than a century, I fear that ours will be the

generation that fails this task.



In the 1850s, Australia rode the gold rush wave to prosperity. In the first half of the Twentieth

Century we did it on the sheep’s back and at the beginning of this Century we enjoyed the

mining boom.



But what will be the 21st Century secret to our success? Where will Australia be in 10, 20, 30

years’ time - when today’s high schoolers, primary schoolers and pre-schoolers are in the jobs

market?



In the past, we’ve managed transitions in the economy - and become richer in the process.

We’ve had lots of resources, lots of customers, and not a lot of competition.



But it is different now.



Those countries which are the most technologically advanced, and which have economies that

are the most complex and the most dependent on human innovation, human intellect and

human capital, are also the countries which are the wealthiest. These are the economies which

are generating the most secure well-paid jobs.



In short: where lies modernity lies prosperity.



Depending on how you see it, modernity might lie in Seoul or Munich, perhaps Shanghai or

Taipei. In another sense it might be Silicon Valley or Tel Aviv. But nowadays no-one is

claiming that it is here. And the gap between Australia and the cutting edge of modernity is

growing.



While developed countries have seen a shift to economies with a greater emphasis on the

provision of services, particularly professional and financial services, what each of the of the

places that I have mentioned has in common is that they have fought to hang on to

manufacturing. Being in the business of making goods forms a critical part of being a diverse

modern economy. And having a diverse modern economy is the key to the generation of well-paid secure jobs.



Manufacturing in a developed world context looks very different to the “dark satanic mills” of

the industrial revolution. Manufacturing that competes solely on the basis of price - making low

value products which in turn demand low wages - is unlikely to be a recipe for a prosperous

Australia. But manufacturing that competes on quality - making the highest value products - is

the means by which manufacturing can generate well paid jobs. This is the secret to modern

manufacturing. And it demands that our manufacturing and our nation climbs the technological

ladder.



This technological change comes with challenge and causes anxiety. A recent estimate

suggests that in the next 15 years, 2.7 million Australian jobs are at risk of being lost to

automation - about 20 per cent of the current workforce.



But technology also generates new jobs and lots of them. The jobs are there. The rise of

technology, AI and automation can create more jobs across the world than they replace.



And while much of the innovation conversation is focused at the high-end of the skill spectrum,

if we can grow advanced manufacturing in this country, as others have done, the new jobs

won’t just come with white lab coats.



Blue-collar trade jobs are skilled-jobs. They are well-paid jobs. And they are essential jobs for

our future.



We needed them in the traditional manufacturing industries, and we will need them for

advanced manufacturing. We need to add value right along the supply chain and right along

the skills spectrum.



Which, by the way, makes the Liberals’ long-term decimation of TAFE and apprenticeships so

exceptionally stupid. They aren’t saving money, they are slashing skills and slaying future

jobs.



But here’s the issue. Losing some old jobs in Australia is a near guarantee - it’s the safest bet

you could make, we can’t stop it. But gaining the new jobs of the future is not guaranteed. We

have to win those jobs. They will not be handed to us.



Others have recognised this - in different parts of the world, at different points in history. In the

early 1960s, UK Labour Leader Harold Wilson asked his country to start a new chapter - by

harnessing “the white heat of the technological revolution.” In doing so, he reminded them:

“There is no more dangerous illusion than the comfortable doctrine that the world owes us a

living.”



So are we working as hard as Korea, or Singapore, or Japan, to prepare our economy and its

future workers - our kids - to earn those future jobs?



Make no mistake - in the race for the jobs of the future, the starter’s gun has been fired. Other

countries are off and running.



And in order to compete in and win that race, Australia must have the courage to embrace

science and complexity.



Under Scott Morrison’s Coalition our nation’s relationship to technology has become fraught.

When the Coalition Government goaded the car industry off-shore we lost our most complex

manufacturing. Indeed in the last eight years we have seen as much de-industrialisation in

Australia as in any period in our nation’s history.



Australia has lost sovereign industrial capability.



And to turn this around we must change our society in two key ways. First we need to be much

better at turning science into jobs. And second we need to encourage our kids to study STEM

subjects at school.



It is critical that Australia dramatically improves our capacity to commercialise our public

research and make our economy more complex.



The Country Complexity Index produced every year by Harvard University, compares how we

measure up in a world where high-value, highly-complex production generally means higher

growth and higher wages.



Japan is ranked 1st. South Korea is 3rd. Singapore, 5th. China makes the top 20. Malaysia

makes the top 30. But where does Australia rank?



We are ranked 87th in the world… sandwiched between Uganda and Burkina Faso… And

we’re getting worse. It’s a number, which if we do not change, will describe a radically poorer

future for our grandchildren.



When, at the Liberal Party’s urging, car manufacturing left Australia, there was a sense of

nostalgia among us - a sense that we were waving goodbye to a piece of our past. But what

we need to understand is that we were also waving goodbye to our future.



Because instead of climbing up the technology ladder, we were tumbling down it.



The Ford factory, in my hometown of Geelong - was much more than an old-fashioned

assembly line. There were PhDs in that building. Researchers, designers, engineers, IT

experts and every kind of trade skill you can think of. White-and-blue collar workers, the whole

spectrum of skills, up and down the supply chain. And the Coalition just severed the chord.

Surrendered an industry, sent away the jobs, sold out our future.



Once it’s gone, it is very hard to make it come back. And if Australia loses the refining sector

and the petro-chemical and plastics industry with it - all high-tech manufacturing - we will be

doing the same again.



By contrast since 2007, countries like Israel have grown their high-tech manufacturing from

seven per cent to 23 per cent of their manufactured exports. Over the same period, our high

tech exports as a percentage of GDP declined to 1.27 per cent.



New industries need new ideas.



As Professor Deborah Terry explained here a few weeks ago, the Global Innovation Index

ranks Australia 13thfor innovation inputs, but 31st for innovation outputs.



We are punching at our weight when it comes to discovery, but we are relative laggards when

it comes to turning discovery into dollars - into industry and jobs.



In recent years, we’ve been placed at the bottom of the OECD when it comes to the proportion

of Australian businesses collaborating and innovating with universities - behind Chile and

Latvia.



Australia must start turning science into jobs, and we must start by recognising science as an

economic pillar, not just a high school project.



Indeed the single biggest micro-economic reform challenge facing our country today is to

properly commercialise science: to do so thoughtfully and with a clear-eyed understanding that

science means jobs and not just for scientists.



The starting point in this is to diagnose the problem and to make fixing it a political priority. To

rebuild advanced manufacturing in this country, government must lead a national mission to

play to our national strengths and to grow the industries of the future with new technology.



Research and Development funding continues to trend down - now below 1.8 per cent of our

GDP. Compare this to South Korea, or Israel, who have kept increasing their R&D spends -

and both are now close to five per cent of their GDP. Who is better placed to turn ideas into

innovation, innovation into industry, industry into jobs - them, or us?



Australia needs public policy to support the skills, research and innovation that will build

manufacturing capability. We need to reinvigorate research - and the commercialisation of

public research.



While Labor will have more to say about the solutions as we move toward the next election a

good place to start is Cicada Innovations.



Cicada is Australia’s top deep tech incubator, supporting more than 40 Australian tech firms. It

is owned jointly by the University of Sydney, The University of New South Wales, the

University of Technology Sydney and the Australia National University. A couple of weeks ago

I visited their inner Sydney home with Ed Husic.



In one location they provide a base for new companies seeking to commercialise deep tech.

But it is far more than just providing space. They help with early stage finance. They provide

access to the research facilities of the universities involved along with their post-graduate

students. They also provide mentoring and advice and allow the interaction of their companies

to weave the magic of scientific collaboration.



In total it has helped more than 300 companies to raise more than $450 million, file more than

500 patents and trademarks, launch more than 700 deep tech innovations globally, and in the

process helped create hundreds of jobs.



Cicada shows that there are examples of clever commercialisation of science happening in

Australia. Our policy goal must be to find ways of ensuring that this best practice becomes the

everyday practice in Australia. And that is exactly what Labor will do.



While commercialising science is critical, this will only be possible if we are developing the

scientists of the future. And that means we have to do better at encouraging our kids and

young adults to pursue studies in STEM.



The more Australians studying these fields, the better chance Australia has of catching the

high-skill, high-tech jobs wave.



Dr Cathy Foley, Australia’s new Chief Scientist, spoke about this here last week - calling

STEM skills “currency in the new economy”.



As Chief Scientist, she is making the education of children one of her foundational goals. This

is terrific news. Because right now, we are coming up short.



On the sheer numbers, and on performance, we are failing our kids, and so failing their future.

In the last decade, the proportion of Year 12 students studying a maths subjects has gone

down, not up.  Only half of our high school students are studying a science subject in their final

year of school. Less than a third are studying an ICT subject.



This year, a sample of Australian 15-year-olds will be tested in maths, science and reading to

see how we compare to the rest of the world. The last OECD evaluation was in 2018 - and

that showed, once again, our steady slide down the ladder. 12th in maths. 24th in science. We

were beaten by China, Singapore, Japan, South Korea - to name a few.



They are beating our kids in education today, and if we are not careful these countries will beat

our kids to the jobs of tomorrow.



When these rankings are released, we all talk about them for a few days, tut-tut over them,

and then we move on. Can you imagine what would happen if Australia finished 24th at the

Olympics? When we finished 10th in Rio, we actually seemed to lose our minds a bit. There

were media reports calling it a “horror show”. One went as far to suggest that, quote, “a sense

of despondency has engulfed Australia.”



Why are we not similarly upset about our performance in maths and science?



We need to raise the bar for our students - and raise the rate of STEM graduates.



I think it’s time we re-started the conversation about how much we are really valuing maths

and science in our high school curricula. We know these skills are a compulsory part of the

future economy. But learning these subjects is not.



English is compulsory through to year 12 but we let our kids quit maths and science. Let me be

clear: Shakespeare matters. But Australia’s reality is that the future economy will need more

engineers and coders than poets and playwrights.



At the heart of all of this is an even deeper issue: the place of science in Australian society and

culture.



Last week I visited the Canberra Deep Space Communication Complex at Tidbinbilla. Run by

the CSIRO, it is funded by and forms part of NASA’s deep space network along with a facility

outside Madrid in Spain and another at Goldstone in California. The network tracks and

communicates with more than 30 spacecraft that are at a distance from the earth of the moon

and well beyond. This includes the recently arrived Mars 2020 Perseverance rover.



About 90 people work at Tidbinbilla, half of them tradies.



In the control room I watched an operator communicate with Voyager 2. Along with Voyager 1,

these spacecraft that were launched in 1977, are two of the furthest human-made objects from

earth. Voyager 2 is travelling at about 15 kilometres per second and is now in interstellar space

about 19 billion kilometres from Earth located beyond the heliosphere - the environment in

space created by the sun. It still has instruments that work and is continuing to provide critical

information about the nature of interstellar space.



It takes 17.5 light hours for a message to transmit from earth to Voyager 2 and the only radio

telescope which has contact with Voyager 2 is the largest of the dishes at Tidbinbilla. And

there I was watching 17.5 hour old data coming from Voyager 2 appear on the screen right in

front of me.



All of this is happening now, just 40 minutes’ drive from here and who knows about it?



In Murchison, Western Australia, part of the largest radio telescope in the world is being built.

About 130,000 low frequency antennas there will form part of an array of telescopes primarily

located in Australia and in the Karoo, South Africa. Together they form the Square Kilometre

Array telescope known as the SKA.



The SKA will illuminate the heavens in an unprecedented way. It will give us the best view of

the origins of the universe. It will likely be able to detect planets in the universe with biomarkers

in their atmosphere. And when it does, quite possibly at the end of this decade, we will have

the first proof of life beyond earth. This will be a profound moment in human existence.



To operate, it will require two new supercomputers, each more powerful than the current most

powerful supercomputer in the world. One of those will be based at the Pawsey

Supercomputing Centre in Perth.



It has been called “one of the largest scientific endeavours in history.” The world’s smartest

people are working on it - and that includes plenty of Australians. Indeed this is happening

here in Australia.



And who knows about the Square Kilometre Array project? And who among you have reported

on it or on the Canberra Deep Space Communication Complex?



This is our Apollo. And barely anyone has heard of it.



I would be happy for you to ignore everything else I’ve said today… if you were to do one thing

and tell your readers, your viewers and your listeners all about the wonderment of the SKA.



Because when I take a step back it seems to me that if all this astonishing science can be

happening in Australia and yet be largely unreported by you and undiscussed by us in

Parliament House why would we expect our kids to be excited by science? Why would we

expect our companies to invest in science? And why would we imagine that we will suddenly

start to commercialise science?



To reimagine the place of science in Australia, Australia must change its cultural relationship to

science. And that begins with a very different conversation about science which Labor intends

to lead. And at its heart is seeing science as an economic pillar.



Tackling Australia’s need to turn science into jobs speaks in a couple of ways to a broader

narrative that Labor will also pursue through to the next election.



The COVID pandemic, for all its difficulties and disruptions, has reminded Australians that we

are all in this together. No one can buy their way out of COVID. When someone falls it effects

the whole society and all of us need to help them get back on their feet. And in the midst of

this, the role of government in leading the country on a path of reconstruction is paramount.

The role of government has been central to Australia surviving the pandemic. Government will

be pivotal in making the decisions and providing the support to rebuild Australian industry

including through turning science into jobs.



Using the power of government to improve the realities of people’s lives and build our nation is

at the core of the Labor project.



Scientific discovery and the benefits for humanity that come from it, is rooted in risk, aspiration

and opportunity. And this is central to Labor under Anthony Albanese.



Australians aren’t asking for a free ride. They aren’t even asking for life to be easier. They

don’t mind working hard. Every day, in every corner of this country, decent, diligent people are

fulfilling their end of the bargain. Doing all they can to build a better future for their kids. They

just want to know that all their hard work and sacrifice will count for something. That their

government is working just as hard as they are to help achieve this.



Hard work should be rewarded. And government needs to nurture an environment where

Australians can pursue opportunity. That applies to those who seek to commercialise the latest

technology. It also applies to the families of middle Australia who want the opportunity to invest

and build their hard-earned wealth for the benefit of themselves and their kids.



Our values haven’t changed, but our values must now apply to a new vision for a new world.

And I do believe this is fundamentally a mission for the modern Labor party. To provide

security and certainty for Australian families, and opportunity for their future.



Mr Morrison has a script, of sorts, that he gives the Australian people. It’s almost a fairy-tale.

That there’s nothing to worry about. That everything will be okay. That we are coming back

from the COVID crisis, and that’s all that matters.



But if our only goal is to climb out of the COVID hole, we will soon realise we are just sitting on

sinking sand. The Morrison fairy-tale will quickly evaporate when Australia wakes up in a world



for which it is unprepared. And we will be leaving the next generation to count the cost.



So what is Australia’s future? As a forgotten country? At the bottom of the globe and the

bottom of the ladder? With a lost generation who don’t have the skills to succeed in the new

economy, because the generation before them squandered the chance to plan for it?



Or will we fulfil our end of the bargain? Will we join the race for the jobs of the future? Will we

raise the bar for our kids, rebuild our industries and reimagine science and skills for a modern

economy?



Australian Labor has made our choice.



We choose to plan for the future. To prepare our economy. To provide the opportunity for our

kids to take their place in a new world. To help Australian families make good on that promise,

and to hand on a better deal to the next generation.



Because Labor chooses to be on your side.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363





RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR NATIONAL RECONSTRUCTION, EMPLOYMENT,

SKILLS AND SMALL BUSINESS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR SCIENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

NATIONAL PRESS CLUB Q&A

CANBERRA

WEDNESDAY, 24 MARCH 2021



SUBJECTS: Science in Australia; the Commercialisation of science; Women

in STEM; economy post-COVID; Nobel laureates; Research and

Development; Life forms; STEM in school; international collaboration of

science; COVID in PNG.



TOM CONNELL: Thank you for the speech, Richard. Clearly, your passionate;

your study included science and pure maths, it came through. Starting on the glass

half full and the jobs of the future; will Labor be proposing to select industries if you

like, we’ve got Silicon Valley and that was this deliberate collaboration,

universities, government, get business going- is that the approach that's needed

to kick start Australia in the future jobs area?



MARLES: Yeah, look, it's a good question, Tom. And I think, I mean there's lots of

ingredients to this, to successfully turn science into jobs, and to get

the commercialisation piece right. But I do think that part of that is about

understanding and working to our national strengths, so I think we do need to be

thinking through what they are, there is a process that we need to undergo. That's

not about picking winners and saying company X is going to do project Y, but it

is about understanding; who are we as a country? And what are our

national strengths and what are the opportunities that come from that. Now, I don't

have every answer to that right now but there are some obvious candidates for

that. We are a country which is world-leading in mining. You know, we are really

the best miners in the world. And we've kind of exported our mine

management expertise to places like Africa. You might rightly say that the

operations mining capital of Africa is Perth. But to what extent are we

commercialising our mining science? Mining equipment- what are we doing in that

space and what are we doing in the space of value adding to the resources that we

extract here in Australia. That’s an obvious example. I think agriculture is another.

We are amongst the best farmers in the world. What are we doing to

commercialise agricultural science? And we do it well in that respect, but do we

reach our full potential. You get other areas like medical research, it is an area

where we do science really well. The precinct in Parkville around the University of

Melbourne, is as good as medical research precinct as anywhere in the world. Now

we’ve got CSL and it is doing amazing work, but we are only manufacturing one

vaccine in this country, that is our capacity. So, have we commercialised the

opportunities that arise from the incredible medical research that we have done in

Australia? So, I do think that we need to be thinking about strengths such as those.

It is far from an exhaustive list and I do think we need to be playing to those.



CONNELL: So, glass half empty. You mention losing old jobs is inevitable, which

jobs?



MARLES: Well, I think it is really important that we- well, I think it's really poor that

we're focusing on half glass full. It does matter to fight for jobs. And I have gone

through this experience representing the electorate that I do, where we have seen

the loss of Ford as making cars, where we saw the loss of Point Henry, which was

an aluminium smelter for Alcoa. They're example of jobs that have been lost. You

need to fight for them, and we did, and I wish we had hung on to them because

particularly in respect of car manufacturing, it really was the most complex

manufacturing we were doing in the country at that the time. What's really

important though is that we are focusing on the other side of the equation. I mean,

it does need to be about fighting for every job in this country but it also needs to be

about preparing our kids and our population to take up the opportunities of the

future.



CONNELL: First question from the floor is Julie Hare.



JULIE HARE: Julie Hare from the Australian Financial Review, thank you very

much, Mr Marles. We are all too aware of the horrific stories of sexual harassment,

sexual assault and sexism coming out of Parliament House. For years

governments and science groups have pushed for young women to join the ranks

of STEM. This is despite poor graduate outcomes in terms of full-time gainful

employment, low salaries, a gaping gender pay gap and often insurmountable

difficulties in gaining seniority. Add to that, too many high profile stories of sexism

and sexual harassment in labs and other scientific workplaces places. So the

question is why would a young woman chose a life as a scientist? Or for that

matter as a politician?



MARLES: You know, sadly, really sadly, that is a very good question. And, until we

have a meaningful answer to it, what underlies that question represents a real

indictment on our society- as a whole, but also, specifically on the world of politics,

which you have referred to. But you're right,  there is work that needs to be done,

serious work, in terms of changing the workplace culture of science. It's not unique

to us and that's not said as an excuse but really there are examples around the

world where other countries have moved to change culture and do it really

successfully and we need to learn everything we can. There is a kind of a

fundamental truth here, that if, you know, if the starting proposition is that science

is only for men, there's a deep unfairness in that, but we are only getting the

benefit of half our human potential- and we will lose. Nothing is surer than that if

that is how things prevail, we will lose. I'm a devotee of a podcast called Short

Wave which is produced by NPR, which is co-hosted by a couple of women in

science in the US, and they talk a lot about this subject there. You know, I think

there are specifics in relation to science about the structure of employment, the

structure of how research plays out, which needs to be thought through in terms of

enabling women to pursue a career in science. But science also forms part of a

broader societal problem in our country, which is the relationship- the gender

relationships that we see in our society. And actually I think the conversation that, if

we call it that, what we are witnessing in the last month is- well certainly in my

lifetime is the most significant, the most needed reassessment of gender relations

within our society. And, you know, I hope that that leads somewhere. That leads

somewhere in politics and that it leads somewhere in science.



HARE: Thank you.



CONNELL: Sarah Ison.



SARAH ISON: Sarah Ison from The West Australian. You obviously spoke about

two great projects there, one of them is in WA. You're saying the SKA needs to be

talked about more and so on. Will you be going to WA, being part of that? Trying to

really get that on the map in the Parliamentary dialogue- and will you be going

more than once? And regarding getting people who are studying STEM to go more

into science, a lot of people in WA who study STEM often look to the resources

sector, are you saying they should be looking elsewhere and away from that?



MARLES: Yeah, good question. To do the second first. No, they should definitely

look at the resource sector. And part of that is because it's a high-tech industry,

and one of the things that I think is often a misconception about the resource

sector is that people talk it down as being, it's simply extracting something out of

the ground and flogging it off- that so belittles what actually is going on here. When

you look at how we go about mining in Australia, it's the most high-tech mining in

the world but it's one of the most high-tech endeavours that we do in this country.

It's actually an excellent place for people who are interested in STEM to look at, in

terms of a potential future career. Yeah, I'm really keen to get to Murchison, really

keen. I've been on Tripadvisor and looked at the accommodation that's available in

Murchison - not flash I’ve got to say, but we're going anyway. And, so it's about a

three-and-a-half hour drive, I'm looking at Madeleine who says she is going to

accompany me. I don't want to absolutely commit to this because in a COVID

world things change, but COVID-permitting, the plan is to get there in April. We've

got the wheels in motion- I'd like to go back there frequently. And really part of it is,

you know, we need to celebrate big science. When we look at the period in time

where the proportion of kids who in Year 10 were making the choice to pursue

science, that was at its highest in about 1982. That is the year I was in Year 10 and

decided to pursue science and make that fundamental to my academic journey.

And when I think about what inspired me, I don't, you know, remember the moon

landings, but Apollo loomed large as I was growing up. I mean, this was the single

most extraordinary achievement of humanity. How couldn't you be inspired, when

you were looking at what was happening there? And it wasn't something you found

on the back of academic journals; it was on the front page of newspapers. The

moon landing was the most-watched event in history. This was popular. Like, big

science was celebrated, and I don't think it's a coincidence that what came from

that is, you know, in the graph the biggest bubble of people then deciding to

pursue science. To what extent are we doing that now? I mean, the SKA is

astounding. Like, it is a genuinely astounding project. It is the biggest IT project in

history, it's one of the very biggest science endeavours that has ever occurred. It's

happening here, no one knows about it. And you guys have to write about it. This

is on us, right. It's on us to discuss it, but you guys have to write about it. I really

don't get why it's not on the front page of your newspapers every couple of weeks.

But, no one knows and it's interesting, it's inspiring, what it's going to do is

incredible. There is - there's a kind of a current affairs about it. There's a new story

constantly. You, need to write about it. It's part of what we need to do to change

our trajectory.



ISON: Thank you.



CONNELL: Certainly, sound keen to go, hopefully they keep the borders down for

you. Greg Brown, the next question.



GREG BROWN: Greg Brown from The Australian. You talk about the need for a

new economy post-COVID- a reimagination of the economy. And you know, Labor

did have plans for a different society ahead of the last election and that was paid

for by increased revenue measures, broadening of the tax base, in some instances

higher taxes. How do you envision that Labor is going to be able to create this new

economy you're talking about? Will there need to be an increase in revenue

measures? Or will you be able to do this with a tax intake that is roughly similar to

the Coalition's?



MARLES: I think, again start at the end, the answer is yes. And, you know, there's

a couple of things implied in the question. So, we are not going to go the next

election with the breadth of propositions that we went to the last. We've made that

really clear. And the sort of things that we had on the table are all under review and

we have made clear our position in respect of that, and you know, it is for us the

great learning that came out of our review of the last election. You know that.

You've all heard it a lot before. That's our position. I think when we're talking about

what I've been describing in my speech today, I come back to that idea, I actually

think at its heart, it is a cultural question. We need to change the cultural

relationship to science. That's not a function of government revenue. That's a

function of how we place science in our societal view. Like, do we reckon it's

important? Like, you know I am a massive sports fan, but do we know who our

Nobel laureates are? Are we having science fares at schools? Are we actually

getting people excited about it? I think it actually starts there. And the

commercialisation of science, which is kind of the hardest stat that we really need

to shift, and through that shift the stat in relation to the complexity index, is really a

function of the private sector economy. Yes, it starts with public sector research

and, yeah, there is a fundamental kind of dollars component to that. You're not

going to have a science agenda if your starting point is to cut hundreds of

scientists from the CSIRO which is what the Liberals have done. So, I'm not saying

it's got nothing to do with a public endeavour, it obviously does. But the critical

thing, the critical thing, is the commercialisation piece, and that is not a function of

government revenue.



BROWN: So, the issue is where government energy will be directed. Labor- a

Labor Government can pursue its goals in line with its values without increasing

taxes or increasing spending?



MARLES: Correct.



BROWN: And that is what will happen ahead of the next election?



MARLES: Correct.



BROWN: Thank you.



CONNELL:  So, what about your knowledge of Nobel laureates versus say

Geelong Brownlow Medal winners?



MARLES: I mean, I assume we all know in this room, that there is one living in

Canberra and who was here this time last week listening to Dr Cathy Foley. He

didn't win his Nobel laureate as an Australian, he won it as an Alaskan, but he's the

Vice-Chancellor of ANU. I mean, there is something- Elizabeth Blackburn, who is

our most recent Nobel laureate, who did work on telomerase- it's a fantastic

achievement. She's from Tasmania. It was done on the west coast of North

America, that's where it was done. Why isn't Elizabeth Blackburn doing her science

in Australia? That's not a criticism of Elizabeth Blackburn, she's gone where she's

gone but her story in a sense, says what’s great about us; what’s our potential,

what we’re capable of, but it also says kind of what we're not doing right. Now, I

don’t want to - it's not talking it all down. There are - I mentioned the medical

research in Parkville. Quantum computing that we're doing at UNSW. And indeed

Cathy Foley was talking about that last week. World leaders, we're world leaders.

When we do science, we do it really, really well. But it is so important that we are

valuing it and placing it front and centre, and seeing it as important as Geelong's

Brownlow Medal winners.



CONNELL: Next question, David Crowe.



DAVID CROWE: Thank you Tom. Thanks Mr Marles, David Crowe from The

Age and The Sydney Morning Herald. And Tom, I warn you I've got a second

question I'm going to tack onto the end here. But I used to write about technology

and business, and for all the time that I wrote about it research and development

investment was too low, by global standards. It's never changed in the decades

that I’ve written about it. What's required to change that? I mean, it would have to

be a huge policy, surely to lift that percentage up to the levels that we see in other

developed economies. And if I can just throw in the second question now while I'm

here; I'm intrigued by your passion for the discovery of life forms around the

universe. What are your thoughts on what kind of life forms they might be? But first

things first.



MARLES: So, we go to that question, and you have, you know, you prep for an

event like this and your media advisors say, "Please, just don't talk about the

aliens. Please don't do it." And I always talk about the aliens. But it's, well, let me

answer the question; the earth seen externally is unique in terms of, you know,

heavenly bodies around us by virtue of the complexity of our atmosphere and it

makes it really clear that there is life. The biomarkers in the atmosphere, it's a

function of the complexity of the chemistry in the atmosphere. The SKA, and the

next generation of high-powered optical telescopes which will principally be based

in Chile but through the Giant Magellan Telescope, Australia is a 10 per cent

shareholder in one of them, will also have the capacity to see planets with this

granular detail. They talk about- and you’ve probably heard this- planets being in

the Goldilocks Zone, exactly the right space between a sun of an appropriate size.

So, astronomers know where to look. It's a question of having equipment powerful

enough that you look with the precision that you can identify and I guess analyse

the composition of the atmosphere. That's what they predict with a high degree of

confidence they will do this decade. Now, what you'll be looking at is light that is

millions of years old- so you're actually not looking at the present, you're looking at

the past. And we won't know whether that's intelligent life or a whole lot of critters

or single-cell, you know, creatures. But we'll know it's life. That's what we'll know.

That is actually a remarkable moment in the human experience. We're not going to

be talking to it, they're not going to come and visit, it's not going to

be Independence Day, the movie, but we'll know. And we won’t know in theory,

we'll know it's right there, with precision. And we'll know by virtue of work that's

being done in Murchison. So why aren't you writing about that?



CROWE: Okay, I'll rethink my afternoon. Can I also get your thoughts on the-



MARLES: R&D.



CROWE: Research, especially the research and development tax concession, you

know which, does it need to be scrapped? Do we need a completely different

approach?



MARLES: Look, good question. And I don't have all the answers is the honest

answer to your question. And I think, you know, what can be said is that we've got

to have a good look at it. You'll find people around who will give you the full critique

on the R&D tax credit to go off and scrap it would be actually getting rid of the one

thing in our policy framework right now which does seek to encourage R&D within

our companies. And it kind of goes to Greg's question, you know, it's actually about

stimulating this activity within the private sector economy, which is what we need to

be doing. But, whatever it is, what was implied - what was stated in your question

is a hundred per cent right; it's got to be a massive shift. It can't be that this is a

question which is too hard and that we kind of look at it and think, ‘God, we've

been struggling with this forever, let's do something else.’ Cause this is what it's

about. It's in this question that we have the answer to whether or not our

grandkids, people we know and love, will enjoy the prosperity that we have right

now. Like, it's this question and that's what public policy needs to be focusing on.

And if there's anything that comes out of the speech that I'm giving today, it’s that's

where we're focusing when we think about what reconstruction means coming out

of COVID.



CONNELL: The most obvious case for government intervention is around the

vaccine. So we can make AstraZeneca, we can’t make MRNA vaccines in

Australia. To reconfigure a vaccine for a new strain takes six weeks for MRNA, six

months for AstraZeneca.



MARLES: Correct.



CONNELL:  Would Labor pledge to have that MRNA capability?



MARLES: Again, so the significance of that question is obviously right now. And

the significance of that question is about, you know, the last eight years. We’re not-

we don't get a chance of influencing this probably until May of next year and this is

on us right now. That capacity that you've just described exists in India, not here.

So, I guess the one point I'd make is that we have, you know, one of the world

leading medical research sectors, areas in the world and it's not that there's no

commercialisation, because CSL is the biggest company in Australia today- and

indeed a great example of kind of best practice that we need to replicate. But it's

not enough. One company is not enough. And it's not everyday practice. And that's

what we've got to start doing.



CONNELL: Misha Schubert.



SCHUBERT: Misha Schubert, here today as Vice President of the National Press

Club but declaring also that in my other life I'm CEO of Science and Technology

Australia. Thanks for your speech today and for the passion that infuses your

conversations about science. I wanted to return to the part of your speech where

you talked about STEM education in schools and floated the idea that maybe we

need to rethink as a country, mandating subject choice into the senior years of

secondary level in STEM. Also interested in your views, particularly around the

teaching workforce is sufficient to bring that enthusiasm. Often when you talk to

brilliant scientists, technologists, engineers and mathematicians around the country

and say, ‘what was it that set you on the path into STEM?’ an inspiring teacher is

often part of the ingredient mix there. So, what are your thoughts on how

potentially the country needs to grapple with part of the puzzle?



MARLES: So we need to celebrate science teachers and there's some work that

we as a society do in relation to that, but we've got to do better. You know, I'm the

proud uncle of a niece who in Year 11 made the Australian Physics Olympic team,

which was an incredible achievement. Came to Parliament House, had the photo

and everything. She went on to become a science teacher and I couldn't be

prouder of that. Like, that is a choice that we really need to see as valid as any

choice in terms of pursuing scientific- a scientific career, so I think that's really

important. I think in terms of- I'd like to start the conversation about how we see

science in schools. And I don't intend to try and conclude the conversation here.

But is it okay if we've got kids who are struggling with science and maths that we

say, "No worries, you can do other things."  Or maybe there is a point at which we

need to say, "well, we’ll get you up to speed." Because we do that in relation to

English, as we should of course. We do that it in relation to literacy. Numeracy is

just as important. And again, I think it forms part of this broader question. I think we

don't value science enough in our society, I really deeply think that. And we need

to change our cultural relationship to science and this is a critical part of it. Thanks,

Misha.



SCHUBERT: Thanks.



CONNELL: Next question from Nic Stewart.



NIC STEWART: I'm one of those journalists who's really going to disappoint you

because I'm not going to write about the search for extra-terrestrial life. What I'm

more interested in is; what the, I think, the most Australians are more interested in,

which is the ability to get, say, a car industry moving in Australia. Now, you were

quite good at highlighting all the problems. What I found almost as difficult as the

search for extra-terrestrial life was actual initiatives that you're definitely going to

take to boost science in Australia. Will you, for example, give a commitment to free

science degrees? Because that seems to be one easy way of sending a financial

signal that will push people towards doing science. That will actually encourage

them rather than mandating that they need to do one thing or another. Brian

Schmidt you referred to, we're now at a stage where the ANU is considering

abandoning neuroscience in- as a subject. I mean, isn't that terrible? And what

would you do to recreate this as a real scientific hub?



MARLES: Yeah, and the answer to that last question is it is terrible. Look, in a

sense you charge me with not having all the answer to the questions today, and

I'm guilty as charged. And there is a lot of work that we need to do, and we will go

to the election with a much more comprehensive statement- as I said in the

speech, which details the solutions. I think, what I really seeking to do right now is

to highlight the biggest picture that we really need to change our appreciation of

science but that there are two fundamental stats that we need to turn around. One

is the declining rate of kids pursuing science and the second is the

commercialisation of science. And you know, you put forward one solution in

respect of the question of getting more people to pursue science- I think we need

to look at all of these things. It's obviously complex. There's a lot of work that

needs to go on. We will come up with answers. But there is a fundamental starting

point here, and that is to have a complete shift in the way in which we view this and

to have a very different conversation and that's what I hope to lead.



CONNELL: Next question comes from Steve Lewis.



STEVE LEWIS: Steve Lewis, Director of the National Press Club. Surprised you

didn't mention Professor Bob Dylan when you were asked that tricky question from

Tom Connell about great Nobel laureates but I know that was an oversight. I don't

wish to be accused of being sinocentric, but I wish to follow-up a question I asked

the Chief Scientist, Dr Foley a week or so ago, about our collaboration with China.

Can Australia- can we sustain very close scientific relationships and collaboration

with China at a time when we are strategically, quite deliberately, moving away

from China, the recent announcement on the Quad. You as a former Shadow

Defence Minister knows that our defence industry is moving ever closer with

America, away from China. So, if Labor wins the next election- and I note

that Sportsbet has shortened the odds on a Prime Minister Albanese winning the

next election- how will you, as Minister, frame that Australia-China scientific

relationship? Would you ban the Thousand Talents Program? Would you put bans

on that collaboration? Or is it a free for all and you'd allow Australian scientists,

Chinese scientists to collaborate on everything.



MARLES: It's a really good question, Steve and it's one that we- it's really

important we don't have a fundamentalist answer to, is perhaps where I'd start.

And I thought actually Cathy Foley gave a really good answer to this question last

week about the level at which collaboration occurs but also the, you know,

fundamental importance for, I think, she gave a stat that we represent 2 per cent of

global research.



LEWIS: That's right.



MARLES: If we're not collaborating internationally, we're not in the business of

science- and China is a huge part of the international landscape. So, I guess the

starting point I'd say is to come to this with a kind of fundamentalist position which

says we should decouple in terms of our scientific collaboration with China, is

insane. That makes no sense. It is really important, that we manage- or that we

continue to have scientific collaboration in a whole lot of areas with scientists in

China, and by the way that collaboration is happening between scientists in the

United States and scientists in China. It's how the global scientific community

operates, and it is really important people understand it and it's really important we

don't end up in a kind of populist, fundamentalist space in relation to that. It's not

without its complexity. I mean, you raise that particular program, you raised

defence industry. You know, defence industry and defence technology and

defence science is not something we can collaborate with China on; that's clear as

well. And, it's not beyond our wit to walk this line, to know what are areas which

are possible to work on and what are areas which are not. And indeed our kind of

system as it were, does walk that line right now. But I think, you know, there are

going to be really sensitive areas which need to have classification around them,

which cannot lend themselves to collaboration with any country, and with China;

okay, we put a fence around them. But then there's a whole other broad area of

scientific collaboration which must continue because if it doesn't, we are literally

given the size of the country that we are; cutting our nose off to spite our face.



CONNELL: Michael Keating.



MICHAEL KEATING: Michael Keating, from Keating Media. What do you think of

the government's response to the COVID crisis in Papua New Guinea? Does that

present a clear and present danger to Australia?



MARLES: Yeah, good question. It's a really good question. I mean, the truth is- I

know lots of people in PNG, as people would be aware and I've had

communication with them in the last little while. And, you know, my heart breaks,

really, for what is happening up there. And I think there is a human tragedy of

proportions that we don't understand here, which is unfolding on our border. So

before we talk about it being a danger for us, you know, what is happening to PNG

right now, you know, must form part of our focus as their neighbour, as their friend,

as the country with the relationship that we would seek to have with PNG- not in

respect of us but for them. It really matters. And again, something that is very

important, that people understand fully. And I get that it became the focus of a

day's news last week and that's, you know, something unusual in terms of the way

in which we have seen reporting on PNG but it's still there. It didn't finish when the

reporting stopped last week, and I think the situation is getting worse. I think in

fairness to the government, I don't- I'm not across every detail of what they are

doing, so I don't feel I'm in a position to do the critique. But I do know that this is

not going to be fixed by sending a couple of things, or a couple of people up there



and having, you know, a few thousand vials of vaccine. This is on a completely

different plane, a different order of magnitude, and it really matters that there is a

response to that. And the final point I'd make- which then does go to us; I think the

disease running uncontrolled, in the proximity that we're talking about to Australia

has to be a concern from our national interests point of view as well.



CONNELL: Just finally, drawing on your passion for science; would you commit to

the first ever debate with the government at the National Press Club on science-



MARLES: Sure.



CONNELL: Ahead of the election?



MARLES: So, Karen and I worked together as the Co-convenors of the

Parliamentary Friends of Science which we've done for the last eight years. At that

point neither of us in any portfolio sense were connected with science. She is now

the Minister for Science, I'm now the Shadow Minister for Science- so we have

mainly worked together actually on trying to improve the science literacy of

Parliament House. But I am absolutely certain that Karen would relish the

opportunity to have a debate here.



CONNELL: There you go. Alright, ladies and gentlemen, let’s conclude on that

note. Please thank Richard Marles.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363



