

T h e  H o n . D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T



Monday 11th January 2021

Minister Littleproud iv Sky News Chris Smith

CHRIS SMITH: On Friday I told you about an agriculture audit which showed that because of a  lack of foreign workers in the bush at the moment, we have wasted $39 million in unfarmed  produce. Meanwhile, we hear today that both Victoria and New South Wales are in for a horrid  fruit picking season as workers remain trapped behind closed borders and bureaucratic red  tape. Agriculture Minister David Littleproud joins me right now. Happy new year to you David.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Happy new year mate, good to be with you.

CHRIS SMITH: Yeah, good to have you here. Just- can I ask you about COVID before we get  onto the guts of what I want to talk to you about? What's your reaction to Mark McGowan's  lesson that he's dished out today to New South Wales about how New South Wales should be  fighting the virus instead of ticking along with it?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Oh look, just grow up. I mean, a whole lot of these premiers - our  federation is failing this country at the moment because with petulant premiers just wanting to  act like teenagers, trying to score cheap political points rather than lead. Federation was  meant for us to work together, and though it was a line put in a map 120 years ago, and at the  moment it's failing us, because it's parochial politics. McGowan's going to an election in March,  he's using it as a political advantage to himself - and I get that, that's politics.

But this is above this; this is a crisis, a national crisis, where we've got to back one another.  We're all Australian at the end of the day, and we have to back one another with the signs -  we've learnt a lot since this started nearly 12 months ago. So, it's time for the premiers to grow  up, they want to be big boys and girls now and have ownership of a lot of the public health and  make all the big calls, but with that comes a responsibility of working together. And unless  they're going to do that, they should bugger off, because effectively the rest of the country's  had a gut full of this.

CHRIS SMITH: Spot on. Well described - you haven't held back there. And I- can I just add to  that? That New South Wales and the country, the entire, you know, nation is lucky that New  South Wales did try as much as it could, took so many risks to keep open because it is the  engine room of the economy.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Exactly. And look, this is what we've said from the start: we don't need  to have hard lockdowns of straight borders right across the line. What you need to do is back  yourself localised lockdowns, and invariably, we're moving towards that as we're getting  through this virus. Now we've got a localised lockdown of Greater Brisbane and a few of the  shires around it at the moment - that's the right thing to do. The Northern Beaches of Sydney -

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T



that's the right thing to do. But back that state that has that localised lockdown; don't cut off the  rest of the country.

And particularly for us in regional Australia, we're the forgotten Australians in all this; we're the  second-class citizens, and everyone's forgotten about it. We've had city centric decision  making processes predicated on everyone in the city. And that's great, but then they've put an  arbitrary line on the map and said: this is what's going to happen to you all. Well, it doesn't fit  for us because, you know, we haven't had the cases, we're not being impacted the way that  city people have. Have the localised lockdown and keep the country moving.

As the- your last guest just said: we've got to learn to live with this. This is going to be around  for some time. And instead of just reverting back to old type of having that parochial politics at  the state border and looking after your own dung heap, we have to work together. And that's  what National Cabinet was meant to do. But at the moment, federation is failing our country  until these premiers grow up and learn to live and work with one another.

CHRIS SMITH: Okay. Let's talk about the drastic shortage in, well, foreign workers initially,  and now workers in general when it comes to agricultural produce, and in particular, fruit  picking grapes and apples in Victoria and fruit picking in New South Wales.

We've got two problems; we've got a bureaucratic barrier occurring in Victoria because they  can't work out how to pay for a quarantine system that would allow workers in from overseas  to do the job. And then you've got those who should be in New South Wales, back in Victoria,  because the border's closed. How do you solve these two problems?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, this is where federation has particularly failed farmers and  regional Australia more than anybody in all this. Back in March, we tried to put in an Ag  workers code, where we could have the free movement of workers between one state and the  other. But Queensland, Western Australia and Tasmania told me to go and take a running  jump. The other states signed up to it, but then they put all these restrictions on it. In August,  we reopened the Pacific and Seasonal Programmes; there's 25,000 pre-vetted, work ready,  men and women to come into this country. Because, unfortunately, when we market tested  these jobs with Australians, they won't take them. So, we've had to bring them in, because  farmers don't have the luxury of sitting around, wait for someone to turn up and pick it. When  it's ripe, it has to get off the paddock onto your plate and that's why we've said to the states:  you want to own public health, you want to own the quarantine responsibilities, then here it is.  You come up with the protocols and we will stamp the visas.

In Victoria, the industry in Victoria themselves, lead the way with Aspen Health, an  internationally recognised health organisation. The WHO, for what that's worth, but also other  state agencies are also recognising these as the peak commercial health entity in Australia,  had put a proposal to Victoria back in October to say they would do either hotel quarantine,  on-farm quarantine or in fact, set up a tent city. They put this up in October, the Victorian  Government has been sitting on this since October and will not make a decision, despite the  fact that Greg Hunt himself, has made it very clear to the Victorian Health Minister, the Federal  Government has no worries about this whatsoever. There is no impediment to us stamping the  visas of those people. So, it is in your court. National Cabinet, Dan Andrews, big man beat his  chest and said this was important, we need these workers in, we will take responsibility. He  has been sitting on this since October and still will not make a decision. There is no red tape to  this; the only people that are holding this up is Dan Andrews and his Government. All they  have to do is listen to Aspen Health…

CHRIS SMITH: But, what if - and spend the money that will reap them the benefits of the  industry on its feet.

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T





DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, this is the thing is - so, those initial numbers that you saw, Chris,  is very important to put into context. That's only with what's happened, particularly in Northern  Australia. So, as you understand, as it gets warmer in the Northern part and then spreads itself  down through the Southern states as we get further into summer. That really predicates, those  numbers are predicated on what's happened in Northern Australia. So, Victoria and New  South Wales and Tasmania's part is about to hit them, because we're getting warmer, they're  coming into their season now. And particularly, when you've got state borders locked off, we  can't workers across and then we can't get these seasonal pacific workers in. We are looking  at a situation where these farmers are making commercial decisions now where they're  ploughing crops in and they're actually letting crops fall - for no reason whatsoever, because  there had been proposal from Aspen Medical and industry, put to Dan Andrews, in October in  front of him. The Federal Government said: we've got no problems with it whatsoever, go your  hardest, we're there to back you. They still will not make a decision and this isn't about pointing  figures, this is about accountability. This is about federation; every tier of Government,  standing up in a crisis and standing up to their responsibility and getting it solved. We have  solved the problem and it's found 25,000. We've said to the states: now you let them in, you  find the quarantine protocol and I can tell you, Aspen Medical is doing the on-farm auditing of  those foreign workers that have come into Queensland. So, they're doing the on-farm- So  Queensland trusts Aspen Medical. The Victorian Government in fact, is engaging them in  other matters already. So, this isn't some sort of fly by the night company, that's just set up  under COVID-19. This has been a long standing international company that is world-renowned  to having the best credentials. Yet, the Victorian Government has been sitting on this proposal  since October and will not make a decision. The Victorian farmers, but also every Australian  consumer will pay for this. 15 to 25 per cent increase at the checkout, because the Victorian  Government is sitting on their hands. This is where federation is just doing my head in, I can  tell you. My old man used to be a state member of parliament and I used to believe in the  states, but I think we need to have a mature conversations about the future of federation  because it has been found wanting during COVID-19.

CHRIS SMITH: Couldn't agree more, couldn't agree more. David Littleproud, thank you very  much for your time.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks for having me, mate.

Media contact  0455 448 985

