

MATT THISTLETHWAITE MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR THE REPUBLIC

MEMBER FOR KINGSFORD SMITH





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

THURSDAY, 4 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Essential workers left behind by Morrison government; harsh IR changes;

RBA comments.



MATT THISTLETHWAITE, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES:

Recently, I met with a group of aged care workers, these are the hardworking Australians that

have been helping people, our vulnerable older people, to get through the Covid pandemic. I

was really struck by how overworked, underpaid and stressed this group of Australian workers

was. They were telling me about the fact that, although many of them work full time, and even

work on weekends and night shifts, they all had a second job, a second casual job, just to pay

the bills. They were talking about the lack of PPE in their facilities and the fact that many of

them are emotionally drained and overworked. These are hardworking Australians who have

cared for the vulnerable during the pandemic, but they're also the Australians who are in the

line of sight of this government if their new workplace relations laws get up. It's the Australian

workers that gave the most during the Covid pandemic and could stand to lose the most under

this government's changes to workplace relations if they are enacted by the Parliament. That is

why Labor is opposing the changes to the Better Off Overall Test, and the reduction in wages

and conditions that will come if this government's new workplace laws are passed.



Now yesterday we saw the Reserve Bank Governor also makes some comments about the

fact that wages aren't growing in Australia and the effect that it is having on the Australian

economy. It's been known for some time that wages inaction has been a problem for the

Australian economy. It’s been made worse by this government, cutting the penalty rates of

workers in vulnerable industries like hospitality and retail. It's been made worse by this

government always opposing an increase in the minimum wage for some of the lowest paid

workers in this country and the Reserve Bank Governor’s comments highlight just how out of

touch this government is when it comes to supporting the wages and working conditions of

Australian workers. Happy to take some questions.



JOURNALIST: If the government was to remove any of those changes, the Better Off Overall

Test, would Labor be more open to supporting the legislation?



THISTLETHWAITE: Well there's problems beyond the Better Off Overall Test, of course, the

changes to casual conversion and the fact that there is no arbitration mechanism, that

someone would have to go to the Federal Court if they wish to challenge a decision where

their employer didn't convert them to permanent employment after a 12 month period. There

are problems beyond the Better Off Overall Test, but the focus of this legislation is of course,

as it always is under a Liberal National government, to cut the wages and working conditions

of Australian workers, and that's not on. Labor is on the side of Australian workers, we will

always stand up for them and their wages and conditions and that's what we'll do in this case.



JOURNALIST: The RBA mentioned their might be some job shedding when the JobKeeper

and JobSeeker allowances end in March, does Labor still push for an extension of those even

though the economy is roaring back and should be back to where it was pre-pandemic by the

middle of the year?



THISTLETHWAITE: Well, last week I met with some people that work in the travel industry,

travel agents, people that operate tour companies, and these are the companies that are really

struggling, and they're not going to be back to full operations come the end of March. They

know that they're going to continue to suffer and to do it tough beyond March. And our

question for the government is - what are you going to do to support workers and jobs in those

industries where we know there's going to be a major problem come the end of March when

this support is withdrawn? And that's why Labor has been calling on the government to look to



extend some of that support in those industries where there's going to be an ongoing effect

beyond March. Thanks guys.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: BEN LEESON 0404 648 275



