

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY



LINDA BURNEY MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND SOCIAL SERVICES

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDIGENOUS AUSTRALIANS

MEMBER FOR BARTON



SENATOR JENNY MCALLISTER

SHADOW CABINET SECRETARY

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER TO THE LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR COMMUNITIES AND THE

PREVENTION OF FAMILY VIOLENCE

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

SYDNEY

TUESDAY, 30 MARCH 2021



SUBJECTS: Australian Labor Party National Conference; Women’s policy; Education

policy.



JENNY MCALLISTER, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR COMMUNITIES AND THE

PREVENTION OF FAMILY VIOLENCE: Good morning everyone and welcome to Labor's first-

ever online conference. Right now upstairs we're debating chapter four and shortly we'll move

on to chapter five. These are the chapters where Labor's core commitments around equality

for women are set out. This is a most important part of Labor's program. It always has been

and it will be in a future Labor government also. This is an area where we are having an

incredibly important national conversation. The Australian people want action. They are tired of

words and the Government is failing. They have had so many years - years during which they

ignored reports that were placed on their desks. And in the last year a period where they

ignored women's interests as we went through the pandemic. This will not be so for a Labor

government. A Labor government will act with urgency and ambition to address the aspirations

of Australian women for safety, equality and participation. And it's my pleasure to be here with

my friends, Tanya Plibersek and Linda Burney. And I'll hand now to Tanya.



TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SHADOW MINISTER

FOR WOMEN: Thanks very much Jenny. And it is terrific to be here with you Jenny, and with

Linda Burney. What Australian women right now want is action rather than words. Australian

women want action, not just words - and they want real leadership. I was at a National

Conference a little bit like this in 1994. We were in Hobart in the Wrest Point Casino - it wasn't

virtual in those days. We actually had to turn up. At that conference in 1994, we moved our first

affirmative action rule changes. I was there with our leader Anthony Albanese, with Penny

Wong, and with many others. All those years ago, we moved to change the rules in the Labor

Party because we wanted to see more women joining the Labor Party, and we wanted to see

more women progressing through the Labor party. Because it's not just good for the Labor

Party. It's good for our country when our Parliament looks more like the Australian population.

We make better decisions when our Parliament is more representative of the whole of our

community. What that's meant, in recent times, are terrific, really important policies like more

affordable quality childcare for Australian families. Like 10 days paid domestic violence leave.

Like policies that would reduce the gender pay gap. Like policies that would reduce the

superannuation gap for women in retirement. The fact that we have a party and a Parliament

that is more representative of the Australian population means we have better policies for all

Australians. That's what we want to see. Real leadership for Australian women and men - for

all Australians. Linda.



LINDA BURNEY, SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND SOCIAL SERVICES,

SHADOW MINISTSTER FOR INDIGENOUS AUSTRALIANS: Well, good morning, everyone.

And like Tanya and Jenny, I'm very pleased to be here with two extraordinary women within

the Labor Party. I am proud to be a Labor woman. I am proud to be a Labor woman because

it's a Labor Party with leadership like Tanya's and Jenny's, and many others, that makes sure

that there is a place - a real place - for women in our party. A real place for women. There are

two conversations going on in this country at the moment. There is the conversation about

what we want our Parliament to be like, to look like, and to reflect. There is also the

conversations going on in the broader community about the way in which women are treated,

the way in which women are represented, and through the Labor Party - as Tanya said, the

affirmative action program that started way back in the 90s - we now have a party that is full of

strong, articulate, extraordinary women, and we have strong, articulate, extraordinary men that

walk with us. And this is who we are as Labor. Tanya has mentioned something that I'm

extremely proud of, and something that the government just baulks at every single time. When

women and children leave a violent relationship, they have to recover. They have to get

through the trauma. They may have to move their children. They may need to find new

accommodation. They may need to see a lawyer. Why should women have to use their annual

leave to do this? Labor strongly affirms the fact that we will back in, absolutely, 10 days paid

domestic violence leave, so that women who are leaving difficult relationships - violent

relationships - have time, capacity, and most importantly the economic position to be able to

get their lives back onto a different path. To get their children's lives back onto a different path.

Like I said, we are good, strong Labor women, and it is our party that backs us in completely.



PLIBERSEK: Any questions?



JOURNALIST: Tanya, can I just ask you about this taskforce that Scott Morrison's announced

- the taskforce for women in the Cabinet. Is that something that you welcome? Is that a model

you think Labor will work with?



PLIBERSEK: There's two things to say about Scott Morrison's announcements yesterday. We

absolutely hope that the promotion of more women in the Morrison Government will make a

difference. That there will be real action, not just words from the Morrison Government. We

hope that they succeed. Because if they succeed, then that makes a difference for all

Australian women. We have said, all the way along, that Labor is very willing to work with the

Government, both on the difficulties that the Liberal Party has in getting women elected to the

Parliament. I stand absolutely ready to share the things that have worked in the Labor Party to

see better women's representation. We are at almost half female representation in the Federal

Parliament as Labor women. Tthe Coalition continues to be stuck at a quarter. They've been

stuck there for decades. We want to share what will work. When it comes to the really

important policy issues - issues like sexual assault, domestic violence - we want to work with

the Government on those issues, too. Now the Government has talked about a violence

against women summit later in the year. I would very much hope that Labor women will be

consulted on that, and the Labor Party more generally. We would love to work in partnership to

make sure that the people who are invited to that summit, and the policies - most importantly

the actions that come from that Summit are ones that can have bipartisan support. This will

work better if it's something that the whole of the Australian community gets behind and backs.

We'll have better outcomes from any summit if it's a bipartisan summit. So we would hope that

the Government will come to us and consult in the lead-up and on the actions that come from

that.



JOURNALIST: Tanya, Anthony Albanese's put Labor's goal for paid parental leave at 26

weeks at full wage back on the agenda. Will Labor take this policy to the election and isn’t this

[inaudible]?



PLIBERSEK: This is a policy that's actually been in our national platform as an aspiration for

some time. And Linda, who has responsibility for paid parental leave, will want to add to this in

just a moment. This is a policy that has been an aspiration for some time. But at any time, we

always prioritise the people who need the greatest help most. Linda, do you want to talk about

PPL specifically?



BURNEY: So, what Labor's aspiration is - is that we have 26 paid parental leave with

superannuation and on full pay. This is an incredibly important position for the Labor Party. It

has been in our platform for over two years. It is an aspiration. It is something that we will work

on very diligently on coming into Government. Clearly it is very different to the current policy,

which is thirteen weeks on minimum pay. 26 weeks on full pay, with all conditions, is Labor’s

aspiration. I can assure you that what Labor takes into the next election will be fully costed and

fully articulated before that election.



JOURNALIST: Labor was quite critical of Tony Abbott’s paid parental leave policy, that was

very similar. How will this be different?



BURNEY: Well, this paid parental leave scheme that will be adopted in this platform, as well,

as I said, the last platform, is something that we have looked at very closely. We have looked

at other suggestions, and it is our view that what we’re presenting is the right policy going

forward. I’m not interested in comparing and contrasting. What I’m interested in - and I know

that Jenny and Tanya and everyone else is of the same view - what I’m interested in is what

we’re putting in front of the party. And as I said, it’s fully paid, and it’s all the entitlements that

should go with twenty-six weeks of paid parental leave.



JOURNALIST: Ms Plibersek, yesterday when the Prime Minster was announcing his

ministerial reshuffle, he described his Minister for Women, Marise Payne, as the Prime

Minister for Women. Does that make you, as the Shadow Minister, the opposition leader for

women?



PLIBERSEK: You know, Scott Morrison: ‘blokes don’t always get it right’. I’m waiting for the

time that he does actually get it right. I mean, what a nonsense proposition: that we have a

Government that is half for men and half for women. This is not a fight between the men and

women of Australia. This is an argument between people who are sexist and people who don’t

like sexism. This is an argument between sexism and equality, not between men and women.

And I think, every time Scott Morrison gets engaged in this sort of stuff, he gets it wrong. He

hits the wrong note. I don’t want a government that’s only for women. I want a government

that’s for all Australians. But when women make up half the Australian population, then our

government needs to reflect that.



JOURNALIST: Labor leader Anthony Albanese called for women within the Labor Party to

come forward and make formal complaints about harassment. Have any such complaints been

made?



PLIBERSEK: I wouldn’t be party to them if they had been made because, of course, we have

all sorts of confidentiality arrangements. I’m certainly not aware of any. But I would join with

Anthony Albanese in saying that if someone has been sexually harassed at work, or even

worse, sexually assaulted at work, I would want them to come forward. I would support them to

come forward. We have put in place stronger measures than the government departmental

measures - we’ve actually got stronger measures than that - and we would hope that people

make use of them.



JOURNALIST: The fact that the Prime Minister did unveil this new cabinet yesterday, with this

stronger focus on women, do you believe that’s a sign that he’s starting to get it?



PLIBERSEK: It’s a sign that he’s worried, and that’s a good first step. If he’s finally taking this

seriously, that would be a good first step. And I think, as more women come into the

Parliament, which I hope happens, on the Liberal side as well as the Labor side in coming

years, it will continue to change the culture. It is very hard for Liberal women at the moment,

when they are a quarter of their Parliamentary representatives, to affect the culture change

that needs to happen.



JOURNALIST: Does the Labor Party support all recommendations of the Respect@Work

report?



PLIBERSEK: We think it’s absolutely vital that the Government takes the Respect@Work

report seriously. Of course, not all the recommendations are to government. Some of those

recommendations go to state governments, some of them go to business. But we believe that

the Government sitting on this report for more than a year now is negligent, frankly. I mean, the

Sex Discrimination Commissioner, Kate Jenkins, has done a fantastic job talking to hundreds

of organisations and individuals about sexual harassment in every Australian workplace. We

need to tackle this. We’ve got a report that’s been with the Government for more than a year,

that has a raft of very sensible, practical suggestions, and it’s shameful that it hasn’t been dealt

with ‘til now. That it’s only being dealt with now because the Government has a political

problem that it needs to fix.



JOURNALIST: You’ve been to plenty of Labor conferences in your time I’m sure. How

different is it in a virtual form to be at a conference like this? Are you disappointed that you

actually couldn’t have held a [inaudible] conference?



PLIBERSEK: I really miss our national conference. It’s sort of like a ritual. It’s like a big family

getting together for Christmas. And there’s some people you don’t want to get stuck sitting next

to, for sure. But it is like a big family getting together for Christmas. And a virtual conference is,

of course, better than no conference at all. We are still able to debate very important policy

issues at this national conference. And of course, all of us have got used to working in different

ways during 2020, during the COVID lockdown periods. So we’re pretty familiar with using

these new ways of working. But there’s something- I think it’s fair to say that there is something

a little bit missing because we're not in in a room together.



JOURNALIST: Speaking of people who might not have wanted to see each other in the past,

Bill Shorten and Anthony Albanese, that show of unity at the start. How important is that for

Labor going into the election?



PLIBERSEK: It's fantastic. And of course, all of us, all of us, opposition Members of

Parliament are 100 per cent committed to getting behind our leader to make sure that we win

the next election. Not just because we want to be in government. But because Australia

changes when Labor is in government. Like right now we're talking about women's policy.

Think about the women's policies that Labor governments have implemented. No fault divorce.

The family court, just destroyed by the Liberals. The funding of the first women's refuges, the

first women's health services, the first sexual assault services, the original paid parental leave,

affirmative action, the Sex Discrimination Act. Laws to reduce the gender pay gap to make

sure that women and men are paid equally. All of these things delivered over decades by

Labor governments, because it is only ever Labor governments that take this seriously.



JOURNALIST: Liberal Senator Sarah Henderson has said that she feels uncomfortable being

in the partyroom with Andrew Laming. Do you feel comfortable being with him in the chamber?



PLIBERSEK: I've never been especially impressed by Andrew Laming. I think it's the things

that have come out in recent weeks are pretty stunning examples of appalling behaviour. And

I'm not surprised that some of the Liberal women are speaking up now and saying that it's

unacceptable that Andrew Laming continues in the Parliament.



JOURNALIST: Given the revelations about Andrew Laming and the other broader debate that

we are seeing in politics at the moment about respect for women - all three of you have been

in politics for quite some time, are you sensing that this is the moment where the tide is

turning? We have had, for want of a better word, uprisings before, but do you reckon that this

is the moment where it’s changing?



PLIBERSEK: I've never seen the women's movement as strong and as angry as people are

now, as raw as people are now. Every single day, in pretty much every conversation I have,

someone is disclosing a sexual assault, a historic sexual assault, the assault of someone they

love. This is an outpouring. An overwhelming outpouring of anger and emotion and frustration.

Women around Australia have had a gutful. This is a moment for change. I hope we've got a

government that is capable of seizing the moment, and actually acting in a way that keeps

women safe in their homes, on the street, at work, that addresses the economic inequality that

goes hand-in-hand with violence against women. Linda, did you want to add?



BURNEY: This is a moment. There is enormous anger out there. And it is turning into action,

which we are listening to. It is good for anger. It is good for outrage, but it has to result in

something changing, in many things changing. And I fear that Scott Morrison is not meeting

the challenge as the Prime Minister. It's all very well to have a woman's taskforce. It's all very

well to promote women. Those things are important, and we will work with Government

collectively because we believe that this issue is above politics. It cannot be managed as a

political problem, and Scott Morrison needs to understand this. He needs to listen to 50 per

cent of the population who are saying this is the time for change and you are in a position to do

something about it.



JOURNALIST: Is it time, perhaps, to change the leadership of the Labor Party, and look at

putting a woman at the helm?



BURNEY: I think that leadership is absolutely fantastic, and there are women in great

leadership positions. And we would not have the confidence, we would not have the policies

that Tanya has articulated, over decades, if it had not been for the commitment of this party

towards equality and towards decency and towards respect for women. That's what we have in

the Labor Party.



JOURNALIST: Richard Marles said last week that under Labor the tax and spending levels will

be similar to what the Coalition's are. You, before the last election, in your policy area of

education, you had big spending increases - 14 billion. Ahead of this election will the budget

for education be similar to the Coalition's, and will Labor's education policy therefore be about

the focus [inaudible] the same amount of money [inaudible]?



PLIBERSEK: Thanks for that question, Greg. We’ll make all of our policy announcements, and

release all of our costings well before the next election. So you’ll have the opportunity to read

them in detail then.



JOURNALIST: But just as a broad sort of - can we expect the spending levels, just on that

issue of spending, to be roughly in line with the Coalitions'...in other words, will you be able to

achieve your policies without massive increases in spending, or do you disagree with Richard

Marles' assessment that he gave last week?



PLIBERSEK: You can expect our education policy to make sure that every child, in every

classroom, in every school, in every part of Australia, gets a great education, and gets every

opportunity. You can expect our education policy to start with supporting parents, their

children's first educators, to be in the best possible parents, and offer their children the best

start in life. You can expect our education policy to reflect our view that early childhood

education and care, childcare, is where so much of the educational foundation for a person's

life is laid down. You can expect our education policy to make sure that TAFE and vocational

education is properly funded to address the skills shortages that Australia faces, despite our

high levels of unemployment and underemployment. You can expect our education policy to

reflect our support for a university education accessible to all. You can expect our education

policy to support research in our universities, because it's the discovery, the invention, the

innovation of that research that has helped us punch above our weight as a global economic

power. That's what you can expect from Labor's education policy.



JOURNALIST: So we expect more funding for education then?



PLIBERSEK: I think I've answered your question Greg. We've got another question on the

other phone. Who have we got on the other phone?



JOURNALIST: I don't know what phone I’m on, but Clare from the Daily Telegraph. I have a

question.



PLIBERSEK: Hi Clare. Sorry, you've got a question for?



JOURNALIST: Tanya I was just wondering with regards to your response to the task force the

Prime Minister announced yesterday. Firstly, what would you, given that it's been announced

now and Labor is at best a year away from, probably, an election, what you hope that task

force could achieve in the year? What would be your barometer of potential success that you

would expect it to be able to deliver on? And secondly, the Government is due to respond on

the Respect@Work report imminently. If Labor is not satisfied with that response, would you

be considering releasing your own policy response to that report?



PLIBERSEK: Okay. Thanks Clare. Did people hear Clare's questions? The first question was

about the task force. And the second question is about the Respect@Work report. Clare asked

what would we expect from the task force over the next year? Look, I hope that this Cabinet

task force of Liberal women actually leads to real action, not just talk. We need real action in

two key areas. We need real action to make sure that women have economic security and

independence. And we need real action to address violence against women. When it comes to

economic security and independence for women, this is 100 per cent about jobs, about wages,

about the gender pay gap, about retirement incomes, and about income support for those

people who aren't working. And we've got a whole suite of policies there, a whole host of

recommendations that we can make to the Government about how we ensure that Australian

women have economic security and independence, particularly when it comes to reducing the

gender pay gap, particularly in female-dominated areas, and particularly when it comes to

retirement incomes. On the issue of safety, we need the next national plan for violence against

women and their children - is due in the middle of next year, June 2022. I've seen no evidence

that work has even really started on this national plan. We stand ready to help. And it starts

from the earliest days. This Government actually cut funding for respectful relationships

programs in our schools. Right now we're having a crisis, where we're saying our young

people don't understand consent. Well, it didn't help when they cut funding last year and only

restored it after an outcry from Labor. It goes to our judicial system, our policing. We know that

laws are stacked against victims of sexual harassment and stacked against victims of sexual

assault. We know that our domestic violence service system is not adequate yet. There's a raft

of policies here that we can recommend to the Government. So we're willing to talk. We stand

ready, in the interests of the women of Australia, and the whole Australian community, to work

with the government on these areas. On the issue of Respect@Work - look, we have to wait

for what the Government comes back with on the Respect@Work report. We'll examine their

response. And if it's inadequate, you can bet that we will be holding them to account on that.



JOURNALIST: Can I just ask one more? I guess reflecting on the way Labor has handled

inappropriate behaviour on its side over the years, are you satisfied with the way it’s been dealt

with?



PLIBERSEK: Well, I can tell you in the couple of instances I know, people have been dealt

with swiftly and with the subject of the inappropriate behaviour guiding the response - which is

very, very important.



ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350



