

Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE GOVERNMENT IN THE SENATE  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA



STATEMENT



29 March 2021

APPOINTMENT TO ATTORNEY GENERAL AND MINISTER FOR  INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS

I am honoured the Prime Minster has today appointed me as Attorney General and Minister  for Industrial Relations.

As Attorney-General, I will, among many tasks, work closely with Senator Amanda Stoker to  finalise the Government’s response to the Respect@Work report.

In my role as Industrial Relations Minister, I look forward to working with all stakeholders to  ensure that employers, in particular small businesses, and their employees are given better  access to information about their rights and responsibilities. This will help create greater  confidence for small business to employ more Australians.

I want to thank my predecessor the Hon Christian Porter MP for his work in the Attorney  General and Industrial Relations portfolios.

As Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business I am extremely proud of my  record. As Employment Minister, I worked with colleagues to oversee the largest return in  jobs, following the short and sharp recession caused by the covid-19 pandemic. I am also  proud to have initiated the overhaul and modernisation of our employment services system to  create more efficient and better outcomes for job seekers.

It was an honour to serve as Minister for Skills where skills reforms agreed by the National  Cabinet have been progressed and I thank my State and Territory counterparts for the  constructive way we have engaged on these reforms.

The success of the Morrison Government apprenticeship wage subsidies has seen more than  120,000 apprentices remain in their jobs and created over 100,000 new apprenticeship and  trainee opportunities.

Finally, in the Small and Family Business area, I have implemented a number of landmark  reforms to support small businesses to prosper, grow and hire more Australians. This includes  improving small business cash flow through the Payment Times Reporting Scheme and  Procurement Connected Policy and access to finance through the Australian Business  Securitisation Fund and the Australian Business Growth Fund.

With these achievements, and a record number of Australians in employment, I believe my  successor the Hon Stuart Robert MP will be able to continue to deliver good outcomes for all  Australians.

Media Contacts:   Minister Cash: Guy Creighton - Guy.Creighton@dese.gov.au - 0438 815 302

