









TRANSCRIPT

The Leon Delaney: Drive Show with Senator Andrew Bragg  11 January 2020

Leon Delaney:  Donald Trump has had and the I guess, the avid enthusiasm that his  followers have for everything there has to say, but Twitter has decided  that some of the things he has to say are simply not acceptable. Now,  while we can sit back here in Australia and nod and smile about  goings on halfway around the world, there are increasing concerns  that social media platforms like Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, various  other platforms are perhaps exercising a little too much power in  deciding what you and I and our politicians can and cannot say on  their platforms. Do they have a responsibility to regulate intemperate  speech or should they allow people to say whatever they damn well  please? Well, there's a growing number of Australian politicians who  are a little concerned that perhaps social media platforms may be at  risk of going too far and stifling free speech. One of them is New South  Wales Senator and chair of the Select Committee on Financial  Technology and Regulatory Technology, Senator Andrew Bragg on  the phone now. Good afternoon.

Andrew Bragg:  Leon, how are you?

Leon Delaney:  Very well, thanks. Thanks for joining us today. Censorship is a hot  topic right now, and a lot of people have pointed out social media  platforms and accused them of censorship and in the United States  suggested that it's contrary to the First Amendment. But, of course,  these are private companies. They can choose what's published on  their platforms and what's not published, can't they?

Andrew Bragg:  Well, I think for too long these organisations have been viewed as sort  of public organisations when they're not. They are, as you say, private  companies. And they're very much like your organisation, they're  publishers, and they can decide effectively what's on these platforms.  It is not for us as policy makers or as a government to tell them what  they can and can't publish. That's not the system we have, but they  cannot run systems where they contravene our laws, especially in  relation to incitement of violence or in relation to defamation, for  instance.

Leon Delaney:  All right. But obviously, President Trump has been accused of  incitement of violence. So under those circumstances, do you think  Twitter has done the right thing in suspending his account?



Andrew Bragg:  Well, as long as they do that consistently, it's up to them, they're a  private organisation, and they are entitled to run their affairs in that  way, but they've got to be consistent. So it's no good them leaving  anti-Semitic, for example, or defamatory statements on their platforms.  They've got to be consistent. And so I think it's very important that they  take this this consistency point very seriously.

Leon Delaney:  Now, of course, some of your colleagues have been arguing that  perhaps further regulation should be imposed on these platforms to  prevent them from exercising undue or unfair censorship. Do you think  there's a case to be made for that to happen?

Andrew Bragg:  Well, I think the question for us as policy makers is what are we going  to do to ensure that there is consistency in this space? I mean, these  are although they are private companies, they are very powerful. They  have enormous reach, perhaps like the railways and the oil companies  did in centuries gone by and so in other areas where we thought they  have had too much power, such as Google search and Facebook  news. In relation to media companies, we’re proposing to put in place  a code of conduct. So we have conducted some market intervention  there where we thought it was justifiable. But, you know, in this case,  as I say, if they want to intervene in their own products it's up to them,  but they've got to be consistent, in my view.

Leon Delaney:  In the past, the big concern people have had is when social media  platforms have failed to remove offensive content or objectionable  content. Now, we've got the opposite argument taking place, though,  suggesting that there needs to be some sort of kerb placed upon them  to ensure that they don't remove content arbitrarily. Is there a happy  medium to be found?

Andrew Bragg:  Well, I mean, the balance here is how do you balance free speech and  free economy. Now as part of a free economy, you have free  businesses and these businesses, whether they're media companies  or some other organisation, they are just that they are private  organisations. So I think it's all consistent, actually, that they are  responsible as semi publishers. I mean, these are not the same as  newspapers, but they are publishers for the content on their platforms.  And so whether it's the president of the United States or SBC worker  from Shepparton, it's got to be the same standard that applies. And in  the case of New South Wales, where we have laws which guard  against incitement and guard against defamation, and these platforms  are not above our laws and they need to comply with them.

Leon Delaney:  Indeed. George Christensen, one of your government colleagues,  seems to be a lot more vocal in this. And even the deputy prime  minister or the acting prime minister today, Michael McCormack, has  made comments that seems to support the idea of imposing some sort  of regulatory framework around social media platforms to ensure that  they can't simply arbitrarily remove your content. Is there a debate yet  to be really fully explored here?



Andrew Bragg:  Well, I don't think the debate has really started. I mean, I think the  removal of President Trump is really crossing the Rubicon. I mean,  that's a moment where the social media platforms crossed the  Rubicon. So the debate is just commenced in my judgement. And so  the question is, what are they going to do with all the material on their  platforms which already transgress our laws, especially in relation to  incitement and defamation? Now, one of my parliamentary colleagues,  Anne Webster, who's the member for Mallee, has had, you know,  highly defamatory information published about her, which she has  sought legal remedy to have removed. But their platforms have not  been, as I understand it, particularly helpful. And so I would I would  like to see if the platforms do this at their own volition and if not, look to  put in place a code of conduct and if that doesn't fail, then you'd have  to look at further, more onerous obligations that could be considered  by Canberra.

Leon Delaney:  Yeah, there are those who are concerned that the move to remove, to  get rid of President Trump's account is a challenge to free speech. Is  there a threat to free speech that's at play here or are people missing  the point? And they should be more focused on what you're saying  and focusing on the consistency and making sure the things that are  truly objectionable are, in fact, removed.

Andrew Bragg:  I think people are missing the point, I think it is very important that  people understand that these are private businesses. If you believe in  a free economy, you can't force people to publish things on private  platforms. It is a private platform in which the users agree under the  terms and conditions and the private platform is decided to make this  change. Well, I think that that platform, Twitter should do it should  apply that standard across the board, and it should be looking to  remove anti-Semitic and other incitement, which appears on its  platforms across the world. And certainly in my state of New South  Wales, I want to see it, you know, remove information which is  defamatory or also potentially driving incitement to violence.



Leon Delaney:  What about politicians like George Christensen, who has a history of  posting and reposting items on social media that perhaps might be  considered by some to be dubious or even offensive? He's readers...

Andrew Bragg:  It doesn't matter if it's dubious or offensive. I mean, we're not talking  I'm not talking about misinformation. What I'm talking about is  incitement or defamation.



Leon Delaney:  Okay.

Andrew Bragg:  Misinformation is entirely different and I think if you try to regulate  misinformation, to be frank, I think you are getting into a territory of  censorship in a very dangerous position. So what I'm concerned about  is that there are social media platforms which host information which is  based on incitement or we're trying to drive incitement.

Leon Delaney:  Yeah.

Andrew Bragg:  Or is defamatory. That's where I draw the line.

Leon Delaney:  Sure. But misinformation has been a great problem, hasn't it, both in  the United States and here, particularly in dealing with the COVID-19  health crisis, where some misinformation is in fact quite dangerous. So  doesn't something need to be done about that as well?

Andrew Bragg:  Well, I'm a lawmaker and I'm worried that our laws aren't always  properly enforced in the Wild West of social media. Where often, too  often anything can go. I'm not worried about misinformation relative to  my concerns about people being defamed for no good reason or  worse, there being violence incited against people because they're  Jewish, for example. So that is where my concern lies.

Leon Delaney:  Indeed, while there's, I guess, some distance for this debate to go yet,  thanks very much for your time today.

Andrew Bragg:  No worries. Thanks a lot. Cheers.

Leon Delaney:  Thanks.



MEDIA | Office of Senator Bragg | 9159 9320

