



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE  BANDT - SIEWERT

GREENS CALL FOR FINANCE MINISTER'S COVID ADVANCE TO BE  USED NOW FOR PUBLICLY-OWNED VACCCINE PRODUCTION

13/04/21

The Greens say the government should use unallocated discretionary funds set  aside for COVID to begin work on a publicly-owned domestic vaccine  manufacturer. If the government fails to act, the Greens plan to move in the  Senate to demand action on domestic vaccine production when Parliament  resumes.

The Greens call on the Government to ensure that the 2021/22 budget  allocates funding for the urgent development of publicly-owned mRNA vaccine  manufacturing capability in Australia, and that it immediately initiates this work  by drawing on $1 billion from the $10 billion made available in the 2020/21  Advance to the Finance Minister, which was boosted for the specific purpose of  responding to the COVID-19 pandemic, most of which remains unallocated.

The Greens say this discretionary budget was conceived to deal with  unexpected costs of the pandemic and shoring up vaccine supplies against  international uncertainty is a perfect example of a universally beneficial  application of the fund.

The Government previously announced $1b in funding to support the domestic  manufacture of the AstraZeneca vaccine. The Greens are calling for $1b to be  allocated to a publicly-owned manufacturer which has mRNA capacity. The  Greens together with scientists have been calling for domestic mRNA  manufacturing capacity for several months.

Current expert advice and international experience suggests that it could take 6  months to construct and commence mRNA production domestically in  Australia, which is not only competitive with the Government’s best guess  timeline around international vaccine imports, but vastly superior, as it would  provide a permanent buffer against unexpected events overseas.

Lines from Leader of the Australian Greens Adam Bandt MP:

“We should be able to make each key type of COVID vaccine here in Australia,  to look after ourselves and our neighbours.

“By failing to diversify domestic vaccine production, the government has left us  exposed to international events and the whims of big drug corporations.

“If the government had set up a publicly-owned vaccine maker when the  Greens first called for it almost a year ago, it could be up and running by now.

“This government wants to build a publicly funded gas power plant to cook the  planet, but not a publicly funded vaccine facility to keep Australians safe.

“So much of Scott Morrison’s failures have come as a result of poor planning  for international uncertainty, and assuming that everything will go smoothly  from here is reckless.

“The government set aside $10b in discretionary funding for the COVID  response. The government should immediately direct $1b of the unallocated  discretionary funds to help set up a publicly-owned vaccine manufacturer with  mRNA capability.

“This is exactly the kind of public health measure that the government should  be using the discretionary budget to fund. If Scott Morrison fails to act, the  Greens will be moving in Parliament during the Budget session to demand  funding for domestic vaccine production.

“The abandonment of the vaccination timetable is in part due to the  Government’s failure to heed calls to develop domestic, publicly-owned vaccine  production.”

Greens Health spokesperson, Senator Rachel Siewert said:

“Australia unfortunately sold off our publicly-owned vaccine capacity - cheaply.  Now it’s time to buy back the farm.

“If we had domestic mRNA manufacturing capacity established in Australia, we  would be in a position to roll-out the vaccines we need with a timeline that we  had some control over.

“The Greens put the case for publicly-owned domestic vaccine production to  the government a year ago. But we say today that it is better late than never,  and in the post-Covid era such capacity will put us in good stead for decades to  come.





“With publicly-owned domestic mRNA manufacturing capacity, we will be able  to beat this pandemic, and any one that follows it. With domestic vaccine  production we’ll be able to rapidly adjust to new strains as they develop,  and  become a vaccine production hub for the region.”



FURTHER READING:  ANU Molecular Biologist Thomas Preiss says similar facilities have been  established overseas, producing mRNA vaccines “from scratch” in six months:  https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2021/apr/09/frustrated-experts-say-australia-could-already-be-producing-mrna-covid-vaccines-if-it-had-acted-earlier   Greens first called for a publicly owned vaccine manufacturer in May 2020:   https://adam-bandt.greensmps.org.au/articles/publicly-owned-covid19-vaccine-manufacturer-may-be-only-way-save-lives-greens

Media Contacts:  BANDT - Will Kelly; 0427 819 461 - Tom Burmester; 0429 109 054



