

MATT KEOGH MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE INDUSTRY

SHADOW MINISTER ASSISTING FOR SMALL BUSINESS



MORRISON GOVERNMENT GIVES UP ON SMALL BUSINESS ADVOCATE



In another sign that the Morrison Government is all photo op, no follow up, it is yet

to announce a new Small Business & Family Enterprise Ombudsman, as their five

year term comes to an end.



After a year of unprecedented shocks to the small business sector, the Morrison

Government has decided to do without the key small business advocate within

government just as it is set to withdraw JobKeeper support from small businesses

around the country.



With 1.6 million Australians relying on JobKeeper, many small businesses are

bracing to go to the wall - doomed to an insufficient JobSeeker rate during a time

of heightened unemployment.



Small and family businesses are working hard to recover from the COVID-19

induced economic downturn and now they are bracing themselves for the

unplugging of the JobKeeper lifeline.



The just released January Sensis Business Index survey reveals 39 per cent of

small businesses around the country expect the loss of JobKeeper will have a

major effect on their business, with a further 51 per cent of small business owners

believing it will have a moderate impact.





Despite the growing chorus of small businesses crying out for an extension of

JobKeeper, the Morrison Government continues to refuse to provide assurance

beyond the end of March.



Small businesses account for more than 98 per cent of all Australian businesses,

they contributed almost $418 billion to our GDP in 2018-19 - that’s more than 32

per cent of our economy. They are the key to an innovative, flexible and

community minded nation.



The Morrison Government’s failure to announce a new Ombudsman to date is

leaving small business behind.



Small Business deserves a government that’s on their side, a government that

prioritises Small Business.





FRIDAY, 12 FEBRUARY 2021

MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHANIE MATHEWS, 0430 595 700



