SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women  Acting Minister for Defence

MEDIA RELEASE  CONSUL-GENERAL IN CHENNAI

Today I announce the appointment of Ms Sarah Kirlew as Australia’s next Consul- General in Chennai.

The Australia-India relationship Comprehensive Strategic Partnership is one of our  closest and most significant in the Indo-Pacific region, under pinned by the  Comprehensive Strategic Partnership agreed to by Prime Ministers Morrison and Modi  in June 2020.

The Consulate-General in Chennai is located on India’s Indian Ocean coastline and  plays a key role in pursuing Australia's strategic, trade and investment interests in the  southern Indian states of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Telangana,  and the Union Territories of Puducherry and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands. Our  consular officers in Chennai have been central to the Department of Foreign Affairs and  Trade’s support for Australians seeking to return during COVID-19, with five flights  facilitated from Chennai alone since 23 October 2020.

Southern India includes some of India's fastest-growing and most economically  advanced cities and regions, offering a range of opportunities for Australian business. It  is home to India's dynamic innovation, start-up and technology sectors, a valued source  of students and tourists to Australia and where many Indian-Australians draw their  ancestry.

Ms Kirlew is a career officer with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. She has  previously served overseas in Beijing, New Delhi and Cairo. In Canberra she has  worked in a range of Indo-Pacific focused foreign and economic policy roles within the  department, including on Australia’s strategy for the Indo-Pacific and geo-economic  issues.

Ms Kirlew holds a Master of Public Policy and Management from the University of  London; and a Bachelor of Arts from the University of Sydney.

Date received: 19 March 2021



I thank outgoing Consul-General Susan Grace for her contributions to advancing Australia’s  interests in Chennai since 2018.

Media Contact  David Wroe: 0429 531 143  Melanie Ruiz: 0427 888 392



