



SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Finance  Leader of the Government in the Senate  Senator for South Australia



TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Interview on ABC Sydney, Drive with Richard Glover   Topics:  Tourism support package  11/03/2021  06:05PM



Richard Glover: Well, I wonder if you've been daydreaming about a holiday today. The federal

government is hoping you have been, today they announced that 800,000 half price airline tickets will be

made available as part of a one point two billion dollar support package for the tourism industry. But there

is a limited list of destinations and some questions today about why New South Wales in particular has

largely missed out. Simon Birmingham is the minister for Finance and joins us on the line, Simon good

afternoon.



Simon Birmingham: Hello, Richard. Good to be with you.



Richard Glover: Why did you why did you pick and choose why? Why 13 regions?



Simon Birmingham: We've started with those regions where the data shows that they are most

dependent in terms of regional employment on the tourism industry and where there are particular

examples in relation to their dependence on international visitation or tourists and the like. So it has very

much been a data driven process to work through the regions looking at tourism impacts, employment

impact in those regions, and making sure that in those economies, communities who have such high local

dependence on the tourism industry that we are supporting, getting more people there, filling up. It's filling

up their restaurants, getting more people, undertaking the activities and experiences on offer.



Richard Glover: Yeah, I mean, when you first look at the list, though, it does look a bit random. Alice

Springs is there, but not Darwin. Merimbula on the south coast of New South Wales is there, but not

Bourke or Tamworth or Byron Ballina. You'll make some friends through this policy, but you'll also make

some enemies, some hoteliers who'll think, well, why not us?



Simon Birmingham: I think it is tough in that sense. But as I say, it's been quite a data driven process to

to look across the states, making sure all the states are included, all have various degrees of international

exposure, but then looking at where there is greatest dependency of local jobs and the share of the local

economy, on the tourism industry. And from there, of course, trying to work out where planes go and

wanting to make sure we're getting people travelling, knowing that if you are taking a holiday in a regional

part of another state or the different part of Australia, then there's every chance you'll also spend some

time in that capital city as you fly through that capital city to get to the regional destination, that there will

be other knock-on consequences. And that, in fact, our evidence shows that for every one dollar an

Australian holidaymakers spend on their airfare, they'll usually spend 10 dollars on the ground supporting

other local businesses. And that's the type of support and expenditure we're really trying to leverage here

by supporting 46,000 discounted flights a week, 800,000 overall. And we've been clear as well this has

been an initial list, we will work with the tourism industry and the airlines to adapt those destinations as

necessary through the months this programme operates to get the best bang for the buck in saving

tourism jobs.



Richard Glover: Simon Birmingham is with us. You mentioned the capital cities and this has been one of

the main bits of criticism today in the Tourism Council says our capital cities drive Australia's visitor

economy, particularly Sydney and Melbourne. They are very dependent on overseas travel and with shut

borders. You know, they are really desperate. They're not on this list at all.



Simon Birmingham: A couple of points there, Richard. The first is that capital city economy is a far more

diversified. So unlike many of these regional areas where tourism is overwhelmingly the number one

economic contributor, the number one employer in those regions, the number one reason for businesses

to exist, that's not the case in Sydney. There are many other industries, jobs that are operating in Sydney

or in any other capital city around the country. So we've targeted the regions because they have such a

high, disproportionate reliance for their economy and employment on tourism. But also, as I said, we

realised that once we get people moving, then cities benefit. And there isn't just this tourism support

programme that we're announcing today of the total one point two dollars billion in support there is also a

continuation of the Domestic Aviation Network Support Programme, which is absolutely about keeping

planes flying between our capital cities in particular and flying at affordable rates between those capital

cities. So we've been working right through the pandemic with airlines to make sure they survive and the

planes keep flying. And that continuation and extension of domestic aviation network support through to

the 30th of September will give far greater benefit into the capital city markets too.



Richard Glover: Our minister, who's from your side of politics, Andrew Constance, he's not impressed

with this. All he says, he points out that there's one city in New South Wales, one town in New South

Wales, which is on the programme, that's Merimbula, nothing else whilst Queensland is bristling with

offers. He says you're rewarding Queensland for blowing up its own tourist industry because they're so

badly off, because they've shut all their borders and in his view, behave petulantly. It's the federal

government to the rescue.



Simon Birmingham: That's not the case at all. The fact is that regional Queensland reached areas such

as the Gold Coast that particularly those three North Queensland, Whitsundays and Tropical North

Queensland are, as regional destinations, far more heavily reliant on international visitors than we usually

see across regional New South Wales. So Sydney is a major entry point, of course, for international

visitors to Australia. And that's why the Domestic Aviation Network support programme supporting flights

between capital cities across the country, keeping them in the air and making them affordable. And of

course, also even under these half price tourism subsidised fares, many of them will be flights in and out

of Sydney. And I've got no doubt that some of them, although they might be structured to try to get people

from Sydney to other parts of the country, may well see people come from other parts of the country to

Sydney utilising those discount air airfares as the airlines released them to the market.



Richard Glover: Hmm. Back to the idea. That's a bit random, Merimbula. I mean, beautiful place is one

of the most spectacular places in the world, but it's not particularly an international destination. For

instance, Byron Ballina, I would have thought, would have a bigger share of international travellers in

normal times.



Simon Birmingham: Yes, I think in that case, there's probably a cascading series of effects on

Merimbula as a destination is the broader regional question of the proportion of jobs and of local

businesses that are tourism dependent. And that drives the focus there. There's the COVID effect of

border closures. And knowing that those closures have had a particular impact on some of the border

communities within striking distance in Merimbula, particularly those that usually have visitors coming up

from Victoria, but also recognising that the other impact felt over the last 18 months, in particular, warrant

inclusion in that regard.



Richard Glover: Okay, that may be more to come. Simon Birmingham is just finally, if you won't get any

time to take off, I'm sure, this year. But if you did, where would you go?



Simon Birmingham: Well, because as a South Australian, I can say that I took my family last year to

Kangaroo Island for a few days and school holidays and had an amazing time with them. But looking a

little further afield, I think heading to heading to the northern climates to Broome or to Tropical North

Queensland, you know, they're pretty amazing parts of Australia and there where people can have a fair

dinkum holiday take longer than you might ordinarily on a domestic trip and treat it like you would an

international holiday go and explore book experiences. You know, you're actually supporting Australian

jobs in doing so. And that's what this programme is all about.



Richard Glover: I still remember being chased by that seal on Kangaroo Island and it moved pretty fast.

Hey, Minister, thank you very much for your time.



Simon Birmingham: Thank you very much. My pleasure.



[ENDS]



Media Contacts

Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325

Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644





Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.





