



The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP  WAUCHOPE, NSW  FRIDAY 26 MARCH 2021



EO&E…

DR DAVID GILLESPIE MP: Thank you, ladies and gentlemen. Well, welcome to Wauchope SES. I  would formally, and most importantly, like with Melinda Pavey, my coinciding state member  formally welcome the Prime Minister, Scott Morrison, and my colleague, Dave Littleproud, along  with Premier Gladys Berejiklian and John Barilaro, Deputy Premier. So Melinda and I are really  honoured that all of you have come to see firsthand what's going on. Now first of all, I would just like  to say I'm looking forward to the time when both of you are here and it's not an emergency, but it  has been a year to remember, and a year a lot of people would like to forget. It's uncanny that we  had a drought, then a bushfire, and then we got a new Water Minister, and you've done too well,  we've got too much of it now Melinda, but really, it is a real shock to people's systems to be going  through so many crises, and that is what people are feeling. A lot of people are still running on  adrenaline. Australians, their home and their farm or their business is often the centre of their life  with their family and to have it washed away is really, a really scary event. We've got plenty of  people who have been displaced out of their homes. But why the Prime Minister and the Premier  and all these other important Ministers are here is because we want them to see what it's been like  for people and we realise we are stoic country people, but we do need help and I'm so glad ADF are  here as well. I'd like to formally also on my behalf, thank SES, the RFS, Marine Rescue, Surf  Lifesaving, Police, Vehicle Rescue, Fire & Rescue and all the other services, counsellors, council staff,  engineers. And I'd like to thank all the volunteers that turned up with boats themselves, rescuing  people, and for electricians who are fixing up people's electricity for nothing. All these people are all  helping and I'll hand to Melinda.

THE HON. MELINDA PAVEY, MINISTER FOR WATER, PROPERTY AND HOUSING: Thanks very much,  David. It's just wonderful to have the support from our state leadership and our national leadership.  We're on the ground today seeing the damage firsthand. I know the Premier, and the Deputy  Premier are just about to leave with me we're going to go and visit some farmers, some dairy  farmers, you know, milk going down the driveways because we can't get the trucks in. There's a lot  of work we've got to get done. And I'm just so grateful for our communities pulling together and  doing what we're doing. And now over to our leadership of our nation and our state. Thank you very  much.

DR DAVID GILLESPIE MP: Prime Minister, thank you.

PRIME MINISTER: Thank you Melinda and thank you David, and to Gladys and Bara and to David  who joins me, and of course, the Commissioner, who is here with us as well, and Joe Buffone,  Director and General of Emergency Management, is also doing a terrific job. Can I just start by

echoing my thanks to the amazing people we've been meeting here today, and in other parts of the  Mid North Coast. It is quite humbling when you just sit and talk and listen to people who have been  through an incredible last seven days and more than 20 rescues here alone, saving lives, putting  themselves at risk, holding hands of children and others who are scared and going through  something like this. It is just an enormously humbling and proud moment to see the wonderful  resilience and character of Australians in times like this. And we have seen it so many times over the  last two and a half years in particular. The Premier and I have stood here in this very spot not that  long ago, back in 2019, as fires ripped through this area. Dave and I have been through here on  drought and now we're here with floods. And over the last year, you've been dealing with COVID  too. Earlier today when I was down in Port places like Telegraph Point and others, and just seeing  the devastation of people's businesses, and it's not just that the businesses have lost their  equipment and generators and all of these things. These are businesses that families have built up  over a lifetime, and it's not just the loss of the income. It is the loss of a way of life that they have  worked so hard to build. And that is just heartbreaking for them. And just as we have stood with  people, whether through COVID, whether through bushfires, whether through drought, floods,  tornadoes, cyclones, we're of course going to stand here with the people on the Mid North Coast,  the Hawkesbury, others who have been devastated by these floods. Already, of course, we're rolling  out the disaster recovery payments on that 180 2266 number, we have over two thousand people  there taking calls. They've done a magnificent job getting emergency support to people, but we got  to do a lot more than that. The clean-up now begins. The sun's out, the waters are receding, and  there's going to be more difficulty ahead as we see what happens, particularly for primary  producers, whether they're oyster farmers or they're dairy farmers or other producers across the  district. They've got some difficult days ahead. I remember seeing this also firsthand up in North  Queensland and the devastating floods that wiped out over half a million head of cattle in 24 hours.  And there's going to be a lot of that devastating loss as we have to get into carcass disposal and  cleaning out these sheds that have been in water up to their roofs. And so I want to thank the New  South Wales Government of Gladys and Bara, the partnership between the New South Wales  Government and the Federal Government has been extraordinary. We've been working closely  together and I want to thank the Emergency Management Minister as well, Dave. They've done a  great job working with my Minister to get the support where it's needed. Defence Force have now  arrived, they're here, they're part of the recovery team, the clean-up team. 70 are already here  being drawn from the 44th Battalion who are already on the ground. They're going to be joined by  more than 400 more as we work with all the other teams. It's been so good to see SES working with  RFS, with the Fire and Rescue, the whole team working as one unit with our Defence Forces to  ensure that we can get the job done, just seamlessly working together as a team. It's tremendous,  but we've got to back this up with a number of new measures to support. The Premier wrote to me  yesterday and outlined their plan. I will let the Premier and John Barilaro speak to that more  specifically, but a key part of that is what's called category C and D funding support, which is what  comes in place when you get a big disaster like this. That means that New South Wales and the  Commonwealth Government will share the cost of the recovery 50/50. We will carry this load  together as we have already carried so many other loads together over these last few years. What  that means is, we will be able to support small business grants for those directly impacted and John  can speak more to that, of up to $50,000 and importantly primary producer grants of up to $75,000.  Now, those $75,000 grants are critical for those producers to get back up on their feet, but know we  are backing them in and that we will be there to help them restock and rebuild and get their  machinery up and running again and be able to get their operations up and running again. These  grants have been so critical in previous disasters, in particular flood disasters. It's just not cash, it’s a  message of hope to each of those producers and those small businesses, who are going to need that  help, who have been directly impacted through these arrangements. The broader clean-up  arrangements they will continue. The ADF support that is all over and above what we're talking  about here. And so, this is not just a helping hand, this is an enormous embrace that is coming from  the Commonwealth Government along with the State Government to ensure that we stand with the  people of the Mid North Coast and across the state to ensure as the waters recede their hopes rise  and we see this part of the country once again realise all of their expectations. Gladys.



PREMIER BEREJIKLIAN: Thank you. Thank you, Prime Minister. Also having travelled through the Mid  North Coast today, it's unimaginable the kind of trauma and devastation people have experienced in  the last few days. Yet what really struck me today is the way everybody's come together to support  one another. But what I do suspect is that a lot of people who have lost their homes or have  experienced the devastation are still in a state of shock. We just say to everybody, please know that  the Federal and State Governments are working together to get you what you need in the next few  days, weeks and months ahead. We know for some people the clean-up and recovery will be a  shorter period than others. But we also know, regrettably from all the experience we've had, that  sometimes the clean-up and recovery is more difficult than the crisis itself. I just want do extend my  deepest gratitude to all of our emergency services workers and volunteers who have worked so well  together from all the different agencies to really support our communities and Commissioner, you're  from the SES - you have lead the charge and I want to thank her publically for all her efforts. To all  the agencies the Prime Minister mentioned, everyone stepped up and worked together. Who would  have thought Fire & Rescue and RFS would be supporting SES in a fire, in a flood rather, but that’s  exactly what’s happening. It’s been all resources on deck and we’ve got through the last few days  and as the sun’s come out we know this is when the clean-up and recovery starts. I am grateful that  the Prime Minister has made available those categories of funding. It means that we can really kick  in that support for many who are doing it tough. We have unfortunately seen many businesses  today up close and personal and seen what they have lost, but also of course also individuals and  their homes. That is why a few days ago I moved quickly to appoint the Deputy Premier as  responsible for the clean-up and recovery of New South Wales. Regrettably, he's had too much  experience in this category, having previously supported the community in the bushfire category. I  also want to acknowledge Minister Melinda Pavey, who has not only done an outstanding job here  locally supporting her community, but also supporting the New South Wales Government more  broadly and getting assistance where it is required during this difficult time. It has been a team  effort. We know that New South Wales and Australia always does better when we work together  and I again want to thank the Prime Minister and his team for all the support we've received, and I  also want to more than anything thank the community for restoring our faith, restoring our faith in  good citizenship and restoring our faith in helping one another. No matter where I have gone today,  I have just been struck by people saying thank you to each other. Even though they are going  through the most horrible time. I met volunteers today in Port Macquarie who had lost their own  homes but were there helping other people and that is the kind of spirit that brings us together and  makes us feel proud of who we are and I just urge everybody to please get help when you need it.  We know how difficult it's going to be, whether it is financial, physical or mental health. Please know  that we're here to support you in the coming weeks and months. I think Mr Littleproud and also the  Deputy Premier John Barilaro will outline recovery efforts that have already commenced. Thank you.

THE HON. JOHN BARILARO, DEPUTY PREMIER, AND MINISTER FOR REGIONAL NEW SOUTH WALES,  INDUSTRY AND TRADE: Thank you,Premier, and Prime Minister, and to both David and Melinda, at a  local level, yeah the Premier's right. We're still in the midst of recovering from bushfires. That  architecture of government is still in place. For us to roll from recovering to fires to recovering from  floods is going to be easier when we first started post-fires. I want to acknowledge David Littleproud,  the Federal Minister, who worked along with me during that perioda nd what the Prime Minister has  announced today with the Category D funding allows us to get on the ground quickly. There are  three stages to the recovery. The first stage of course was managing the crisis itself and I want to say  thank you the emergency service personnel for the effort, but also to the citizens for keeping your  neighbours safe. That’s the first part and now it is safe to enter, we begin the clean-up and as of last  night, the multiagency strike forces has hit the ground. That is all the agencies, emergency service  agencies of the State Government, along with the generosity of the ADF and the Federal  Government were on the ground. You’ll start seeing bins in streets, you’ll start seeing machinery in  streets, and assist the citizens to clean up after the floods. Then of course the rebuild. The rebuild is  going to be that long journey. We are still rebuilding from fires and unfortunately for me, when I  come to this region and across the state, I'm visiting the same places that I visited as the Minister

responsible for bushfire recovery. In one way it is sad, but the other way, because the architecture is  ready to go, those $75,000 grants for primary producers, like our oyster leases or farmers, or dairy  farmers, that mechanism is already in place. We can start rolling that out as of next week and we will  have more to say about that. All the other assistance will be there and we will quickly roll that out  because we know how important it was to respond in a timely manner. My commitment to the  Prime Minister and the Premier in this role, along with David Littleproud, we will get on the ground,  we will be back and we will be supporting the community as we go forward.

THE HON DAVID LITTLEPROUD MP, MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, DROUGHT AND EMERGENCY  MANAGEMENT: Thanks Bara. Look, to everybody, help is here but more help is on the way. We have  worked collaboratively with New South Wales, Resilience New South Wales and making sure we  have boots on the ground. That’ll be 500 ADF personnel deployed into the Mid North Coast in the  next day or so, some are already here. We want to make sure that we take away that emotional  strain of the clean-up with a practical measure, having boots on the ground, people cleaning out all  that damage that's there. We're also, as part of this program, this $75,000 that are going to primary  producers and $50,000 grants to small businesses, let me tell you from the experience of the North  West Queensland floods, that saved lives. There are primary producers in North West Queensland, I  have sat with after, that said had they not had that comfort of knowing that we were there with  $75,000, the emotional toll was too much. So it is important to understand that this will just take  away that, not only the financial burden, but the emotional burden as well. Understand that we will  also be surging in further mental health support. We will be working with the state, as well as our  Primary Health Networks to make sure whatever it takes, they'll be there. I also advise that we have  now added another 26 New South Wales Local Government areas to the Disaster Recovery  Payments of $1,000 per adult and $400 per child, that takes it to 60 local government areas across  New South Wales, which just shows the sheet gravity of this event. So, obviously we will continue to  now work collaboratively through Shane Stone, who will be leading our support with Joe in EMA to  make sure we are working with New South Wales in simply getting out of everyone's life and just  getting money in their pockets and getting them back into the swing of life as quickly as we can.  We're here to help and we are going to keep going until the job is done.

PRIME MINISTER: I have another piece of good news for you. For people in the Mid North Cost,  despite these terrible floods, we got that last shipment of the vaccines this morning through the  Taree. That was the last one that had to get through to the GPs all around the country. And so even  the floods can't stop it. When you got people who are just working to do everything they can for the  local community. So, well done to the team for making sure they got through. Happy to take some  questions. Let's please focus the questions at first on the matters that obviously have been the  subject of the announcements today. Happy to deal with other things, I suppose but we are also on a  schedule the Premier and I. We’ve got a lot of people to see also this afternoon.

JOURNALIST: Farmers we’ve spoken to have said that with some of the help that came after the  drought, came after the bushfires, came a lot of red tape and paperwork for them. It was very  difficult when they were mentally struggling. Are you going to have these boots on the ground for a  long time? Or is it a stop in, step out situation and they are on their own to access the help?

PRIME MINISTER: No, I will let Bara comment on this as well. The $75,000 grants we’re keen to get  that in people's hands as quickly as possible, and with as little fuss as possible. The good example is  how we now do the $1,000 payments, no-one has to fill out any forms, they get on the phone, it’s  processed on the phone and they’ll have money within an hour when it comes to those disaster  recovery payments, the $1,000, the $400. We’ve learnt a lot working with states on how we can  delivery those things as quickly as possible. The agency, headed up by Shane Stone, the federal  agency, which is effectively our resilient agency, equivalent to what’s in New South Wales. The  agency stays on the ground. They are still on the ground up in North Queensland from the floods of  2.5 years ago, working with local communities, because you’ve got to hang in there for the rebuild  and recovery. What I like about the plan that Gladys has Premier presented to me is those phases.

Of course, the immediate response phase, but then there’s three phases of clean-up, then the  recovery, and then building the resilience further. And that's not a couple of months' job, that's  years. That is years. In the same way with the bushfire grants, it was a two-year program of funding  and more than $2 billion and but Bara, you might want to talk about how the process rolls out,  because it’ll be administered by New South Wales.

THE HON. JOHN BARILARO, DEPUTY PREMIER, AND MINISTER FOR REGIONAL NEW SOUTH WALES,  INDUSTRY AND TRADE: There was learnings in the early part of the bushfire recovery, and we  simplified the primary producer grants with the Rural Assistance Authority and then through Service  New South Wales, which is the one-stop-shop, we have a customer centre approach. We allocate an  individual to look after each applicant that comes through customer service, so that consumer gets  looked after and we will be able to assist them. We have a tell us once sort of policy in us, if you  have ever dealt with Service New South Wales before, all your data is collected, it is on file. I'm  confident we will be rolling out these assistance packages quite quickly, compared to what we learnt  post fires. As I said, we have learnt a lot. Those learnings, the architecture of the post-fire recovery is  in place, and as the Prime Minister touched on, even as late as last week, I was issuing another  $50,000 grant in relation to bushfires down at Cobargo. So, we are not shutting this off. There is no  timeline. We have said with people from the start of the bushfire recovery, we will do the same  here, we‘ll stick with you until we know we have left nobody behind.

JOURNALIST: It is estimated between 200 and 250 dairy farms have been impacted by the floods.  They are throwing out milk, they’ve got cows with mastitis. What will be available to that industry in  particular to help them get back on their feet?

THE HON. JOHN BARILARO, DEPUTY PREMIER, AND MINISTER FOR REGIONAL NEW SOUTH WALES,  INDUSTRY AND TRADE: Well, the primary producer grants, as we’ve just touched on would be  $75,000 grants. So, that's the first part. Local Land Services are also working with getting fodder and  feed in place. Of course, the unfortunate and tough job of removing dead carcasses, we're taking  responsibility of that and we're working with those farmers. But, you know, we will be going to see a  couple of dairy farmers, a dozen dairy farmers shortly. The more that I hear on the ground, that’s  what we are here for, not just to talk. It’s to listen, and if we’ve got to be flexible in what we need to  do, we’ll do that. We showed that in, with bushfires, with David Littleproud and I made changes to  the program whenever were required, so we’ll do that.

JOURNALIST: Will you be making sure the supermarkets support them through it, too? We saw  some real problems after the drought with supermarkets controlling the prices.

THE HON. JOHN BARILARO, DEPUTY PREMIER, AND MINISTER FOR REGIONAL NEW SOUTH WALES,  INDUSTRY AND TRADE: We'll have a look at that. I don't recall that being a big issue, as in price  gouging I'm assume you're talking about?

JOURNALIST: Just ensuring their own brands were supported through, and not necessarily looking  after the locals.

THE HON. JOHN BARILARO, DEPUTY PREMIER, AND MINISTER FOR REGIONAL NEW SOUTH WALES,  INDUSTRY AND TRADE: We will look at all that.

JOURNALIST: Can we expect, as well, to see programs like fencing disaster recovery?

THE HON. JOHN BARILARO, DEPUTY PREMIER, AND MINISTER FOR REGIONAL NEW SOUTH WALES,  INDUSTRY AND TRADE: Yes, so we touched on that. And again, that, that fencing program that we  set aside, I think it was something like $85 million in part of responding to bushfires, and again, you  know what the sad thing is? Some of these fences that have gone under water are the same fences  we've built during the fires. That program still is alive. There's funding in that program, and so we'll

just move that program along to assist those with fencing needs and we may even engage with  BlazeAid again to see where they can set up camp.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on obviously the Brittany Higgins issue, do you think you’ve  misjudged the mood of nation lately?

PRIME MINISTER: I have made a number comments in my earlier press conference today, so it’s a  very serious important issue. I am doing everything I can to ensure we do the things we need to do  get this right.

JOURNALIST: You said you'd be willing to meet with her. Will you extend that invite to her?

PRIME MINISTER: I already addressed that this morning.

JOURNALIST: You said you were willing to meet with her, not that you’d asked her to meet with you.

PRIME MINISTER: We are working through those processes.

JOURNALIST: You said you misunderstood the issue. What would it take to make you understand?  Who can explain it to you?

PRIME MINISTER: I don't think that's a very fair way to put it. And I think, what I was simply saying is  this is a very deep and difficult issue which has so many different dimensions. We all have an  understanding to, at one level. But I think this is a very important conversation the country is having,  and I'm having it.

JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Australia's Ambassador to China has labelled Beijing's trade  punishment as vindictive. Do you agree with that assessment?

PRIME MINISTER: We want to have a positive trading relationship with China. We are obviously  facing some difficult issues in that relationship and really appreciate the great support we've had  from liberal democracies around the world. None less so than the United States. Keen to work  through the issues. We’ve always been keen to work through the issues. But while we're big on  trade in Australia, we don't trade away who we are. We don't trade away our values, ever.

JOURNALIST: Just quickly, back to the floods.

PRIME MINISTER: Yes, let's talk about the floods.

JOURNALIST: One of the things we're hearing, over and over again on the ground at the moment in  this region, is that the flood insurance was too expensive. A lot of homeowners and businesses  weren't covered. Is that something we need to look at?

PRIME MINISTER: Well, I might hand over to my state colleague, if they’d like to address that. I  mean, it's different in different parts of the country. And obviously as the Federal Government we’ve  been very heavily involved in trying to address some of those issues up if in Far North Queensland.  That’s a very complicated issue, as in how it impacted premiums, and reinsurance policies and things  like that. But you know, that’s what resilience policy is about now. I think, particularly as we have  gone through so many of these disasters in recent times, a lot of those issues are becoming part of  the policy challenge. We want the regional parts of our country, whether it is here in the Mid North  Coast or in south western Western Australia or up there in Far North Queensland, we want  Australians to be able to live their lives safely and prosperously and ensure that we can provide the  right settings that enable them to do that. That's what we want to achieve here. I’ll tell you one of  the great things today was, and David will remind me of the exact date - I think 11 April, is that right?

14 April the Blue Whale down there on the Mid North Coast. He said, "We will open up on the 14th."  I thought he meant May or June, perhaps. He meant April. That small business is keen to get back on  their feet and that was incredibly inspiring. Inspiration is what you find in the middle of all these  dreadful events and we’re finding a lot of it here. So, with that thank you all very much.

[ENDS]

Media Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney



