The Hon Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health and Aged Care

The Hon David Coleman MP  Assistant Minister to the Prime Minister for Mental Health  and Suicide Prevention

MEDIA RELEASE  2 March 2021

Release of the Final Report of the Royal Commission into Victoria's  Mental Health System

The Australian Government welcomes the release of the Final Report of the Royal Commission  into Victoria's Mental Health System.

The report is a comprehensive examination of the mental health system in Victoria and has  identified a number of important issues that need to be addressed.

Mental illness and suicide has a devastating impact on Australian individuals, families and  communities. Suicide is the leading cause of death for people under the age of 50, and almost  half of all Australians will experience mental illness in their lifetime.

Like the Victorian Government, the Australian Government is committed to the refonn of the  mental health and suicide prevention system.

This is why the Australian Government has increased the health portfolio expenditure for  mental health services and suicide prevention from $3.3 billion in 2012-13 to a record high  estimated $5.9 billion in 2020-21.

In particular, our Government has made significant key investments including:

• doubling the number of Medicare-subsidised individual psychological therapy sessions  nationally, providing up to 20 sessions per calendar year and making this system  available to residents of aged care;  • creating 64 new Medicare items to provide up to 40 Medicare subsidised sessions for

people with eating disorders;  • providing funding for the establishment of adult mental health hubs and residential  eating disorders centres;  • dramatically expanding youth mental health services, including increasing the number

of headspace sites from 56 in 2013 to 153 services by 2022, and providing funding to  reduce waiting times; and

• establishing the $ 125 million Million Minds mental health research mission through  the Medical Research Future Fund.

In addition, the Government has made available more than $500 million in direct supports to  respond to the mental health impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including $43.9 million to  establish 15 mental health clinics across Victoria and further enhance digital and phone  services to assist people impacted by the restrictions imposed in that state.

While significant improvements have been made to the system in recent years, it is clear that  more needs to be done.

We look forward to continuing to work with the Victorian Government to implement  meaningful and lasting reform in this key national health priority area.

-ENDS-

Media contact:  Assistant Minister Coleman: Whitney Harris - 0466 462 5 11

