

The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina



MEDIA RELEASE

The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au

7 March 2021



CELEBRATING CAPTAIN JEANINE DRUMMOND THIS  INTERNATIONAL WOMEN’S DAY

The Australian Government wants more women to become involved in the nation’s maritime  industry, following in the footsteps of new Australian Maritime Safety Authority (AMSA) Board  member, Captain Jeanine Drummond.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said International Women’s Day on Monday - the global day celebrating the social,  economic, cultural and political achievements of women - is an opportunity to celebrate the women  around us and their achievements which help shape our nation.

“Today we recognise Captain Drummond’s impressive global experience across shipping and  leadership roles, which will complement and enhance the AMSA Board’s collective maritime and  governance expertise,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“Captain Drummond is a strong, up-and-coming leader in the maritime sector and continues to  support female representation in a historically male-dominated industry.

“In 2018, she was the inaugural recipient of the Australian Shipping and Maritime Industry Women in  Shipping and Logistics Award.”

Captain Drummond said that, having started her maritime career as an Australian seafarer, it was an  absolute honour to have been appointed by the Deputy Prime Minister to AMSA’s Board.

“Having worked across a variety of maritime industry sectors, at sea and ashore, in Australia and  overseas, I look forward to being able to contribute an often unique perspective and understanding  to a range of issues - that will allow me to offer valuable input,” Captain Drummond said.

“I am particularly passionate about maritime safety, the environment and communities we operate  in, seafarer welfare, and the continual evolvement of a diverse and inclusive maritime industry - one  that is ready to respond to the regulatory and operational challenges of implementing wisely the  next generation of evolving technologies and digitalisation, at sea and ashore.”

The Deputy Prime Minister said Captain Drummond’s strong advocacy for gender diversity, including  as a member of the Women’s International Shipping and Trading Association, as well as her youthful  perspective, would help shape the future of AMSA and of shipping in Australia.

“Her links to the Australian Maritime College and interest in maritime skills will support the  Government and industry in responding to shared future challenges, such as ensuring a steady supply

of new mariners needed to fill critical roles in Australia at sea and on land,” the Deputy Prime  Minister said.

“Her passion for improving the wellbeing of all seafarers will be particularly important as we continue  to face the challenges of COVID-19 for seafarers, while keeping our international trade moving.

“Captain Drummond is a shining example to future female leaders, providing excellent support for  AMSA to deliver its primary functions for maritime safety and protection of the marine environment  while being an advocate and influence for change.

“International Women’s Day 2021 campaign theme is Choose To Challenge, which stands as a  reminder we all have a choice to call out gender bias and inequality.

“I would also like to highlight initiatives seeking to influence positive change for women in the  maritime industry, such as AMSA’s domestic and international scholarship programs which focus on  developing skills and support young women entering the maritime industry.”

Ends.

Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Dean Shachar 0418 202 860 | Caitlin Donaldson 0428 389 880

