Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, Sydney.





THE HON PAUL FLETCHER MP  Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts

MEDIA RELEASE

22 February 2021

New voluntary code on disinformation

Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, the Hon Paul Fletcher MP,  today welcomed the release of the Australian Code of Practice on Disinformation and  Misinformation by the Digital Industry Group (DIGI).

The new Code, the development of which will be overseen by the Australian Communications and  Media Authority (ACMA), is an industry initiative to combat the spread of harmful disinformation  online.

“We’ve all seen the damage that online disinformation can cause, particularly among vulnerable  groups,” Minister Fletcher said. “This has been especially apparent during the COVID-19 pandemic.”

“The Morrison Government will be watching carefully to see whether this voluntary code is effective  in providing safeguards against the serious harms that arise from the spread of disinformation and  misinformation on digital platforms.”

ACMA will report to government no later than 30 June 2021 on initial compliance with the code and  its effectiveness in responding to the problems identified by the Australian Competition and  Consumer Commission in its Digital Platforms Inquiry.

“I look forward to receiving ACMA’s feedback, which will guide us on whether further action is  needed,” Minister Fletcher said.

The Code was developed by DIGI in response to the Digital Platforms Inquiry. DIGI is an industry  association advocating on behalf of the digital industry in Australia, and developed the code in  consultation with platforms and interest stakeholders.

The Code aims to empower consumers to make better informed choices of digital content, disrupt  advertising and monetisation incentives, strengthen public understanding through strategic research,  and improve transparency over measures used to combat disinformation and misinformation.

For more information on the Code, go to www.acma.gov.au/online-misinformation

Media contact:  Imre Salusinszky | 0432 535 737 | Imre.Salusinszky@communications.gov.au  Christine Byllaardt | 0409 433 357 | Christine.VandenByllaardt@communications.gov.au

