



The Hon Stuart Robert MP

Minister for Employment, Workforce, Skills, Small and Family Business

MEDIA RELEASE





Authorised by S. Robert MP, Canberra

Tuesday, 13 April 2021

Consultation open for review of Australian Small Business and Family  Enterprise Ombudsman

The Morrison Government is encouraging small and family businesses to have their say in the  independent review of the Australian Small Business and Family Enterprise Ombudsman.

Minister for Employment, Workforce, Skills, Small and Family Business, Stuart Robert, said the  review is considering how effectively and efficiently the Ombudsman has provided assistance and  advocacy for Australian small businesses.

‘The review comes at a critical time when small and family businesses nationwide are rebuilding from  the economic shocks of the COVID-19 pandemic,’ Minister Robert said.

‘Small and family businesses are the engine room of the economy and the office of the Ombudsman  plays a valuable role in ensuring that they have the necessary assistance to navigate the business  landscape as and when they need it.

‘Critically, the Ombudsman also acts as an advocate for the sector, ensuring the interests and views of  the industry are represented at all levels.’

Ms Carmel McGregor PSM has been appointed to lead the review. Ms McGregor has held a number of  senior executive positions in the public service and has significant expertise in public sector reform  and service delivery.

The review will consider how the Ombudsman has responded to the recommendations of the 2017  review including delivery of new functions since that time. The review will also consider the need for  any legislative or administrative improvements to support the Ombudsman. The review is a statutory  requirement, due to be completed every four years.

The review is open now and public consultation will conclude on 30 April 2021.

Information about the review, its terms of reference and consultation process is available at  https://consult.industry.gov.au.

[ENDS]

Media contact:  Minister Robert’s Office (02) 6277 7610

