



MEDIA RELEASE

Queensland pays the price for Morrison’s flawed vaccine rollout

30 March 2021

The Greens have laid the blame for Brisbane’s three-day COVID lockdown at the Morrison  government’s door, saying its failure to ensure all frontline healthcare workers are  vaccinated has triggered a necessary public health response that will damage already  struggling businesses and force more workers into unemployment.

The more than 130,000 people currently receiving JobSeeker in Brisbane will have their  safety net slashed to below the poverty line on Thursday after the Coalition and Labor  refused to support the Greens’ proposal for an $80 a day payment.

Queensland Senator and Greens leader in the Senate Larissa Waters said:

“The people of Brisbane and Queensland can thank the Morrison government for this  lockdown.

“The PM promised us that four million Australians would be vaccinated by early April. But  with two days until April less than 15% of that number - 550,000 people - have received a  dose. In Queensland that number is only 65,000.

“The PM must explain why there are still unvaccinated frontline healthcare workers treating  COVID patients in Queensland hospitals.

“Not only has this government failed the people of Queensland and Australia with its  flawed vaccine rollout, it’s abandoned businesses and workers by pulling away the safety  nets that have allowed hundreds of thousands to remain employed and kept millions above  the poverty line.

“By ending JobKeeper the government consigned 150,000 to unemployment nationally,  right at the time when the JobSeeker unemployment benefit is being slashed to $43.57 a  day. The Brisbane lockdown will guarantee that more people will be forced out of work and  into poverty.

“It’s unconscionable that this government can leave thousands of businesses and millions  of workers to fend for themselves knowing full well that their failure to bring COVID under



control leaves them vulnerable.”





Media contact: Guy Mosel, 0419 626 725



