1





The Hon. Christian Porter MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Industrial Relations  Leader of the House



TRANSCRIPT

Interview - 2GB with Ben Fordham  Thursday, 11th February 2021



E&OE

Subject: Labor’s $20 billion tax on business

BEN FORDHAM:  Well, Anthony Albanese has had his industrial relations reform slammed. He wants to give  casuals stronger entitlements, better protection for Uber drivers and other workers in the gig  economy, but businesses don't want a bar of it. The strongest criticism has come from the  Industrial Relations Minister, Christian Porter. He's live on the line. Christian Porter, good  morning to you.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Yeah, good morning, Ben. How are you going?

BEN FORDHAM:  You say this plan from Anthony Albanese would be an extinction level event for tens of  thousands of businesses.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   Well, you just have to look around Australia at the moment. Businesses have been through  probably the worst year that they've had since the Great Depression. And many of them are  coming out well and fighting their way through the COVID-19 recession having survived the  health pandemic, some of them are struggling and there'll be a struggle for some period of time.  What the economy needs now is nurturing, not sledgehammers. And Anthony Albanese came  out and gave a copy of his speech to the press. And in that, he said that he would work with  state and territory governments, unions and industry to develop portable entitlements for  annual leave, sick leave and long service leave for Australians in insecure work. And insecure  work, so like non-permanent work is about 2.5 million casuals and around about 1 million  independent contractors. And it doesn't take a particularly sophisticated analysis to work out  that if for the first time all those 3.5 million workers were going to get new entitlements for  them of annual leave, sick leave and long service leave and they're going to be portable. That  would cost $20 billion a year. And that's …

2





BEN FORDHAM:  Well, what do you say, Minister, to those casual workers who say we're not asking for too  much when we want sick leave?

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:  Well, I mean, casual work is about 25 per cent of the Australian economy and it has been that  way for about 25 years. There's always been casual work and casual work is of a certain type  and it's structured a certain way and it's different from permanent work. But it can't be both  casual work and permanent work. And the types of entitlements that you get are different  between permanent work and casual work and in permanent work, generally speaking, you get  access to sick leave and annual leave. It's not portable, by the way, for most people in  permanent work, if you choose to lose your job, you don't get to take it with you. And in casual  work, you're paid 25 per cent more up front in compensation of those things. Now, we want  conditions to improve for all Australian workers. The best way to do that is, of course, to  provide more, better paying jobs. But if you're suggesting, as Anthony Albanese is, that you  can all of a sudden pay 2.5 million casual workers, both their 25 per cent compensation for  things like sick leave and annual leave and sick leave and annual leave and long service and  make it portable, that's fine. And that would be a very nice thing to be able to do. It would  mean that casual workers would actually be better remunerated and have access to more  benefits than permanent workers. And it would come at a massive cost to business in the form  of a tax which would cause businesses to go extinct. So, like all things that would be nice to  do, they come with a cost which, when it comes to Labor, manifests in a tax and it would kill  business in Australia. So, it's utopian and a lovely thought, but totally impractical, massively  costly. And the end result of it would be kill jobs, not grow them.

BEN FORDHAM:  I've got a feeling you'll be on your feet many times next week when Parliament's back, and  we'll catch up soon. Thanks for your time.

ATTORNEY-GENERAL:   Indeed. Cheers.

BEN FORDHAM:  Christian Porter, the Industrial Relations Minister.

ENDS.







Authorised by Christian Porter, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra



