Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





The Hon Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health and Aged Care

MEDIA RELEASE



14 February 2021



Vaccine rollout to support people from all backgrounds in Australia

The Australian Government is ensuring the COVID-19 Vaccination Program meets the needs  of everyone in Australia, including those from culturally, ethnically, and linguistically diverse  (CALD) communities.

To be successful, high uptake of COVID-19 vaccination will be required in Australia.  Therefore it is critical that the vaccine program is designed and delivered in a manner which  is accessible, inclusive and culturally safe.

This includes ensuring that communications are developed and targeted for CALD  communities and that information and services are delivered in appropriate languages and  formats and within appropriate facilities and locations.

The Government recognises that people from multicultural communities are a significant part  of the health, aged care, childcare and disability workforce and will be among the first people  in Australia to receive vaccinations.

A comprehensive vaccine implementation plan (the Plan) has been developed in partnership  with multicultural specialist agencies - and with advice from the national CALD  Communities COVID-19 Health Advisory Group - to reach people from culturally and  linguistically diverse backgrounds.

The Plan also ensures that the medical workforce administering vaccinations will be trained to  work with people from culturally, ethnically and linguistically diverse communities to ensure  that services are delivered in a culturally appropriate and safe way, with the assistance of  interpreters where needed.

The Plan is supported by the $31 million COVID-19 vaccination public information campaign  which is now rolling out across the country, which included an additional $1.3 million to  reach culturally and linguistically diverse (CALD) communities through their peak  multicultural organisations.

This Plan is available on the Department of Health website.

Vaccinations will be accessible on a rolling basis, depending on vaccine delivery schedules   and prioritisation of groups for most urgent vaccination.

-END-



