

CATHERINE KING MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT AND REGIONAL

DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR BALLARAT



SENATOR GLENN STERLE

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR ROAD SAFETY

CHAIR OF THE RURAL AND REGIONAL AFFAIRS AND TRANSPORT

REFERENCE COMMITTEE

LABOR SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA



SENATOR TONY SHELDON

LABOR SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES



AVIATION INQUIRY SUBMISSIONS HIGHLIGHT INADEQUATE GOVERNMENT SUPPORT



Industry submissions to the Senate Inquiry into the future of Australia’s aviation sector paint a

concerning picture of the crisis facing the sector and the Morrison Government’s failure to

provide adequate support to airports, airlines and Australian workers.



These submissions from unions, airports and associations ahead of tomorrow’s first public

hearings in Brisbane highlight the impacts felt by tens of thousands of Australian workers and

communities across the country.



According to the McKell Institute, comparable nations around the world have contributed 0.24

per cent of their GDP to supporting their aviation sector. In contrast, the Morrison Government

support for aviation has amounted to just 0.136 per cent of GDP. This is despite Australia

being a large nation, located far from our major trading partners and dependent on aviation for

domestic and international travel.



The Morrison Government could have and should still be doing more for Australian aviation.



As we enter the second year of this COVID crisis, the Morrison Government still has no plan to

provide ongoing support to our aviation sector or to drive it through the recovery.



With Professor Brendan Murphy suggesting borders will remain largely closed throughout this

year, the Morrison Government cannot abandon this essential industry when they withdraw

JobKeeper support in March.



The aviation sector urgently needs firm commitments on the support it will be offered along the

long road to recovery.



Throughout this crisis, the Morrison Government has denied support to airports, denied

JobKeeper to Dnata workers, allowed Virgin Australia to fall into administration and failed to

act as Qantas sacked thousands of workers.



These failings are already resulting in staff and skill shortages and causing flight cancellations.



Airlines, airports and unions are united in calling for a plan for aviation - the Prime Minister

finally needs to listen.



Excerpts from submissions to the Senate Inquiry into the future of Australia’s aviation

sector



Australian Local Government Association:



“the Federal Government’s support to the aviation industry during the pandemic has not

adequately assisted airports… the exclusion of local governments from JobKeeper has

disproportionately affected council-operated airports and the communities they serve in

regional and remote Australia.”



Queensland Airports, the largest regional airport operator in Australia:



“Airlines were subsidised to operate flights for essential services, while airports were not. This

meant that, for example, Gold Coast Airport was required to open the terminal for one flight a

day and was required to maintain runway operations at all times. This came at a significant

cost, which in turn reduced the funds available for other measures such as capital projects or

employee retention.”



Australian Federation of Air Pilots, the largest professional pilot association in Australia:



“Given that the Job-Keeper and Job-Seeker arrangements have and will be reduced, and that

initial offerings were a real take home pay cut for most pilots, the prospects for snap-back type

circumstances to pre-pandemic status for most disadvantaged pilots is unrealistic. The

situation for these pilots is dire and for them, the aviation sector and Australian community, it’s

actually an urgent situation.”



The Australian and International Pilots Association:



“AIPA maintains the view that much of the disproportionate damage inflicted on the aviation

sector among the severe economic damage induced nationally was largely avoidable and that

our future planning must prioritise the preservation of our aviation connectivity.”



The Australian Airports Association:



“While airports have played their part during the pandemic of providing essential transport

infrastructure and services, it is increasingly clear that the Federal Government’s support to the

aviation industry during the pandemic has not adequately assisted airports.”



The McKell Institute:



“It is clear from the comparative analysis undertaken that the Australian

Government’s support compares poorly to that provided by the governments of other

countries.”



The ACTU:



“The government’s response to the crisis brought about in the aviation sector by the COVID-19



pandemic has been to largely ignore the sector and to create programs which deliberately

leave aviation workers out.”



The Australian Services Union:



“Without a viable aviation industry, Australia’s economic recovery will suffer. It is therefore

imperative the Australian Government develop an aviation recovery plan immediately to

provide a policy and regulatory framework to help the industry recovery from the pandemic and

Australia’s current economic downturn.”



THURSDAY, 28 JANUARY 2021



MEDIA CONTACTS:

NICK BEAVER (KING) 0419 709 266

BEN WHOLAGAN (STERLE) 0400 685 543

KATH CUMMINS (SHELDON) 0422 366 037



