

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS WITH ALAN JONES

WEDNESDAY, 24 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: NewsPoll; Brittany Higgins; Senator Reynolds; Jobs and employment;

Childcare; Renewable energy.



ALAN JONES, HOST: Well who could deny the disarray that exists in both major political

parties at a Federal level. A Newspoll this week on preferred Prime Minister has Scott Morrison

first and daylight second; Albanese barely in the race. But the Liberal Party think they've got a

mortgage on the next election. Labor, with a leader no one wants, is 50/50 at the polls after 12

months with the Prime Minister dominating the news space. And remember, we're told

coronavirus gives the incumbent a decided advantage. A 50-50 two-party preferred with a

coronavirus advantage doesn't make attractive reading for rank-and-file Liberals. The person

spoken of as an alternative Labor leader is the former Deputy Tanya Plibersek. She's a regular

panellist on this program. I've written before of the simple political truism as I see it today - if

Albanese stays, Morrison wins. If Albanese it goes, the Liberals are in trouble. So in a sense

the fate of both parties rests with Albanese. Tanya Plibersek is a potentially divisive figure in

the sense that, usually when she speaks the Labor rank-and-file rally, and on the conservative

side, they start throwing things at the TV because she's a formidable and experienced political

figure, hard to rattle. Remember, excluding the LNP in Queensland, the last Federal election,

for all the imperfections of Labor and some hideous taxation policies, the Liberal Party polled

27.9 per cent of the primary vote. Tanya Plibersek joins me tonight. Thank you for your time,

Tanya Plibersek. Could I just ask firstly, surely our ultimate gift is democracy, which is

government by the people. Do you understand that there's an increasing anger out there, that

if people challenge government they are silenced?



TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION, SHADOW MINISTER FOR

WOMEN: Well Alan, I do think democracy is the best system of government but it's much more

than that. It's about our values as human beings, the idea that each of us is equal. Each of us

has a right to our opinions. Each of us has a say. Each of us is able to govern our own lives

and our own future, our own destiny.



JONES: But as you heard me say, sorry Tanya. So but as you heard me say then that I think

there are things there I said before that people should know and they're hidden from those to

whom government is accountable. I mean, there are many things talk about hitting that I

wanted a canvass with you, but the Prime Minister claims that he only discovered the Higgins

affair on Monday of last week. Is it credible that almost two years, for almost two years, the

Prime Minister was unaware that alleged criminal activity had occurred within his government.

Is that credible?



PLIBERSEK: Several Cabinet Ministers knew, several members of his own staff knew. We

know that your colleague, Peta Credlin, the former Chief of Staff of Tony Abbott, says that she

doesn't think it's possible. Former Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull says he doesn't think it's

credible. I think you need to draw your own conclusions. So many people knew, the idea that

they wouldn't tell the boss that this terrible thing had allegedly occurred just metres really from

his office, I don't think it really passes the credibility test.



JONES: Well Minister Reynolds has gone to hospital today and we wish her well, but if you

were the Prime Minister, would you sack a Minister for concealing alleged criminal activity

within the government from the person who's constitutionally in charge of running the

government?



PLIBERSEK: Well, I do wish the Minister well and I hope she recovers very quickly. But I'm

not sure that- I don't think Senator Reynolds has handled this perfectly.



I think the real question is, with all of the people in the Prime Minister's office who knew, with

all of the Cabinet Ministers who knew, several Cabinet Ministers knew, why did the Prime

Minister allegedly only find out after his office had been dealing with media inquiries all

weekend? It just doesn't pass the sniff test Alan.



JONES: Do you think it's acceptable to the electorate to have an internal investigation, if the

former Chief of Staff to the Prime Minister when he was Treasurer is to conduct the

investigation?



PLIBERSEK: What's even worse is that this internal investigation where you've got, as you

say, the former Chief of Staff of the Prime Minister getting his department to have a look at

what the Prime Minister's office knew and when they knew: the Prime Minister won't even

commit to making that public.



So we'll have a process and it won't be made public, the results won't be made public. We

don't even know whether Brittany Higgins, who is the subject of this inquiry ultimately, whether

she will get a copy of the findings of the report. I just don't, I don't think (inaudible) -



JONES: But surely you don't need an inquiry if the, if the problem is who and-



PLIBERSEK: Yeah he should just be able to ask his staff.



JONES: Yeah. That's the point.



PLIBERSEK: He should be able to walk into the office and say 'Who knew?'



JONES: Quite. I mean if the problem is who in the Prime Minister's office knew, there are 55 of

them, call them in and ask them who knew what?



PLIBERSEK: And do you know what? The Prime Minister said in question time 'Well, you

know I've asked for the official phone logs'. Alan, you know as well as I do, that half the

communication these days is done on these apps where the messages disappear two minutes

later.



I mean, people very deliberately communicate in this way so that there isn't a record of

conversation. So the fact that he's calling for official records of conversations and official

reports made, I just think he must think we're a bunch of mugs. If he thinks that's transparency.



JONES: What about what about the security issue? I mean, I find this unthinkable. It's in the

early hours of a Saturday morning in 2019. I mean basically they are saying that both of these

people have had quite a bit to drink and someone lets them into the office of the Minister for

Defence. What does this say for security at Parliament House?



PLIBERSEK: Well Alan, my staff have had to come into the office sometimes late at night or

early in the morning because it is a 24 hour a day sort of a job. I think what's troubling about it

is that they were both reportedly intoxicated and reportedly this fellow left and the poor young

woman was left in the office for several hours after that, with people checking on her but not

really taking action to care for her. I think the whole thing is really troubling. It's really troubling.



JONES: And what about this business, the Prime Minister's fixer. I mean the person, the Prime

Minister's fixer, called Miss Higgins in the week that the Four Corners program aired November

9 last year. It was a program about sexual misconduct in the government. So someone

presumably this Finkelstein, was in touch with Miss Higgins. Why would he be in touch with

Miss Higgins?



PLIBERSEK: Well, you'd have to ask him that Alan. And again, here you've got Senator

Reynolds’ former Chief of Staff has gone back into the Prime Minister's office. You've got his

Principal Private Secretary, you've got a report from another staff member that the Chief of

Staff was told.



You've got so much evidence of the fact that people ought to have known or are reported to

have known, you've got Cabinet Ministers who knew, you've got media inquiries and the Prime

Minister is still saying that he didn't know. It just beggars belief.



JONES: Well okay let's just move on. On the preferred Prime Minister's poll, the Prime

Minister is a mile in front of your Leader. How do you deal with that? You can't win an election

in that circumstance.



PLIBERSEK: Well Alan, as you said, incumbent governments around Australia and around the

world doing better at a time of crisis because people want security, but I think we really do

have an opportunity. Because it's all about jobs isn't it? And we know that Australians are

feeling insecure. They're worried about not having a job. They're worried about not enough

hours of work. They're worried about the fact their wages haven't gone up in eight years.

They're worried about work.



You know, when my dad used to come home on a Friday afternoon, he'd bring the pay packet

home and would have cash in the pay packet and he'd slap it down on the table for my mum to

pay the mortgage. There wasn't a lot, it wasn't a big fat pay packet, but we knew it would be

there next week and next month and next year if he did the right thing.



People don't feel that sense of security now and I think Labor has an opportunity when we offer

people that sense of security, when we say we want you to have a secure job with decent pay,

we want to be a country that builds things, that makes things, that cares for people. I think that

is speaking the language that people are really crying out for now-



JONES: But talking about jobs-



PLIBERSEK: We are talking about jobs.



JONES: Yeah well, what about Christine Holgate's job? The Prime Minister humiliated her out

of a job. She's been thoroughly vindicated. Why wouldn't you demand an apology? How have

you prosecuted that case, when the Prime Minister ordered a report which is a waste of

taxpayers’ money, but kept it secret, released on the eve of Christmas. Christine Holgate is

exonerated. I mean do you think Labor is prosecuting these cases on behalf of the electorate. I

mean the Robodebt issue? I mean people committed suicide - it was designed by Scott

Morrison. There's a lump of land at Badgerys Creek, the Leppington Triangle -



PLIBERSEK: Ten times more, ten times more, taxpayers paid for that than it was worth.



JONES: But what is the Opposition doing about it? What's the Opposition doing about these

things?



PLIBERSEK: Alan we are pursuing all of these cases. The Leppington Triangle. The sports

rorts, $100 million there. Angus Taylor's grassland scandal, the water buy backs that were just

an absolute rip off. There is scandal after scandal from this Government and they never face

up to it. They're always trying to slide out of it and cover it up-



JONES: But out there, they just see you as being silent. The one thing they remember you for

is that Labor has publicly supported Daniel Andrews. I mean that is toxic to the average voter

out there. It's toxic. It's costing you votes. I mean Troy Bramston wrote last year and he's got

his ear to the ground, Labor is in danger of becoming a zombie party aimless with little sign of

life, the B-grade front bench from the Rudd-Gillard years is just going through the motions.

How do you answer that?



PLIBERSEK: I love Troy and he's often right but he's not right on this. We've got a job to do

which is holding the Government to account for the series of scandals that you've mentioned.

And I'd throw in not getting Australians back from overseas, and the failure of the tracing app,

and the failure of aged care where we've got people with maggots in their open wounds -



JONES: Yeah but Tanya you've lost seven of the last nine elections. Seven of the last nine

and you're on track to make it 8 out of 10.  Now surely in a two horse race when you can only

win 20 per cent of the elections there must be something seriously wrong.



PLIBERSEK: Alan, I am frustrated that we've only won two of the last nine elections, and I

think our focus on the future has to be on reassuring Australians that we've got their backs,

that we're on their side. That we are all about good jobs with decent pay and security.



John Howard used to talk about ‘relaxed and comfortable’ and I think that there's actually really

something in that, but we should as a nation be relaxed and confident. Confident that there will

be a job for you next week and next year. And that your kids will have a better life than you've

had. That's what we should be confident about.



JONES: You've got children who are now teenagers, but a baby born today will be still paying

off this debt when they're 80 and yet your Leader went into the budget reply speech and he

promised $6.2 billion for childcare. So people on $500,000 a year will still get a handout do you

think that's a vote winner?



PLIBERSEK: I think actually paying up to 90% of people's child care costs is really important

social policy. It's also really good economic policy Alan because we know and you know

women like this: smart hard-working women, who say ‘it's not worth going to work for a fourth

or a fifth day a week because I lose more in childcare costs than I gain when I go to work’.

That's just wrong for those families, but it's also wrong for our country. It's wrong for our

country to lose that skill.



JONES: Yeah but I mean the great increase in female workforce participation occurred in the

1970s long before child care subsidies emerged, I mean if we have a child care system

shouldn't it be towards parents caring for their own children, which is the most efficient child

care of all?



PLIBERSEK: I want people to have the choice. And if people choose to stay at home and

raise their own kids like my mother did, and I'm very grateful that she did, that's a perfectly

legitimate choice and we should be encouraging and supporting that.



The reality is in most families people have different times in and out of work. Sometimes

they're working full-time. Sometimes they’re working part-time. They might take a year off in

paid parental leave. It should be about parental choice. I won't disagree but right now child

care is too expensive.



JONES: But I mean child care centre owners are clapping their hands, they're the main

beneficiaries. When you increase the subsidy, they just stack up the cost of childcare.



PLIBERSEK: We do need to redesign the system to make sure this doesn't go straight

through into the pockets of big corporate child care providers as profits. We need to make sure

that this makes child care cheaper for families and also that it pays a decent wage to those

early childhood educators who work so hard to make sure those kids get the best start in life.



JONES: Now just before you go I mean, we've talked here all night, but you're still going on

about this Paris climate change stuff. And this is what Joel Fitzgibbon said. It's driving people

nuts, they're obsessed. You're the same as the Government actually was talking about 2050

when you won't be around. I won't be around. Scott Morrison won't be around 2050 and yet

here we are -



PLIBERSEK: Well I'm hoping to be around Alan!



JONES: Are you? That's 30.



PLIBERSEK: Oh come on, yeah I'm hoping to!



JONES: But seriously do you understand out there this is not in voter land one of the top ten

issues and while you keep rabbiting on about the Paris climate change, which is going …

which is basically a national economic suicide note. Putting people out of work, demonizing

coal-fired power, ignoring uranium, people out there are saying the Labor Party no longer is

relevant to what I want the party to do.



PLIBERSEK: Okay, let's just forget about climate change for a second Alan. Do you want

cheaper energy in Australia? We now know that solar is the cheapest form of electricity in

history. That's what the International Energy Agency says. There is a reason that a quarter of

Australian households have solar panels on the roof. Some of them care about climate

change. Some of them don't. They all want cheaper power. There is a reason -



JONES: We don’t have cheaper power. There is a reason why the source of our power Tanya

is coal at the moment. I mean honestly-



PLIBERSEK: New coal-fired power would be much more expensive than solar and you look at

big companies like Wesfarmers, big shops like Bunnings. There's a reason they're putting

panels on the roof, they want cheaper power for their business.



JONES: You and I have had discussions about this-



PLIBERSEK: Many times.



JONES: I asked you what the problem was with carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide a by-product-



PLIBERSEK: Oh Alan-





JONES: Well I won't embarrass you again so I'll tell you. It's 0.04 per cent of the atmosphere.



PLIBERSEK: I remember you telling me Alan and I'm saying to you let's just put aside - you

and I don't agree on everything. There's plenty of stuff we don't agree on. Let's just say, let's

put aside the debate on climate change. If you want cheaper energy for households and for

businesses. Let's look at the cheapest forms of energy, and that's renewables and there's a

reason that a quarter of Australia households have got solar panels on their roof. It's because

they want cheaper power and we want that for our businesses too -



JONES: They've got solar panels on their roof because the poor damn taxpayer has

subsidised them to the tune of $7 billion dollars. I'm telling it. Now we've run out of time. But

the point that's been proven tonight is that we have to go into the public place and talk about

these issues. So I'm grateful for your time.



PLIBERSEK: And I'm grateful for the opportunity.



JONES: And there she is, Tanya Plibersek.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350



