Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria



The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health and Aged Care



TRANSCRIPT

8 February 2021



INTERVIEW WITH BEN FORDHAM  2GB BREAKFAST

E&OE…

Topics: COVID-19 vaccine rollout, Vaccine administration training, State border restrictions

BEN FORDHAM:  We’re gearing up for the first coronavirus vaccinations in Australia. Around the world, millions of  Pfizer jabs have already been delivered. In preparation, the Government will be rolling out vaccine  training programmes, telling providers how to store, handle and administer the vaccines. The  Federal Health Minister, Greg Hunt is on the line. Minister, good morning to you.

GREG HUNT:  And good morning, Ben.

BEN FORDHAM:  I should ask you first of all about South Africa; South Africa’s walking away from the AstraZeneca  vaccine. We’re told this morning authorities have ordered a halt to the planned rollout because it  doesn’t protect recipients from the new strain of the virus. It’s not only South Africa with concerns,  are you worried about the effectiveness of AstraZeneca’s vaccine?

GREG HUNT:  No. In fact, what we’ve seen is additional data coming out of the UK recently. I spoke with the UK  Health Secretary in recent days, that’s their health minister equivalent, they’re having very strong  results. In terms of particular variants, particular countries, the world is learning about those with all  vaccines.

But all up, what we’re seeing is very significant results from the vaccines that have been approved,  with up to a hundred per cent protection on the early data that we’ve seen in the clinical trial results  for serious illness and hospitalisation. So, that’s the critical thing, and that’s the protection. And  ultimately, this is about saving lives and protecting lives.

BEN FORDHAM:  You’ve put out a bit of a guideline this morning on how the vaccine rollout is going to work?

GREG HUNT:  Yes. So, what we have is training modules, in the same way that we’ve had, all up, about 1.4  million people do 3.6 million units of training on infection prevention and other elements, with  regards to infection control, Australians have just been incredible.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria

Now it’s time to prepare for the administration of the vaccines. In particular, what we’re looking at  is having people begin to prepare for the first of the vaccine rollouts, Pfizer and then the  AstraZeneca. And we’re inviting health professionals from later this morning to go to  health.gov.au, and then there's the COVID vaccine training programme, or COVID19vaccination  training.org.au.

And all of that will take you through, and that will help make sure that we’ve got training on the  vaccine administration, the vaccine handling, storage, these elements which are part and parcel of  inoculating a population.

BEN FORDHAM:  If there are any adverse reactions to either vaccine, you're going to share all of that information on a  database?

GREG HUNT:  That's correct. So, there'll be a weekly report from the Therapeutic Goods Administration, that's our  medical regulator. And what that will do is outline the vaccinations, any adverse reactions. Just in  the same way if we're having the flu, or our kids might be having measles, mumps, rubella  vaccinations. We're very used to this. We have the Meningococcal ACWY, or we might have the  Gardasil 9 vaccine.

Some people will have a response; it could be a sore arm, they might be feeling a little bit ill. And  where there is any significant, what are called adverse events, then we'll have public reporting of  those.

BEN FORDHAM:  We're speaking to the Federal Health Minister, Greg Hunt, this Monday morning. I can't quite  believe this, but we've now gone three weeks in New South Wales with no community  transmission. And Mark McGowan, the West Australian Premier, said yesterday: the door’s still  shut to New South Wales.

GREG HUNT:  Well, look, that is a matter for him. I spoke with the Premier Gladys Berejiklian on the weekend,  and she, I think, maintained a very careful, cautious but balanced programme where she looks at the  situation in other states with her Chief Health Officer and her Health Minister. New South Wales  has continued allowing people from Western Australia and Victoria, WA where there've been-  sorry, Queensland, where there've been outbreaks.

And it's a risk-based assessment, there's no Commonwealth hotspot definition for any state or  territory in Australia at the moment. And so, it then becomes a matter for individual Premiers if  they wish to do this, and it's up to them to set out their medical advice.

But frankly, New South Wales is doing incredibly well. I understand there are reports, obviously, of  a return traveller after 16 days, in their post-quarantine, they having a very weak positive, and the  state will set out those details. But we know how to deal with these outbreaks, that's the thing.

All the states, mainland states have been tested recently; we’ve had outbreaks in New South Wales,  Victoria, Queensland, South Australia and WA in recent months, and every state has been able to  manage them. And that's, I think, the very, very important news for Australians. We said we'd get  through it, we said there'd be challenges. I think both are accurate, and Australians have absolutely  risen to the task.





Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria

BEN FORDHAM:  I've only got about 30 seconds left with you. Can you tell me the date of the first jab that will be  administered?

GREG HUNT:  Late February. So, we’ll set a final date once we have shipping confirmation from the company. But  we’ve been in contact with Pfizer Australia yesterday, and they remain on track. I was in contact  with AstraZeneca on the weekend, indeed, the Australian and global heads, they remain on track for  early March.

So, late February for Pfizer, early March for AstraZeneca. And we're on track to complete the  vaccination programme for Australia by the end of October.

BEN FORDHAM:  We appreciate your time, Minister. Have a good day.

GREG HUNT:  Thanks Ben. Take care everyone.

BEN FORDHAM:  Greg Hunt, the Federal Health Minister, joining us live.

-ENDS-



