

The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham  Minister for Finance  Leader of the Government in the Senate  Senator for South Australia



Senator the Hon Jane Hume  Minister for Superannuation, Financial Services and the Digital Economy  Senator for Victoria



Senator the Hon Bridget McKenzie  Leader of The Nationals in the Senate  Senator for Victoria



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au

19 March 2021



$235 MILLION NORTH EAST RAIL LINE UPGRADE A WIN FOR  VICTORIAN RAIL PASSENGERS

Rail passengers in Victoria will enjoy a smoother ride and fewer delays between Albury-Wodonga  and Melbourne following the completion of main construction contracted works on the $235 million  North East Rail Line upgrade.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the upgrade works on 532 linear track kilometres delivered local jobs at a vital time.

“Any infrastructure funding we invest in means locals jobs for local proponents, local contractors and  economic stimulus for local businesses, laying the foundations for Victoria’s recovery from the  COVID-19 pandemic,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“With the completion of the main works on the North East Rail Line upgrade, passengers will  experience more reliable services and a better ride quality between Spencer Street Junction in  Melbourne and Albury-Wodonga.

“The works bring the rail line up to a Victorian Class 2 track performance standard, which is in line  with other regional passenger rail lines in Victoria, including accommodating new VLocity trains on  the line.

“The benefits of this project go beyond the passenger experience, with more than $70 million  invested into regional North East Victorian communities since the start of the project in early 2020,  which has supported 173 Victorian businesses and service providers.”



Minister for Finance Simon Birmingham said the Australian Rail Track Corporation (ARTC), together  with contracting partner John Holland, were able to deliver the works ahead of schedule and above  the original scope of the project.

“The early success of the North East Rail Line upgrade meant the Australian Government could task  ARTC to consider what further works might be accelerated with the pandemic offering the unusual  opportunity to fast-track some of Australia’s major infrastructure projects during a time that would  have minimal impact on commuters,” Minister Birmingham said.

“Accelerated works took place on the line between July and November 2020, with ARTC delivering  additional turnout renewals and more than 30 extra bridge deck conversions, enhancing the services  and safety to passengers and communities of North East Victoria.

“We also extend our thanks to the team of 100 John Holland contractors that were based in  Wangaratta, many of whom made personal sacrifices to remain in regional Victoria to continue  working and complete this project as the pandemic struck.”

Senator for Victoria Jane Hume said the project was delivered by ARTC on behalf of the Australian  Government with support from Victorian transport agencies including V/Line, Public Transport  Victoria, Transport for Victoria and Rail Projects Victoria.

“This was a large-scale project that involved approximately 615,000 working hours and we would like  to thank everyone who played a part in the successful delivery of this significant project including the  communities of North East Victoria,” Senator Hume said.

“Whilst the objectives of the project have been achieved with the completion of major works, some  project signalling works will continue throughout the remainder of 2021.”

Wodonga-based Nationals Senator for Victoria Bridget McKenzie said the North East Rail Line  upgrade has been vital for keeping businesses open during the pandemic.

“Government investments like these have long-reaching benefits, from supporting businesses in the  region to keeping people in work,” Senator McKenzie said.

“Businesses such as the Euroa Caravan Park were kept open with the work crews’ business and  CountryWide Asphalt received a boost by providing thousands of tonnes of asphalt for the  upgrades.”

The project is fully funded by the Australian Government through the Australian Rail Track  Corporation.

The Australian Government has invested more than $2.2 billion in regional passenger rail projects in  Victoria.

Ends.



Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Dean Shachar 0418 202 860 | Caitlin Donaldson 0428 389 880  Minister Birmingham - Benn Ayre 0428 342 325

Senator Hume - Electorate Office - (03) 9428 1773  Senator McKenzie - Nicky McMillan 0439 438 500

