Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, Sydney.





THE HON PAUL FLETCHER MP  Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts

MEDIA RELEASE

30 March 2021

An extra $5 million for Victoria’s creative sector to RISE

The Morrison Government is helping the Victorian arts sector get back on stage, with 18 organisations  across the state to share in more than $5 million under the second batch of grants from the $200  million Restart Investment to Sustain and Expand (RISE) Fund.

Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, the Hon Paul Fletcher MP,  said the latest RISE funding will begin to flow immediately to creative sector organisations throughout  Victoria, which are seeking to restart, re-imagine or create new cultural and creative activities.



“The Arts and entertainment sector is pivotal to Victoria’s identity, supporting cultural expression,  community and social wellbeing, along with significant employment and economic benefits for the  state,” Minister Fletcher said.

“That is why we’re excited to see more than $5 million flow immediately to rejuvenate the sector,  which will support 18 innovative projects and create more than 3,100 job opportunities across  Australia.”

One of the largest grant recipients in Victoria is Agency Projects Trust, who will receive $785,000 in  funding to partner with 25 Indigenous Art Centres, to transform their community collections and  galleries into interactive and immersive experiences.

“This is an exciting community-owned and operated project that will empower Aboriginal and Torres  Strait Islander artists, culturally and linguistically diverse artists, and artists with disability to create  unique and energising arts and cultural experiences to attract larger and new audiences to their  centres,” Minister Fletcher said.

Peking Duk Touring will receive more than $90,000 in funding to perform in 15 regional centres  throughout Australia in 2021 to audiences of over 20,000 attendees.

“This grant is directly supporting Australia’s energetic contemporary music scene and will in turn  provide work for crew, suppliers, managers, agents, promoters and production companies throughout  the country and support affiliated industries that rely upon live touring” Minister Fletcher said.

On 25 March the Government announced the RISE Fund will be boosted with an extra $125 million to  support around 230 projects and up to 90,000 jobs, building on an original commitment of $75 million.

In November 2020 more than $60 million in funding was announced under Batch One of the Fund.

The successful Victorian projects listed below are part of 61 projects funded under Batch Two of

Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, Sydney.

RISE. The full list of Batch Two recipients will be announced in the coming weeks at:  www.arts.gov.au/covid-19-update

Media contacts  Imre Salusinszky | 0432 535 737 | Imre.Salusinszky@communications.gov.au  Christine Vanden Byllaardt | 0409 433 357 | Christine.VandenByllaardt@communications.gov.au

Organisation Project Name Funding Description

Nicholas Clark  Management  Pty Ltd

Nicholas Clark  Management  2021/2022 COVID-safe Touring  Program.

$387,697

Five productions of innovative work for  families, touring to 38 regional and  metropolitan venues in five states.

Peking Duk  Touring Pty Ltd  Peking Duk  Australian Regional

Tour

$91,500 Peking Duk Australian regional tour.

Stella Rose  Productions

Tim Ferguson - A  Fast Life On  Wheels. Melbourne  season 2021

$25,000

Tim Ferguson's Multiple Sclerosis has  put him in a wheelchair. But MS won’t  stop Australia’s busiest comedian,  screenwriter, movie-maker, author and  comedy writing teacher.

Melbourne Jazz  Limited  Melbourne  International Jazz

Festival 2021

$177,755 Australian artists performing in 120  events across 30 venues at the Melbourne  International Jazz Festival 2021.

The Trustee for  Agency Projects  Trust

Addressing the  digital divide for  remote Indigenous  Art Centres

$785,000 Agency will partner with Indigenous Art  Centres to transform their community  collections and galleries into interactive  and immersive experiences.

Kids Promotions  Pty Ltd  KIDS LIFE - Live  Interactive Family

Entertainment

$411,679 Innovative and reimagined offering of  the annual calendar of LIVE touring  concerts targeted to preschool children  and their families.

Kadimah Jewish  Cultural Centre  and National  Library

Kadimah Yiddish  Theatre   $220,000 The creative development and production  of Australian theatre works.

Melbourne  Writers Festival  Inc

Melbourne Writers  Festival 2021 -  Hybrid and COVID-safe

$100,000 Combines the large-scale, live festival  events with the newly developed digital  capabilities learned by the Festival in  2020.

A Thoughtful  Spot  Lior & Domini  Forster - Animal in

Hiding

$191,950 A collaboration between critically  acclaimed singer/songwriter Lior,  together with emerging artist, Domini  Forster.

The Brickman  Exhibitions  (Aust) Pty Ltd

Brickman Jurassic  World  $668,416 A unique artistic exhibition — immersive  scale re-creation of Jurassic World

scenes in LEGOÂ® bricks.

Photo Australia  Ltd  PHOTO 2022  International Festival

of Photography:  Bringing art to the  streets of Melbourne

$290,000 Commissioning ten Australian artists to  create site specific works to be presented  at iconic locations in central Melbourne  and regional Victoria.

Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, Sydney.

Theatre Works  Limited  Resurgence -  Reactivating the

independent sector

$290,000 Resurgence Initiative offers three  targeted programs to restart, invest in and  sustain the independent sector.

Velodrome  Events Pty  Ltd  Reunion Park $441,948 A transformation of Melbourne’s iconic  ‘Burnley Circus Site’ into Australia’s

first COVID safe, bespoke, Winter  friendly outdoor live music and  performing arts venue.

Remix Summits  PTY Ltd   REMIX Summit  Sydney 2021

$99,030 REMIX will provide online summit  access, develop year round online  community support, including online  courses and extending REMIX Academy.  REMIX is located in Victoria and the  Summit held in Sydney.

Good Life  Music Festivals  Pty Ltd

Lost City u18s  Music Festival

$290,000 Annual large-scale outdoor festival  where teens are entertained with two  stages of DJ’s and live music.

Victorian Opera Victorian Opera  Digital Outreach  $276,783 An opera connecting regional, national,  and international audiences with live

performances, speaking to Australia’s  First Nations heritage through operas  both new and old.

Melbourne  Street Eatz Pty  Ltd

Melbourne Street  Eatz Reloaded  $205,676 A celebration of music, food, arts and  entertainment uniting and inspiring local

and surrounding communities.

Essential  Theatre  Incorporated

The Dream  Laboratory

$91,722 Immersive theatrical experience created  for The Palais Theatre, inspired by  Shakespeare’s “A Midsummer Night’s  Dream”.



