

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T

Wednesday 3rd February 2021

Minister Littleproud Media Conference   Parliament House Canberra

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Good afternoon and thanks for coming. Obviously, the Federal  Government is watching every closely the events that are unfolding in Western Australia at the  moment with bushfires. We have worked collaboratively with the Western Australian  Government and their emergency service personnel, and can I thank them for the tireless work  that they've undertaken over the last couple of days. That journey is going to get even harder  in the coming hours as we understand conditions are going to worsen this afternoon. And can I  say to all residents that are in the area of risk, please listen to emergency service personnel.  You must take their warnings and you must act when they ask you to act. These men and  women are putting their lives on the line for you. It is not only the responsibility of you to look  after yourself and your family, but you have a responsibility to them to do as they ask you. This  is a serious situation and it can't be a she'll be right sort of attitude to this. This is a dangerous  situation where, fortunately, we haven't had any loss of life, but if you do not listen to  emergency service personnel, there is a real risk of that. So, I just ask any resident in the area  at risk to talk heed of those warnings.

The Federal Government has already worked with the West Australian Government and  yesterday, we sent an Australian Defence asset with retardant to Western Australia to support  them. And I've got to say and can I congratulate, not just the Western Australian Fire  Commissioner, but the fire commissioners from around the country who pre-emptively had a  large aerial tanker positioned in Western Australia before these fires started and before the  season started. And New South Wales, in our coordinated method of aerial assets in this  country, has sent a further asset over, and any further assets or support that is required from  Western Australia will be provided. And in fact, I spoke to the Western Australian Emergency  Service Minister this morning and reaffirmed the fact that if they required any further federal  assistance, then we will be there to support them.

But we, the Federal Government, as a result of advice from Emergency Management Australia  are initiating disaster recovery payments for those people that have had damage to their  properties. We have lost 71 homes. This is $1000 per adult and $400 per child. This is simply  to give them some dignity and respect in a trying time, to allow them to know that they'll be  able to get the essentials. The Australian Commonwealth is there with them. And after  discussions with the WA Minister, there will be further announcements between ourselves and  the Western Australian Government later. But this is an initiation of a payment to let those  people that have been impacted by this know that the Federal Government is there to support  them. We will continue to make sure that there are further assessments made, and if there's  further support that is required, we will do whatever it takes. We will be there with them. This  money is available from 8AM tomorrow through Services Australia, through Centrelink, and we  would encourage anyone that has had damage to their property to come forward, not to self-

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

assess. The Australian people are here to support you. Please do not think there should be  any stigma about asking for support in your hour of need. We're a rich country and we should  support one another when times are tough and the Federal Government has initiated this on  the premise that Western Australia needs a helping hand. Western Australia was there for us  on the east coast last year. It's time for us to reciprocate and let everyone in the WA area of  concern know that the Australian Government and the Australian people are there to support  them.

But please, this is a trying time. This is a dangerous situation. Please do not underestimate  what can happen. We have the complexity also of a very significant rain depression that's  coming down that will change wind direction and also have lightning into the bushfire area.  That makes it even more dangerous coming in to this afternoon. So, again, I just plead with all  residents, please do take this seriously. Listen to the warnings. Make sure you heed it and act  appropriately.

QUESTION: Did the WA Minister indicate that he would be asking for more assistance and  could that extend to ADF personnel?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well ADF has already been used under the tasking request that was  sent yesterday. He's made it clear that if there is, he'll make that immediately. That's why I  reached out, so that there was a clear understanding, there should be no delays in any  requests. We will provide that for them. And the WA Minister said that he would make those  decisions predicated on the conditions as they evolve, but we are on stand-by and we stand  ready to help Western Australia. And I've got to say, the Western Australian minister and his  fire commissioner have done an outstanding job in preparing for this event, but if there's  further assistance, the rest of the country stands ready to move.

QUESTION: Minister, would you support Scott Morrison making a concrete commitment of net  zero by 2050?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, hold on. Is there anything else in the bushfires before we get off  that?

QUESTION: Yeah. I have one about an announcement you- or a comments you made this  morning, Minister, criticising telecommunications companies, singling out Telstra. Could you  just run through exactly what information it is that they haven't provided and whether that  information is available elsewhere? I mean, local council maps have water troughs locaters.  I'm just a bit confused about what information is lacking.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: So this is something that I asked back in 2019 when I visited their  operation centre and in fact, the emergency service community were asking for, in terms of the  type of assets that are in some of these disaster-risk areas. So, that there can be assessments  made by emergency service personnel about what resources should be sent to continue to  make sure that they are unabated in any disaster, that they can preserve and support  protecting them. These are decisions, strategic decisions, that emergency personnel have to  make to make sure that communications stay alive between, not only their personnel, but the  community. This is something that is not new. And for any telco to sit there and say this  something else or new - I'm sorry, I've had a personal conversation with Andy Penn who  assured me after our meeting with Telstra some 12 months earlier that he'd sort this. Nothing  has happened. It is a recommendation in the Royal Commission that we need to work with the  telcos. The time for letter writing and for talk is over. They simply need to sit down with  emergency service personnel and provide that information. I understand this can be  sometimes commercially sensitive information, but we're not in the business of sharing with  competitors. We're in the business of sharing it with emergency personnel so we keep people

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

safe. This is about people, not profits. This is about making sure that our emergency service  personnel have the resources and the tools that they require to protect us and themselves.

QUESTION: Minister, do you have concerns - the Prime Minister has spoken to Craig Kelly  the other day. Do you have concerns that some of the views he's already been spouting could  damage public confidence in the vaccine and the Government's health strategy in general?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: I am a proud defender of free speech, but on this one, Craig is on his  own. The evidence is quite clear and this is a time for Australians to listen our Chief Medical  Officer, the TGA, and their local doctor. I just say I respect the fact that people are allowed to  have their own views, but this is far more important than that. Craig Kelly is a great guy, but on  this one he is on his own.

QUESTION: Craig Kelly has said that he agrees to support the Federal Government's vaccine  rollout, that he's always sought to support the success of the public health response. Is that  true?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I take Craig on face value. Obviously, he is delving into areas  that are quite complicated, that are scientific. And whether he's been able to enunciate that  clearly is a matter that obviously now he's trying to make sure is clearer in the public domain. I  respect him for that. It takes a big man to come back out and try and ratify and rectify any  statements that he's made. But the Government's position is clear, it's very clear on this. The  science is clear. We've gone through a very stringent process, one that I think here in Australia  has shown to be the best in the world, because we haven't had to rush it. We've done it  properly. We've done it calmly. And we're going to make sure that we keep Australians safe in  terms of the rollout of this vaccine. And that's what we should allow our medical profession and  the scientific profession do in an unabated way.

QUESTION: But from the commentary he's made so far, is it true he's supported the nation's  public health response? Do you think what he's done supports that?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I take Craig on face value. If he's saying that, I take him on face  value. If some of his comments have been clumsy, then obviously Craig will need to rectify  that himself. But the Government's position is very clear. We will not deviate from that in any  way, shape or form. The Government's position has been predicated on science, the best  medical advice that we've got, and that will continue to be predicated on any further advice  that we provide the Australian public. That is the Government's position. And if anyone within  the Government ranks makes comments to the contrary, well, they're on their own.

QUESTION: Minister, this week, the Prime Minister has talked about a preference of net zero  by 2050. He’s obviously warmed up his language, but will you support the Prime Minister  making concrete commitments to net zero by 2050?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, the Prime Minister said in Question Time yesterday that he'd  make a commitment once he could be honest with the Australian people about how he got  there and who paid for it. That's been the position of the National Party quite clearly from the  start. We have to be honest with the Australian people. If you look back to the last federal  election, we had the Opposition making these claims that they were going to get to net zero by  2050 but couldn't tell anyone how they were going to do it and who was going to pay for it.  Well the Australian public clearly rejected Labor's proposition back in May last year- in '19. So  we have got to be honest with the Australian public. People want us to act on reducing  emissions. We're doing that now. They want more, but they want to know- they want some  honesty from their politicians. They want to know how they are getting there and who has to  pay for it. That's what any responsible Government should do. It shouldn't be about posturing

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

philosophical views. It should be about truth and fact. And I think the Prime Minister is leading  his way on this in saying that that's his aspiration. But he's not going to commit the Australian  Government or the Australian people to it until he can be honest with people about how he  gets there and who has to pay for it.

QUESTION: Minister, if that true fact and science points to the need of net zero by 2050,  would you support a commitment this year, a concrete commitment to net zero by 2050?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, again, the Government's position is that we will make a  commitment once we understand how we get there and who pays for it. Now, there is- we  have a technology based approach to this. And in fact, it's good to see the United States, in  fact, aligns with us and are now signed up to what we've already signed and we're achieving it  under Paris. We never turned our back on the Paris Agreement, and we're saying that we will  reach that, and in fact beat it. So, the US is catching up to us on that. But in terms of the future  we've signed up over that Paris Agreement to reach zero emissions sometime in the second  half the century. Now, if we can accelerate that, and we can make sure that the economy isn't  hurt, and we can transition. Well, obviously we'll look at that in a pragmatic way. But you've got  to be honest with the Australian people. People are sick of platitudes and politicians talking of  big aspirations but no way of getting there. What we need in Australian politics today is just  some honesty. And you don't do that until you've got the facts, and we don't have all of them  yet, but we've got a commitment to find them.

QUESTION: Minister, Scott Morrison singled out soil carbon capture as a particularly  perspective technology in the land sector. Would you support any sort of policy that went- that  paid farmers to capture - in any way - paid farmers to capture carbon in their soil?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Oh, totally. I think this is where our stewardship of our land, our land  managers, our farmers, have a real opportunity to play in reducing our emissions and  capturing carbon. And I think they should be rewarded for it. And I congratulate Angus Taylor,  we've made a $14 million commitment to try and understand to be able to measure that with  real currency so that we can go to the world and say we're doing this, and we're reducing our  emissions. And we're trying to do- find that measurement, it's currently around $30 a hectare  to try and measure that at the moment. If we can bring it down to around $3, well then you  really get farmers excited. We're also doing that with the Biodiversity Stewardship Fund, and  the ANU have finished that methodology about measuring the improvement of biodiversity and  how farmers can be rewarded in that. In fact, I'm proud to say that in the next month, we'll be  announcing some pilot areas, where we'll be taking that to the next level. So the Government  is actually looking at pragmatic ways in which we can reduce emissions, and working with  those that manage our land, particularly the large parts of our country, to be able to do it and  they should be rewarded for. Farmers have done the heavy lifting for a long time, and it's  important they're rewarded for it financially.

QUESTION: Should the Prime Minister publicly criticise Craig Kelly's views? Is it his  responsibility as a leader to do that?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: His responsibility to this country is to lead the nation and tell them the  facts. Now, I think the Prime Minister has been very clear. The facts come from the TGA and  the Chief Medical Officer. There will be divergent views in any society. And the Prime Minister  made it clear, as he has led this nation, as he has said to the Australian public, that is who you  should be listening to. That is who the government listens to. Divergent views in a free society  will always appear. And they should be respected. But obviously, at the end of the day, facts  and science needs to overtake those. And that is the Government's position. And that's what  the Prime Minister has been very clear on.

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

QUESTION: Minister, has time run out to fill the agricultural workforce shortages or is it too  late now?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I fear. I fear, sadly, that it could be. The states have been given  the opportunity to fill them with the 25,000 pre-vetted workmen and women in 10 Pacific  nations to come over. We gave them that opportunity back in August, and in fact, the Northern  Territory government were able to find some in September. But other states haven't done  anything about it. They've sat on their hands, and that as late as December last year, National  Cabinet, the premiers all walked out and said, we want to continue to own quarantining  arrangements. We are the ones that are best placed to do it. Well, they were given that  responsibility, that ownership. And they've done nothing with it. And unfortunately, this has  failed farmers. The federation has failed farmers where premiers have come out and talk big,  but actually haven't delivered. And unfortunately, we've seen a lot of policy settings predicated  during COVID-19 off metropolitan issues. And they haven't necessarily thought about regional  issues. And unfortunately, what's going to happen for you, in metropolitan Australia now is  you're going to pay for the checkout. And that's because you haven't valued what we do out  there, putting bread and butter on your table every morning.

QUESTION: Minister, is there any concern carbon border taxes are going to impact…

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Sorry, the?

QUESTION: Carbon border taxes. Are they going to- is there concern they're going to impact  ag exporters, given the EU and the US are both considering it?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, in fact I had a conversation with the EU ag commissioner last  night, and I made it very clear to him that it wouldn't be appropriate to have a one size fits all  approach to the environment because the environmental and agricultural production systems  in Europe are far different to Australia. We have a different ecosystem that is far more fragile  and diverse than what they do in Europe. And to have a one size fits all isn't appropriate. In  fact, there's even colleges coming out saying that much of what's being used in agricultural  production systems is important to protect the environment. So it's important that the EU and  those nations understand the very unique nature of our continent compared to others. We are  doing the heavy lifting. And the country, our country, signed up to the Paris agreement. We're  leading the way. We're going to meet it and beat it and then we're saying we're sticking to it.  Some nations around the world got out of it and now re-signed. I think as Australians, we get  into self-loathing a lot and we've got to actually look at what we've actually achieved. We're  actually leading the world on this. We've been consistent. And we made sure that our  principles and values have been enunciated clearly, publicly around the world. And we'll  continue to do that. And we expect our trading partners to acknowledge that as well.

I'm going to have to go. Thank you. Thank. Thank you.

Media contact  0455 448 985

