

MARK BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING

MEMBER FOR HINDMARSH





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE

MONDAY, 15 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Vaccine rollout; hotel quarantine; Parliament House.



MARK BUTLER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING: Our thoughts remain

with the people of Victoria today. As they endure another day of lockdown in response to the

latest outbreak from the Holiday Inn at Melbourne Airport. Over the past three months all five

of our major cities have been impacted by outbreaks from hotel quarantine, all causing very

serious social and economic disruption. Outbreaks from quarantine are right now, the biggest

failing Australia has in its COVID-19 response, and it is a failing for which Scott Morrison as

the country's Prime Minister, is constitutionally and legally responsible. Australians are fast

losing patience with the impacts and disruption caused by a failing hotel quarantine system

and it's no longer acceptable for Scott Morrison to continue to duck shove responsibility for this

onto eight different state and territory governments.



Last week the AMA called for urgent national action to deal with this issue, and this week Scott

Morrison must outline the steps he intends to take to bring this matter back under control.

What dedicated national facilities are able to be put in place to take the pressure off our CBDs

with quarantining return travellers? What national standard will be put into place? And driven

from a national level to deal with the issues that are being well traversed over the past several

months, around staffing arrangements, around access to PPE, particularly masks, and also

around ventilation - given the vast and broad view of health experts that this disease to the

degree it has become airborne? We want to see that detail from Scott Morrison over the

course of this week.



On vaccines, Australians remember that back in August, Scott Morrison promised, to use his

words, Australians will be “among the first in the world to receive a COVID-19 vaccine” and in

November he promised again that Australia was “at the front of the queue”. Well, we are now

in the second half of February and still not a single Australian has received a single dose of

COVID-19 vaccine. Around the world figures indicate that more than 170 million people have

already received their vaccine. In America, more than 52 million Americans have received their

vaccine, and in the UK, more than a quarter of the adult population has been vaccinated. In

those countries, in the US, in the UK and across Europe, the Pfizer vaccine was being

delivered to people in less than a week after their authorities approved it.



Today it is 3 weeks since the TGA approved the Pfizer vaccine, and still that vaccine is not

even in the country. Critical details remain utterly unclear. When are we going to receive these

vaccines and in what quantity? How will they be distributed to the states? Still, the training

arrangements have not been finalised for staff who for the first time in Australia will be using

multi-dose vials. The online booking system is not yet completed. And we read a story in the

newspaper this morning that Greg Hunt and Brad Hazzard, the New South Wales Health

Minister, can't even agree on which level of government is responsible for the vaccine rollout in

the state of New South Wales. Scott Morrison promised Australians that 4 million vaccinations

would be delivered by the end of next month. It's time now for him to outline clearly how he's

going to deliver on that announcement.



JOURNALIST: Does Labor regret offering bipartisan support for full TGA approval given that

emergency approval could have helped prevent these outbreaks by vaccinating frontline staff?



BUTLER: No, we think giving the TGA its proper remit to consider these issues carefully, to

consider the impact of the rollout that had been happening earlier around the world was the

right thing to do. But I say again, it's three weeks since the Pfizer vaccine was approved by the

TGA. In the US, the UK, in Europe those vaccines were ready to go, being put into people's

arms in less than a week after the approval was given. We’re three weeks on, the vaccine is

not even in the country, we don't know what the training arrangements will be, what the

delivery arrangements, what the booking arrangements are. Brad Hazzard and Greg Hunt

can't even agree who is responsible for this rollout in our largest state. So it's not that the TGA

was going through the wrong process - Labor continues to support that process. It’s the

Government wasn’t ready to deliver on the approval once it was given.



JOURNALIST: I understand you’ve had some briefings off and on over the last few weeks and

months. How long does batch testing take, according to the evidence or information you're

given?



BUTLER: Well, the briefings I've been given, and I’ve only been in the portfolio as you know

Andrew for a short while, but the briefings I was given recently by the CMO indicated that

batch testing will take in the matter of days. Again, there are other testing arrangements that

need to take place around the temperature control of the Pfizer vaccine, around the sealing of

the vaccine and suchlike. As I say again, there’s still enormous confusion in the health sector

about who was going to receive how many of the 80,000 doses that are intended to be

received, apparently this week. Remember, that its only 80,000 doses that are being received

in Australia this week. That is not a big number in the context of the huge number of healthcare

staff, frontline hotel quarantine and border staff, residents of aged care facilities that are

intended to be vaccinated in the first phase of this strategy.



JOURNALIST: We read some horrifying details about an alleged rape that happened in

Parliament House two years ago, given that it was alleged to have happened two years ago

and that the PMO and the Minister were aware back then, how crucial is it that they make

comment or at least address this issue today?



BUTLER: Well, I think we're only still absorbing the details of this story, which has emerged

out of the last few hours. Firstly, can I say that all of our thoughts are with the victim of this

horrific event. This horrific crime that was perpetrated on her. It's the responsibility of everyone

in this building, particularly those of us in positions of leadership to ensure that this workplace,

Parliament house, like every workplace across the country, is a safe workplace, One that

protects our staff and supports them. This is a horrific story, I think we're still absorbing the

details of it and I'm sure there will be more to say about it over the course of this day.



JOURNALIST: Would you say that Parliament House is currently a safe workplace for

women?



BUTLER: I think all workplaces need to do better in this respect, and this story shows that this

workplace is no different. The Australian Parliament House must be a safe workplace for

everyone working within it. A lot of those are young women, the hours are extended, the

pressures are enormous, there are particular responsibilities I think we have in this building to

ensure that everyone working for us, delivering on our democracy is safe and is supported.



JOURNALIST: Do you know which vaccine you'll be getting and is it appropriate for the Prime

Minister and other politicians to be getting the Pfizer vaccine when it's actually AstraZeneca

that most people need more reassurance on?



BUTLER: No, I don't know what vaccine I'll be getting. I'll be taking whatever vaccine is on

offer of the portfolio so far that we have which is Pfizer or AstraZeneca. That's not a matter for

me. I'll take what is offered to me. I have strong confidence in the TGA’s approval process. I

think down the track we do need some more information from the Government about what

they're doing to diversify our vaccine portfolio. Particularly, I've said a number of times, I'd like

to know some detail about the Government's negotiations with Moderna, which produces the

other highly effective mRNA vaccine. Australia doesn't appear to have any arrangements with

that company that's delivering a vaccine around the world in the US, in Europe and other

places with an effectiveness or efficacy rate of 95 per cent. I think we need some more detail

from the Government about that, but personally I will take whatever vaccine is offered to me at

the time in accordance with the vaccine strategy.



JOURNALIST: Further to Mr Karp’s question, do you think we are becoming a bit too brand

focused when it comes to vaccines? Given that a lot of who take the flu shot every year would

have no idea who makes it and its effectiveness, it’s probably less than the effectiveness,

supposedly the effectiveness of any one of the COVID vaccines on offer?



BUTLER: As I said I will take whatever vaccine is offered to me of the portfolio the TGA

approves. I don't accept the comparison with seasonal flu. This is a global pandemic, It's

caused enormous disruption. There is obviously a lot of community interest in the different

efficacy rates of different vaccines and making sure we have the broadest possible portfolio

available to us. We've seen again, the enormous social and economic disruption being caused

right now for the people of Victoria, businesses in Victoria, students in Victoria of this pandemic

and its broader impact, so having the most effective vaccines, a diverse portfolio available to

us, I think is the right way to go.



That's why we criticised the Government last year for not having the world's best practise of

five or six different vaccines on the table. But , AstraZeneca assuming it is approved by the

TGA, Pfizer, both of them are vaccines which I would happily take.



JOURNALIST: Mark, Greg Hunt said yesterday that they would hope to get all of phase 1A,

which is about 700,000 people vaccinated in the first six weeks that will be somewhere in the

realm of mid-April. Do you think that that mark that was set out a while ago of getting 4 million

people vaccinated by April is in jeopardy? Do you think they could still be on track?



BUTLER: That's a matter for Greg Hunt and the Prime Minister to outline clearly to us. We

might receive 80,000 doses sometime this week. So we're deep into February by the time we

received the first vaccine in country, only in the tens of thousands, and that has to be batch

tested and then we have to be clear on how it's being distributed around the country.



Time is moving on. As I said, millions of vaccinations are being delivered around the world

everyday in countries very comparable to Australia: the UK, the US, other European countries,

the vast bulk of Israel's population is already vaccinated.



It's time that the Prime Minister told Australians clearly, when this will start, how we will get to

his promise of 4 million vaccinations by the end of March?



JOURNALIST: 80,000 jabs in that first shipment, who among that first cohort group should be

getting priority for it? Obviously its border workers, hotel quarantine, aged care and frontline

healthcare, who should be getting the first 80,000?



BUTLER: My view is that that's a matter for health experts. These decisions must be taken by

experts who work out who is the most vulnerable and who is most in need. I think the

population cohorts identified in phase 1A seem very sensible to me, but there's 685,000-odd of

those, and there's only 80,000 doses arriving in Australia, potentially later this week, so experts

are going to have take the hard decision to prioritise among those groups.



JOURNALIST: Should there be a significant expansion in the number of returned Australians

coming back into Australia once quarantine workers are all given the jab?



BUTLER: I think all Australians want Scott Morrison, who is responsible for our borders, to be



able to reassure them that our quarantine arrangements are going to operate effectively and

safely. Australians are losing patience with the regular failings in our hotel quarantine system

and particularly losing patience with the Prime Minister's inability or refusal to take

responsibility for that. I don't think anyone can remember a politician in recent times who has

made more of the Commonwealth's responsibility for our nation's borders than former

immigration Minister Scott Morrison. But in the midst of a global pandemic, he wants to wash

his hands and pretend this is all the responsibility of state governments. He is the one who

promised that all stranded Australians will be home by Christmas. He's the one who has

constitutional responsibility for setting up a safe, effective quarantine system that would allow

that to take place. To the extent that these debates now emerge about what's happening with

return travellers, what's happening with hotel quarantine, that is a responsibility of the Prime

Minister.



Thanks everyone.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LUCY CARUSO 0408 803 428



