



RICHARD MARLES MP

DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

SHADOW MINISTER FOR NATIONAL RECONSTRUCTION, EMPLOYMENT,

SKILLS AND SMALL BUSINESS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR SCIENCE

MEMBER FOR CORIO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

TODAY SHOW

FRIDAY, 12 MARCH 2021



SUBJECTS: Tourism fail; Vaccine rollout.



KARL STEFANOVIC, HOST: This tourism package is a lemon. It's a lemon. For more on that

and the support package I want to bring in Home Affairs Minister Peter Dutton in Brisbane and

Deputy Opposition Leader Richard Marles in Geelong. Good morning to you guys, nice to see

you.



PETER DUTTON, MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS: Morning, Karl.



RICHARD MARLES, DEPUTY LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: Morning,

Karl.



STEFANOVIC: Pete, it's an absolute lemon isn’t it, this tourism package?



DUTTON: Karl, what sort of Queenslander are you? Weak at the knees there as soon as Ally

pushed back. Queensland is a great spot. Everybody should be holidaying up here. Karl, if you

look at the facts; Mayors, local mayors will play politics that's fine. For every dollar somebody

spends on an airfare they spend $10 on the ground. The whole idea of this package is that

people will spend money with tourist operators, with cafes, with people that are providing

tourism services on the ground, hotels, motels, etcetera- caravan parks. But if this was the only

element to this package, then maybe you would have a criticism but there are hundreds of

millions of dollars going to regional airports, to airports in capital cities. There are loans that

small businesses in the tourist sector don't have to pay back for the first two years, not a dollar

in interest, not a dollar in capital that they have to repay. So, this is a very comprehensive

package- and it's $1.2 billion.



STEFANOVIC: So why has it been unanimously deplored by the tourism sector itself?



DUTTON: That's not the case, Karl. There are plenty of tourism operators who have welcomed

it. And look, there are lots of people that will take any dollar that you give them and if you give

them a dollar, they ask for a second and I just think if you look at the facts of what we’re

offering here, this is a very significant package. It's not the only support that we’re providing to

tourist destinations. And we’ll continue to provide support. If you look what we have done

under JobKeeper, instant asset write-off, now the huge building boom which is going on

because of the first home buyer assistance- all of that plays out, right across the country. This

is a government that has provided significant support, we’ll continue to do it. And this is one

way in which we can really get people onto planes. And the fact is mums and dads love this

policy because they want a cheap airfare, they want to go for a holiday, they want to be able to

spend money in regional areas. That's exactly what we're doing.



STEFANOVIC: Richard, I'm sure you will complain about the government being more Labor

than Labor.



DUTTON: Come to Queensland, Richard.



MARLES: This has been a massive let down- You are welcome here in Geelong. It's a

massive let down.



DUTTON: No thanks.



MARLES: It’s a massive letdown and the tourist sector has been looking to this for weeks now

to see what the answer was going to be. And as you said Karl, what they have got here is a

lemon. I mean, like, half price tickets to marginal electorates, that's fine. But there is so many

tourist operators who are struggling with the fact that there is the necessary closure of our

international borders, half a million people in the tourist sector lost their job last year, with this

now in place, and there being no other answer, we're going to see hundreds of thousands of

more job losses baked into this sector going forward. And in that sense the government has

completely missed the mark with this package.



STEFANOVIC: I think it's almost defamatory what you just said then, "a lot of these air tickets

going to marginal seats", I mean, that's just awful, incomprehensible, Pete.



DUTTON: Well, I mean Richard is-



MARLES: I'm looking forward to Peter suing me for that comment.



DUTTON: Richard has been drinking last night again it seems, Karl.



STEFANOVIC: Now that’s defamatory.



DUTTON: He's taking these random thoughts from his head.



[LAUGHTER]



DUTTON: Karl, the fact is...



MARLES: I will see you in court. I will. I'm there at 9:00 am.



DUTTON: That's a fair defence from you, Richard.



STEFANOVIC: Righto.



DUTTON: I have forgotten the question. What was the question?



STEFANOVIC: So have I, so have I. It wasn’t important- just marginal branch stacking. Peter,

in terms of the AstraZeneca vaccine, can we talk about that quickly? This is a significant issue

this. Already people are nervous about the vaccine. It's been suspended in Norway and

Denmark. It's up to you guys to convince us it's the right thing to do. Is it safe?



DUTTON: Yes, it is Karl. And I think it's important for all of us, not just those of us in leadership

roles but I think it's important for the media, as well, to really report fairly on this. I think you

had an excellent contribution from the professor only a few minutes ago. And Brendan Murphy

and others look at all this evidence from around the world. The fact is the virus needs to be

dealt with. We need to deal with it by way of vaccine, particularly for older vulnerable people.

And the way in which this rollout has worked not just here, but around the world, means we do

have an enormous amount of data and the conclusion here is that the vaccine is safe. It will

continue to rollout and we want to get to heard immunity as quickly as possible. But we will

wait to see the evidence - remember there was, right at the start of the rollout of the vaccine,

in Germany, I think it was, one death in an aged-care facility? As it turned out that wasn't

related to the rollout of that vaccine, as I recall, and yet there was panic about it. So, I just think

cool heads need to prevail here. Let's look at the advice of the scientists. We have the best

doctors in the world. They have gone through all the tests and trials. We were told to rush it.

We've not rushed it. We will look at all of the evidence. And if there's a problem the

government responds very quickly. But at the moment the advice very clearly from the doctors

is that this is a safe vaccine and we want the rollout to continue.



STEFANOVIC: Richard, you bagged the government for the slow rollout. Maybe it's working in

our favour.



MARLES: Well, I think- firstly, I completely agree with what Peter said around the fact that the

vaccine is safe. And it really is important that we do have cool heads in this space. And Peter

is right, we have the best doctors in the world, the TGA have gone through this very carefully.

We need to be rolling out the vaccine and there does need to be a sense of confidence about

this and people can rightly feel confident about the safety of the vaccines. It is important that

the rollout happens as safely as possible but also as quickly as possible. I mean, the

government has rightly said that our economic recovery is tied to the rollout of the vaccine. The

vaccine is how we get to the other side of the COVID-19 crisis. And so, I think you talked about

the big slow - go slow, Karl, actually I don't think that's right because for the thousands of

people who still don't have jobs, and who face, you know, prolonged periods of unemployment,

by virtue of us not getting our economy back on foot, the vaccine is actually the answer to

them. And so, we do need to have this happening as with swiftly as possible in the context of it



being safe. The government went out and said that four million of us were going to be

vaccinated in March. That's not happening. The one person you can't believe about the pace

of the rollout is now the Prime Minister. He said we were all going to be vaccinated in October.

The truth of that statement lasted about two hours before the Secretary of Health yesterday

made clear that that would not be the case, and that it was more likely going to be the end of

the year. We need to have authoritative information from the Prime Minister. And when we are

seeing, you know, millions of people being vaccinated every day in the United States, it's

actually the case that we need to get on with this here in Australia as well.



STEFANOVIC: Alright, Richard you need to stop drinking. And Pete, I will see you in court at

9:00 am. Thanks gentlemen. We will talk to you soon.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KATE HANNS 0423 974 363



