

CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON



GOVERNMENT FINALLY RESPONDS ON VACCINE TIMELINE



The Government’s belated decision to bring forward the COVID-19 vaccine rollout is welcome

- but shows yet again that Scott Morrison is more motivated by spin than substance.



Scott Morrison and Greg Hunt have spent the last week hysterically claiming that bringing

forward the rollout would risk Australians’ health.



As part of this desperate campaign, Mr Morrison has even cast doubt on the UK Government

and its independent vaccines regulator.



Yet the Government has now brought forward Australia’s vaccine rollout twice in two days: to

early March yesterday, and to mid-late February today.



The fact that the Government only acted when it felt pressure from experts and Labor tells you

everything you need to know about Mr Morrison.



While today’s announcement is welcome, important questions remain - including why it will

take up to a month after expected TGA approval to roll out the Pfizer vaccine, and how quickly

it will be delivered at scale.



Despite the Prime Minister’s claim today, other jurisdictions have been able to roll out the

vaccine much more quickly after relevant approvals.



With just three vaccine deals - and only two of those vaccines imminent - Australia also



remains vulnerable to any further failure of vaccine candidates and continued vaccine supply

chain pressures.



Other countries have sensibly hedged their bets by investing in five or six vaccine candidates,

beginning last March.



Yet the Government did not sign its first deal until September, and has failed to secure access

to other vaccines - including one which the TGA has recognised as very promising, and

another which has shown 95 per cent efficacy in trials.



Despite Mr Morrison’s claims, Australia has never been - and is still not - at the ‘front of the

queue’ for COVID-19 vaccines.



THURSDAY, 7 JANUARY 2021



MEDIA CONTACT: ELIZA MITCHELL 0413 410 931



