



Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra



TRANSCRIPT

Sunday, 11 April 2021

Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment Dan Tehan interview with Kieran  Gilbert, Sky News

SUBJECTS: Prince Phillip, Euro visit, vaccines.

Keiran Gilbert: Let’s go live now to the Minister for Trade and Tourism Dan Tehan. Thanks very  much for your time. I’ll get to your areas of responsibility shortly, but this big news of the last 24, 48  hours and the passing of Prince Phillip(*) [audio skip] today the Prime Minister and Governor General  will be attending a church service to pay their respects to the Duke. It really has been an enormous  reaction in the UK and around the world to the passing of the longest serving consort in British history.

Dan Tehan: There has, Keiran, and our thoughts and prayers are with Her Majesty The Queen and  her family. I think all of us appreciate what an extraordinary partnership the Queen had with her  husband, and the outpouring of emotion is in much as part not only for the service and the duty of  which he carried out, but also for the way that he was by the Queen’s side right throughout that —  and our sympathies and our prayers are with Her Majesty at this time. It must be an incredibly trying  time for her and the family, especially when you think of the life that they’ve lived together, what  they’ve been though, not only dealing with public life but also they’ve had to be parents, as well, and  deal with family matters, which have occurred right throughout their lives. So, our thoughts are very  much with Her Majesty The Queen at this time.

Kieran Gilbert: And my interview with John Howard coming up shortly for his reflections on Prince  Phillip. You, back to your area of responsibility, you’ll in fact be in the UK, as I understand it, later in  the week. The face-to-face diplomacy’s been very difficult, if not impossible, during COVID-19 but, as  I understand it, you’re departing for Europe and the UK on Wednesday. Will you be pushing for  greater access to vaccines?

Dan Tehan: Well, one of the things that I will be doing is vaccine diplomacy. I want to speak with the  European Union and also ministerial counterparts in France and in Germany and Brussels, and I’ll  also be meeting with the Director-General of the World Trade Organization to talk about what we can  do to ensure supply of the vaccine, not only for Australia but globally.

Kieran Gilbert: So give us a rundown of your plans. Obviously, you’ve- we’ve also got other  challenges at play here with the free trade agreements with the UK and the EU but, alongside that,  you’ll be seeking to achieve that greater access, as we mentioned, to the vaccines, which we’ve  already paid for?

Dan Tehan: That’s right. So, the first port of call will be Geneva, and I’ll be meeting with the Director-General of the World Trade Organization. One of the really important things we have to do is get the  World Trade Organization back up and running so we can ensure that trade rules are adhered to and  we can continue on the trade liberalization path, especially when it comes to issues, for instance, like  environmental goods and services, as we seek to deal with climate change. But I’ll also be talking to  her about vaccines and export restrictions that have been put in place. She’s been outspoken against  those export restrictions. Then it’ll be to Berlin to meet with my German counterpart; Brussels to meet  with the EU Trade Representative, where we’ll be talking around the EU free trade agreement, the  need for us to make progress beyond the 10th round, which was a very successful round, the most  successful round we’ve had of the 10 rounds of negotiations; then onto France, where I’ll be meeting  with my French counterpart for the second French-Australian trade and investment ministerial talks;





Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

and then onto the UK to meet with my counterpart Liz Truss to really put some energy into the UK -Australia free trade agreement. It holds big hopes for us to be able to have a truly liberalising  agreement with the UK, and I’ll be very keen to progress that with Liz Truss.

Kieran Gilbert: And it’s also- do you recognise the importance the British put in relation to climate  action? And they will want the Government, our government, to step up its climate response in order  to do a deal on trade?

Dan Tehan: Absolutely, and that’s one of the key messages that I’ll be relaying in the UK and with all  the other talks that I’ll be having, is this idea that we need to liberalize when it comes to environmental  goods and services. If we can bring down tariffs on environmental goods, free up the flow of  environmental services, that’s the best way we can ensure all countries have access to the  technology, and the means, and the ways that they need to deal with emissions reduction. So, this will  be a key thing I’ll be putting on the table. There was some Democrats in the US who have recently  come out and said that environmental goods, in terms of the World Trade Organization, should be  something that we need to be looking at again. So, on the back of that, I’ll be making sure that this is  something that’s firmly put on the agenda.

Kieran Gilbert: I read your comments to Paul Kelly in The Australian yesterday talking about the  importance of regional and global bodies in stepping up. Is that all in the context of China? Is your  message to these groups, multilateral groups and so on, that if we’re allowed to cop this economic  coercion that it sets a terrible precedent internationally?

Dan Tehan: Well, as we come out of the pandemic, we’ve all got to be conscious that we don’t want  to see trade retaliation. We don't want to see a shift towards protectionism. What we want to be  seeing is everyone understanding the importance of trade liberalisation for driving economic growth. If  you look at what happened to the world post-Second World War, it was that trade liberalisation  agenda which helped lift countries out of poverty to make sure developed countries could continue to  provide and increase the living standards in all their countries—and so this is a really important  message we need to be given. Now is not the time for us to be resorting to trade protectionism. Now  is not the time where we need countries using harmful trade measures against other countries. It's a  time where we all need to be working together to grow the global economy out of this pandemic .

Kieran Gilbert: And to push back against China?

Dan Tehan: Well, one of the things that we're very keen to do is to make sure that with our trade  disputes with China is that we're using every means that we can to deal with them. Obviously, the  World Trade Organization is one of those mechanisms, and we're using that when it comes to barley.  And we're under very deep consideration now when it comes to wine as to whether we'll also refer  that to the World Trade Organisation. But we also need to be looking at other ways that we can  address what's called these level-playing-field issues to make sure that everyone is adhering to the  rules. And that's going to require new forms of new diplomacy, new alliances, new groupings when it  comes to dealing with these trade issues and that's something that I'll be looking at, and talking to my  counterparts, as I make this trip.

Kieran Gilbert: And have you had your vaccination before departing for Europe?

Dan Tehan: I've had one AstraZeneca dose and I'll be looking forward to having the second one  when I return from this trip. You've got to have a 12-week gap between them. But I'll also be making  sure that I'm practising good, safe COVID-19 practices while overseas.

Kieran Gilbert: Is the Government confident it can roll out the vaccines by the end of the year to have  the nation population vaccinated? The population inoculated against COVID-19?





Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

Dan Tehan: Well, look, that's definitely the aim, that's the goal that we've set is to try and have all  Australians have a dose by the end of the year but we have to remember that we're dealing with a  pandemic. Things can change, and we've seen things change in the last week when it's come to the  AstraZeneca vaccine. So we've set ourselves a goal. That's what we'll be aiming to achieve. But I  think all Australians understand, as they have over the last 12 months, when you're dealing with a  pandemic there's a lot of unknowns, and you've just got to make sure you set your goals but you're  prepared to adjust those as things occur. But, very much, we're hoping to have every Australian  vaccinated by the end of the year. Obviously, this announcement about these extra 20 million doses  of the Pfizer vaccine is welcome, so now it's just a matter of making sure that we get all the contracts  honoured, and then we make sure that we can distribute the vaccines right across the nation.

Kieran Gilbert: A couple of quick ones before you go, the delay in the vaccine, though, raises the  prospect of more state border closures, doesn't it? And lockdowns? That's a terrible message to send  to industry and to tourism particularly.

Dan Tehan: Well, one of the things that the Federal Government has been asking of the states is that  they use border closures or economic lockdowns as a last resort. And I think we’re, now that we're 12  months in, we've got to remember our contact tracing and our testing can be very much used as that  first defence against the vaccine spreading and if we can do that, we can balance the health  consequences of the virus and the economic livelihoods aspect of it—and I think that's incredibly  important to remember. And the fact that we've now got a bubble which will commence with New  Zealand shortly, I think, that should give confidence and hope to, especially, our tourism industry and  other parts of our economy, which are dependent on travel. And we’ll continue to work with states and  territories, and obviously with the New Zealand Government, to make sure we're doing all we can to  see that movement of people occur- continuing.

Kieran Gilbert: And finally, it would be remiss of me if I didn't mention the boy from Warrnambool,  Marc Leishman. He’s contending in the Masters. Not far off the lead right now.

Dan Tehan: No, doing an extraordinary job. He’s a wonderful Australian: laconic, friendly, but doing a  great job in this year's Masters and, I can tell you, everyone in Warrnambool will be glued to their sets  over not only the finish of the round today but tomorrow morning as well. And there'll be nothing  greater for the south west of Victoria if Marc Leishman was able to win the Masters tomorrow  morning. So we'll be watching closely, and let's hope he can do it Kieran.

Kieran Gilbert: Dan Tehan, we do indeed. Joining us live from Hamilton in country Victoria from  Warrnambool. Thank you. Talk to you soon.









ENDS



Media contact:  Tehan: Byron Vale 02 6277 7350 | minister.media@education.gov.au

