



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina



Senator the Hon Zed Seselja  Minister for International Development and the Pacific  Senator for the Australian Capital Territory



Andrew Barr MLA  ACT Chief Minister

Chris Steel MLA  ACT Minister for Transport  ACT Minister for Roads and Active Travel



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au



24 February 2021

$132.5M OF FEDERAL FUNDING FOR ACT’S LIGHT RAIL STAGE 2A

The Australian Government today announced funding for an important infrastructure project to boost the  nation’s capital - construction of the first section of the City to Woden light rail extension.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the Australian Government’s $132.5 million commitment for Stage 2A of light rail would  help make the project a reality for Canberra.

“Extending the light rail will also create jobs and bust congestion in the ACT by improving public transport  and pedestrian and cyclist safety,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“This is what the Australian Government’s $110 billion investment pipeline is all about - getting  Australians home sooner and safer whilst boosting local economies as we bounce back from the COVID-19  pandemic.”

ACT Chief Minister Andrew Barr acknowledged the contribution from the Australian Government  emphasised the importance of the project for the Territory.

“The Commonwealth’s support for the project is welcomed, and it follows in the footsteps of the financial  support received for stage one of the ACT’s light rail network ,” Chief Minister Barr said.

“The project is critical to the Territory’s Jobs and Economic Recovery plan, and I look forward to working  with the Commonwealth on progressing the approvals for the entire stage 2 project.”







Senator for the ACT Zed Seselja said for Canberrans, extending the Gungahlin-City light rail made sense.

“It is important we get light rail right for Canberrans. With construction anticipated to commence in 2022,  Stage 2A is the first leg of bringing light rail to Woden, and will extend the existing route by three stops to  Commonwealth Park.”

“Today’s announcement boosts the Australian Government’s infrastructure bonanza in Canberra to more  than $1.4 billion in recent years,” Senator Seselja said.

ACT Minister for Transport and City Services Chris Steel said the ACT Government has already seen great  results for local jobs, transport and the economy with Stage 1 of the Light Rail, with further benefits  from  Stage 2A.

“Light rail is seeing more Canberrans choose public transport, with more than 43% of people surveyed  stating they had never used public transport before catching light rail,” Minister Steel said.

“Stage 2 of light rail will extend the benefits of better public transport, by extending the line to create a  north-south spine for our city-wide light rail network.

“Whilst this project will be very disruptive during construction, it will deliver long term transport and  economic benefits for our city, with better quality, mass transit, powered by 100% renewable electricity.”

Stage 2A will add 1.7 km of track and three new stops South of the existing line operating ‘wire free’ from  Alinga Street through to Commonwealth Park. An additional 2,500-3,000 passengers a day are expected in  the first operating year.

Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Jo Williamson 0418 475 668 | Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Chief Minister Barr - Kaarin Dynon 0422 772 215  Senator Seselja - Cassandra Choake 0427 839 164  Minister Steel - Anton Gallacher 0422 574 108

