

CATHERINE KING

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT AND REGIONAL

DEVELOPMENT

MEMBER FOR BALLARAT





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

4CA CAIRNS BREAKFAST WITH MURRAY JONES

THURSDAY, 11 MARCH 2021



SUBJECTS: The Federal Government’s tourism package; state borders.



MURRAY JONES, HOST: Wonderful to talk to you Catherine and I believe you're actually

driving cross country and enjoying some sunshine in regional Victoria this morning as well.



CATHERINE KING, SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT AND

REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT: I am. Thanks very much Murray, it's really lovely to be with you

again.



JONES: Excellent. And look, we know that not just in our part of the world, regions right across

the country and interestingly, even in Dan Tehan's electorate down there, going through the

Great Ocean Road and all that type of thing. There's been quite a few areas in the country that

have been really concerned about the end of JobKeeper and the impact that is going to have

particularly on tourism. Interestingly, it's coming out just in the last couple of days that no

surprise that JobKeeper is not going to continue after March. But I think in a lot of ways these

800,000 tickets that have been subsidized by the federal government is something that can't

be sneezed at and it's going to assist in a lot of ways for areas just like Cairns.



KING: Well we will scrutinise the package the government's announced today for tourism and

aviation and of course any extra support will be welcomed. But what my concern would be

about this package is that it is sort of three months of, you know, here is a stimulus to get

people out and about. I do think it's a bit odd that for Cairns, you can be subsidised to go to

Cairns from my hometown in Ballarat if I bought a ticket but if you live in Brisbane you can't.

You'll be subsidised to go to Tasmania and come down south, so we'll welcome

Queenslanders in Victoria and Tasmania, but that Brisbane people can't go to Cairns or be

subsidised to go to Cairns is a bit strange. But it really isn't going to be a substitute for

JobKeeper. What happens after the three months? You know, here until July when people use

up these travel subsidies I think you will see a boom of people heading up to Cairns and

around, but it's really not a substitute for either the long term structural reform that is needed

for aviation nor is it a substitute for a wage subsidy for particular sectors. I think it's still going to

be a very patchy recovery. You'll see a boost for those regions who've got the subsidised

tickets but you have to say that there are other tourism areas that have had significant impacts

on them as well that are slow to recover, but the government's chosen these thirteen. But I

also think it's really going to be a long slow burn for the economy to recover in those areas

because it's been hit so hard. This will be welcome, but I don't think it's going to be enough.



JONES: Now we'll come to the loan guarantee in just a sec but some have suggested it is a bit

of a political swipe against Annastacia Palaszczuk, because obviously this whole package is

contingent on keeping the borders open. Annastacia Palaszczuk, love her or hate her, she's

garnered a lot of support here in Queensland by protecting Queenslanders from COVID-19. At

the end of the day, is it a bit rich from the federal government, who have been keeping

international borders closed and for good reason, but to basically have this bit of a swipe at

Annastacia Palaszczuk?



KING: It's been really fantastic to see the state premiers right the way across the country step

up and follow public health advice and every border closure has been based on the advice

from their public health officials and that's been important. The federal government is

responsible for quarantine which it has abrogated frankly, and it's responsible for the vaccine

rollout. The quicker the vaccine rollout happens the risk factors around border closes then

change. You would expect that the federal government should concentrate on what it needs to

do to lower the risk factors across the country and state premiers are going to always follow

their public health official’s advice. So, you know, there are some risks in this package around

border closures but it hasn't just been Queensland that has closed its borders, Victoria has at

one point closed its borders to Queensland, we've had Western Australia. It's across the board



and it is based on public health advice and keeping people safe. So if there's another outbreak

if the vaccine rollout is too slow then that is one of the risk factors in the governments package

around people booking holidays interstate.



JONES: Let's talk a little bit more about the loan guarantee because I think for a lot of tourism

businesses that are doing it very, very tough and very unsure about the certainty of the future,

particularly with international borders looking pretty much like they're going to be closed at

least for another 12 months or so. What are your thoughts about the loan guarantee?



KING: Well, it's really an extension of the existing program which has been really

undersubscribed. It's hard for tourism business that has already, you know, a lot of them are

already in substantial debt, to take on further debt. Even if it's a guarantee for a loan it is still a

debt that's in the business so I don't expect there's going to be a huge uptake of that loan

guarantee, just as there hasn't been under the previous packages that the government has

had. It's really been an announcement they've made that looks as though, you know, here we

are doing something but really it has been substantially undersubscribed. If you're a business

that's desperate for certainty and there's not a lot of that at the moment, and obviously the

international order is still closed for a long period. If you're a tourism operator, you're probably

going to think twice about taking on any extra debt at the moment.



JONES: Yeah and I think that is certainly one of the concerns. Until we have that long term

certainty with respect to tourism. I've got to get to news, and again, thank you for outlining

some of your concerns and I can assure you that I'll be putting some of those concerns to the

Deputy Prime Minister in a couple of minutes time. Thank you so much for your time this

morning Catherine King, enjoy your drive as well. She's the Shadow Minister for Infrastructure,

Transport and Regional Development, have a wonderful day.



KING: You too Murray, lovely to talk to you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: NICK BEAVER 0419 709 266



