Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.







The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health



TRANSCRIPT

19 March 2021



INTERVIEW WITH PETER STEFANOVIC  SKY NEWS FIRST EDITION

E&OE…

Topics: AstraZeneca vaccine; COVID-19 vaccine rollout;

PETER STEFANOVIC:  Well, let’s go to Melbourne now. Joining us live is the Health Minister, Greg Hunt. Minister, good  to see you. Thanks for joining us this morning.

First of all, your reaction to this news overnight? A lot of European nations given the go ahead for  AstraZeneca. Your government, our government held its nerve, that proves it was a justified  decision.

GREG HUNT:  Look, I think this is a very important piece of global, medical news. What we see is the European  Medicines Agency has made the same conclusions as the Australian TGA, the Australian Chief  Medical Officer, the Australian Technical and Advisory Group on Immunisation that AstraZeneca  is safe and effective.

We’ve seen it rolled out with over 11 million doses that have been administered in the UK. It’s  saving lives and it’s protecting lives and it will do that here in Australia and it will do that around  the world. It’s Great news.

PETER STEFANOVIC:  The Government seems to have shifted its language somewhat when it comes to having everyone in  this country vaccinated. The original target was October, but now the line is that it’s not a race,  slow and steady. So, what is the new target? Is it October, November, January next year?

GREG HUNT:  No, no. Our goal remains for first doses for all Australians that seek it by the end of October. That  was reaffirmed on Sunday by Professor Brendan Murphy, his presentation with the Prime Minister.

We’re always vaccine supply dependent. But we’re in a strong position because we have our  domestic manufacturing, we have our contract for 50 million doses from CSL. That puts us in a  very, very strong position.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



We’ve seen massive global supply chain challenges, particularly in Europe. So we’ve been  fortunate to receive the vaccines we have. But we determined in August last year that we would  make Australia vaccine-independent, with a sovereign vaccine manufacturing capability.

And along with the decision to close the borders with China in February last year, probably one of  the two most important pandemic decisions. And that will keep Australia strong, and keep Australia  vaccinated.

PETER STEFANOVIC:  The New South Wales Premier was critical of the Government, the Federal Government yesterday,  Minister. She doubts those targets can be reached on the current program. Are you expecting  hiccups, particularly when the next phase begins on Monday?

GREG HUNT:  Look, what we’ve always said is that there will always be challenges. We’ve been in contact with  New South Wales and reaffirmed their supplies.

Indeed, they have over 70,000 doses on hand that can be administered at any time in their infantry  at the moment. Every one of those is available right now for first doses. So, we continue to  encourage them to do the rollout. They’re doing a great job.

Around the country what we see is that we’re likely to pass a quarter of a million vaccinations  today. We’re at 570 approximately aged care facilities, and over 50,000 of our most vulnerable aged  care residents.

Next week we start what’s known as Phase 1B, which is the first of the general population, the over  80s, the over 70s. There are six million in that group. We think that there’ll be 250,000 doses made  available, all won’t be used in the first week, but will be progressively used.

So, it will take time to do that group, but in terms of our goal for the year, we’re in a very strong  place.

PETER STEFANOVIC:  Right. Well, Laura Jayes had a GP on her program yesterday who said that they’re only getting 100  doses next week and that won’t come until Friday. So, it doesn’t exactly instil confidence.

GREG HUNT:  No, we were always rolling out (inaudible), we actually started early, so we’re rolling out  Wednesday, Thursday, Friday. And we see is that the general practices have an initial 10 week  allocation, which was reaffirmed last night. So, they can book in at any time over the next 10  weeks.

We had over 4,000 general practices apply, double what we had initially expected which is fantastic  news and be approved. And of those, 98 per cent accepted. So, I remember just over a week ago  people saying oh, general practices wouldn’t take it up. 98 per cent that applied and were accepted,  have agreed to be part of it, which again, was a higher starting rate and then a higher acceptance  rate.

So, they’re doing a great job and we’re ready to go. And practices will come online during the  course of next week. And over 100 Commonwealth vaccination clinics announced yesterday and  taking bookings as of today for the over 80s and over 70s.



Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



But be patient. Six million people, that will take some months. But we’re in, as I say, because of our  sovereign vaccine manufacturing capability, a really strong position.

PETER STEFANOVIC:  How are you going, Minister?

GREG HUNT:  Yeah, no, picking up. And you know, we all get infections and things like that in life, and I had  what’s called a cellulitis, which is a form of septic infection of the leg, and it gives you a bit of a  fever.

And so, fortunately though, the New South Wales health system took very good care of me, and St  Vincent’s, both the public and the private side. The nurses, people such as Bina and Neave and so  many others. The doctors were just amazing. So, I’ll give a shout out and a thank you to them. And  to Paru in particular who was my principle carer.

PETER STEFANOVIC:  Okay. Minister Greg Hunt, thanks for your time this morning as always. We’ll talk to you soon.

GREG HUNT:  Thanks.

-ENDS-

