



Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham  Minister for Finance  Senator for South Australia

The Hon Stuart Robert MP  Minister for the National Disability Insurance Scheme  Minister for Government Services



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE





Authorised by S. Robert MP, Canberra

Monday, 1 March 2021

New Services Australia office a boost for Adelaide CBD

Work has begun on the $450 million redevelopment of 60 King William Street in Adelaide’s central  business district, with the site set to become home to more than 2200 Services Australia staff.

Minister for Government Services Stuart Robert and Senator for South Australia and Minister for  Finance, Simon Birmingham visited the site today to officially launch the start of construction.

Minister Robert said more than 1,500 local jobs would be created during the two-year construction  phase.

‘During the next two years, Charter Hall will construct state-of-the-art facilities to ensure Services  Australia staff are appropriately equipped to deliver the best services for Australians well into the  future,’ Minister Robert said.

‘My agency’s 10-year lease demonstrates the Morrison Government’s commitment to delivering  quality Centrelink, Medicare and Child Support services from Adelaide.

‘Having more than 2200 staff in one location will allow for greater collaboration and support between  areas, which means better outcomes for customers.’

Senator for South Australia and Finance Minister Simon Birmingham said the iconic redevelopment  couldn’t have come at a better time, providing a major boost to the South Australian economy.

‘The construction of this project along with the long-term commitment by Services Australia is  unlocking thousands of jobs for our state,’ Minister Birmingham said.

‘More than 1500 jobs will be created through the construction phase, followed by thousands of people  eventually working from the redeveloped site, driving positive flow-on effects for businesses in our  CBD.



Authorised by S. Robert MP, Canberra



‘The past 12 months have been incredibly tough for businesses and it’s projects such as this one that  are driving our economic recovery from COVID-19.’

Minister Robert said no Services Australia jobs would be lost when agency staff relocated to the new  building and the proposed consolidation would not impact any face-to-face customer services in  Adelaide.

Services Australia will make further announcements about the site closer to the scheduled opening in  2023.

[ENDS]

Media contact:  Minister Robert - James Larsson 0427 100 431     Minister Birmingham - Benn Ayre 0428 342 325







