

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE  SENATOR FOR THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC CAPITAL HILL  WEDNESDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Craig Kelly misinformation; Scott Morrison’s months of inaction over Craig  Kelly misinformation; permanent increase to JobSeeker rate.

JANE NORMAN, HOST: We’re here with the leader of the nationals in the Senate, Bridget  McKenzie, and Shadow Finance Minister Katy Gallagher, thank you both for joining me today.  Bridget McKenzie, Craig Kelly is one of your colleagues in government, was it right for the PM  to pull him into the office this morning and say enough is enough on these COVID claims?

SENATOR BRIDGET MCKENZIE, LEADER OF THE NATIONALS IN THE SENATE: Well I  think we all need to focus on making sure we get the vaccine rolled out, we get as many  Australians taking up that opportunity and ensuring that we get as many people vaccinated as  quickly as possible to continue the great recovery that we as a nation have been experienced  when you compare us globally. Now, we live in a democracy and people are entitled to their  views. Obviously, Mr. Kelly has released a statement. As you said, he is supporting the  government's vaccine rollout and I, like most members of parliament, similarly support medical  advice. And people actually follow medical advice, not just when it comes to COVID, but  obviously, with your health and that of your family.

NORMAN: But when you have these big public health campaigns urging people to listen to  medical experts, you have, of course, the vaccine roll at about to begin. Do comments like  Craig Kelly's as a government member undermine those campaigns that message?

MCKENZIE: Not at all. I think Australians are smart people. They take their medical advice  from medical people. Science is contested. I support the fact that our scientists and our  researchers who are amongst the best in the world, and now have a lot of government funding  behind them to be examining this particular issue - how do we best protect ourselves, our  family and our society from COVID and from the symptoms - are encouraged to explore new  ideas and to actually look at a whole raft of solutions, not just the vaccines we've got available  to us right now, to make sure that we're looking at every possible opportunity to keep  Australians safe.

NORMAN: How comfortable are you to have one of your colleagues, Liberal MP Craig Kelly,  pushing treatments for COVID-19 that our own health authorities have said are either not  effective or discredited?



MCKENZIE: Well, Jane, I’ve been really clear. I take the doctor's advice and say, and I don't  go to the doctor on Facebook.

NORMAN: All right, well, Katy Gallagher, Labor had obviously been demanding the PM pull  Craig Kelly into line, are you satisfied with what's happened today?

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE: Well this has been a  real problem for the government and for the country, really. We've got this really important  vaccine program rolling out - we need the government to be on the same page. What we've  seen over months - it's not just in the last few days it’s months - is Craig Kelly and some  others in the government running a misinformation campaign: untested theories protesting  against lockdowns protesting against mosques, you name it. It's a problem and it's a problem  that the Prime Minister should have fixed months ago and not allowed it to get to this point  when you've got an MP brawling with another in the corridor. You know, for the rest of the  country to see at a time when we need people to trust the process, and trust the information  that's coming from Australian health authorities.

NORMAN: but are you satisfied over the Prime Minister, we understand according to senior  sources in government, the Prime Minister has pulled him in and said start, I suppose,  promoting the government's official line on COVID-19?

GALLAGHER: Well, time will tell, whether the discussion was successful. We understood  there was one yesterday. And then there's been several doorstops since. The information on  Mr Kelly's website and Facebook page and social media accounts - which there are many - is  all still there, all still arguing contesting what Australian health authorities are actually urging  the Australian people to believe, and then undertake a vaccine program.

NORMAN: Before we move on to another topic, we've seen previously when Craig Kelly has  spoken out about some of these issues that he has gained a lot of traction on social media,  and an increase om followers - there's been more engagement in posts. What's the risk here, I  suppose the calculation that Labor needs to make in terms of sort of drawing attention to Craig  Kelly that you might end up making a martyr out of him in certain pockets of the society?

GALLAGHER: Well I think certainly if you go to Facebook he argues that with his followers.  He says, look, look at what happened to me, I've got all these new followers because people  have been picking on me. So there's no doubt he uses that as part of his engagement with his  followers. I think for us, this is not a political attack. This is the most important thing that's  linked to our economic wellbeing, our overall health and wellbeing in dealing with a pandemic  is getting good information, trusting information that the Australian people believe and accept  and follow. And what's happening is we've got some rogue MPs on the government side who  are doing whatever they feel like, and it's taken months for the Prime Minister to stand up and  rein them in. And time will tell whether it's actually been effective or whether tomorrow or  tonight we'll see another post, telling people, you know, whatever Mr. Kelly and his followers  believe.

NORMAN: Alright, well I want to move on to another topic. Just before in his speech Philip  Lowe, the RBA Governor, was asked about the JobSeeker allowance. At the end of March, it's  due to snap back to pre-pandemic levels. Currently it has a bit of a boost by way of the COVID  allowance. He said that the consensus in the community is that the JobSeeker needs to be  raised - the rate needs to be raised - and that is his view too. What's your view on that?



MCKENZIE: Well, obviously the government's got some decisions to make around what to do  with the JobSeeker and the multiple payments that those who are receiving that particular  payment received from government - for instance rent assistance and  a whole raft of support  structures, rather than the base rate itself. So I'm hopeful that the government will take into  consideration all of those factors when looking at ongoing support, but the reality is we were  very very clear at the start of the pandemic that we’d be swift with our response, that it'd be  targeted and that's exactly what it has been. And that is, I think, borne out in the really positive  results that the Reserve Bank governor was speaking about today in his speech. Like, it has  been successful. We also made the commitment that we would adjust our response as  required throughout the pandemic and we've also seen that. I mean when you've got 15% of  Australia's GDP has been focused on supporting Australians and Australian businesses  through the pandemic, that's been majority heavy lifting by the federal government itself. And  then you've got the cheek of state premiers, some, coming out and saying, ‘come on, cough up  more when really, we are all in this together.’ It's as a result of many state premier’s border  closures that their own businesses are really struggling. And so, they also need to support it.  I'm not pointing the finger. It's just you can't always expect one level of government to pick up  the tab all the time.

NORMAN: But specifically on JobSeeker, throughout the crisis we've seen the government  and the RBA really work hand-in-hand on monetary and fiscal policy. To have the Governor  saying that he thinks the JobSeeker rate needs to be raised, that's a lot of weight behind that  argument isn’t it?

MCKENZIE: Well, I'm sure the government will take that into account as they consider this  going forward.

NORMAN: But you don't believe that if it snaps back to the pre-COVID levels that that is too  low, that that is an unfair payment?

MCKENZIE: Well, I believe that's a decision for government and ministers have all the  information available to them. At the time that they make that decision. And so I'm sure they'll  take that into careful consideration going forward.

NORMAN: Katy Gallagher, what did you think about Philip Lowes’ remarks that he has joined  the community consensus that the JobSeeker rate needs to be at least maintained or raised  from what it was?

GALLAGHER: Well, I welcome those comments and I hope the government listens to them.  He joins a raft of others, there's a lot of peak groups across the country and, of course, federal  Labor have been saying for some time that $40 isn't enough, that there should be a permanent  increase. For the people who are living on that payment - 1.4 million people and a bit more if  you count in Youth Allowance, students and others who are surviving on that payment - in 50  days they are going back to $40 a day. Some certainty needs to be provided. I think you have  everyone, almost every stakeholder group that wages into discussions like this, saying $40 a  day is not enough, it needs to be lifted. And I hope that maybe with the Governor saying this,  the government will loosen up. My own reading of the tea leaves from what the Prime Minister  said on Monday and what Mr Frydenberg said on Sunday on Insiders was that they weren't  looking to deal with JobSeeker in a permanent way. I hope they reconsider that.

NORMAN: Just before we have to leave unfortunately, it currently is $715 a fortnight. It was



$565 a fortnight. Would Labor be satisfied if it remained at that $715 level that's about $150  extra a fortnight?

GALLAGHER: What we've done is we've tried to give the government the room, as Bridget  says they've got the information, they've got the data, they've got the advice from Treasury,  they're looking closely at what's happening in the economy, they taking feedback from  businesses about what they're saying in terms of employment and getting people into jobs.  You make the decision - you're the government. We're giving you the room to do that. We just  want them to do that but it certainly needs to be more than $40 a day.

NORMAN: Alright Katy Gallagher, Bridget McKenzie, we've run out of time but thank you for  joining program today.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: PAT CRONAN 0432 758 224



