

MARK BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING

MEMBER FOR HINDMARSH





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC AFTERNOON BRIEFING

MONDAY, 12 APRIL 2021



SUBJECT: Vaccine rollout failures; Scott Morrison giving up on vaccine targets;

vaccine rollout failures in disability facilities.



JANE NORMAN, HOST: Mark Butler, thanks for your time.



MARK BUTLER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING: Hi Jane



NORMAN: Given the new safety advice and all of the new uncertainties that that has caused is

it sensible for the government  not to set a target for the vaccine roll out. And therefore not

raise Australian’s hopes?



BUTLER: I think it is understandable given the Prime Minister not being able to deliver on his

promise to have 4 million people vaccinated by the end of March. And he won’t be able to

deliver on his promise to vaccinate everyone by the end of October that he takes time to

recalibrate the plan and present a new plan to Australians. But we utterly need timelines and

targets. If you haven’t got targets and timeframes in a plan, it is not a plan. I think what was

remarkable last night was the Prime Minister’s statement on Facebook that indeed he has no

plans to announce any targets for when Australians will be vaccinated. This is incredible, this is

the most important thing we can do this year, the vaccine rollout. The health of Australians

depends on it and the strengths of our economic recover rests very squarely on the

effectiveness of the vaccine rollout. The idea that just because he hasn’t been able to deliver

on any of his other promises that he can walk away from his obligation to set out a new

strategy with clear timeframes and clear targets is unthinkable.



NORMAN: Do you acknowledge that there has been some unforeseen circumstances which

make it difficult to set and meet goals? I mean, who would have predicted ATAGI’s advice last

week for example?



BUTLER: Sure that was unpredictable  and that is exactly why for many months now Labor

has been saying we should have had more back options. We should have negotiated more

deals. Australia was late in getting to the table the US and the UK have negotiated their deals

Pfizer vaccine in July, it took us till November to negotiate a deal in spite of  the fact that Scott

Morrison said we were at the front of the que. And we didn’t have enough deals. The UK has 7

deals in place. So when the UK the pause their use of AstraZeneca for younger people over

the last several days they have been able to move to use Moderna as well as Pfizer. They’ll

soon move to Johnson and Johnson as well.  And that’s the point we’ve been making. There

has not been enough redundancy in Scott Morrison’s plan enough back up to deal with these

sorts of unforeseeable events, unpredictable events as you describe them. Which from time to

time  do arise in the middle of an emergency.



NORMAN: So Australia obviously has a deal with AstraZeneca, with Pfizer, it has a deal with

Novavax if that vaccine is approved. We have access to the CoVax Facility. What do you know

about the negotiations Australia has had with companies like Moderna and Johnson and

Johnson. Because it looks like there has been talks but they just got nowhere.



BUTLER: That’s right I think. Greg Hunt and Scott Morison need to explain why that is the

case. I mean Moderna is a mainstay vaccine in North America, the UK and Europe. It has

been incredibly important for the rollouts over there. That’s why those countries or one of the

reasons those countries are so far ahead of Australia. We see the US deliver 4.6 million jabs

just on Saturday they’re up to about 187 Million jabs already. We’re at 1 million. So having a

vast portfolio of vaccines enables a country to move more quickly, more effectively. But also

deal with these now sometimes inevitable unforeseen events that arise during emergencies.

As to why we’ve not been able to negotiate a deal with Moderna or with Johnson and Johnson

I think that’s for Greg Hunt to explain. We said last year there should be 5-6 deals. Not 4, one

of which has fallen over, the University of Queensland deal.



NORMAN: Do you get the sense that it’s Moderna and Johnson and Johnson that aren’t

playing ball with Australia. Because a few months ago the Chief Medical Officer Paul Kelly

noted that it take two parties to strike a contract. So sort of trying to read between the lines of

those public statements, what does that indicate to you?



BUTLER: First of all we shouldn’t have to read between the lines of public statements from the

Government. The Government should come clean and tell Australians what is happening. I

think that has been one of the real challenges over the last couple of weeks, people have been

getting information for weeks almost on the fly. GPs for example found out through the media

when Greg Hunt told millions of patients ‘ring your GP practise tomorrow to make an

appointment to get your vaccination.’ Notwithstanding the fact that only 1000 had been

approved and most of them were only getting 50 doses per week. So this idea of sort of things

being announced on the fly, over promised, under delivered, not enough information being

provide not just to GPs and other health providers but to the Australian community more

broadly is part of the reason we are so far behind the rest of the world.



NORMAN: Just returning to the target and where we are actually at with our rollout. What

target should the government be setting? Like, when would you like to see all Australians at

least receive their first dose of the Covid-19 vaccine?



BUTLER: We should have had arrangements in place to do this by October. I think it’s been

an incredibly bad situation for Australia not to have a target in place to be fully vaccinated by

October. Many other countries to which we usually compare ourselves have will be fully

vaccinated well before then. The strength of their economic recovery will start surging.

Importable they will be in a position to deal with the fact that pharmaceutical companies and

research bodies are now coming to develop booster shots because this virus is

mutating.  There are variants of concern now, with South African, the so called British Variant,

The UK Variant and the Brazilian Variant that are becoming the dominant variants for the virus

around the world. We’ve seen them emerging through hotel quarantine here in Australia. If

we’re not in a position where we’ve all got the existing or current generation of vaccines in our

arms we’re not going to be able to take advantage of those booster shots. So, we shouldn’t

have given up on October as quickly as Scott Morrison did.  And when Dan Tehan ‘well maybe

we can commit to the first shots before the end of the year.’ As I said, the Prime Minister then

walked away from that last night. I just don’t think that has enough ambition. We’ve had the

Prime Minister say ‘this is not a race, there’s not rush to do this.’  Well, sorry, I disagree. This is

a race. It is a race in health terms to be ahead of those variants that are taking over the virus

around the world. And it is a race in terms of economic confidence and jobs.  And I think for so

long as there is still this fear and you get the sort of outbreaks you saw a couple of weeks ago

and we’re not a vaccinated population, there is going to be a lack of economic confidence in

our country. So get some ambition back into this show and get some recognition that their

strategy isn’t working. And they are going to have to, I think, call on the states to do more.

They have to go to the states and say ‘we need to use your experience, your capability of

mass health service delivery to start to accelerate this thing.’ Because we are running far too

way behind.



NORMAN: Obviously the October deadline, the Government has abandoned that as well as

their other targets. Would you like to see as Dan Tehan suggested yesterday all Australians at

least receive their first jab by the end of the year, by Christmas?



BUTLER: I think that’s way too modest a target, but it is better than nothing. I mean we really

should be through this well before the end of this year because I think it is becoming clearer

that the world is going to have to start dealing with variants before the end of this year. As I

have said before Matt Handcock, the UK health secretary has talked about the people in his

country receiving booster shots in the northern Autumn, which is the Australian spring.  I mean,

we won’t be very far even into the first dose of the current generation of vaccines on Dan

Tehan’s projections. The time when other countries in the world are already getting their

booster shots to deal with these very dangerous variants.



NORMAN: And Mark Butler, you mentioned a moment ago the economic impact. What will the

impact be if we are still vaccinating Australians well into next year, well into 2021. Well, we

won’t be able to open up our economy to the rest of the world obviously. And you know, any

international facing sectors of the economy, tourism and education and many others besides

will continue to have a dampener on their confidence, a dampener on jobs but there will as well

be the constant sort of uncertainty about more outbreaks happening. Largely through hotel

quarantined or through other  parts of our society being able to lead to the sort of lock downs

we saw only a week or two ago in Brisbane and outbreaks in northern New South Wales

interrupting some very large pieces of economic activity by way of the Falls festival, the Blues

Fest. So, all of this is going to be an ongoing dampener in confidence as Australians watch the

rest of the world open up because they have frankly had, effective, competent vaccine rollout.





NORMAN: And just before I let you go Mark Butler. We’re obviously two months into the

nation-wide rollout. More than 1.1 million Australians have received their first dose, they are

part of phases 1A and 1B. But we have learnt today from one of Australians biggest disability

service providers not a single dose has  arrived at their facilities. I mean how much of a

concern is that, given we’re heading into winter?



BUTLER: This is a scandal. Phase 1A particularly the most vulnerable people living in age

care and disability facilities were supposed to be fully vaccinated, not just one dose, fully

vaccinated by Easter.  The first six weeks of the rollout. The idea that almost no people living

in disability facilities had been vaccinated even with their first dose is a scandal. Those people,

Australians living with a disability and their carers understandably would be feeling abandoned

by Scott Morrison.



NORMAN: Alright Mark Butler, thanks for your time today.



BUTLER: Thanks Jane.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LUCY CARUSO 0408 803 428



