

JIM CHALMERS MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR RANKIN

‘EXCEPTIONAL UNCERTAINTY’ IN ECONOMY

While the IMF’s new World Economic Outlook Update says prospects for global growth have  improved, it still expects the international economy will be characterised by risk and uncertainty  associated with the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.

In such an uncertain economic environment, it is beyond comprehension that the Morrison  Government has a plan to cut the wages of working Australians and rip support out of  communities, industries and businesses which are still struggling.

It’s welcome that parts of our economy are recovering but this Outlook highlights the  substantial challenges of high and persistent unemployment and underemployment, the risk of  labour market scaring and the need to maintain support until a vaccine is broadly deployed.

According to the Outlook:

- “Global activity will remain well below the pre-COVID, January 2020 WEO projections  through the forecast horizon. The strength of the projected recovery varies across countries,  depending on the severity of the health crisis, the extent of domestic disruptions to activity, the  exposure to cross-border spillovers, and—importantly—the effectiveness of policy support to  limit persistent damage.”

- “Although employment in some countries generally appears to have recovered more quickly  from the trough of the recession than in previous downturns, large numbers of people are still  unemployed and underemployed in many countries…Moreover, as discussed in the October  2020 WEO, the burden of the crisis has fallen unevenly across groups: workers with less  education, women, youth, those in contact-intensive sectors, and those informally employed  have suffered disproportionate livelihood and income losses.”

- “Policies should ensure effective support until a vaccine-powered normalisation of activity is  underway and limit persistent damage from the deep recession of the past year.”

The Morrison Government should not and cannot congratulate themselves while more than  two million Australians are either without a job or don’t have enough hours and wages are  stagnant.

After racking up a trillion dollars of debt, the Morrison Government should have more to show  for it in terms of jobs and opportunities but instead they’ve wasted too much on rorts, executive  bonuses and advertising.



The Morrison Government’s plans to cut wages, cut super and wind back consumer  protections in the banking system risks weakening the recovery and will leave too many  Australians behind.

WEDNESDAY, 27 JANUARY 2021

MEDIA CONTACT: NATHAN JOHNSTON 0488 176 452



