

ANDREW LEIGH MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR TREASURY

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR CHARITIES

MEMBER FOR FENNER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2SM WITH MARCUS PAUL IN THE MORNING

TUESDAY, 26 JANUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Companies using JobKeeper to pay out executive bonuses;

Companies repaying JobKeeper payments after reporting huge profits;

Australia Day; Margaret Court; Gender imbalance in the Australia Day

awards system and the need for revamp.



MARCUS PAUL, HOST: The first of our Australia Day guests today is Andrew

Leigh MP. Good morning to you Andrew and happy Australia Day, mate.



ANDREW LEIGH, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR TREASURY AND

CHARITIES: Good morning, Marcus. Great to be with you.



PAUL: I see on page 20 of today's Herald, there's a push on corporate Australia to

repay JobKeeper. Now you and I have discussed this in the last couple of months.

Corporate governance experts are urging more of Australia's big companies to

repay funds received through the federal government's JobKeeper wage subsidy

scheme, warning taxpayers will bear the brunt of the $90 billion cost for decades,

Andrew.



LEIGH: Absolutely, Marcus. And what a great patriotic moment it would be if some

of these corporates decided that they'd make a national gesture to give back

taxpayer subsidies they don't need for the good of the country, to help those less

fortunate than themselves. I can't think of a more generous patriotic gesture than

that from some of the corporates who received handouts last year - thinking they

would need them - but then had a bumper year of profits.



PAUL: Yeah. Well, let's have a look major Australian companies that have posted

strong profits, including Super Retail Group, the local arm of Toyota and Coca Cola

Amatil [New Zealand] have said they will repay millions in wage subsidies received

over the course of COVID-19, thanks to a surge in consumer spending, prompting

better than expected sales and profits. So we need to give credit where it’s due to

these.



LEIGH: Absolutely, and those firms have done it as good corporate citizens.

They’ve recognised that good corporate citizenship isn't about just giving some

money to charity. It's not just about having good statements of policy. It's also

about making generous gestures to the entire Australian community. I hope that

Premier Investments - a company owned by Solomon Lew, which has seen its best

profit year last year despite getting JobKeeper, had so much money it could pay it

CEO a bonus of $2.5 million - will now look at itself and say, ‘well, this is the

moment to be giving the money back to the Australian community, let’s do it

today’.



PAUL: So, who are we calling on? Solomon Lew and his company - what’s the

name of his company again?



LEIGH: It’s Premier Investments. It runs Portmans, Just Jeans, Smiggle - they'd be

the outlets your listeners would be familiar with.



PAUL: And what, they paid Solomon Lew a bonus of $2 million. They've recorded

record profits. But they've done this as well as taking the JobKeeper program?



LEIGH: Solomon Lew’s the major shareholder there, so of the dividend that they

handed out last year, he would have earned about $20 million. Mark McInnes, the

CEO, was the one who took home $2.5 million as a CEO bonus. Good luck to him,

but it's not clear to me that they need taxpayer handouts at a time when the

government is bringing the JobKeeper program to a premature close and looking

at cutting the JobSeeker unemployment benefit down to poverty levels.



PAUL: This is the problem, isn't it? These acts of corporate goodwill may well be

few and far between with funds managers and governance experts not confident

that boards will be inclined to return the beneficial stipend. The Director of

corporate governance firm Ownership Matters says the likelihood of widespread

JobKeeper paybacks is slim, particularly due to the lack of transparency and

accountability around the scheme. They said that JobKeeper was extraordinary

and generous, but accompanied by very little transparency in the fact that - the fact

of the matter is that the Australian taxpayer will be paying for employers who've

been unjustly enriched by JobKeeper for the next 30 years. I mean, that's a

concern.



LEIGH: It really is, and credit to Dean Paatsch from Ownership Matters. He's

somebody who's been on the case with this issue for many months now. And

many other shareholders are concerned by this. So Premier Investments had

almost half of its shareholders voting against their remuneration report, a

significant backlash from shareholders. You can only imagine what the views are

out in the Australian community when people see large firms with billionaire

shareholders receiving taxpayer handouts, and then not being willing to do the

right thing. Now, if Premier Investments had gone further backwards, they'd be

approaching the government and saying we need more. But when they've had an

unexpectedly good year, they don't do the right thing and give the money back.



PAUL: Alright. Andrew, let's move on to something a little brighter and lighter.

Australia Day, what does it mean for you?



LEIGH: It’s a moment to reflect on who we are and where we've come from. I think

certainly it's prompted a very different conversation this year than when I was a

kid, where I remember the Bicentennial being all focused on white arrival. Now

there's a real recognition that it is an extraordinary thing to share this country with

a people who've been here for 60,000 years. That's an amazing proud heritage,

but for Indigenous Australians, this is a day of pain. So it's prompted a more

sophisticated discussion. I think that indicates our growing maturity, and the sense

from many Australians that we want a national day to be one that our first

Australians can be proud of.



PAUL: Well, you know there's a bit of a concern with the date when even the new

Australian of the Year - this amazing young Grace Tame - is one of those who's

calling for a change in the date.



LEIGH: Grace Tame has been calling for it. Malcolm Turnbull has been calling for

it. More than half of Australians think that the date will be changed within the next

decade. It’s worth remembering Marcus that this isn't the date on which the First

Fleet arrived in Australia - it’s the date on which the First Fleet moved from Botany

Bay up to Farm Cove. Australia Day has only been a national holiday right across

the country since 1984. And as we grow and mature, many of our traditions evolve,

and this is I think a really welcome conversation. We should be proud of the

conversation, we shouldn't hold back from it. We should respect that there are

going to be many different views, but only by deeply engaging with our past and

listening to Indigenous Australians can we forward as a country. And if you don't

listen to Indigenous Australians on the issue of Australia Day, then you're not really

listening to Indigenous Australians, are you?



PAUL: Well no, not really. Look, Kerry O’Brien has had a crack again at the

awarding of an Australia Day honour - in fact, one of the highest apart from

Australian of the Year, of course - to former tennis great Margaret Court. I mean, I

think unfairly she's personally come under criticism, but I think the process of

awarding such awards is probably where the criticism is warranted. I mean, the

decision to award Australia's highest honour to Margaret Court may serve to erode

the hard fought gains made over decades in reducing the impact of discrimination

against members of the LGBTQ plus community. I mean, that's what the veteran

journalist Kerry O'Brien has said in his letter to the Governor General as he rejects

his Australia Day award. Is this the right thing to do?



LEIGH: He's following on the back of the decision by Clara Tuck Meng Soo, a

Canberra doctor who I know well, to hand back her AO in protest against Margaret

Court’s comparison of gay and lesbian advocates to Hitler. You know, these are

statements that are utterly beyond the pale from a woman who already has an

OBE, already has an AO. The decision today is to upgrade the AO to the AC,

which has just come at an incredible painful cost to so many Australians. I think it

really does highlight that we need a revamp of the honour system. The share of

women receiving awards went down this year, from 40 per cent to 37 per cent,

despite the fact we know that most community organisations are run by women.

It's women that win the lower ranks of awards, those toiling away in little

community organisations, and it's more esteemed blokes in formal organisations

that seem to have nominating systems that get them in. We've really got to look at

the whole thing more carefully, Marcus.



PAUL: In fairness though, it is worth acknowledging that all of the major awards -



the Australian of the Year, the Senior Australian of the Year, the Young Australian

of the Year - were all female. So that is good. That's good stuff.



LEIGH: It is great to have an all female lineup on the Australian of the Year again,

for a second time. Grace Tame just an extraordinary achiever, a marathon runner

on top of her bravery in standing up for sexual assault victims. So there are many

people today receiving awards that make us proud. Just because we need to have

a more careful look at the system doesn't mean that those who have received

awards today shouldn't feel their hearts fill with pride, and their friends and

neighbours really, really feel proud for them.



PAUL: Alright, Andrew. Always good to have you on the program. Well done all

the hard work on trying to get JobKeeper repaid by these corporates that have

made a lot of money in the past year or so during the pandemic. Let's keep on it.



LEIGH: Let’s work together on this one, Marcus. I reckon we can crack the nut.



PAUL: Thanks, mate. Talk soon.



LEIGH: Bewdy.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHANIE ANDERSON 0431344056





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











