Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania









Senator the Hon Richard Colbeck  Minister for Senior Australians and Aged Care Services  Minister for Sport



8 February 2020



Aged Care Voluntary Industry Code of Practice

The Australian Government congratulates the Aged Care Workforce Industry Council on its  official launch of the Voluntary Industry Code of Practice.

Minister for Senior Australians and Aged Care Services, Richard Colbeck said the Code of  Practice is already receiving strong early support from the aged care sector, as some of  Australia’s largest providers pledge their commitment to quality care.

“This Code of Practice is the first of its kind for the aged care sector in Australia,” Minister  Colbeck said.

“It is based on seven guiding principles for quality care and will be a transformative tool for  Australia’s aged care sector.

“Importantly, this Code of Practice tells Australians that the aged care sector has aspirations  for excellence, and will hold itself accountable to the community.”

Minister Colbeck said the launch with industry and workforce leaders marks a new chapter in  the delivery of quality aged care services in Australia.

Most importantly, it highlights the process of continuous improvement of aged care services  in Australia, as a feature of adopting the principles of the Code.

The Voluntary Industry Code of Practice was developed, in consultation with consumers,  providers, and peak bodies, and is an achievement against strategic action 2 from A Matter of  Care, Australia’s Aged Care Workforce Strategy.

The Code of Practice is a centrepiece of the strategy, and provides the framework for a  culture of proactive reform from aged care providers.

“The Government is supporting work to implement the strategy with $10.3 million over three  years allocated in the 2020-21 Budget,” Minister Colbeck said.

Media inquiries | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018  Authorised by Senator Richard Colbeck, Tasmania





“This investment will support ACWIC to lead nine projects, and help implement other  actions from the strategy.

“This additional funding builds on $2.3 million the Government previously delivered to  support the establishment of the ACWIC and kick-start its important work.

“The Code of Practice underpins the values and principles for delivering quality care to our  senior Australians.

“In practice, these principles will better support the aged care workforce in its critical role of  caring for, and delivering services to, older Australians.”

Minister Colbeck commended the Aged Care Workforce Industry Council and the sector for  showing commitment to tangible reform.

“The fact that industry has reached this milestone during a year of such disruption, due to  COVID-19, is a testament to the sector’s commitment to cultural change,” he said.

“It’s a demonstration the sector will work to meet - and exceed - the community’s high  expectations when the Royal Commission into Aged Care Quality and Safety releases its  final report in February.”

For more information on the Voluntary Industry Code of Practice, please visit  www.acwic.com.au.

[ENDS]

