

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

4BC BRISBANE DRIVE WITH SCOTT EMERSON

WEDNESDAY, 24 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Vaccine error; Linda Reynolds; Parliament House sexual assault

allegations.



SCOTT EMERSON, HOST: Well I think, Tanya Plibersek, we've got the Hilltop Hoods behind

you there that that intro there. Tanya Plibersek, good to have you on 4BC Drive.



TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION, SHADOW MINISTER FOR

WOMEN: I love the Hilltop Hoods actually Scott. I've been to a couple of concerts, took the

kids twice to The Hilltop Hoods. It's very good fun.



EMERSON: I can tell you, this is my bit of trivia for you Tanya Plibersek, now the other day

probably about a month ago, maybe two months ago now AC/DC got the record for the most

number one albums in Australia, so that was six albums, right? But they only equalled the

record. Do you know who the other band was?



PLIBERSEK: Bee Gees.



EMERSON: That's what most people would say. No, that wasn't the answer.



PLIBERSEK: What is it?



EMERSON: The Hilltop Hoods.



PLIBERSEK: Great. I mean just shows that Australians have great taste right?



EMERSON: They do, it's a great band.



PLIBERSEK: You know, my husband- a long, long time ago, our second date I think it was -

was to an AC/DC concert.



EMERSON: So hopefully it wasn't Highway to Hell for you and your husband. Politics a bit like

rock and roll, isn't it? It looks all looks pretty easy from the outside, but...



PLIBERSEK: It's a long way to the top.



EMERSON: That's exactly right. Let's get serious here, because it was a big day in news here

in Canberra. Look just a breaking story this afternoon, obviously it’s been a big story all the day

through Queensland about the bungle with the Holy Spirit nursing home and the overdosage of

the Pfizer vaccine. Good news is no seems to be no adverse effects at all. But obviously it's a

worry that the fact that there was an overdose and Greg Hunt has had to get up in Parliament

and correct the record, initially said the doctor had been trained in giving the vaccine and then

had to correct the records that he'd be given an erroneous advice. No the doctor hadn't been,

how were how much our worry is that for you?



PLIBERSEK: Well, it's inexplicable. I don't understand how you could have a doctor giving

vaccines who hadn't had the training. Look, I'm a great supporter of this vaccination program.

I'm very keen for Australians to get vaccinated. I'm very keen to queue up myself and take

mine when the time when it's my turn and I’ll be rolling my sleeve up with no doubts.



But this is a real worry and the thing I guess that worries me about it is some of the other

things that the federal government's been responsible for like aged care from the beginning,

like getting Australians home from overseas, like the tracing app, have not been particularly-well managed. And I've been saying all the way along: the government really cannot afford to

stuff up this vaccination, this vaccination program. So we need some answers pretty quick

smart about how it's possible that such an error would happen.



EMERSON: I think the answers we do need, exactly right Tanya Plibersek. It's a worry there

because I think my concern is you're going to get the anti-vaxxers just seizing on these kind of

errors to just...



PLIBERSEK: You're right, Scott. You're absolutely right. People will jump on this and use it as

a reason to be fearful when we know from all of our super smart people, health professionals

that if taken properly this is a safe vaccine. And much safer, of course, than getting COVID-19,

getting sick from COVID-19.



We've seen half a million Americans dead from this virus. It's not nothing. It's not just a

common cold as some people try and tell you, it's a serious thing. We want people to be

confident to get vaccinated. But that means the government needs to get its act in gear. It is

inexplicable that such an error could happen.



EMERSON: Well Annastacia Palaszczuk, the Queensland Premier, she's calling on Scott

Morrison to call an emergency meeting of National Cabinet to talk about the roll-out, talk about

the vaccine strategy and obviously the events that have occurred today in Queensland. What's

your view about that?



PLIBERSEK: I think we need to get to the bottom of how such a serious error could occur.



EMERSON: A National Cabinet meeting? Do you really think that's necessary?



PLIBERSEK: I think the Premiers will want to know, not just talking about Labor premiers here

- Liberal and Labor Premiers - will want to know. The Federal Government has said, Scott

Morrison said, and Greg Hunt the Health Minister, they've said: ‘It's okay guys, we've got this,

the vaccine roll-outs us, we're taking responsibility’.



And within the first week you have a major stuff up like this. The Premiers will be having to

reassure their populations. The premiers have to stump up every day and say ‘It's safe. You

can take this safely’. They want to be reassured so they can in turn reassure the public that the

program is being well managed. I'm not surprised that Liberal and Labor premiers will want

some answers here.





EMERSON: Just quickly, Tanya Plibersek, Linda Reynolds. She's being admitted to hospital in

the advice of her cardiologist. She was going to front the media club today and obviously she

would have been questioned again about the Brittany Higgins, the alleged rape of Brittany

Higgins when she was a staffer of Linda Reynolds. This story doesn't seem to be going away

for the Government at all.



PLIBERSEK: No, I mean obviously I wish Senator Reynolds all the best. We all hope that she

has a speedy recovery. And the real heart of what's happened here is a young woman in a

place she should have been safe, who's experienced the worst possible experience, this

allegation of very serious sexual assault, something that would attract a penalty of up to 12

years here in the ACT.



And what's even worse: on top of that horrific experience, she tells us that she felt like she had

to choose between keeping her job and reporting the rape. And that part of it, we need to again

get to the bottom of that.



The Prime Minister has been sliding around refusing to answer questions about how it's

possible that he didn't know. We know former Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull says it's

inconceivable the Prime Minister didn't know, even the chief of staff, Tony Abbott's old Chief of

Staff Peta Credlin, says the same thing.



EMERSON: I think that Tanya Plibersek, there's a lot to find out about that. We'll have to leave

it there. Tanya Plibersek, great to have you on 4BC Drive this afternoon.



PLIBERSEK: Great to talk to you Scott. Thanks very much.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350



