



THE HON GREG HUNT MP   MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGED CARE

THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP   MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND YOUTH

THE HON STUART ROBERT MP   MINISTER FOR THE NATIONAL DISABILITY INSURANCE SCHEME  MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT SERVICES

MEDIA RELEASE



23 January 2021

PARENTS URGED TO CHECK THEIR KIDS VACCINATION HISTORY BEFORE  START OF SCHOOL YEAR

Parents across the country are being reminded to check their children’s immunisations  for conditions such meningococcal, measles, and tetanus are up to date, as they get  ready to begin schooling this year.

Immunising against harmful, contagious but vaccine-preventable diseases, protects the  health of Australian families and communities. It is also a requirement for many  Centrelink payments that children are immunised.

The process to check that a child’s immunisations are up to date is simple and easy to  navigate online.

Minister for Health and Aged Care, Greg Hunt described Australia as a “vaccination  nation,” and encouraged families to prioritise their child’s immunisation.

“The first three quarters of 2020 saw record results of child immunisation for one year  olds, two year olds and five year olds, which is a terrific reflection on Australian families  and their dedication to prioritising their children’s health,” Minister Hunt said.

“COVID-19 vaccines will be made available over coming months once they are approved  for use by the independent Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), however it’s critical  we protect our children from other harmful, contagious but vaccine-preventable diseases  now, through immunisation.”

Vaccination is safe and effective and the Governments ‘Get the Facts’ about  immunisation campaign encourages Australian parents and carers to get their kids  vaccinated on time, every time, for the best protection.

Minister for Education and Youth, Alan Tudge said 2020 has shown the importance of  the health of our families, our children and our communities.

“Around Australia, more than 330,000 students will start school for the first time in 2021  and around 4 million students are returning to school,” Mr Tudge said.

“Parents need to ensure their children are protected from vaccine-preventable diseases.

“I encourage all families to get routine vaccinations for their children against diseases  like measles, mumps, rubella, polio and tetanus before school gates open. Not  vaccinating, puts their own child at risk, but it risks the health and safety of other children  too.”

Minister for Government Services Stuart Robert said families can easily check their  child’s immunisation history online.

"The Medicare online account on myGov and the Express Plus Medicare mobile app will  have the information on your child’s latest immunisation status," Minister Robert said.

“I urge all families who already receive or plan to claim family assistance payments this  year to check their child’s immunisation history.”

Family Tax Benefit and Child Care Subsidy can be affected if your child’s immunisation  status is not up to date. Parents are encouraged to talk to their health provider about a  catch up schedule if needed.

Families are also encouraged to check their other Medicare details are up to date using  their online account through myGov.

For more information about immunisation visit  https://campaigns.health.gov.au/immunisationfacts

For more information about immunisation requirements for family payments visit:  http://www.servicesaustralia.gov.au/immunisation.

[ENDS]

Media Contact:  Minister Tudge - Steve Kidner 0466 385 097  Minister Hunt - James Perrin - 0447 534 427  Minister Robert - Liam Jones 0448 763 351

