

MATT THISTLETHWAITE MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR THE REPUBLIC

MEMBER FOR KINGSFORD SMITH





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS

SUNDAY, 21 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Facebook; Melbourne journalist arrest; vaccination policy; alleged assault

in Parliament House.



SHARRI MARKSON, HOST: Let’s bring in my political panel now, Labor MP Matt

Thistlethwaite and Liberal senator, Andrew Bragg, thank you both so much for your time. Let's

kick off with this topic, Matt how much of this situation with Facebook, how much do you blame

the government for this?



MATT THISTLETHWAITE, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES:

Well, I certainly think that Facebook's gone a bit overboard. I don't support them taking down

health website news feeds, community groups news feeds, I think that's reprehensible

conduct. But at the end of the day, it's up to the government to try and fix this because last

week, Sharri, before the news media bargaining code was passed by the parliament, the

government said that the negotiations with large tech companies were going well and that they

would get an outcome. On Thursday we saw that wasn't the case. The government needs to

explain just how they messed up these negotiations and more importantly how they're going to

fix them because a lot of community groups in particular, do rely on Facebook and other social

media platforms to get information out there in the wider community. So I think the government

really needs to explain to the parliament this week how they're going to fix the mess.



MARKSON: Andrew Bragg, what is the government going to do now to fix this, anything?



ANDREW BRAGG, SENATOR FOR NSW: Well Sharri in taking away real news, Facebook

has become the home of fake news and cat photos. And I think it's petulant performance will

be seen for what it is. I mean just three or four weeks ago, people like Google, organisations

like Google were saying that our code will break the Internet, and now they're signing deals

under our media bargaining code so we're on the right track with these laws. It's important that

we rebalance the playing field so that public interest journalists, journalism, can be paid for.

And it would be ridiculous for us to change course now so we will proceed with our laws, we

will proceed to prescribe Facebook as one of the designated services under the code. And as

you say, other countries looking at what we're doing here, this is a really important battle within

our liberal democracy.



MARKSON: Yeah, and I agree with you, Andrew, but what is the government's plan from this

point onwards? You know my information is that the Treasurer Josh Frydenberg had spoken to

Mark Zuckerberg, at least six or seven times in that you know the week or week and a half

leading up till the, this Thursday ban, so he was in regular contact with him, speaking with him

directly, you know, there's a standoff at the moment, how's it gonna break?



BRAGG: It's a standoff that we don't intend to lose and you're right the Treasurer is in regular

contact with Mr Zuckerberg, and I think really lucky, you got to look at where we are now. So,

news is off Facebook, people can get news through Sky News through the Guardian the ABC,

whatever. And so I think Facebook now has restored most of those community and charitable

pages. So the reality is, people will have to go directly to apps and websites for news, until

such time as Facebook decide that they want to cut deals, or have face arbitration under the

code. So, really, like, life will go on for most Australians.



MARKSON: So, Matt, what do you think of this? Do you think the government should plough

ahead, implement the, legislate, sorry legislate the code, and if Facebook doesn't want to play

in the Australian market, so be it? Should that be the attitude?



THISTLETHWAITE: Well despite some shortcomings of the code, Labor has supported it,

these are all important reforms. But we weren’t involved in the negotiations, the Labor Party

wasn’t involved in the negotiations, this was all handled solely by the government, and we’ve

been asking a lot of questions in the last week, particularly about the amendments moved the

government in the Parliament, it's all evolving, and particularly at the last minute. And at the

end of the day, Sharri, Facebook did warn on two occasions, they said on two occasions in

writing that if the government proceeded with this, that they will withdraw newsfeeds. We've

supported this code, but a lot of it was based on the fact that the government will say, don't

worry, we're confident of getting an outcome, the negotiations are going well, that hasn't been

the case. So the government really needs to explain this week how they are going to fix it,

because it's due to go to the Senate and start off very quickly.



MARKSON: Just before we move off this topic, Andrew, Greg Hunt has given interview this

morning where he indicated that he'd ordered his Department of Health to stop advertising,

stop spending money with Facebook, you know, do you broadly agree with this policy of all the

government's, you know, all Federal departments pulling funding from Facebook, and then

what do you think about the side effect of this, that this furthers further contributes to the

problem of allowing you know just disinformation to spread out at a time when crucial health

messages, you know, need to reach the population?



BRAGG: Well I think that's a matter for each Minister in the government, but I think the really

important point here is, but we're not going to, you know, lay down here because Facebook is

the home of fake news, I mean there are so much different decision information on our

platform as well as material which is designed to incite hatred, who also which is defamatory,

Facebook’s done nothing to try and clean that up. And they resist being called a publisher,

whereas they've now started to turn people off their platforms, whether it be Donald Trump, or

other people like Craig Kelly. So they clearly like censoring people, so they have a lot more

control over their own platform than they've been prepared to say in the past, so I really don't

think we owe this company a favour. But in terms of your question about whether or not

Ministers should direct their departments to not advertise that's really a matter for them and I

have a strong view on that.



MARKSON: Yeah, look, I think the point you raised about political censorship not just on

Facebook, but on Twitter as well is just a shocking global problem and, and these tech giants

shouldn't be operating in an ideological way like that. I want to move on, a story that that

happened in Melbourne. Just yesterday there was a journalist, Olivia Jenkins and her

photographer, Jake, and they were covering an anti-vaccination protest, they ended up getting

arrested by police. They were wearing their media badge, the whole thing that police knew

they were media, and yet they got arrested. Matt, what's your reaction to this?



THISTLETHWAITE: Sharri, it's a bit difficult to comment because I haven't actually seen the

footage of that situation but from what I understand, the police have in the wake of that

apologised and said that there won't be any fines issued to the journalist and I think that’s a

sensible outcome. The police forces in the various states I think have been doing a fantastic

job during this COVID period, they’ve been public orders in place for good reason to try and

stop mass gatherings and the risk of infection. So on the whole I think the police have done

quite a credible job during this difficult period and that's a sensible outcome and a common

sense outcome.



MARKSON: I think it's just another example though when people look at this story, Andrew,

you know we've seen so many cases where police have just stepped over the line and been a

bit too heavy handed, particularly in Victoria, you know, we've, you know, we've seen the

footage of breastfeeding Mums being ordered off park benches, elderly women just sitting

there, not harming anyone you know what's your reaction, do you think just the state has gone

a bit too far here?



BRAGG: The two points here I think are that we don't have a tradition of arresting journalists, I

think that's a very dangerous precedent. The second point is, where there is community

transmission, I think we need to be applying rules around gatherings to local government area

zones rather than making rules across a huge geographical area like the state of Victoria

because you get these perverse consequences, where you’ve got little or no transmission. And

yet, life as normal isn't allowed to transpire, so I think it is, it is troubling and I'm hoping we can

get to a more mature landing, as we start to vaccinate.



MARKSON: Look, Safe Work Australia put out a fascinating ruling on Friday, Matt, they said

that shoppers and diners might have to be vaccinated and show the proof of their

immunisation before they can walk into shops or restaurants. You know, this is the workplace

safety regulator, this is actually giving businesses the power to order customers to show the

proof of immunisation. Do you agree with this?



THISTLETHWAITE: Well, the government said that the vaccine should be compulsory and

that's something that I support and Labor supports. It's up to individual businesses, about how

they run their businesses that's their right and I think that in a lot of cases, requiring someone

to have a vaccine for transacting with a particular business is a sensible thing so for instance

Qantas has said that no one will be able to purchase a ticket to fly until they can prove they’ve

been vaccinated, I think that that is reasonable in circumstances, so I think as long as

businesses are reasonable, I certainly will be vaccinated as early as I possibly can on the list,

and I encourage others to do the same. As long as these rules are bought in before everyone

has had the opportunity to get vaccinated, I think that's the most important thing, we’ve got to

make sure that the rest of this year, getting everyone that is possibly able to get vaccinated

before you bring in restrictions.



MARKSON: Andrew, a quick couple of things, would you go to a cafe if you knew some

people that weren't vaccinated, would you want everyone to show proof of immunisation, and

also concerned me this morning that the Health Minister Greg Hunt said it was not be

compulsory aged care workers to be vaccinated?



BRAGG: Well I think you'll find that the back door way that will become compulsory is that the

aged care businesses will actually require their staff to be vaccinated and I think it's a matter

for private businesses, if private businesses want to force customers to have a vaccination

that's a matter for those businesses. Personally I will be taking the vaccine, I had Coronavirus

last year, I’m told that my anti-bodies have probably worn off, and as Matt says, the sooner the

bulk of our community has the vaccine, the better our economic recovery.



MARKSON: God, that'd be the worst news, that you could get coronavirus twice, for anyone

who doesn't remember watching this you know, Senator Andrew Bragg was one of the first in

Australia to get coronavirus because you went to a wedding in the countryside in New South

Wales, from memory where people had arrived from the United States and about 35 people

from that wedding got coronavirus. I want to turn to the handling of the rape claim by Brittany

Higgins, the story landed on day one of the Parliamentary sitting fortnight. And it was a major

issue, major political issue with the government's response under the spotlight throughout the

week, Matt, how would you judge both the Prime Minister and Linda Reynolds handling of this

case and do you think Linda Reynolds should resign over it?



THISTLETHWAITE: Well I think there's certainly still questions that need to be answered by

the Defence Minister and by the Prime Minister. Ms Higgins deserves to be treated with

respect. In her words she feels that she wasn't by the government when she raised these

allegations, and certainly in the Parliament last week the Prime Minister informed the

Parliament that he was only informed on these allegations, a week or so ago, but some text

messages were revealed in The Australian over the weekend that his office was told about

this, just after it occurred in 2019. So I think that there's an explanation that the Prime Minister

needs to give about how his office was informed of these allegations yet he wasn't and if a

rape occurred in a senior Minister's Office and the Prime Minister wasn't told about I think that

that's a serious problem with the system and it needs to be fixed.



MARKSON: I have to agree with that, Andrew is it credible that two cabinet ministers knew

about this senior staff and the Prime Minister's office knew about this, is it credible that PM

didn't know?



BRAGG: Well that's why we're having these four separate reviews, one of which is  looking

into that exact question and I think one thing that has come to my mind over the past week has

been, you know what, what are the sort of institutional changes that could be made so that

people don't feel the need to choose between their career and making a complaint, especially

a very serious complaint, as we've seen in this case, and in a, in a private business, you know

in a large corporate you do have that HR department where you can go to an independent,

more independence, than perhaps exists in politics, I think there are you know I think it's very

important that we don't waste this opportunity because Brittany's been very brave in raising

this. And so, let's see where these reviews get to.



MARKSON: Do you both think that is a culture problem when it comes to the treatment of

women at Parliament House. Matt?



THISTLETHWAITE: Well clearly there is a problem, because now over the course of the

weekend we’ve had two women raise instances of very serious crimes being perpetrated

against them. We've had other investigations by other news outlets, which has uncovered

similar behaviours. So I think the fact that we've got all these inquiries and investigations going

on certainly indicates that there is a problem and it's not acceptable for our nation's Parliament,

which should be leading the way, when it comes to putting in place procedures and policies to

support people that make sure that they have a safe workplace. If that's not occurring, it needs

to be fixed as soon as possible.



MARKSON: Andrew you just came into the Senate into the Parliament recently from corporate

Australia, do you notice any culture difference?





BRAGG: I don't think it's in doubt that there is a cultural problem. I think the Prime Minister has

been very upfront about that and that's why having an independent review into culture. I think

the excuses that are bandied around like alcohol and the like, I think really are cop outs. I

mean yes it is an unusual workplace, but it's not a unique workplace. In corporate Australia,

there's a lot of travel, there's long hours so there was a lot in common. I think with other

professionals and it's very important that we lead by example, and that the institutions we have

here, provide the sort of support that people need if there are transgressions and there are

serious offences that occur here.



MARKSON: Alright, Matt Thistlethwaite and Senator Andrew Bragg, thank you both very much

for joining me this evening. Have a good week in Canberra.



THISTLETHWAITE: Thanks Sharri.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: BEN LEESON 0404 648 275



