The Hon Darren Chester MP  Minister for Veterans’ Affairs  Minister for Defence Personnel

MEDIA RELEASE

Supporting reservists’ civilian careers

Defence Reservists and their civilian employers have been recognised across Australia  for their outstanding contribution to the Australian Defence Force (ADF) through the  Prince of Wales Awards.

Minister for Defence Personnel Darren Chester said the annual awards acknowledged  the continued support of employers, providing ADF Reservists working in their  organisation with the opportunity to up-skill in an area that will benefit their civilian  career.

“We have more than 25,000 active Reservists who are supported by their civilian  employers to contribute vital skills and capability to the defence of our nation,” Mr  Chester said.

“You only need to look at the integral role our Reservists played in 2020 through the  bushfire and coronavirus responses to get a glimpse at just how much they contribute to  our nation.

“The Prince of Wales Awards recognises the incredible support provided by civilian  employers in enabling our Reservists to answer the call when needed and fulfil their  military service obligations.

“In an effort to give back to those employers, Defence provides funding for professional  development and training for Reservists in areas that directly benefit their civilian career  and their employer.

“I commend all the Award recipients and wish them well for their upcoming training and  development.”

No publication date : received by Parl Library  on 20/01/2021



Defence provides direct support to ADF Reservists and their civilian employers through  the Employer Support Payment Scheme and a range of engagement programs and  activities.

“With the 2021 Award submissions opening soon, I highly recommend all Reservists  consider this opportunity for themselves and their employer,” Mr Chester said.

The full announcement of ADF reservist recipients of the 2020 Prince of Wales Award  along with their civilian employers is available at www.defencereservessupport.gov.au.

Imagery is available  at: https://images.defence.gov.au/assets/Home/Search?Query=20210113ADF8663678  _PoWA002.jpg&Type=Filename







MEDIA CONTACTS:  Cedric Szigeti: (02) 6277 7820  Defence Media: (02) 6127 1999



No publication date : received by Parl Library  on 20/01/2021

