



MEDIA RELEASE

PUBLICLY OWNED mRNA VACCINE MANUFACTURER NEEDED



04/02/2021

The Greens have called for the government to establish a publicly-owned

mRNA vaccine manufacturer in Australia, so that Australia can be guaranteed it

will receive enough of the mRNA vaccines that are proving to be more effective

and more adaptable as the virus mutates.



Adam Bandt MP has commended scientists and health experts who have

joined the Greens call for Australia to build its own domestic mRNA vaccine

manufacturing capacity.



“mRNA vaccines could be our best defence against the ever-mutating

coronavirus, and we should be making them right here in Australia, for the

public good, and using them to keep us and our region safe,” Leader of the

Australian Greens Adam Bandt MP said.



“Australia can’t be reliant on big drug companies, hoping we get a good spot in

their queue.



“We need a publicly-owned manufacturer to ensure we have enough doses

here, including of mRNA vaccines.



“A publicly-owned vaccine manufacturer will put public health first and ensure



we can look after ourselves and our region.



“The Prime Minister’s latest Pfizer announcement is a concession that the

mRNA vaccines are more effective and more adaptable, but we don’t have the

capacity to make them here.



Greens spokesperson on Health Senator Rachel Siewert said:



“Vaccines that use mRNA technology are easier to adapt to new strains of

Covid-19 and Australia should be at the forefront of this revolutionary

technology.



“With this domestic manufacturing capacity, we won’t just be able to make sure

that all Australians are inoculated against new pandemics as they come, but

we’ll be able to function as a vaccine production hub for the region.



“The virus doesn’t acknowledge borders. We’re not safe from coronavirus

unless all of our neighbours are safe - and Australia can and must play a vital

role in building vaccine capacity for our neighbours in the Pacific.”







Media Contacts:

BANDT - Will Kelly; 0427 819 461

SIEWERT - Lucy Cowcher-Guthrie; 0418 401 180





