

SENATOR KRISTINA KENEALLY

DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

PRESS CONFERENCE

SYDNEY

THURSDAY, 8 APRIL 2021



SUBJECTS: Respect@Work Report; Andrew Laming.



KRISTINA KENEALLY, DEPUTY LABOR LEADER IN THE SENATE, SHADOW

MINISTER FOR GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS: Well, today Labor welcomes the fact

that the Government is finally responding to the Respect@Work report. It's taken

12 months. It should not have taken an alleged rape in the Parliament for Scott

Morrison to respond to the Respect@Work report. It should not take this long. But

that is what has happened here. We have seen the Prime Minister Scott Morrison

and his former Industrial Relations Minister and Attorney General Christian Porter,

sit on Sex Discrimination Commissioner Kate Jenkins' report, now for over a year.

It took an alleged rape for Brittany Higgins in Parliament House to motivate Scott

Morrison to respond to this report.



And what do we see from today's report? We see a lot of words, not yet a lot of

commitment. What we see here is Scott Morrison and now his new Attorney

General Michaelia Cash, making a commitment in principle, or in words. But not

yet in money. Not yet in reporting mechanisms. And while there are things that

Labor welcomes about this report, particularly the Government's response to this

report, particularly that judges and MPs will be subject to the Sex Discrimination

Act, that we will see a joined up approach so that there is no wrong door for

someone to go through when they're raising concerns or complaints in relation to

sexual discrimination or harassment. And we also welcome that the education

sector will be provided funding. Well, actually, I should say we welcome that the

education sector will be provided training for staff, but we haven't yet seen the

details about the funding.



And this is the key point here. Labor welcomes some of the Government's

response to this report. But what we are quite clear about is we want to see the

details. We want to see the funding, and we want to see the legislation. Because it

is so often the case with Scott Morrison, it's all about the announcement, rarely

about the follow through. Scott Morrison loves to make an announcement. He

loves to say a lot of words, but without money, without reporting mechanisms,

these words are meaningless.



And when it comes to Scott Morrison's words about women, none of his words can

be taken seriously as long as Andrew Laming remains a member of the Liberal and

National Party rooms. We have here the Government saying they want to bring

MPs and judges under the Sex Discrimination Act. Well, give us a down-payment

on that Prime Minister. Give us a down-payment on that commitment and boot

Andrew Laming from your Liberal Party room. Stop sheltering Andrew Laming in

your Government. And while we're at it, Prime Minister, why don't you give

Australian women a down-payment on all these commitments, and just deliver 10

paid days leave for domestic violence, so that when a woman needs to escape her

abuser when she needs to go to court, when she needs to put plans in place to

escape providing an abuser, she has some paid leave that she can use.



These are some simple things the Prime Minister could have stood up and

announced today, but he didn't. He didn't. And so while, we welcome the fact this

long overdue Government response to this important respect at work report has

finally been delivered. We know with sorrow it shouldn't have taken the alleged

rape of Brittany Higgins in Parliament House to motivate Scott Morrison to move.

And we note that there are a lot of details lacking and a lot of commitments still to

be made. And one thing we know about Prime Minister Scott Morrison: he's all

about the headline, he's rarely about the follow through. So we will be holding him

and his Government to account. Because Australian women want a Government

that's on their side, Australian women want a Government that delivers. Today is a

good first step. But it is the very beginning of the journey. And Scott Morrison so far

has failed to deliver for Australian women. Happy to take any questions.



JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister has said the Government wants to implement

the respective work report in a bipartisan fashion. From what you've seen, is that

something Labor will do?



KENEALLY: As I said, we welcome the fact that the Government has finally

responded after 12 months - we've been calling for the Government to respond to

this report. What we're sceptical about is a Prime Minister that's always there for a

photo op, never there for the follow through. What we're sceptical about is a Prime

Minister, who delivers a lot, a lot of words, but hasn't yet delivered a lot of detail.

So we look forward to the government's detail. We want to see the legislation, we

want to see the reporting mechanisms. How will the Australian public and how

Australian women know how the Government is progressing on the implementation

of this report? Because the Government hasn't even outlined the reporting

mechanism as to how they're going to meet their various milestones. When are we

going to see the legislation? The Government has had this report from Kate

Jenkins for 12 months. We know that Christian Porter never once met with Kate

Jenkins, we know that Christian Porter never once had a meeting with his

Department about this report.



Now Scott Morrison will say oh, COVID, COVID, COVID, COVID kept us from

doing it. Well, COVID didn't stop the Prime Minister from bringing forward

legislation under Christian Porter's name to cut the pay of Australian workers.

Legislation that was watered down thankfully by the Australian Senate. So if Scott

Morrison can find the time to try and cut the pay of Australian workers, surely he

could have found the time to deliver a report called Respect@Work for Australian

women. Any other questions?



JOURNALIST : How would you want the extension of the termination provisions to

cover MPs and judges?



KENEALLY: Well, this is the Government's idea. This is their proposal. My

understanding is that this is not something that was recommended specifically by

the Sex Discrimination Commissioner, Kate Jenkins. However, we welcome this,

but it's up to the Government to explain the detail of it. And if Scott Morrison were

serious about this recommendation, he would have started today by booting

Andrew Laming out of the Liberal Party room. If Scott Morrison really means what

he says, that the Sex Discrimination Act should cover Members of Parliament, well,

I can point to one in his own party room - Andrew Laming. Take action today,

Prime Minister. Take action today and make clear that Andrew Laming has no

place in the Liberal Party, quite frankly, he should have no place in our Parliament.



JOURNALIST: Given that they can't be sacked, what sort of consequences should

MPs face if they are found to have sexually harassed someone?





KENEALLY: Again, this is the Government's idea. You should be asking the

Government how they're going to implement it. And this is my concern: the

Government's had this report for 12 months. We know that Christian Porter, as

Attorney General and Industrial Relations Minister did nothing with this report,

didn't meet with the Sex Discrimination Commissioner once, did not have a

meeting with his own Department.



Now, this today is long overdue. But it looks like a rush job. It looks like it has little

detail. It doesn't have any funding. It doesn't have any legislation. It doesn't have a

reporting mechanism. And when it comes to some of the key questions like how

would this work in practice to apply the Sex Discrimination Act to MPs and judges.

Well, quite frankly, that's up to Scott Morrison and Michaelia Cash to explain. It's

their idea if they put it out there without any detail that's on them. Anything else,

great, thanks, everyone.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: JESSE NORTHFIELD 0407 099 469



