

SHAYNE NEUMANN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR VETERANS' AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE PERSONNEL

MEMBER FOR BLAIR





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

WEST BREMER RADIO THE BREAKFAST CLUB WITH DAMIEN LEE

WEDNESDAY, 6 JANUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Government failures and broken promises in Veterans’ Affairs; Scott

Morrison’s cuts to JobKeeper and JobSeeker; industrial relations.



SHAYNE NEUMANN, MEMBER FOR BLAIR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR VETERANS'

AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE PERSONNEL: Good morning Damo. Good morning to all your

listeners.



DAMIEN LEE: It is great to talk to you for the first time in 2021. I wish it was in better

circumstances because, I mean, when we look at the track record of the Morrison Government

when it comes to veterans’ entitlements, we're not doing terribly well.



NEUMANN: We're not. 2020 was a year of broken promises and delivery failures with

everything from raising expectations on TPI pensions and the DFRDB scheme, to being

slapped down on those issues politically. But also, we saw calls for a Royal Commission into

the tragedy of veteran suicides, we saw failures in a whole range of areas and the Budget in

October didn't deliver on the promises that the Government made earlier in the year.



LEE: One of the biggest slaps in the faces for local vets is, of course, their Total and

Permanently Incapacitated pension that was on the drawing board for some time, and people

were getting their expectations raised. And then all of a sudden, you know, some bad news

came with only 10 per cent looking like they're going to get it.



NEUMANN: That's right. Before the last federal election, the Prime Minister announced that he

would ever review it, but with the expectation of increasing the amount of the Total and

Permanently Incapacitated pension. In fact, he raised expectations, so much so that during

Senate Estimates, the Secretary of the department just said that people had, effectively, a

compelling case, and were basically justified in feeling let down. So what happened was that

the Budget was handed down in October. What the Government did was say that people were

entitled to nothing in terms of increasing their pensions. But what happened was that they

announced in the Budget they'd provide some rental assistance to those TPI pensioners who

actually rent premises. Initially they thought it was going to be 20 per cent of the TPI

pensioners. In fact out, it's 10 per cent. And what happened is that they said it'll take over two

years before any benefits flow, because they had to identify which veterans were eligible, and

make changes to legislation and had to put in some IT system reforms. So having raised

expectations before the election, they broke their promise, and now it's on the never never,

way past the next election. It's not good enough.



LEE: I mean, even when you look at the basic entitlements of our Defence Force personnel, I

mean, some are waiting two or three months to even get a glimmer of hope or getting their

payments.



NEUMANN: It’s another reason why we have Senate Estimates because what happens is that

people who are departmental officials are at the end of the question. We know that 42 per cent

of the Department of Veterans’ Affairs has been outsourced, labour hired or privatised. And we

know that for a fact because of Senate Estimates. And it's not the first time. It’s been

happening for years and it’s getting worse. But what that means is that veterans are now

waiting for two to three months just to have some initial liability claims looked at. And when we

do a mobile office in my electorate of Blair, as a Federal MP, we know when veterans contact

me, or indeed send me an email, or have a conversation with me in a shopping centre, that

they can wait up to six months or longer to receive payments. It's simply not good enough.



LEE: And of course, Shayne, if that happened in the commercial world, you would have so

many authorities coming down on top of you for not doing the right thing by your employees.



NEUMANN: If you go into liquidation for a start, you'd have Fair Work or the trustees in

bankruptcy on to you. You can imagine if you didn't pay wages or do the right thing. It’s simply

hopeless. And it's just, you know, we already saw a Productivity Commission report released in

the middle of 2019. And the government hasn't responded to any more than 25 of 69

recommendations and it took them to October last year to rule out any changes to the Gold

Card for veterans. So having raised expectations before the last election, the Government has

since gone about demolishing those expectations and dashing them. It's really quite tragic the

way the Government's played politics with veterans.



LEE: And it's a slap in the face of those that go out there and valiantly defend our country. And

of course, Ipswich is a defence town so, you know, we certainly have so many vets who are

living in Ipswich who are really struggling without these payments.



NEUMANN: That's right. And government failure on delivery means people's lifestyles and

livelihoods are suffering. And we've seen that in a very difficult time. And you know what, that's

bad for business. We saw that the changes that took place in January on JobSeeker, which is

the new name for Newstart, or what anecdotally a lot of people call the dole, when it's been cut

from $250 to $150 in terms of fortnightly payments. We're going to go back in March 2021 to

the old $40 a day. That's not enough for people to live on. And then for 1.6 million Australians,

there are cuts to JobKeeper. How is that good for local businesses, let alone employees, if

they get a reduction in wages?



LEE: Well, that's the thing mate. And I mean, employers are now going to look at what they

can actually afford, and starting to make some pretty rash decisions without this full amount of

the JobKeeper coming in.



NEUMANN: And less and less money in their pockets means less money being spent in clubs,

in supermarkets, retail outlets, and on recreational pursuits. That's bad for our local economy

as well. The other thing about that was at the end of last year, right at the death, after the

Government had been negotiating with the unions and employers for months, there was a last

minute change by the Government in an announcement of their legislation that they would be

getting rid of the ‘Better Off Overall Test’ in enterprise bargaining, which meant that people

would be much worse off. Cleaners, retail workers, truck drivers, childcare workers, aged care

workers, many of whom have put their lives at risk in getting Australia through the COVID-19

pandemic. What we're seeing is some nasty IR changes, which will mean people will lose their

take home pay. It’s simply not good enough.





LEE: Well mate, I know when you're next in Canberra, you certainly will be raising this with the

Government and really appreciate you valiantly looking after our defence personnel especially.



NEUMANN: Good on you. Good to talk to you Damo. See you mate.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT:  CHRIS CONDON 0422 018 616





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













