

JIM CHALMERS MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR RANKIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RADIO BRISBANE DRIVE  MONDAY, 1 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECT/S: Western Australian MPs and Senators in quarantine; Lack of national  leadership on quarantine; State borders; JobKeeper cuts to struggling sectors;  Patchy economic recovery; Two million Australians unemployed or underemployed;  industrial relations changes, job security and wages; Return of federal parliament.

STEVE AUSTIN, HOST: Prime Minister Scott Morrison has given his first major speech of  2021. The first federal parliamentary sitting days have been thrown into confusion by the  case of coronavirus in Perth, with Western Australian politicians arriving in Canberra  instructed to immediately quarantine and get tested. Now they're all flying back there, Jim  Chalmers is from Queensland, Jim’s the Labor member for Rankin on the south side of  Brisbane, he’s the Shadow Treasurer. Jim Chalmers, is it really chaos with the West  Australian MPs told to quarantine and get tested?

JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: G’day Steve, well some of my favourite  colleagues are from WA, so we'll miss them for the time that they'll be locked away, but it's  important, obviously that they follow that advice. They took off from Perth thinking all was  well and by the time they've landed they’ve got the news. And so they're off to get tested  and make themselves scarce for a bit.

AUSTIN: Where do the politicians stay, what hotel at Canberra do they stay at?

CHALMERS:  I think it's a mixed bag. I think some people rent rooms, some people have  got their own place, some people are in the hotels. So it's a bit of a mix, but I think the big  challenge is for people who share, if they’re going to quarantine they need to be on their  own obviously.

AUSTIN: Do you share an apartment with anyone in Canberra?

CHALMERS:  Not me, Steve. I'm too messy to do that. I’ve left my share house days in my  20s where they belong. So I'm on my own.

AUSTIN: Should there be a nationally agreed lockdown framework between all the States  and the Territories, where if something like what's happened in WA occurs, or something  like what happened here in Queensland where we did the snap three-day lockdown, that it's

an agreed national position, so that everyone in the Federation is singing from the same  song sheet.

CHALMERS: I think there should be some national guidance and some national  leadership. I think different states are getting different kind of advice about the type of virus  that’s detected and where it's detected and all of that. So there probably needs to be a little  bit of flexibility. I think where the big need for a national system is, and some national  leadership, is actually in the quarantine arrangements. Scott Morrison got a review done  last year by a woman called Jane Halton who made all kinds of recommendations about a  national scheme of quarantine but for some reason, which genuinely escapes me, the  Prime Minister hasn't come at that. So what happens is, when something goes wrong in  quarantine, you get the PM and others from the government pointing fingers when what we  really need to see is a bit of national leadership.

AUSTIN: But he can't do anything about it because it's a Federation, the states control their  own borders.

CHALMERS: No, I’ve gotta pull you up there, Steve. I mean, obviously there is state /  federal overlap in some issues, but there is absolutely no question that quarantine is a  federal responsibility. Since the earliest days of Federation that's been the case.

AUSTIN: I know international is, but intrastate?

CHALMERS: That’s the way it’s always been. And the Prime Minister seemed to accept  that when he commissioned the review, but he’s washed his hands of it a bit. I know you  don’t like me going too partisan in these conversations…

AUSTIN: No, no. You do what you have to do, Mr Chalmers!

CHALMERS: … well, I’ve gotta say, if quarantine was going well, Morrison would be all  over it. He’d have his mug in every photo, he’d be in front of every camera, he’d be claiming  credit, but because there's been a couple of issues in quarantine, he’s nowhere to be  found. I think he’s got form in that regard. You know, if it goes well, he claims it. If it’s not  going perfectly, he blames the states. And I think people are crying out for a bit of national  leadership and they’re not getting it.

AUSTIN: Okay, well let me reframe my question then, Jim Chalmers. Do you think all the  States and Territories would ever agree to one national framework? Because you recall  Jim, that here in Queensland, the Queensland Premier for some reason did opinion polling  on border lockdowns, that’s not a scientific position, that's a political position?

CHALMERS: I think anyone who concludes that what Anastasia Palaszczuk did wasn't  based on medical advice is wrong.

AUSTIN: Do you think all States and Territories would ever agree though to one national  framework?

CHALMERS: I think they'd agree to a framework which gave them a little bit of flexibility to  make decisions based on the advice that their state chief medical officers were giving them.  And I don't think we're necessarily that far off there. The big gap, as I said, is in the national  system and national leadership, I think is on the quarantine front rather than the border

issues. You think about it, different states have got different exposures at the border. In our  case, we've got a big population centre either side of the Queensland / New South Wales  border, that's not the case for South Australia's borders, for example. So probably a little bit  of flexibility, but where there is a big need for leadership is on quarantine.

AUSTIN: Federal Labor’s Jim Chalmers is my guest, Shadow Treasurer, and the federal  Member for Rankin. It's 20 minutes to five, this is ABC Radio Brisbane. The Prime Minister  at today's Press Club address said, quote, ‘you can't run the Australian economy on  taxpayers money, forever’, unquote. JobKeeker looks like it's going to end in March, do you  disagree with his statement that you can't run the economy on taxpayer money forever?

CHALMERS: I don't, Steve, but to argue that any of us are saying that JobKeeper should  go on forever, that it should be a permanent feature of the Budget, is just one of those kind  of straw men that he puts up from time to time. Nobody in my team is saying that  JobKeeper should be there years down the track. The point that we've made is it should be  responsive to what's going on in the economy. I spend a lot of time in regional Queensland  as you know Steve, and there's some parts like Cairns, exposed to the closure of the  international border. Towns like Cairns are on JobKeeper life support the government  shouldn't be pulling the plug. That's the first point I'd make. The second point I'd make  about that speech, he had all the usual kind of rhetoric around blank cheques and all the  rest of it, but he says, look, there's no money to support businesses or workers which are  struggling in places like Cairns, in terms of JobKeeper, but he's found a billion dollars in  government advertising, he’s spent money on market research, and executive bonuses,  and sports rorts, and dodgy land deals. So I think when people hear him say these sorts of  things as he did in his speech today, full of slogans, they scratch their head a bit because  they think okay well you say there's no money but you seem to find a lot of money to  advertise how good you’re going, or you seem to find a lot of money for executive bonuses  in Sydney and the like. And all we've said is, let's prioritise money going where it's needed  most. We know that we're in debt, there's a trillion dollars of debt in the Budget, let's make  sure we're getting value for money out of that, not just spraying it around in ways that don't  help people find meaningful work,

AUSTIN: In his speech he said that more than 90% of the jobs lost during the pandemic  were already back, and the nation's comeback was gathering pace. Do you agree with that  90% figure, that 90% of the jobs lost already ‘back’, quote, unquote?

CHALMERS:  Well, clearly, some of the jobs have come back Steve, because when you're  coming out of the worst recession in almost 100 years, when you're coming out of some of  the more drastic restrictions at the state level, particularly in Victoria, then clearly the  economy's going to recover. And to the extent that that creates jobs and opportunities, we  welcome that. We've said that all along, but the reality is, once you acknowledge that the  economy is recovering, you also need to acknowledge things are still tough for those two  million Australians, in the government's rush to congratulate itself, at a time when a lot of  people are still doing it tough, this pandemic has not all of a sudden disappeared. How we  manage this is heavily dependent on whether or not the government can roll out the  vaccine as fast as they said they what, is dependent on a whole bunch of other factors. So  don't just pretend that all of our woes will be over in the last week of March, when they  intend to cut JobKeeper. but be smart about it, tailor that economic support to what's  actually going on in the economy, not what you hope is going on in the economy.

AUSTIN: Sixteen to five, this is ABC Radio, 612 on the AM band, streaming online via

digital radio, via the ABC Listen app on your smartphone and channel 25 on your TV. Jim  Chalmers is the Shadow Treasurer for federal Labor and the federal Member for Rankin  here in Queensland. He’s speaking with me from Canberra Parliament House. Do you  agree that the nation's economic comeback is gathering pace, Jim Chalmers?

CHALMERS: I think yes and inevitably that's the case, for the reason I just mentioned. In  the course of last year we had the worst economic figures that we've had since the Great  Depression. And how these figures work is that inevitably there is a recovery from the  depths of that, we have been coming out of it and  that's a good thing. Some jobs have  come back, but not all the jobs have come back, still 1.6 million people relying on  JobKeeper, for example, plus those two million I mentioned a moment ago, and the  stagnant wages and all the rest of it. So there is a recovery of sorts, but it's not a  meaningful recovery if people are still left behind, if people can't, even if they are working  hard, if they can't get by and get ahead then it's not a meaningful recovery. A real recovery  is broad, it's inclusive, people who work hard cannot just provide day to day for their  families, but put something away for holidays. My fear is the government gets carried away  with its own rhetoric and they're in such a rush to congratulate themselves and pat  themselves on the back, that they forget that what really matters here is what's happening  in real communities, to real workers and real small businesses, in places like Cairns and  elsewhere. And I think we'd be doing them a disservice if we looked at some of these  aggregate numbers in the economy, some of which have been okay, some of which  haven't, and conclude that everybody's all of a sudden fine, when that's obviously not the  case.

AUSTIN: A listener, Kevin, wants to know where you're getting your claim of two million  unemployed Australians from?

CHALMERS: Well, Kevin, it's the ABS figures. We’re saying two million is a combination of  people who can't find work - which is just under a million - plus the just over a million who  are underemployed, who don't have enough hours at work.

AUSTIN: So that's the unemployment rate and the underemployment rate?

CHALMERS: Correct. That's about two million people. In my view, people say to me,  ‘what's the defining feature of the economy?’, I think that's really that combination of job  insecurity, underemployment, stagnant wages, and how that flows through to living  standards. I think if you could focus on one sort of cluster of numbers, and data, and the  economy, that's what people should focus, on rather than some of these headline figures  around GDP and the rest of it.

AUSTIN: What does the week ahead hold now that the federal parliament has returned,  Jim Chalmers?

CHALMERS: There's a fair bit going on at the moment. You alluded to the Prime Minister's  speech today, even in that speech there were a lot of issues. Obviously, climate change  and energy policy. There's some issues around media reform that you and I have spoken  about before. Our priorities are obviously those issues I just mentioned, things like wages.  The government has its industrial relations legislation coming before us which, if you can  believe it, sees an economy where wages are historically stagnant and makes it actually  easier for people to get a wage cut, and makes their jobs less secure. So, there's lots of  really important issues. I know that your listeners sometimes think that parliament’s a bit of



a waste of time, but in weeks like this, when we are talking about fundamental issues like  wages, and super, and all of these sorts of things, then you can see why that kind of clash  of armies here in Canberra can be so important

AUSTIN: Jim Chalmers, thanks for your time.

CHALMERS: Thank you, Steve.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT:  BRETT MASON 0419 239 811











