

TRANSCRIPT  Senator James Paterson  Liberal Senator for Victoria



Monday 08 February 2021

Sky News: News Agenda

Subjects: Labor’s ‘fiscal responsibility’, Daru city proposal



Tom Connell: Let's get to our political panel, liberal Senator James Paterson and the  Labor Party, Kimberley  Kitching. Thanks both for your time. I might start with shadow  cabinet rumblings if  I can. Senator Kitching, interesting to hear from  out of  this. Anthony   Albanese wants offsets savings in terms of  any  new spending. So it's about economic   credentials for Labor and budget credentials. Is that the right focus in a pandemic?

Senator Kimberley Kitching: Well, hi, Tom, and hi, James. Could I just start, Tom, with  congratulating James on becoming the chair of  the Parliamentary  Joint Committee on  Intelligence and Security. He's the latest in a long line of very good chairs of that  committee. And obviously  that committee is above politics. But I wanted to say  I think  I'm   not really  surprised by  the contents of  what's been leaked in Rob Harris's story  this  morning. Labor has always been a fiscally  responsible party. And I think, you know, from  Paul Keating onward saying that, you know, the Australian economy  is not a magic   pudding from  statements such as, you know, that government should be the lightest  burden it can be on working Australians. But I think  we have the historical record shows  that, in fact, the Labor Party  is has been the most fiscally  responsible party. We've run  lower deficits. We've spent less money  as a proportion of  the economy  than the coalition  has.  And  while  I  think  the  coalition  talks a good day, a good, good game, I don't think  that  they  can really  claim  to be the most fiscally  responsible party. But of  course, now, I guess.

Connell: Right now in a pandemic, is that what voters want to hear? Make some savings.

Kitching: Well, I think  that I actually  think  Australian taxpayers want government to be  absolutely  responsible with their money  and it is their money. So when we see blow outs,  this government is going to have a record trillion dollar debt that's, you know, that's coming  up with half  a trillion dollars in 2019. And obviously, you know, there's been spending  stimulus packages. But I think  that what Australian taxpayers want is a government that's  responsible  and everyone knows that it'll be their grandchildren who'll be paying down the  debt.

Connell: James Paterson, you've got some glowing praise and a fiscally  responsible  Labor Party. You disagree with much of  that. Can you?

Senator James Paterson: Well  it's a good start, Tom. I saw Anthony  Albanese say  at his  press conference today  that he will make no apologies for being fiscally  responsible. That's  like saying you'll make no apologies for being in favour of  motherhood and apple pie. The  test,  of  course,  comes to actually  being fiscally  responsible rather than just saying you're  going to be fiscally  responsible. And in some previous election campaigns, the Labor Party   has taken tax  increases as so-called savings measures. A tax  increase is not a savings  measure. And if  they're planning on doing that in this economic  climate that would be very   damaging as you say. But we'll wait and see what comes.

Connell: What about what the coalition says versus what it does. Debt doubled on your  watch before covid?

Paterson: Well, Tom, as you know, we inherited a very  challenging fiscal trajectory  from   the previous government. They'd baked in a lot of  spending with legislative measures that  the Senate then blocked us from  undoing in any  way, shape or form. So it's been much  more challenging to get the budget back  into shape than we would have liked it to be. But  we have made really  good progress and we delivered a balanced budget for the first time  in many  years just before the crisis hit. Now, it's obviously  going to take a long time to get  back  to that, but it's going to require all shoulders to the wheel. So I welcome the Labor  Party's commitment today  to participating in that. I look  forward to them  being positive and  proactive in the Senate chamber in particular and supporting fiscal responsibility.

Connell: It might be a while before the back  in black  mugs can actually  be used. Just very   short on time and can get both of  your views. First of  all, you Kimberley. This city  of  Daru  that a Chinese company  is looking at tipping almost 40 billion dollars into its as close to  Australian territory  as you could get in PNG. What do you make of  this move?

Kitching: Well, look, I'm  actually  not in favour of  a Chinese company  leasing the Port of   Darwin. So my  views on the city of Daru are equally with you know, with that view, I like to  be consistent, but I do think  the Australian government needs to ensure that we do  continue to have a good relationship with Papua New Guinea. Obviously, we have  historically  very  close ties from  the Second World War, for example. But we've also done a  lot of  a lot of  good work  with our PNG neighbours. So we want to be a friend. And I think   Australia has been a friend to lots of  countries in our region rather than just being a  country that writes big cheques that come with many  unfortunate conditions.

Connell: Do you see this as a provocative move, James, on behalf  of  the Chinese  government?

Paterson: Well, unlike some other countries, Tom, Australia respects the sovereignty  of   our neighbours and encourages their development and all that we do is seek  to ensure  that it occurs in a sustainable way, in an ethical way, in a legal way. And Prime Minister  Morrison and Prime Minister Marape have a very  strong personal relationship and work   very closely  together on these issues of  regional security  and stability. And I'm  sure we'll  be providing whatever assistance the PNG government needs to help them  navigate  issues like this. All I can say  at this stage is that it does look  like it's fairly  speculative

proposal. The PNG government themselves have said they  have not received any  formal  proposal, and I'm  sure we'll work  closely  with them  on navigating it.

Connell: We'll have longer next time, I promise. We'll call it time management on my   behalf. Senators, thank you both for your time. Talk again soon.

ENDS



