



The Hon Ken Wyatt AM, MP

Minister for Indigenous Australians  Member for Hasluck

MEDIA RELEASE

18 March 2021

INAUGURAL MEETING OF THE NEW NATIONAL INDIGENOUS TOURISM ADVISORY  GROUP

Minister for Indigenous Australians, the Hon Ken Wyatt AM, MP, yesterday launched the first  meeting of the National Indigenous Tourism Advisory Group (NITAG) and welcomed the  members that will ensure the $40 million Indigenous Tourism Fund is Indigenous led.

The Indigenous Tourism Fund is a comprehensive package of business support and grants,  designed in consultation with Indigenous tourism businesses to support the growth of the  sector.

Minister Wyatt said the NITAG will play an important role ensuring there is an Indigenous  perspective in the implementation of the fund and advise the Government on future priorities  for Indigenous tourism.

“After a difficult year, Indigenous tourism markets are growing and the Australian  Government is committed to investing strategically to meet the current and emerging needs  of the sector,” Minister Wyatt said.

“This new Advisory Group will provide advice on the development of national tourism  priorities and strategies and ensure Indigenous tourism is well placed to recover from the  COVID-19 pandemic and remain sustainable into the longer term.

“I’m excited about the calibre of the seven NITAG members who bring a significant depth  and breadth of experience in tourism and other fields.

“Their knowledge, expertise and passion will ensure the Indigenous Tourism Fund delivers a  wide range of benefits to businesses and operators that offer world-class tourist  experiences.”

NITAG is chaired by Professor Deen Sanders OAM (Worimi, New South Wales), an Ethics  and Professionalism leader for the Deloitte Governance, Regulation and Conduct group.  Professor Sanders leads the Indigenous Strategy and Truth and Reconciliation Action Plan  for Deloitte.

The Deputy Chair is Helen Martin (Arrentte, Northern Territory), Managing Director and co-founder of the Banubanu Beach Retreat. Ms Martin has been working in the tourism industry  for more than 15 years, and holds many representative roles including Commissioner on the  Tourism NT Board and Chair of the NT Aboriginal Tourism Committee.

The other members include Mr Tony Coppins, Director of Kangaroo Island Ocean Safari and  Totem WiFi; Ms Rhonda Appo, the Indigenous Program Manager at the Queensland  Tourism Industry Council; Ms Jirra Harvey, founder and Director of Kalinya Communications;

Mr Andrew Smith, CEO of Sand Dune Adventures; and Mr Robert Taylor, CEO of the  Western Australian Indigenous Tourism Operators Council.

For more information on the Indigenous Tourism Fund, visit www.niaa.gov.au/ITF



Media contact: Lisa Hugg, A/g Senior Media Adviser, 0438 231 687

Authorised by Ken Wyatt AM, MP, Member for Hasluck.

