SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE  Minister for Foreign Affairs  Minister for Women  Acting Minister for Defence

SENATOR THE HON ZED SESELJA  Minister for International Development and the Pacific

MEDIA RELEASE

AUSTRALIA’S PARTNERSHIP WITH COVAX DELIVERS VACCINES  TO OUR NEIGHBOURS

The COVAX Facility has started rolling out the first round of doses of safe and effective  COVID-19 vaccines to Australia’s Pacific and Southeast Asian neighbours.

The COVAX Facility, a global vaccine sharing initiative, has allocated an initial 1 million  doses to the Pacific and 25 million to Southeast Asia. Delivery of doses has commenced,  with Fiji, Cambodia, Indonesia and Philippines so far receiving vaccines. Other eligible  countries are expected to receive initial doses by April 2021.

There is no higher priority for Australia and countries in our region than access to safe and  effective COVID-19 vaccines. The Australian Government is committed to working together  with our neighbours to save lives, help economies reopen and ensure our region’s stability.

Further COVAX Facility allocations will be announced later this year to ensure all eligible  developing countries have sufficient doses to vaccinate up to 20 per cent of their populations  by the end of 2021.

The COVAX Facility aims to ensure equitable access to COVID-19 vaccines. These doses  will be delivered to partners in our region in parallel with the rollout of vaccines in Australia.  In this pandemic, no one is safe until everyone is.

The COVAX Facility is a unique global collaboration that pools technology risk and  purchasing power to maximise the availability of a diverse range of COVID-19  vaccines across the globe.

The Facility is co-led by the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI),  Gavi and the World Health Organization, alongside key delivery partner UNICEF.

Australia has contributed $80 million to the Facility to ensure healthcare workers and  vulnerable groups in our region and beyond have timely access to vaccines.

Date received: 15 March 2021



Australia’s support complements our $523.2 million COVID-19 Vaccine Access and Health  Security Initiative for the Pacific and Southeast Asia.

Media Contact  David Wroe: +61 429 531 143  Melanie Ruiz: +61 427 888 392  Cassandra Choake: 0427 839 164

