

LINDA BURNEY MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FAMILIES AND SOCIAL SERVICES  MEMBER FOR BARTON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT CANBERRA, CANBERRA  TUESDAY, 23 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: JobSeeker; Sexual harassment in the Parliament.

LINDA BURNEY: [RECORDING STARTS] … the legislation as carefully as we need to. I  want to see what the mutual obligation issues are. I want to see whether it's a permanent  increase or a temporary increase. Obviously want to see what the amount is, and whether  or not there's going to be legislation, which will have to be introduced, because we know on  the 31st of March, the cliff happens when JobSeeker and JobKeeper, both finish. So there  is a long way to go with this particular issue. And Labor will be looking closely at what the  legislation and what's involved in the government's announcements today.

JOURNALIST: Are you concerned that the mutual obligation changes will be too onerous  for people?

BURNEY: One of the things that I'm going to be very studious about is in fact, what the  mutual obligation requirements - we’ve only heard news reports, there is nothing solid in  front of us to look at, at the moment. And that's what's important.

JOURNALIST: How much would you like to see it rise by? We've been hearing, maybe it's  going to go $40 - 50? Is that going to be enough?

BURNEY: Look, Labor has not determined an amount. And I will not be pushed into  naming an amount today. What's important is to look at what the Government announces.  What's important is to look at the mutual obligation requirements that the government puts  around, if any additional ones - I want to carefully look at whether they've bundled the  present supplements into the new amount that they're supposedly announcing today.

JOURNALIST: I was going to ask as well, it looks like the government's ditching the idea of  having an all in one payment. Were you concerned that that idea to have everything in one  payment was designed to make it look like the payment had gone up by more than it  actually had?

BURNEY: Well, I'm not surprised at anything this government does. We've analysed  carefully what the supplements are. There is only one supplement that everyone gets, and

that’s the energy supplement. Some people get Rent Assistance, but in the main, the  supplement go to a very small amount of people. And they are very small amounts. I think it  was a bit of a sleight of hand, the government threw that red herring up in the air to see  how people respond. The important thing for Labor today is to take this calmly. Look at the  detail of what the government announces and have the appropriate discussions that we  need to have to come to a firm arrangement.

JOURNALIST: But is it adequate to have a one size fits all? And there are so many  regional variations and living costs.

BURNEY: There are a lot of regional variations and living costs. I don't think the  government’s talking about having different amounts for regions and cities. That would be  extremely challenging. Look, the social security system is complex. It's - it involves lots of  payments, it means different things to different people. And unless you truly understand the  social security system, it's hard to understand some arbitrary amount the government will  have announced today.

JOURNALIST: Last year the government rolled a number of benefits into the one  JobSeeker which people forgot that happened, which then along came COVID. With all the  other changes which happened with benefits. There does seem to be a bit of sleight of  hand with meshing everything together. But are you also concerned that if they do  announce plans for an increase, there will certainly be plans to announce a plan for change  in the budget.

BURNEY: I am waiting to see what the budget - sorry, I am waiting to see what the  government actually announces today. I don't think it helps to speculate. I want to see firmly  what they announced whether it's a permanent increase, whether it's an extension of the  present Coronavirus supplement. I want to see whether or not they've included the other  payments into this amount. And what to see what the increase is, whether it's permanent,  whether it's not permanent. And most importantly, I want to see what they do in the budget  which is not very far away. And that will give us a good indication of what the government's  intentions are.

JOURNALIST: Just on another issue, now for women have come forward about this Liberal  staffer alleging sexual assault. One of those women told the ABC yesterday that at the time  of the incident, she was so used to sexual harassment, she just brushed it off that culture in  the workplace and parliament was so bad. Does that surprise you?

BURNEY: That response from that young woman doesn't surprise me. What is clear with  this issue, and the government, I believe is going to announce today who's going to head  up the independent inquiry, I would like to see more consultation with Labor from the  government, about the inquiries, in particular the independent inquiry. But what is clear is  that there needs to be structural change within the parliament, that is going to be critical. So  that people understand that there is a clear path for making complaints and resolving those  conflicts.

Thank you.

ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: DARYL TAN 0422 028 222





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.







