



SENATOR THE HON SIMON BIRMINGHAM  Minister for Finance  Leader of the Government in the Senate  Senator for South Australia



TRANSCRIPT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  Interview on Sky News Live, AM Agenda with Laura Jayes  Topics:   AstraZeneca vaccine; vaccine rollout; reopening borders; Parliament House workplace conduct  09/04/2021  09:20AM



Laura Jayes:  To the Finance Minister, Simon Birmingham. Simon Birmingham, we sit here this morning

with more uncertainty over the vaccine. Is there some stuff up from government along the way here?



Simon Birmingham: No, there's not. Laura, this is a deeply, deeply disappointing circumstance that has

evolved around the AstraZeneca vaccine, but it's one that is beyond anybody's control. Frankly, it's quite

pathetic to be hearing Anthony Albanese there behaving like he's some sort of giant Nostradamus type

figure who can see into the future and predict what will happen. The truth is that our government at every

stage over the last 12 months has taken the advice of health experts, that we closed the nation's borders

to keep Australia secure, that we undertook different steps in terms of the way in which social isolation

occurred, social distancing occurred, in making sure that testing, tracing arrangements were put in place

to keep Australians safe. When it comes to the vaccines, we're taking all the steps to keep Australians

safe as well. Now, if we had followed Anthony Albanese and the Labor Party's advice and rushed the

health approvals through and sought to undertake the vaccine rollout in some sort of extraordinarily rapid

rate, then we would have had many more Australians potentially face consequences of the knowledge

we've now found out about through the health advice, through international experience. Australia's

vaccine rollout is underpinned by the fact that we do have, contrary to the lies the Labor Party are telling,

multiple contracts in place to be able to secure tens of millions of other doses of other vaccines. And

that's why all along we took the approach indeed of pursuing multiple vaccines, multiple contracts. Yes,

we acknowledge this is very disappointing, but we now get on and recalibrate the programme and do so

in a way that keeps Australians as safe as possible.



Laura Jayes: Well, where are those vaccines? Where are those contracted vaccines? We have a million

of Pfizer and Novavax is not going to arrive till later this year. And now the sovereign capability of

AstraZeneca that has been so touted by the Prime Minister is not going to be used for the bulk of

Australia. Now, it can't be used for two thirds of adults that are under the age of 50. We should have

hedged a bets more back in January when we knew of the supply issue, shouldn't we?



Simon Birmingham: We have always been hedging our bets that is why we pursued the multiple

different contracts. But there's no doubting the fact that across the globe we have a circumstance where

there's huge demand for vaccines. Vaccine manufacturers have not unreasonably prioritised countries

that have major health crises. And to Australia's credit, we do not have a major health crisis. If you look at

us alongside comparable countries who have done well in terms of managing COVID, our vaccine rollout

has been progressing faster than in New Zealand, than in Japan, than in South Korea. Yes, it's all very

well to go and compare us against countries like the US or the UK or parts of Europe. You know what?

Many thousands of people have died and are still dying of COVID-19 in those countries. So it's just not

comparing apples with apples.



Laura Jayes: Absolutely. That's a fair enough point. But we sit here. More than a year into the crisis, we

have not returned to normal. Small businesses every day live under the threat of being locked down. And

it happened just last week with two and a half million people in Brisbane. And then we hear that there's no

burning platform, there's no rush to roll out the vaccine. Well, those thousands of small businesses would

disagree, wouldn't you think?



Simon Birmingham: I understand indeed, there are many businesses who have faced very tough

consequences through the last year. But equally, that's why we've responded in ways that have sought to

support and assist them and have delivered once again world leading outcomes. The reason that

Australia can take cautious and careful approaches when it comes to keeping Australians safe around the

vaccine is because of our world leading approach to suppressing COVID the reason Australians jobs are

more secure than just about anywhere else in the world is equally because of our strong economic

response, evidenced this week by the IMF report, updating our growth forecast four and a half per cent,

evidenced by the fact that employment levels in Australia are back above where they were in March of

last year. These are extraordinary outcomes that we've managed to achieve through careful economic

management, careful health management, through all of it, keeping Australians safe and secure. And I

have to say, when I listen to Australians and their views around the vaccine rollout, the safety of it is the

prime consideration for the vast majority of Australians. And that's why we will continue absolutely to

pursue a vaccine rollout as aggressively as we can but without in any way compromising the safety of it.



Laura Jayes: Ok, well, let's get down to it, because you're a numbers man. We've got the budget coming

up and essentially people want to know about the economic side of this as they do the health side. So

how many people need to be vaccinated in Australia for us to open up the borders to us no longer to be

living under the threat of a lockdown?



Simon Birmingham: We have lived for more than a year now with the uncertainty of COVID-19, and that

uncertainty spills into the vaccines. And what we are still trying to assess in countries right around the

world or in the same position is understanding whatever the vaccine it is, whether it's AstraZeneca, Pfizer

or otherwise, how long the vaccine lasts for. To what extent it suppresses transmission. They're the types

of factors that we will have to assess in terms of when we can make that full decision to reopen and

completely return to normal. It's not just a question of what proportion of the Australian population do you

have to have vaccinated? And then tick, it's all done. There's a number of other questions that will still

take some period of time and would have still taken some period of time, even if we had not had this

setback with the AstraZeneca vaccine.



Laura Jayes: So you're asking every Australian to get the vaccine if the health advice says they should,

but you're not guaranteeing any extra freedom, so you can't guarantee no more lockdown's you can't

guarantee the international border will open.



Simon Birmingham: What we can guarantee is that from the evidence shown to date and the clear

analysis of our health experts and those overseas is that the vaccines prevent serious illness when

people contract COVID. Vaccines appear to also be significantly reducing the rate of transmission-



Laura Jayes: Great so when do the border reopen?



Simon Birmingham: -in other countries that have big COVID outbreaks. But what we need to know is

how long will the vaccines last for and just how effective is that prevention of the rate of transmission. I

understand the desire to desperately see the borders reopened, but the borders will reopen when all of

the health advice allows us to have confidence that we're not going to have a major COVID outbreak in

Australia when we'll go on to health and safety of Australians.



Laura Jayes: Is that likely to be this year, next year, perhaps the year after?



Simon Birmingham: Well, I doubt you will find a health expert around the world that will be able to

answer that question. And I'm not a health expert, so I'm not going to pretend to be able to jump right

ahead of those considerations. I, of course, really hope that we can see those borders reopen, and I'd

love to see them reopen for the early stages of next year. But whether all of the information in relation to

the extent to which the vaccines last for a long duration, prevent transmission, successfully, deal with any

variations of COVID arise and are occurring around the world. They're all questions we're going to have to

continue to take health advice on and we'll respond accordingly.



Laura Jayes: Let me ask you about the investigation in Parliament House to the staffers that conducted

sex acts, let's call them, in ministers offices? Where is that investigation up to? Has anyone else been

sacked?



Simon Birmingham: In relation to the second part of the question? No. The Department of Finance has

been working to put in place appropriate legal processes and arrangements that are at arm's length

politically to be able to receive information and evidence from the alleged whistleblower and from that to

be able to make decisions about precisely whether or not workplace standards have been breached. If

so, have they been breached by any employees still in the employment of the government? And if that's

occurred, then clearly action will be taken. We demonstrated that where there was clear evidence

published by the media initially where a staff member was identifiable where the acts were clearly a

breach of workplace standards. That person no longer works here. Now, it's not as clear cut in relation to

what's being published in the media. And so we need to make sure it's a proper process. The Department

of Finance are appointing investigators to be able to look at that and undertake that work.



Laura Jayes: So it's not six men as reported?



Simon Birmingham: I'm not going to prejudge based on simply allegations put through the media.

What's important here is that is that we have absolute confidence that if there is evidence, I assure you,

and the viewers that action will be taken, but the evidence has got to stand up and as anybody would

expect a due and proper process has got to be conducted to ensure that we don't end up in a situation of

dealing with unfair dismissal claims or other issues down the track.



Laura Jayes: So are we talking weeks or months until this is concluded?



Simon Birmingham: I hope these matters can all be dealt with in a period of weeks, but that will depend

very much on how the investigators uncover evidence or information in their discussions.



Laura Jayes: Finance Minister Simon Birmingham, thanks so much for your time this morning.



Simon Birmingham: Thanks, Laura. My pleasure.



[ENDS]



Media Contacts

Benn Ayre:  +61 428 342 325

Julia Ebbs:  +61 417 097 644





Authorised by Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham, South Australia.

