

KRISTY MCBAIN MP

MEMBER FOR EDEN-MONARO





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC AFTERNOON BRIEFING WITH PATRICIA KARVELAS

MONDAY, 8 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: 2050 climate target; detention of Cheng Lei; COVID-19 vaccine rollout.



PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: Time now for my political panel, Nationals Senator Matt

Canavan and Labour MP Kristy McBain both of them. Join me this afternoon. Welcome to both

of you. I want to start with you if I can Matt Canavan, Deputy Prime Minister Michael

McCormack has flagged the government might consider excluding agriculture from long term

climate change targets, given New Zealand's lead in exempting emissions from the industry,

would that satisfy you if that was the case?



MATT CANAVAN, SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND: Look, I don't think we should be signing

up to this mythical target in any case. I mean, we've got a much more pressing issues to deal

with in our own country and region right now. This target is 30 years away. The countries that

are most pushing this target themselves haven't even met their own Kyoto targets, which came

to last year. So I'm not sure how much they can be trusted. And you've got a situation where

China last year brought online over 30 gigawatts of coal fired power, which is more than the

whole coal fired power that we have installed in this country. It's just not real. So let's focus on

real things. And I find this a massive distraction.



KARVELAS: Kristy, Matt Canavan is saying that this is a major distraction, yet it seems the

government's inching its way towards this.



KRISTY MCBAIN, MEMBER FOR EDEN-MONARO: Yeah, that's right. I mean, we've had 22

energy and climate policies in the last eight years from this government. We don't have a

commitment to net zero by 2050. And now we've got some talk within the National Party, that

they want to exempt agriculture out of it, but they don't have a 2050 target. So it's, it's an

interesting conundrum, and obviously an issue between the Nationals and the Liberals.



KARVELAS: Yeah, Matt Canavan. It is clear that the Prime Minister wants to sign on to

something. I mean, he says he wants to get there by 2050. If he does decide to sign up, what

will you do?



CANAVAN: Well, I'm opposed to it. And I can't stop a government signing a piece of paper.

But as a Senator for Queensland, I'll make sure that all my votes in the parliament represent

their interests.



KARVELAS: So you'd cross the floor on this?



CANAVAN: Well, absolutely, I would if, if that was the in the best interest of Queensland. I

note my Nationals Senate colleagues in the past have done so. I remember Fiona Nash, and

Wacker Williams. And I think Barnaby was still in the Senate, then crossed the floor to stop

trees being planted on agricultural land a number of years ago, and that's one of my principal

concerns here, what happens under a net zero, target and Kristy didn't have a lot of details

there. And policy is not really fleshed out. But what happens is, people can still fly overseas for

the holidays, they just tick a box, and they plant some trees up where I live in Central

Queensland to offset their moral guilt about flying overseas.



So their net zero impact is not a net impact up here. The gross impacts up in regional Australia

where if a hectare is planted with trees, that's fewer jobs, the farm goes, there's not a longer

people at the sugar mill, there's no longer business for the local tyre shop or the petrol station.

That's the real world impact of this.



KARVELAS: That's the impact if you do nothing to replace those jobs. Right. And that's not

what either Scott Morrison or the Opposition are talking about? Well, you're talking about a

proposition which is just a withdrawal, not a replacement.



CANAVAN: I still want to see a farm in this country. And the facts are, the only reason we met

at Kyoto targets is not because of the efforts of people in Melbourne, or Sydney or Brisbane,

the only reason we met our Kyoto targets is because we stripped property rights from farmers

and stopped them developing their own land, we're now actually reducing the amount of land

under farming today, and I don't want to see that continue. I want to see it's developed the

north of our country.



So I want to see us produce more as a nation, not less, and this policy, net zero, Kyoto. All of

these policies have shut down production in this country and made us weaker for it.



KARVELAS: So, you say you would cross the floor on this if the government does want to sign

up to the 2050 net zero emission target. Are there other Nationals who would do the same?



CANAVAN: Oh, look, I can't speak for others



KARVELAS: You do speak to your colleagues all the time. Is that the sentiment in the

Nationals?



CANAVAN: Okay, and I'm not I'm not. I'm not about to divulge conversations I have with them

on national TV as much as you'd like me to Patricia, that's for them to reveal or otherwise, I'm

letting you know my views. But I know Yeah, just a year ago, Michael McCormack, the leader

of the Nationals came out very strongly said he was opposed to a net zero. target by 2050.



KARVELAS: If he secures the exclusion of agriculture from a potential target, that's not good

enough for you?



CANAVAN: I'm opposed to it holus-bolus because it would shut down coal mines, it would

shut down factories. It would shift our jobs over to China more. I mean, China's been stealing

our jobs for 20 years is they've been in the world trade organisation. This is just another way to

do that, because they're not going to cut their emissions and give me a break. They won't

adhere to a trade agreement we signed five years ago there's no way they're gonna adhere to

a climate agreement.



KARVELAS: Let me just ask Kristy McBain. Kristy McBain if I can put that to you, you know

taking agriculture out of the target like New Zealand, do you think that would be a reasonable

approach?



MCBAIN: Look it's reasonable to have the discussion and that's what we're doing in the Labor

Party - having discussions over it. It's clear that there's a split in the Liberal and National

parties over this.



And there has been for some time and I think the last leader that was toppled on this was

obviously Malcolm Turnbull during that those climate wars but, you know, right across the

Eden-Monaro electorate, we've got a whole bunch of agriculture, we've got on farm and ocean

farming, and I can tell you that farmers stand ready to make some changes, they want to see

more investment in the CSIRO, they want to know what the future of farming is. They've had to

change practices over and over and over again, to deal with the things that are being thrown at

them.



So farmers are ready to play their part in this, the National Farmers Federation has committed

to net zero by 2050. So I think that there is a discussion to be had. And it's not about ceasing

anything. It's about what we do now and what we do differently. That's the important

discussion we should be having.



KARVELAS: Just on today's sad story in relation to Australian journalist Cheng Lei, I want to

start with you, Matt Canavan, what do you make of the arrest of the Australian journalist now?



CANAVAN: Well, it's very concerning. It's concerning when any journalist, particularly an

Australian, -  held on charges which don't seem to have a lot of evidence behind them. It

reminds me of the Peter Greste situation years ago, eventually, we were able to achieve his

release and hopefully here, we'll be able to do the same in Ms Lei's situation.



With that in mind, I don't want to add much more commentary to the specific situation but you

know, it is another unfortunate example of the deterioration of relationship between our two

countries, Marise Payne has certainly expressed concerns in this case, and the Australian

Government is doing everything we can to help Ms Lei and let her let her fair trial and hopefully

freedom at some point.



KARVELAS: Alexander Downer was on the program earlier and he called it hostage

diplomacy. Is that how you say it to Matt Canavan?



CANAVAN: Look, I don't have enough information in this case. It's not the first time an

Australian has been detained in China. And that's been going on for some years, even well

before we've had perhaps a more difficult relationship between the two national governments.



So I want to add speculation to this case except to say that, you know, we are going through a

tough time between our two countries. I do think the Australian Government has had a

consistent position on matters regarding Chinese investment, and any foreign involvement in

our politics, I think it's a position held by the Australian Labor Party as well and we've just got

to put forward at that position as consistently as possible and we can't control what other

nations do.



KARVELAS: Kristy McBain isn't hostage diplomacy concerned about this case.



MCBAIN: Look, it's obviously concerning that we've got another journalist being held in

another country and you know, Marise Payne is following those diplomacy channels at the

moment to have those discussions. But I agree with Matt, anytime that we have a citizen held

by another country it's concerning and, we'll leave it up to the diplomats to sort our way

through that situation.



KARVELAS: Let's just end on the COVID vaccination that, of course, is being rolled out Matt

Canavan, are you going to get the Coronavirus vaccine, if you can?



CANAVAN: Yeah, I will. I think there's enough evidence now from overseas, that it's safe to

take it obviously this vaccine is being produced quickly. But I'm sure it's been produced with

enormous resources behind it. And we've of course, had at least one vaccine approved here in

Australia.



So look, I'm comfortable with our approval processes. They've been diligent and gone through.

And look, hopefully now we'll just get on with it and get this out there as soon as we can. It's

got to be a very challenging task thought, we've had time to prepare. But there have been

difficulties in other countries. And I'm sure like anything in life like any venture, there'll be

difficulties and hurdles for us in the next few months.



KARVELAS: I wonder, Kristy, do you support the rollout of the vaccination certificates? The

idea of being able to get a special certificate to travel?





MCBAIN: Yeah, I think it's really important. I mean, so much of Eden-Monaro relies on tourism

and our local communities need some certainty, so I am very much behind the idea and behind

the rollout and when it is my turn and I know I'm not at the front of the queue, I'll definitely take

my jab to make sure that our local economies and our local communities can continue to

function.



KARVELAS: Thanks to both of you.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: IAN CAMPBELL 0417 482 171



