



TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2GB DRIVE WITH JIM WILSON

TUESDAY, 16 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Vaccine roll out; alleged assault at Parliament; IR reforms; Bringing

stranded Australians home.



JIM WILSON HOST: Joining me now as she does every Tuesday, Labor heavy hitter Tanya

Plibersek. Hi Tanya.



TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION & SHADOW MINISTER FOR

WOMEN: Hi Jim. How are you?



WILSON: You’re live from Parliament House. Always good to chat. Great news about the

AstraZeneca vaccine. Let's start with that, it's been approved for use here in Australia. The

Pfizer vaccine is set to be rolled out by next Monday, things are moving pretty quickly now.



PLIBERSEK: I just can't wait for this vaccination program to start. The sooner it starts, the

sooner we get jabs in people's arms, the sooner things get back to something more like normal

we can open up our businesses, open up our borders, and get on with life.



I think there are still some unanswered questions about this. I don't know when you're going to

get vaccinated or when I'm going to get vaccinated. There's not much information about this

online booking system, and when the states are going to get their share of the vaccines to

distribute. So I'd like to get some answers to that pretty quickly. But yes, big tick, like bring it

on. I'll be rolling up my sleeve.



WILSON: Once the first jab is done it's going be interesting to see if that second jab happens

with that within that 21-day period, that's the question. Greg Hunt said to me on the program

yesterday that he was adamant that would be the case. Let's wait and see if that happens

because in the UK, it's certainly been months.



PLIBERSEK: A lot of these countries have gone way ahead of us in terms of getting jabs into

arms. We've seen 78 countries at least have given out more than a 176 million doses to their

citizens- that’s one of the recent figures I saw. So I'd like to see us moving along as quickly as

it's safe to do so. We have heard from the Government that the whole of the population's

supposed to be vaccinated by October. Unless we get on with it that's really not going to be the

case.



WILSON: Now you're the Shadow Minister for Women. You must have been deeply shocked

by these terrible allegations of a sexual assault in the halls of Parliament House.



PLIBERSEK: I was sickened by it really. It is just such a horrendous thing to think a young

woman member of staff wouldn't be safe in any workplace. But particularly in the heart of our

democracy where every Australian citizen is supposed to be respected and valued and safe,

it's a horrendous thing. What really troubles me about it is that it seems like there's been no

serious action on this for the two years since it's happened from the Government. They're now

talking about an inquiry into workplace safety and culture here. That's an important first step. I

wish it hadn't taken so long.



WILSON: How long is it culture been a problem in Parliament House?



PLIBERSEK: I think you could say how long has this culture been a problem in any Australian

workplace? Every person in every workplace in Australia should be safe. Parliament House

particularly should be a model workplace because if it's not happening for our staff then how

can we pretend that it's happening for the millions of Australian workers who face similar

issues.



I'm not saying sexual assault is happening in every Australian workplace. This is a particularly

serious, particularly bad event, but sexual harassment is happening in many many Australian

workplaces. We know that several years ago, the Government asked the Sex Discrimination

Commissioner to do an examination of this. They received a report early last year, in March

last year. And there's been no real change to the situation in Australian workplaces. There

were 55 recommendations made by the Sex Discrimination Commissioner - we haven't heard

a peep from the Government on any of those recommendations.



So we absolutely have to make sure that Brittany Higgins is getting the justice that she

deserves, that the police inquiry now is unimpeded and can happen swiftly. We need to do an

inquiry here at Parliament House, that is specific to Parliament House. That has to be an

independent inquiry. The Prime Minister's announced an inquiry today: one that's done by one

of his Members of Parliament, and another one that's done by a senior public servant. I don't

think that's good enough. I really do think that Australians want something independent and at

arm's length, so they can have every confidence that it's done properly, that nothing is swept

under the carpet. We also need to take that next step of making sure that every Australian

workplace is safe for every Australian worker.



WILSON: Absolutely. To other matters in Parliament today. The federal Government has

ditched part of its planned workplace reforms. The so-called better off overall test, after Labor

claimed it would lead to pay cuts. Good news for you?



PLIBERSEK: Look I think it's important that they've ditched the getting rid of the better off

overall test. Seriously, right? Here's the thing: you say if a worker is there negotiating and they

trade away some of their conditions, they’ve got to be better off overall. And the government

tries to get rid of that. They were saying ‘it's okay for you to be doing the same job and to get

less paid for it after you've negotiated with the boss. Of course that should never have been

allowed to stand and it was unbelievable that the Government even suggested it.



But we've got so many parts of this legislation that are dodgy as all get-out. Here's another part

of the legislation: if you work overtime and the boss doesn't want to pay you with money the

boss can pay you ‘in kind’. So if you work at Maccas, you can get paid in chicken nuggets. If

you work at the local bakery, you can take home the stale cake at the end of the day. I mean,

is this Australia, really is this Australia?



The PM was asked the other day: ‘should two workers working side-by-side doing the same

job, in the same workplace be paid different amounts of money?’ For example, if one of them

is a labour hire worker, and he couldn't give a straight answer on that. He's prepared - for two

workers doing the same job in the same workplace - for one of them to get paid less than the

other that's not fair.



WILSON: Okay. Labor has been very firm in saying they won't negotiate or budge on IR

reforms but there are some aspects of the Government's bill which I think are pretty good. I

mean like harsher penalties for wage theft. I think we can all agree businesses which

deliberately underpay staff should be hit hard by the book.



PLIBERSEK: Yeah, they should be, absolutely and we've seen some businesses where this is

part of their business model. They were paying workers and then saying ‘now, go to the ATM

and withdraw half of what we just paid you and give it back to me in cash’. I mean that's just

criminal behaviour and it should attract criminal penalties, I 100% agree with that. And what

we’ve said about this whole bill the whole way through is that if it delivers secure jobs with

decent pay, we will back it, if it's secure jobs decent pay will back it. The problem with this

legislation is everything's tumbled in together. So all the bits that are a bit dodgy, we can't vote

for the bits that are dodgy just to let the bits that are good go through.



WILSON: Okay, I want to ask you about hotel quarantine and stranded Aussies. Labor, and

I've seen her you plenty of times on this program about this particular issue, you've been

slamming the Government for months saying they're not doing enough to get Aussies home.

You want more repatriation flights. Yet, you have one of the highest profile Labor leaders in the

country, the Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews, saying we should only be bringing Aussies

home on compassionate grounds. You're not singing from the same hymn book on this one.



PLIBERSEK: I do want to see more Australians home. The Prime Minister promised he'd have

them all home by Christmas. There are still people who are just beside themselves overseas,

and I speak to their relatives here in Australia who are just beside themselves because they

can't get home. They've been turned away. They turn up at the airport overseas, you know

kids in their pyjamas snatched out of bed early in the morning everything packed up to get to

the airport and get turned away and sent home to wait for the next flight or the next flight. It's

terrible, but there is a solution here. Borders and quarantine have always been a Federal



Government responsibility. The Government asked senior former public servant Jane Halton to

provide them with a program of what the Federal Government could do to help. She's talked

about federal quarantine facilities, particularly in remote locations. Let's just get on with it.



WILSON: Okay, but going back to Premier Daniel Andrews. He's saying we should only be

bringing Aussies home on compassionate grounds.



PLIBERSEK: Well, perhaps if he was getting a little bit of help from the Federal Government-



WILSON: He's had plenty of, come on... he's had he's had plenty of help from the Federal

Government.



PLIBERSEK: But what he's had is plenty of advice from the Federal Government. And this is

you know, it's never been a state government responsibility.



WILSON: Well, do you agree with Daniel Andrews? I know you say it's a federal matter, do

you agree with Daniel Andrews that we should only be bringing Aussies home on

compassionate grounds, that's the question.



PLIBERSEK: I want to see more Australians coming home. I want to see more. I'm very clear

on that. We have to do it safely though. And you know, the simple fact is that where COVID-19

is getting into our community at the moment is through hotel quarantine. So the Federal

Government has to pick up its share of responsibility for this and they've got a blueprint sitting

there that a former head of the health department has written for them. Why won't they act on

it?



WILSON: Okay, Tanya as always thanks for your time, we'll chat next Tuesday.



PLIBERSEK: Look forward to it. Thank you.



WILSON: That's Labor heavy hitter and our Tuesday political influencer Tanya Plibersek.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

