

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

6PR PERTH LIVE WITH OLIVER PETERSON

MONDAY, 11 JANUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Car accident; the year ahead; state borders; national coordination of

coronavirus response; National Cabinet; Aussies stranded overseas; quarantine;

possibility of an early election.



OLIVER PETERSON, HOST: On the line is the Australian Labor Leader, Anthony Albanese,

who has been released from hospital over the weekend. He was in a car crash. How's your

health, Albo? Good afternoon.



ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: I’m still a bit sore,

mate. But I'm very, very lucky and very pleased to be in a position to speak to you. There was

a moment there that I'll never forget where I thought it was all going to end with a Range Rover

headed straight for me. It was a very scary experience. But fortunately, I have some injuries,

some external injuries and a bit of internal swelling as well and needs a bit of further

examination. But essentially, I'll be, I'll come through it. Which is very, very lucky indeed.



PETERSON: We wish you a speedy recovery, of course. Now, do you actually agree with your

fellow Labor WA Premier in Mark McGowan saying today that every state bar New South

Wales, your home state, is handling the COVID restrictions well?



ALBANESE: Look, I'm not critical of any state government, including my own. They're all

responding on the basis of medical advice. I think the big thing that's happened during 2020

and at the beginning of this year is the response of ordinary Australians who are making a

difference. It was a tough time to be on the Northern Beaches during the Christmas and New

Year period. And people in Sydney certainly have had some real restrictions on what they

would normally do at this time of the year. And this is the first time I haven't attended a Sydney

cricket Test for a long period of time. But I think that we're showing our resilience and our

preparedness to get on top of this.



PETERSON: What do you think about Mark McGowan suggesting that we should eliminate

rather than suppress the virus? Is that even possible?



ALBANESE: Well, that effectively is what people have been trying to do. And they've been

doing it pretty successfully. The problem with, as Scott Morrison suggested way back in July,

living with it, is that this is a virus that doesn't say, ‘Okay, I've got a few infections, my job's

done’. It multiplies. And the mathematics of this can see it get out of control very quickly. That's

why Annastacia Palaszczuk shut down Brisbane and southeast Queensland over the weekend

pretty quickly. We saw Daniel Andrews get on top of the outbreak in Victoria. And these are

measures that no-one wants to happen. We don't want this virus to exist. But I do think that the

lessons are that you've got to be very strict, act quickly, get on top of any outbreak, because

they have occurred. They've occurred in almost every state. WA, of course, has come through

the last year better than other states. But we've seen outbreaks in South Australia,

Queensland, Victoria, New South Wales. And certainly, I think that people have listened to the

science, listened to the medical experts. And that's the right thing to do.



PETERSON: New South Wales, could it have gone harder? Should have it been more strict?



ALBANESE: I've avoided being critical of any state government. So I haven't done what some

in the Liberal Party have done, which is to be critical of Labor state governments. Of course,

the Federal Government joined Clive Palmer in taking WA to court over the restrictions that

were put in place there that, frankly, have served the population of Western Australia very well.

I think that certainly we need to be clear about the messages which are given. I said a week

ago, well before the Cricket Test started, when we were talking about 20,000 people attending,

that we need to be careful saying to people that you can have five people in your home, but we

have 20,000 cavorting around the SCG. That to me didn't pass the common sense test. And I

do think that we've got to be consistent. And we've got to be, when in doubt, be cautious.

That's the real lesson. Because a minor restriction today is better than a major restriction down

the track.



PETERSON: I think the consistency is what can frustrate a lot of Australians at the moment,

Anthony Albanese, because the rules around state border closures, they differ from state to

state. Do you think it is perhaps time the Federal Government took over the management of

these measures?



ALBANESE: Well, to be frank, we've spoken about this last year. And it's now the case, it

should be clear to everyone, if it wasn't beforehand, that there isn't really a National Cabinet.

What happens is that state premiers meet, tell each other what they're doing, Scott Morrison

makes an announcement at the end of it all. And then, if things go well, he tries to take credit

for it. And if things don't go perfectly, then he blames the states.



PETERSON: So there's a vacuum with the national leadership and coordination of the

response to the pandemic?



ALBANESE: Well, quite clearly, there should, in my view, be much more consistent rules.

There should be better national coordination. But the Federal Government's chosen not to do

that. Even over issues like international arrivals, the Federal Government has sought to pass

blame on to the states. And that is just absurd. Issues like quarantining, even when the

Federal Government got a report by Jane Halton, the former head of the Health Department,

did a review, recommended quarantining at the national level, greater national coordination of

it, so we could bring home the 40,000 Australians who are stranded, recommended places like

Exmouth there in WA as a venue, recommended an expansion of the Northern Territory facility

there at Howard springs which now has belatedly been done, recommended some separation

of the quarantining from your CBD hotels where a lot of the accommodation is being kept.

These were common sense recommendations. And the Government seems to have ignored it.

I do think that the Federal Government has strategically made a political decision that they're

quite happy to hand over responsibility to others, even if it means less national coordination,

because less national responsibility means that they can point to someone else if something

doesn't go right.



PETERSON: Now, I want to see as many Australians home as possible as quickly as possible,

because it's a conversation I was hoping we wouldn't have to have in 2021. And as you say,

we should have learned some of those lessons about bringing people into places which are

away from the major population centres of our cities, whether it be here in Perth, or where you

are in Sydney.



ALBANESE: Well, Oly, we were told that Australians will be home by Christmas. And I'll tell

you what, every office, political office in the land, the number one inquiry which we're getting is

from relatives or from people directly contacting us from overseas who just can't get home,

who've tried to book, often paid one, two, three times and had flights cancelled. And this is a

source of major frustration. It's meant that families were kept apart at Christmas. It also means

that for many of those Australian citizens, they've had to stay in places like the United Kingdom

and the United States, which continue to see a rise in the number of infections. And they'd be

much safer if they came home here, quarantined and then got to stay here. And we've seen

too many of our best and brightest travel overseas for opportunities and they want to come

home and make a contribution here. And they can't get home. And we have a responsibility to

do whatever we can to smooth that return to their nation.



PETERSON: You're out of the blocks early this year. You've killed the franking credits policy

that Labor took to the last Federal election. Are you preparing for a poll September/October of

2021?



ALBANESE: Well, I'm ready whenever it's called. I know that if it is called in 2021, it's because

the Government doesn't have faith in its capacity to keep control of the economy or social

policy or that there are big problems coming in 2022. We have three-year terms in Australia,

that's too short. Four years is the norm for state governments. And internationally, four or five

years is the norm. So I think the Government would want to have a pretty good excuse if they

do go to an election this year. But for Scott Morrison, he's always got his eye on the politics

rather than anything else. And so we'll be ready to go anytime from August/September. We've

put in place our review, we've had our vision statements, we're rolling out policies such as the

cheaper childcare policy and a Future Made in Australia. We have our zero net emissions by

2050. We'll be rolling out more policies. We'll have our national conference online on March 30

and 31. And we are prepared to go for an election whenever it's called. And as far as I'm

concerned, one of the things about last Friday's events in Hill Street, Marrickville, with the car I

used to love but is no more, I was confident I could tackle anything that 2021 threw at me. I am

now absolutely confident that I can do that and beat it and be successful at the election.





PETERSON: Well, we wish you all the very best in your recovery and through navigating the

political path of 2021. And we look forward to speaking with you again throughout the year

here on Perth Live. Anthony Albanese, always appreciate your time. Thank you very much.



ALBANESE: Thanks very much, Oly. And welcome back. And a big shout-out to the viewers,

your listeners there. I did commit to ten visits to WA. We will wait and see when I'm able to

travel there. But I certainly look forward to coming over and talking to you and taking some

calls in the studio as I do.



PETERSON: Look forward to that. Take care.



ALBANESE: Thanks, Oly.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.











