

CHRIS BOWEN MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH  MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RN BREAKFAST  WEDNESDAY, 13 JANUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Vaccine rollout strategy; COVID misinformation.

SALLY SARA, HOST:  […] a serious challenge this morning with medical experts  warning that the Oxford/AstraZeneca jab will fail to generate herd immunity against  COVID-19. A number of doctors and immunologists are backing a call to suspend  the rollout of the vaccine, which is only 62% effective in preventing coronavirus in  trials. Pressure is mounting on the Morison government to crack down on  misinformation about COVID treatments being peddled by Coalition backbenchers  with the Opposition saying it will further undermine public confidence in the fight  against the virus. Chris Bowen is the Shadow Health Minister and he joins us now.  Chris Bowen welcome to RN breakfast.

CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Thanks Sally, good  morning.

SARA: Good morning. Mr. Bowen, firstly the Immunology Society is calling for the  AstraZeneca rollout to be suspended, and the Virology Society is expressing  concerns too. Has the Federal Government backed the wrong horse?

BOWEN: Well my view Sally is the same as it's always been that it would be better  if the Federal Government, the Morrison Government, had more deals, more  advanced supply agreements in place. We've said that for months. Australia has  three, international best practice is five or six. We have deals with AstraZeneca,  Novavax and Pfizer. Now, we don't have to deal with Moderna, or J&J. Moderna  for example, reports indicate about a 95% efficacy and it is much easier to  distribute than the Pfizer vaccine. The trouble with call for a pause, and ultimately  we should be guided by advice by TGA and CMO here, is that there's nothing to  replace AstraZeneca in the Australian context. We don't have deals with Moderna  and J&J for example. That’s why it would be better if we had more deals and we’ve  been saying that for months. We don't know yet whether AstraZeneca will even

pass the TGA test, we hope it will, it probably will, but there's always risk. That's  why the Federal Government should have been months ago spreading that risk  more thinly with more deals.

SARA: But Chris Bowen in the short term is it better to have some protection,  particularly for workers in hotel quarantine and other frontline areas, rather than to  delay the system further.

BOWEN: Well the short answer to that question is yes, and that's why we called  for a faster rollout. That's why we said that once the TGA has approved a vaccine,  first the Pfizer vaccine, it should be rolled out as soon as is practical. That's not  what the Morrison Government was going to do, they have now given in to that  pressure and are rolling it out more quickly, but we only have 10 million doses of  the Pfizer vaccine which is enough for 5 million Australians. We need more. We  need more doses of as many vaccines as possible. The Federal Government said  we were first in the queue. That was not true then, it's not true now, and as we've  been pointing out consistently now for more than six months, the more deals the  better, to spread the risk so that Australians have access to the best possible  vaccines as quickly as possible and under the Morrison government. The facts are  that is simply not the case.

SARA: Chris Bowen, it is still early days with these vaccines. We've seen some  interest in changing the timing of the second dose for AstraZeneca. That rate of  efficacy rose to around 90% when some volunteers were accidentally given a  different dosage, does that mean that there's still some hope though for  AstraZeneca? Do we need to wait and look at that evidence?

BOWEN: Yes, and it is difficult to compare efficacy between different vaccines in  different clinical trials, different methodology. That's why the TGA is so important.  And that's why the TGA deserves the support of all politicians, because it's their  job to ensure that vaccines that are approved in Australia are 1. safe, most  importantly, and 2. efficacious. Of course, there'll be some differences and  vaccines will improve over time as advances and developments are made. The  world's scientists and researchers are working at an extraordinary pace to get this  done. So, it is important that we support the TGA, and that we support the CMO  and the rollout, but the TGA and the CMO would have more weapons at their  disposal, if we had more deals in place with more vaccines.

SARA: But last year Labor was hammering the government for taking too long to  sign vaccine deals. Doesn't this suggests in a way that they should have taken a  bit more time to work out that they were making the right choices?

BOWEN: No it suggests that they should be doing more deals as I've been saying  for months. It suggests that it would be better if we had to deal with Moderna, it  would be better if we had a deal with J&J, it would be better if we were looking at

Sanofi. These are all options that are available around the world, which other  governments have access to, which Australians don't by and large, because we  only have direct deals with AZ, and no Novavax and Pfizer. The UQ deal fell over,  fair enough. I have not uttered one word of criticism of the government for doing a  deal with the University of Queensland because it was right that they took that risk,  it was right that they hedge the risk. It didn't work in the end, that's not anybody's  fault. It's not the researchers fault, it’s not the Government’s fault, it's reality. But  it's also the case that more vaccines might fall over. That's why we should be  having more deals. It’s also the case that some vaccines will be more effective  than others, and that's why we should have access to as many as possible.

SARA: Chris Bowen let's move forward. You've described the Government  backbench MP Craig Kelly as a menace for spreading deliberate misinformation  about COVID-19, why do you think he's so dangerous in the messages he's  posting?

BOWEN: Well, let's look at what he's doing Sally. I mean he's engaging in a  systemic undermining of confidence in our medical and scientific institutions. He's  accused our Chief Medical and Health Officers of and I quote Sally ‘crimes against  humanity’. I mean the most heinous accusation you could possibly make. He’s  engaged in conspiracy theories about Big Pharma and following the money and  saying that this is all a conspiracy because the vaccine will make more money for  Big Pharma than his favourite remedies hydroxychloroquine. He asserted that  hydroxychloroquine didn't get approval in Australia as part of some anti Donald  Trump conspiracy by the TGA and the Chief Medical Officers, and asserted that it  would be approved after the US election, which it hasn’t been because there is not  enough evidence to support that it works. Now all this undermines confidence in  our institutions at a time when we should all be, all of us in public life, supporting  our institutions. I just think it's extraordinary and appalling that nobody in the  Federal Government has the guts to call this guy out and say, what he's doing is  spreading disinformation, it’s dangerous. I mean he undermined the New South  Wales Government yesterday with a bizarre post, about requiring children to wear  masks as being child abuse. I mean, this is what this guy does every day multiple  times a day, in an attempt to undermine science, research and our institutions.

SARA: Chris Bowen what about the platforms, do they have some responsibility to  block or stop or take down this kind of material?

BOWEN: Well they do have obligations to ensure that they're dealing with  disinformation. I understand Facebook has expressed some concern about some  of his posts, but ultimately as well, with freedom of speech comes responsibility,  particularly for those of us in public life and public office. This guy is a member of  Parliament. I mean there's an obligation on him, and if he won't meet these  obligations, there's an obligation on his colleagues, the Prime Minister the acting  Prime Minister the Health Minister to call him out to say, I don't support his

campaign of disinformation to say it's wrong and to correct the facts. Now the  Labor Party is doing it. We've been doing that consistently, the Liberal Party and  the National Party does not have the guts to do it.

SARA: The acting Prime Minister Michael McCormack has defended Craig Kelly.  When it comes to a life and death matter like COVID-19, should the truth be  negotiable in a way that Michael McCormack has suggested?

BOWEN: No. No. He said yesterday facts are contentious. Well I mean we don't  have, you know, alternative facts in the Australian political debate or at least we  shouldn't. Facts are facts and the facts go to what is approved by the TGA, what is  approved by the AHPPC as remedies when Craig Kelly proselytises other  remedies which aren’t proven, whether it be hydroxychloroquine or Betadine and  says that there's some sort of conspiracy, he accuses Dan Andrews of industrial  manslaughter, as well as being a Nazi, not one word of censure from his  colleagues at this language, at this campaign of disinformation, about this  denigration of our scientists and our medical officers. I mean he’s accused as a  separate matter, he’s accused the scientists at the Bureau of Meteorology of being  engaged in a conspiracy to doctor information about climate change. I mean, this is  conspiracy theory stuff from the fringes. B when it's spouted by an elected member  of Parliament, and a member of the Government, no less the chairman of the  Parliamentary Committee on Law Enforcement, then these conspiracy theories are  dangerous and Michael McCormack  should show more leadership than he's done  in his period is acting Prime Minister. He should do what Scott Morrison has  refused to do, and call out this disinformation.

SARA: Let's move forward. Michael McCormack has also doubled down on his  comments comparing the invasion of Congress with Black Lives Matter protests.  What do you think about his decision to do that yesterday?

BOWEN: We’ll he was wrong and he needs to reflect and apologise, and he also  used inappropriate language in relation to Black Lives Matter. Now the Black Lives  Matter movement was a protest movement, it has no similarity to the violent  insurrection on the Capitol, and for him to continually draw this parallel is wrong.  For him to use the term All Lives Matters matter is wrong, and for him, this is part  of a pattern of behaviour. This is a guy who last year, claimed incorrectly that Black  Lives Matter protests had become a super spreading event. He is not accurately  reflecting the views I believe that the Australian people. He’s speaking at the  moment for himself, not for Australia as acting Prime Minister.

SARA: Just finally let me take you back to where we began. Yesterday we had a  spokesperson from the World Health Organization, really praising Australia though  for its overall approach while there’ve been some concerns at the moment of  vaccines. Do you acknowledge though that the overall approach that Australia is  taking is putting us ahead of many parts of the world?





BOWEN: II consistently have Sally, consistently have praised all involved. We’ve  provided, as the Opposition there is a choice about how partisan to be. Now the  approach that Anthony Albanese I and the Labor Party have taken has been to  support the Government, where we should, to suggest better alternatives where  we can, and to criticize where we must. And that's exactly what we've done at  every turn. And we've given full credit to everybody involved, whether they be  federal, the Federal Government or the State Premiers. We’ve provided more  bipartisan support to the State Premiers than the Federal Government has, let me  tell you. We've supported the measures put in place by the premiers of Victoria,  New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania, Western Australia,  without exception, regardless of their party because they deserve that support.

SARA: Chris Bowen time is against us we need to leave it there, Shadow Health  Minister Chris Bowen, thank you for joining us on Breakfast.

BOWEN: Lovely to chat.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ELIZA MITCHELL 0413 410 931



