

BRENDAN O’CONNOR MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR GORTON





DEFENCE MANUFACTURING SUCCESS IN NORTHERN TASMANIA



The Morrison Government must ensure defence prime companies do defence

industry work here in Australia and work with local companies.



Today I visited Tasmanian defence industry manufacturer Penguin Composites, an

example of how small businesses can obtain and benefit from defence industry

contracts.



Penguin Composites started as a manufacturer of surfboards and other water

sports items in 1976. The plastic composites business was able to recently

diversify their business and now makes vehicle parts for the Australian Department

of Defence for the Hawkei Project.



Partnering with defence prime company Thales, they have been able to increase

productivity to build the fibreglass roofing for the four-wheel drive protected mobility

vehicles.



Their work has brought much needed growth and recognition to Tasmania Industry

in the defence supply network.





As announced in last year’s Budget Reply, Labor is committed to ensuring major

defence project contracts and procurements contain measurable, enforceable,

audited and transparent Australian industry content requirements.



Labor will continue to hold the Government to account to ensure it implements

contractual requirements that compel these defence prime companies to do this

work here in Australia.



The Australian Government is spending $270 billion on defence procurement. We

need to maximise the local component of that spend.



This is especially important in Northern Tasmania where COVID-19 has hit

businesses hard, particularly in the tourism sector.



Labor wants to see Northern Tasmania’s industry be able to diversify and defence

contracts could offer new ways to do that.



The defence industry is one of the largest industry sectors in Australia. There are

currently over 3,000 business already working in the Australian defence industry.



The Morrison Government has broken its promises on local content and does not

have a serious plan for Australian defence industry, and for this we must hold them

to account.



MONDAY, 1 MARCH 2021



MEDIA CONTACT: KYLIE JENSEN 0402 298 728



