

STEPHEN JONES MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT TREASURER

SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES

MEMBER FOR WHITLAM





MORRISON GOVERNMENT’S PLAN TO CUT YOUR SUPER, FREEZE THE

PENSION, EAT YOUR HOUSE



Newly-minted Minister for Superannuation Jane Hume has wasted no time in revealing the

Morrison Government’s retirement income strategy: cut your super, freeze the pension, and if

you run out of money sell your house.



This not only represents an assault on Australians’ dignity in retirement but a broken election

commitment.



In a bizzare opinion piece in today’s Australian Financial Review the Minister - who once said

she was “ambivalent” about the Government’s election commitment to maintain legislated

super payments - now argues legislated super payments could be cut and retirees could

always sell their house if they run out of money.



The Coalition that ran a campaign against a non-existent death tax is now proposing a very

real pre-death tax on retiree home-owners.



The Minister says that too many Australians are “eventually dying with most of their savings

intact.”



This is, in the Minister’s own words, a “paradox.”





Her op-ed confirms she has now been charged with ensuring Australian workers die penniless.



This is the same Minister who falsely accused Labor of having a secret death tax policy at the

last election.



Minister Hume may be misguided, but she is not misinformed.



She says an “extraordinary number” of retirees have reached out to her with “heart-breaking

stories of hardship” because their savings have been inadequate to see them through the

COVID crisis.



She says she gets the “anxiety about paying for future health and aged care costs.”



She acknowledges the “anxiety” of retirees for whom “it’s not possible to live adequately off

returns from retirement savings alone.”



However, the Morrison Government’s only solution is to slash workers savings and cut funding

to hospitals and aged care homes.



For five years now the Coalition has promised and failed to deliver a Retirement Income

Covenant that would ensure workers best financial interests are put first in their retirement.



It is now clear a decent retirement income for all Australians is not on the agenda of this

Government.



FRIDAY, 22 JANUARY 2021



MEDIA CONTACT: TOM IGGULDEN 0448 081 191





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.









