

CATHERINE KING MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INFRASTRUCTURE, TRANSPORT AND  REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT  MEMBER FOR BALLARAT



NFF REGIONALISATION AGENDA LEAVES NATS IN THE DUST

Today’s release of the National Farmers’ Federation’s Regionalisation Agenda highlights  just how much more could be done to harness the growth of regional Australia and drive  our nation’s recovery from COVID-19.

By laying down clear markers on how a real regionalisation agenda could reshape the  regions, this report also highlights how far the National Party has fallen.

Regional Australia is ready for a change, but to reach its potential it needs a strategic  approach which invests in growing productivity and building connections with the wider  nation and the world. It also needs a new approach towards the infrastructure priority  lists which too often prioritise city projects providing a short-term boost over regional  projects which can set up generations of growth.

As the NFF identifies, a better regionalisation approach should build on the existing  strengths of regions, investing in what they do well and making them even better.

This requires a long-term vision, not the short-termism and pork barrelling we see time  and time again from the National Party and the Morrison Government.

Recent ABS figures show domestic migration to our regions increased during the  pandemic, with a record 11,200 Australians moving out of the capital cities during July,  August and September last year, while overall a fifth of city-dwellers are looking to  relocate to the regions.

This is a real opportunity to reshape regions and the Australian economy but under the  current Government’s haphazard approach it will be missed.

The Nationals have overseen sport rorts, dodgy Western Sydney Airport land deals,  Building Better Regions Fund scandals, excluded NSW’s fire-ravaged south coast from  regional recovery funding and allowed funding for women’s sport in the regions to go  towards a pool in North Sydney.

Hopefully, the Government reads this report and commits to doing better in the future.  But I won’t hold my breath.



TUESDAY, 23 FEBRUARY 2021

MEDIA CONTACT: NICK BEAVER 0419 709 266





