Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, Sydney.





THE HON PAUL FLETCHER MP  Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts

MEDIA RELEASE

22 March 2021

Current anti-siphoning list to continue to 2023

The current broadcast anti-siphoning list will remain in effect until April 2023.

Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, the Hon Paul Fletcher MP,  said that the Government will review the list over the next two years as part of its reforms to support  broadcasters and enhance the quality of services and content available to all Australians.

The anti-siphoning scheme started in 1992 and aims to give free-to-air broadcasters the first  opportunity to acquire the rights to broadcast events on the anti-siphoning list. The scheme lowers the  risk of subscription television broadcasters obtaining exclusive rights to televise events of national  importance and cultural significance.

“We recognise that many Australians have strong views about being able to watch culturally  significant events for free. It is clear that the current anti-siphoning list requires review to make sure  that it continues to meet the expectation of Australian audiences,” Minister Fletcher said.

“We also need to consider the impact that COVID-19 has had on how live sporting events are  broadcast and the associated changes in deals negotiated between broadcasters and rights holders.

“This decision means that for the next two years the free-to-air networks will continue to have the first  opportunity to purchase the rights to culturally significant events, such as the Olympic Games and  other major sporting events.”

The Government is currently consulting on the next stage of its media reform program, and  stakeholders are encouraged to comment on the media reform green paper by 23 May 2021.

More information on the anti-siphoning scheme is available on the Department of Infrastructure,  Transport, Regional Development and Communications website.

Media contact:  Imre Salusinszky | 0432 535 737 | Imre.Salusinszky@communications.gov.au  Christine Byllaardt | 0409 433 357 | Christine.VandenByllaardt@communications.gov.au

