

JIM CHALMERS MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR RANKIN



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AM AGENDA  WEDNESDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Patchy economic recovery leaving workers and sectors behind; JobKeeper  being withdrawn from communities and sectors still struggling; Government’s failure to  deliver on economic announcements; Secure jobs; Cuts to pay and superannuation;  Election date speculation.

LAURA JAYES, HOST: Let’s go live back to Canberra and the Shadow Treasurer Jim  Chalmers. The RBA predicting, Jim Chalmers, that we will be at pre-pandemic levels by the  middle of this year. That’s good news. Do you credit the government’s stimulus for that?

JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: Obviously, we want the economy to recover  strongly if it creates good jobs and opportunities for more people. I think the recovery that the  Governor of the Reserve Bank is speaking about today is in some ways inevitable, when some  of the State restrictions lift and also when we're coming from the worst recession we've had in  Australia for almost a century. So the recovery’s welcome, but it's inevitable in lots of ways.  The credit for it goes to the Australians who’ve largely done the right thing to limit the spread of  the virus. There’s been an important role for the government to play as well, that's why we  proposed wage subsidies like JobKeeper that has done some important work in the economy,  which we've acknowledged all along. But we also need to acknowledge that the design of that  programme hasn't been perfect. Money is more likely to go to executive bonuses for example  than to support struggling workers and small businesses in places like Cairns after March. So  there are still some issues there, which the government needs to address, which you identify,  rightly I think, in your introduction.

JAYES: JobKeeper ends in March, we've heard there will be targeted assistance. In what form  should that come and do you accept that we no longer need that economy, sector-wide  JobKeeper payment?

CHALMERS: First of all, and the government doesn't seem to understand this, but we've said  all along that we know that at some point JobKeeper will end. Nobody’s arguing for it to be a  permanent feature of the budget or the economy. We need to tailor JobKeeper to make sure  it's responsive to what's actually happening in the economy. I've spent a lot of time speaking  with small businesses and peak organisations in places like Cairns, which is still hurt by the  closure of the international border, and what we've said is the government should be  considering extending JobKeeper in places like Cairns.

JAYES: Can I just ask you about that, just specifically on that point, I don't think anyone's  arguing with that targeted assistance to sectors like the tourism industry in Cairns in particular,  but it can't be JobKeeper per se can it because the way it's disseminated and why the  Commonwealth and States interact, JobKeeper is sector wide. So how would you, I guess,  limit it to geographical areas or sectors that still need that support? Doesn't it have to be  replaced with something like a grant?

CHALMERS: Not necessarily, Laura. I think it shouldn't be beyond the government, which has  already developed all kinds of tests for JobKeeper throughout the duration of the programme,  to be able to recognise that many small businesses are still struggling, that has implications for  the jobs market in particular, and so they should be able to design a test which picks up these  businesses which have been hurt, and continue to struggle. I mean what's happening here…

JAYES: What are your ideas there? What are your ideas there? Would you make it  geographical, would you change the income test thresholds? How would you actually do it?

CHALMERS: Well, there are already tests for JobKeeper as you know, Laura. And many of  these businesses which will be cut off from JobKeeper in March would continue to pass those  tests. And so we're not asking for some dramatic rewriting of JobKeeper. If you speak to the  businesses up there - and I saw the interview the other day and I thank you for that, giving  Cairns tourism operators a voice in this important conversation - all that they're asking for is  some kind of way to recognise that they would still pass a lot of the tests for JobKeeper, and  that will be case for some time now with the international borders closed. The pandemic, and  its ongoing economic consequences, won't just disappear in March, like the government wants  us to believe. Even with the recovery there is still something like 2 million Australians who can't  find a job or enough work to support their loved ones, millions more are dealing with stagnant  wages, so no matter how hard they work I just can't get ahead. All of these issues are really  important. The government is in too much of a rush to withdraw support from the economy and  the Reserve Bank and others have said that that will have consequences for the recovery.

JAYES: OK, we've seen an experience in New South Wales where grants have actually been  disseminated to businesses that need it, particularly small businesses, in quite a speedy way.  Is that something that you might support as a replacement? Of course, we haven't seen the  detail, that hasn't even been proposed, but there is a New South Wales experience?

CHALMERS: A couple of things about that. I mean, clearly, our inclination throughout has  been to support any initiatives which give a helping hand to struggling small businesses and  their employees. That’s been a guiding principle for us throughout and that would guide us if  the government came forward with a different programme. But there is no real substitute for  JobKeeper and the good that it is doing in places like Cairns. And there's also a lot of  scepticism amongst the business community, because this government, they make big  announcements about grants or support programmes, but they have a lot of difficulty delivering  that support on the ground. So if you speak to those businesses and you speak to those  workers around Australia, a lot of them think that even if the government came forward with yet  another announcement they are sceptical, understandably sceptical, that they would actually  get a slice of that assistance and that's because the government has form in announcing  support but not delivering it.

JAYES: Okay, we saw a reshuffle earlier, last week now, Richard Marles is now the Shadow  Minister for Coronavirus Recovery. How are you disseminating those roles? What will you do?  Are you overlapping there?





CHALMERS: Well my role hasn't changed, as you know, and nor has my focus, which is on  secure jobs in the recovery and making sure the economy can be stronger after COVID than it  was before. And I look forward to working with Richard, and the entire team, who shares that  focus. And I think that the Shadow Ministry that Anthony announced not that long ago is a  demonstration of our focus on the recovery, on jobs in particular, on secure work, on the fact  that stagnant wages are holding the country back and preventing people from getting ahead.  These are the sorts of issues that we are all focused on. I think the Shadow Ministry reflects  that.

JAYES: Just finally Craig Kelly is certainly a gift to Labor at the moment, politically, but beyond  that, it strikes me that Labor is struggling to, I guess, countenance a Prime Minister who's  trying to move more and more to the centre. Is that a fair assessment?

CHALMERS: I don't think so, Laura I don't see him as some kind of middle of the road figure,  when you look at what he's doing in industrial relations, using a pandemic to go after people's  wages, and job security, and superannuation. Those are not the actions of some kind of  unifying figure, those are the actions of an ideologue, which will do a lot of damage to working  people in this country.

JAYES: But you don’t seem to be landing a lot of blows?

CHALMERS: I don’t necessarily share that assessment, Laura, but that's for you to make, and  for the political commentators to make. Our focus is on people's work, being on the side of  people who want to work hard and get ahead. We're conscious that a lot of people are at risk  of being left behind. These are the things that we care about. Whether or not we're landing  political punches is for the political commentators to assess and conclude. Our focus won't  change. And I'm confident that we can win this next election, because we are on the side of  people who work hard and want to get ahead. The government is on the side of people who  want to cut pay and come after job security and superannuation - that's the contest. That  matters more than the political commentary, what it actually means for real people in real  communities. I don't think the government has people in mind when they come after their pay,  like they are.

JAYES: And you’ll win it with Albanese at the helm?

CHALMERS: Yes, we will.

JAYES: Jim Chalmers, thanks for your time.

CHALMERS: Thanks, Laura.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT:  BRETT MASON 0419 239 811



