Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



The Hon Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health and Aged Care

The Hon Ken Wyatt MP  Minister for Indigenous Australians



MEDIA RELEASE



24 March 2021



Multi-language radio ads to promote Indigenous health checks

A major push to improve the health of the Indigenous community has been launched this  week by the Australian Government, with a focus on increasing annual health checks.

Backed by a new radio advertising campaign delivered in five Aboriginal languages: Kriol,  Yolngu Matha, Warlpiri, Arrente and Burarra, the Government is encouraging Aboriginal and  Torres Strait Islander people to see their GP and have a 715 health check.

The health check, listed as item 715 on the Medicare Benefits Schedule, is tailored  specifically to support Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people of all ages. It is free and  available every nine to twelve months.

Minister for Health and Aged Care, Greg Hunt said the health checks are an opportunity for  early intervention, prevention and chronic disease management for all age groups.

“In-person 715 health checks decreased during the COVID-19 pandemic and the new radio  advertising campaign, along with the availability of the 715 health check via telehealth, will  help to increase awareness and uptake,” Minister Hunt said.

“The three-month radio advertising campaign is part of our ‘Your Health is in Your Hands’  communications project, delivered in partnership with Aboriginal-owned company 33  creative, who have created print, audio and online content to promote the health checks.”

Minister for Indigenous Australians, Ken Wyatt, said the Government was committed to  increasing the rates of the 715 health check by 10 per cent, as part of the Long Term National  Health Plan.

“These health checks provide important information for both Indigenous people and health  professionals, ensuring they can have their physical, psychological and social health  comprehensively assessed,” Minister Wyatt said.

“While rates have been trending upwards in most locations and age groups, increasing from  11 per cent in 2010-11 to 29 per cent in 2017-18, we encourage all Aboriginal and Torres  Strait Islander people to visit your local GP and have your health checked.”

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.

Collectively, it is estimated that there are approximately 13,000 speakers of the five  Aboriginal languages which will be aired across the Northern Territory and Western  Australia.

The English language ads will be launched in the urban areas of Sydney, Melbourne and  Hobart as well as nationally in remote and very remote areas of Australia.

The campaign began on 21 March 2021 and will run for three months.

-END-

