

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

MEMBER FOR HUNTER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2CC  WEDNESDAY, 27 JANUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: The divide between city and rural Australia; Bill Shorten’s speech;  Early withdrawal of superannuation.

STEPHEN CENATIEMPO, HOST: Now, ahead of his return to Canberra next week,  our regular guest on Wednesdays is Joel Fitzgibbon, the Labor Member for Hunter,  and joins us now. Joel, good morning.

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: Good morning, Stephen. A belated  happy Australia Day to you and your listeners.

CENATIEMPO: Indeed, and it's interesting that you've been talking about the divide  between city seats and regional seats within the Labor Party. You must be well, I  guess, a bit of schadenfreude there with the Liberals and Nationals now having the  same issues. Nationals have come out proposing a manufacturing plan supported by  more coal fired power. The inner-city elite Liberal members have come out and  slammed that. It's both the same on both sides of politics. It's this regional - with this  rural/city divide that we can't seem to - we can't seem to close this gap.

FITZGIBBON: And we have to reconcile that, Stephen. Obviously, I'm getting a bit of  pleasure out of a spat between the Lib and the Nats. I've been saying for a couple of  years now in the Parliament that the Nats just let themselves be pushed around by the  Libs these days. Black Jack McEwen, Doug Anthony, Tim Fischer would be all rolling  in their graves if they saw how weak the Nats are. So, it's good to see them muscling  up. But there's a bit of populism here, too, of course, they're not going to get their way.  But we do need to make city-based MPs more aware of what goes on in the regions  where, of course, the country derives most of its wealth.

CENATIEMPO: Do you think we're seeing more and more people - and stories every  day in the paper about more and more people moving out of the cities into regional  areas - do you think that is going to be the beginning of the cure, so to speak?

FITZGIBBON: I would like to think so. But sadly, I doubt it. Certainly, I think COVID-19  has raised awareness within city-based people of the beauty of the regions and the  advantages we have in terms of distancing, spacing, and, you know, clearer air -  cleaner air etcetera. So, there's a lot to be said about living in the regions and I think

people have seen that. But I don't think that's going to be a magic solution to the  city/country divide which so has besotted Australian politics in the last couple of  decades.

CENATIEMPO: Yeah no two ways about that. It's certainly becoming more and more  stark as we move forward. Now, you've been critical of the Labor Party's policy  platform, but you've been supportive of Anthony Albanese as leader. How helpful do  you think Bill Shorten’s comments in recent times have been?

FITZGIBBON: Just before I go there, Stephen, I just make the point that all the  problems the Nats were talking about yesterday and today, are problems which have  developed on the watch of this government. These are problems created by their  government. But look, on Bill Shorten, look, I welcome his speech. I thought it was a  humble speech. I thought it showed some humility. He accepted responsibility for the  loss of an election that we thought, and most people thought, was unlosable for the  Labor Party. He identified the fact that you can have too smaller policy agenda, but  you can certainly have too bigger policy agenda, as we did last time. But more  importantly, he recognised the need - and he acknowledged that he'd been dragged  too far to the left by other people, both on climate change policy and on wealth  redistribution - but he identified the fact that we have crept away from our traditional  heartland. We've crept away from the people we were born to represent, and if we  don't reengage with them, if we don't send a very clear message that we're back, and  we are on their side, that we're putting labour back into the Labor Party, then we will  continue to struggle.

CENATIEMPO: Yeah, which is obviously because of that, that rural regional divide, it's  going to be difficult. But I guess in defence of Anthony Albanese, it's typical of  Oppositions to have a fairly small policy platform, because you don't want to make  yourself a target when ultimately, you should be making the government a target. Now  - and they've made themselves a fairly small target at the moment, too, which I guess  puts Albo in a difficult position.

FITZGIBBON: And, of course, Albo's trajectory to new policy development has been  [inaudible] by both COVID and as a consequence for the deferral of our national  conference and it's the right thing to do to defer some of your policymaking until you've  given the rank and file of your parties the opportunity to have a say. So, I'm not saying  this is not a challenging situation. But I certainly welcome the fact that Bill Shorten has  like me identified the fact that we have crept away from our traditional working class  base and, you know, we do need to win regional seats not just to win an election to  deliver for people, but you will be a better parliamentary Labor Party if you had - if you  have regional members sitting in the party room, advocating on behalf of their regions.  We have become too city-centric unfortunately.

CENATIEMPO: When I spoke to you last week, Joel, one of my criticisms of your  colleagues were that not - more of them hadn't come out in support of some of the  things that you've had to say. Bill Shorten making this speech, do you think that will  change that?

FITZGIBBON: Look, I hope that it will encourage others to, to say more. I haven't been  completely lonely. There have been a number of MPs over the course of the last  couple of years that have said similar things to me. But Bill was launching a book  which, in more than a dozen Labor luminaries, wrote essays about the Labor Party and



policy direction, and you can split them into two camps. One camp was those  expressing the same sort of frustrations as me, that is creeping too far away from our,  the base which we were born to represent. And the others were just reminding us that  we've crept away or lost our focus. We've been too focused on things like climate  change and not concentrating on family and people of faith who feel that the Labor  Party has been putting political correctness ahead of their right to practice their faith.  Things like that born out of the essay. So, people are out there having a discussion.  And look, let a 1000 flowers bloom. I think it's good that in Opposition were having this  internal and external debates, and I hope it'll make for a better party.

CENATIEMPO: Superannuation has been a hot topic in recent times. One of the  measures the government decided to implement was allowing people to early access  their super to get through this pandemic. We are now seeing, particularly young  people, have drained in some cases all of their superannuation accounts. How do we  fix this? I mean, is the answer to increase the - I mean, I guess the philosophical  divide here is, and where I have a problem with this is, it's our money, should the  government be telling us how much of it we put into superannuation?

FITZGIBBON: Well, that's not what the government really does, Stephen. The  government says - it says, if you put the money into superannuation, we'll give you big  tax concessions so it'll be worth your while. And thankfully, Australians have taken up  that opportunity over many decades now. And not only do they have retirement  incomes now, but the country has a big savings pool, making it less dependent on the  capital of other countries, including China, which concerns people. So, now what  they've done is drained that money away. And as Paul Keating puts it, you know,  people who lost $100,000 for the benefit of a $4 coffee a week, because that money  compounds, it tracks compounding interest while it's in the bank, or in the  superannuation funds, Stephen. So this is, this is a real problem, not a problem for us  today, but when these 20 something year olds are 60 something year olds, our  economy is going to feel this and sadly so, too, are those who were encouraged or  allowed to take their superannuation early.

CENATIEMPO: So, what do we do? I mean, you can't - you know, I mean, it's easy to  shut the gate after the horse has bolted, but is there a way to fix this?

FITZGIBBON: Well, the gate has been taken off, Stephen. It has been destroyed. And  how do you restore that situation for those workers, and now Scott Morrison wants to  deny them the next legislative increase on the employer contribution which is going to  make it worse. So, you know, Scott Morrison has blown the show up and it's pretty  hard to put the pieces back together again.

CENATIEMPO: It certainly is a concern. Joel, always good to talk to you. We'll catch  up again next week.

FITZGIBBON: A pleasure, Stephen.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAVID BULLOCK - 0405 408 871





Authorised by Joel Fitzgibbon, ALP, Cessnock NSW





This email is confidential and may be privileged. If you have received this email by mistake: (1) please

notify me immediately and delete the email; (2) you must not use this email or its contents; (3) client legal

privilege is not waived.

















