



MEDIA RELEASE

AUSTRALIA MUST SUPPORT EQUAL ACCESS TO COVID-19 VACCINES



11 March 2021



The Greens have said that Australia must support a World Trade Organization

(WTO) proposal that would waive intellectual property provisions to allow

Covid-19 vaccine production to be rolled out and made accessible and

affordable to everyone in the global community.

The WTO Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS)

Council is meeting this week, with the Covid-19 vaccine on the agenda.

Senator Mehreen Faruqi, Greens spokesperson for International Aid &

Development, said:

“This is a matter of global justice, and putting people before the profits of

enormous pharmaceutical companies.

“The Covid-19 vaccine is a public good, not a commodity, and access to

healthcare is a human right.

“It would be unconscionable - and highly self-defeating - for Australia to allow

the Covid-19 pandemic to roll on in the Global South all to the benefit of big

pharma.

“All the Global South countries are asking for is to be given access to

intellectual property allowing for research, manufacture and supply of vaccines

without risking a trade dispute.



“Refusing this will allow pharmaceutical giants to shake down nations that are

already struggling under huge debt burdens and the legacy of colonialism. If

they can’t pay or take on more debt, then Australia has condemned them to

years of lockdowns, social injustice, sickness and death,” she said.

Senator Rachel Siewert, Greens spokesperson for Health, said:

“I'm very concerned about the lack of attention being paid to this issue by the

Prime Minister and Cabinet.

“When I asked Mr Gaetjens about Intellectual Property Rights and TRIPS

Waiver this week during the COVID Senate Committee it was clear they haven’t

been engaging with the issue adequately. He said that the new taskforce is not

focusing on that issue and that the terms of reference are not part of our

taskforce.

“This is not good enough. Australia has a global responsibility and the fact is no

one is safe unless we are all safe.

“Australia should also commit to increasing its funding to the COVAX AMC to at

least the level of Canada (an additional $135.2m USD).

“Big pharma must move to temporarily waive intellectual property rights on

Covid-19 vaccines to facilitate universal access.”





Media Contacts:

FARUQI - Mich de Waal; 0474 437 111

SIEWERT - Lucy Cowcher-Guthrie; 0418 401 180





