Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health and Aged Care



TRANSCRIPT

10 February 2021



INTERVIEW WITH KARL STEFANOVIC AND LEILA MCKINNON  THE TODAY SHOW

E&OE…

Topics: Hotel quarantine outbreak, WHO Investigation

KARL STEFANOVIC:  Pressure is mounting on the Federal Government for a major overhaul of Australia’s hotel  quarantine system to keep highly infectious strains out.

LEILA MCKINNON:  Yeah, that comes after two new cases of coronavirus were linked to Melbourne’s Holiday Inn,  forcing an entire floor of people into isolation. Health Minister Greg Hunt joins us now in  Melbourne. Minister, what do we do? This just keeps happening. Is it time for the Federal  Government to step in?

GREG HUNT:  Good Morning. Well, we actually have strong confidence in the Victorian, the Queensland, the  West Australian Governments.

There are those that may have, in some way, cast doubt on their competence because they've each  had cases recently. We don't have doubt. We think they're doing a good job.

The perspective here, over 211,000 cases, the world looks at the Australian system and says it's  protecting Australia. But in a country with 17 out of 21 days of zero cases, we’re doing  extraordinarily well, but those that have indicated that you would never have a case whilst you're  dealing with the outside world, haven't perhaps served us as well as they could. Because we have to  be honest, there’s always risks, so we have rings of containment.

Hotel quarantine, continuous improvement, testing, tracing and distancing, and they're the reasons  why we've been able to have 17 out of 21 days with zero cases and we just continue to work on all  of the different fronts.

KARL STEFANOVIC:  I've got some friends who have come in from Hong Kong. They had to do, I think it was two weeks  in quarantine or at least a week in quarantine before they even left their country.

I mean, if we're going to bring people in from overseas, is that a possibility that they're quarantining  overseas before they even get here just to add to that bubble?

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



GREG HUNT:  Look, we have looked at that. But at this stage, we want to make sure that we have control of the  system. It's such a critical thing that if people were to come in and inadvertently have the disease  and have a number of them out in the community, that poses a risk.

We're always looking at best practice, but it's the world that looks to Australia for best practice. The  UK Health Secretary Matt Hancock called me about Australia’s hotel quarantine system. Our  AUSMAT or our Australian Medical Assistance Team, which has been providing the training  around the country and runs the Howard Springs facility in Darwin, is directly advising the UK.

And so we have a system which protects lives, protects cases coming into Australia from getting out  of Australia with that sort of one per cent-plus rate of those that arrive being positive. And that has  overwhelmingly kept those cases within the system, but it should never be presented that there is no  risk when you engage with the world.

If we're bringing home mums and dads to be here for weddings or births, or people for saying  goodbye to loved ones, then that is part of our engagement with the world. But we’re keeping  Australians safe and when you look at those results, we’re doing incredibly well and now we turn  towards the vaccine in the coming weeks.

LEILA MCKINNON:  Okay. Minister, Daniel Andrews, in a case of spectacularly bad timing, said yesterday that  Victoria's hotel quarantine was of the highest standard than other states. I mean, do you agree with  that and does this competition work for us or is it hampering things, hampering or hindering?

GREG HUNT:  Look, we think all of the states and territories are doing well on this front. I won't try to rank them.  They are doing well.

The fact that there is an individual case because of a touch, a breath, a surface, that is part of the risk  of dealing with the greatest global pandemic in 100 years. I think in some ways, the fact that we  achieved these zero cases means that sometimes people think we’ll be able to do that forever.

What really matters is that we have a system that overwhelmingly prevents the cases coming into  the community, and where there are those cases, we have the testing and the training. And  Australians respond magnificently; it doesn't matter which state, the testing numbers rocket up  when there's been a breach and people are called to come forward.

And as well as that, if we do have to make sacrifices with regards to, in Victoria, inside we're  wearing masks at the moment, people know how to do this. And we've turned out to be an  extraordinarily strong country in regards not just to public health, but I think the social contract of  taking care of each other.

This notion of innate Australian mateship actually has translated to the most deeply responsible  social contract. It's a higher sense of Australia and I think we should be pretty proud of who we are.

KARL STEFANOVIC:  Of course. What about the World Health Organization's investigation into the origins of COVID?  They’ve failed to find a source, surprise, surprise. Understandably, this was the genesis of the icy  relationships with us and China about a year ago. I mean, what was the point of this investigation?





Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



GREG HUNT:  Well look, it's no surprise that there were no surprises. Essentially they’ve ruled out the idea of a  human-created lab virus, which was always our view, that it was not likely to be that.

But they have identified that it is overwhelmingly likely to have come from the animal kingdom,  what’s called a zoonotic virus. And then Mike Ryan, who’s one of the most senior people in the  World Health Organization has said, when you look for the origins, you look nearest to the source  of the first identified human cases.

We have to learn all of the elements and all of the lessons of this virus, its origins, we work on the  containment lessons from around the world, and people look at us, the capacity, how we build our  hospital system to avoid what we’ve seen in other countries, and then the vaccines.

We’re all learning from each other and we’ve learnt immense lessons looking at some of the pit  falls and missteps in some countries with regards to the vaccine rollout. We’re now in a very strong  place. All of this is part of learning.

KARL STEFANOVIC:  Greg, Greg, come on, Greg. Everyone thinks this is a cover-up. Everyone thinks this is a cover-up.

GREG HUNT:  Well, I’ll let the final report come out. At the end of the day, they have to do their work, we   get on and do our work.

And our task is to make sure that we aren't afraid of asking the difficult questions. And that's what  we should do as a country because, ultimately, that’s what’s going to save lives and protect lives.

KARL STEFANOVIC:  Great to talk to you, Greg. Well answered and we’ll talk to you very soon. Appreciate it.

(ENDS)

