

1 April 2021



Craft distillers deserve fair go on tax front







Independent Member for Clark, Andrew Wilkie, will join distillers Cam Brett and Kristy Booth-Lark, from the Tasmanian Whisky and Spirits Association, to highlight the urgent need for tax  relief for whisky, vodka and gin producers.

WHEN: 10am Thursday 1 April 2021  WHERE: Gin Bar by Forty Spotted, Level 1 30 Argyle St (old Mercury building)

“Tassie distillers are continuing to win awards on the global stage for their boutique whisky,  gin and vodka,” Mr Wilkie said. “But the ability of this flourishing industry to recover from  COVID-19 is being hamstrung and its hopes of expanding overseas are being dashed because  Australia has the third highest spirits excise in the world.

“Craft distillers are paying an eye-watering $88 of tax per litre of pure alcohol, which increases  twice a year and is projected to hit $100 over the next five years for each litre produced. This  means when you buy a bottle of craft spirits for $80 in the bottle shop, more than half of that  money is now going into government coffers.

“That's why I’ve repeatedly pressed the Government to reform the taxation regime for  Australia’s 300 boutique distillers to make it more competitive globally and fairer compared  with other alcoholic beverages. Moreover, I’ve also lobbied Federal Treasurer Josh Frydenberg  personally and he has instructed his staff to look into the matter. Easing the tax burden for  distillers will free up funds to employ more staff, invest in better infrastructure and expand  markets. Tasmania's boutique distillers desperately need this reform, and some may sink  without it.”

Mr Brett, president of the Tasmanian Whisky and Spirits Association, whose 52 members  represent about 96% of production in the state, said excise limit changes, in particular, would

help the sector realise its potential as a half-billion dollar industry in the next five years. “We  as an industry appreciate Mr Wilkie’s support because we need to take the handbrake off an  industry that could easily rival winemaking in Australia,” Mr Brett said.

For more information: 0427 291 785

Authorised by Andrew Wilkie MP 188 Collins St Hobart



