

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

MEMBER FOR HUNTER

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SUNRISE  MONDAY, 5 APRIL 2021

SUBJECTS: Covid-19 Vaccine Rollout; Respect at Work Report  Recommendations; Culture in Parliament House; Empathy Training.

NATALIE BARR, HOST: Australia's COVID-19 vaccine rollout is set to  accelerate this week as the number of medical centres distributing the jab  doubles. New South Wales will open dozens of new vaccinations super-clinics,  while Victoria has urged the Federal Government to ask the States for more  assistance.

*AUDIO INSERT*

TIM PALLAS, VICTORIAN TREASURER: One of the great difficulties, I think,  that the Commonwealth have is they're trying to build a system of mass-vaccination that the States and Local Government already have a capacity for.

BARR: Australia is expected to pass the million dose milestone in the coming  days. For their take, I'm joined by Nationals MP, Barnaby Joyce, and Labor MP,  Joel Fitzgibbon. Morning to you.

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: Good morning.

BARR: Barnaby, you know, we've been talking about this for a week now. Is  using the existing State infrastructure the solution to increasing the Federal  Government's vaccine rollout?

BARNABY JOYCE, MEMBER FOR NEW ENGLAND: Well, we accept that  we're behind where we'd like to be, that 1-4 million, we're about to hit 1 million,  but that's going to pick up now. They're doubling the number of clinics that are  providing it. We're very lucky in Australia that we don't have the problems that  they've got, you know, in the countries where well, I think Brazil, 350,000  people have died from Coronavirus, over 70,000 new cases just in a day. We  don't have those problems, because we've done the job well. And now we've  got to, you know, the vaccine rollout will start to kick and I think arguing  between the States and the Federal Government is, you know, it's good for

television, but really doesn't make much of a difference because we haven't  really got the problems they've got overseas.

BARR: Yeah. Joel, look, there's no doubt the Government has done an  amazing job with the Coronavirus handling all last year. No one's denying that.  But right now, you know, people are losing their jobs, things are being shut  down, and lots of people are being affected by these shutdowns. So we keep  saying it's, you know, there's no hurry. Do you think there is?

FITZGIBBON: There is a hurry, Nat, because we can't get the economy  running again until we have broad ranging vaccination. And of course, we'll  continue to be concerned about people in nursing homes and the way in which  they have been locked down until we get broad vaccination. Now this is a  classic case of over promise and under deliver. The Government said it would  do 4 million people by the end of March, it's not yet done a million. And of  course, it did something that is difficult to do last week, and that is to absolutely  unite the States in their condemnation of the Federal Government. But I think,  you know, we have done well in the past and politicians of all political  persuasions have done their best not to bring politics into this equation. But  that's exactly what the Federal Government did last week when it tried to blame  the states for its own problems. It's time to unite again, and get on with the job.

BARR: Yeah, well let's hope that happens this week, because people don't like  this blame game. They just want to get it done, don't they? And it sounds like  with these vaccination clinics, you know, being rolled out with the States,  maybe it'll increase. Look, the government is expected to endorse every key  finding of the review into sexual harassment in Australian workplaces. Seven  News understands the PM will respond to the Respect at Work report this  week, which calls for the Sexual Discrimination Act to be amended, including  making harassment a valid reason for dismissal. Barnaby, the Coalition's  culture crisis is currently under the microscope, as we know. Is this an  opportunity for Scott Morrison to make a strong statement here?

JOYCE: Look, I think it's, obviously, events have made it essential that  something happens and we can see that happening. Look, I don't, I think it's  really important that people understand that there's not this sort of ubiquitous,  generic craziness in Parliament House. Overwhelmingly, overwhelmingly, it's a  decent place. Overwhelmingly, people treat each other with respect, to certain  instances are obviously completely vile, and they've come to the fore and it  needs to be dealt with. I don't think you can actually redesign people's brains,  but you can create the environment where people feel protected at work, and I  think that's what we have got to do. And I'm 100 per cent supportive of that.  People should be able to go to work and feel that, you know, their rights are  protected.

BARR: Well, redesigning people's brains, isn't that what they've sent Laming  off to do? To do this empathy training to teach him empathy, Barnaby?

JOYCE: Well, as you probably read in the paper, I think empathy is more  innate than learned. I don't think you can teach someone empathy. You can  instruct them about what the guidelines are they need to work within and if they  don't want to work within them, they don't have a job. That, I suppose you can  do, but I don't know how you teach somebody empathy. I think you can appeal  for empathy in someone and tell them what the rules are. That's basically how I  see it working.

BARR: So, didn't you go to this empathy training the other day?

JOYCE: Yeah, it was, oh look - because myself and Hollie Hughes and  Stephen Jones and Zali Steggall, so it wasn't like they picked me out for  empathy training. And it was interesting, but we live in a - see, what you've got  to realise, in Parliament, my job is to actually, is to make sure Joel doesn't have  a job, and Joel's job is to make sure I don't have a job. It's different, It's not like  working for the ANZ bank, where we all want the bank to go well, or Channel  Seven where everybody wants Channel Seven to go well. It's a strange  environment, where I actually have to take Joel out, Joel has to take me out.  So, empathy training in that environment is, you know, it's a little bit more  difficult. I have to respect the work Joel does, he has to respect the work I do, I  have to treat him with respect in the corridors. But when we’re on this show, or  when we're on the 7:30 Report, or when we're in a debate, I actually have to  beat him.

BARR: But Joel, I think a lot of people in workplaces around Australia would  dispute that it's not cutthroat, and people aren't after each other's jobs and  trying to work their way up the line.

FITZGIBBON: Yeah, that line will certainly lack credibility, Nat. But Barnaby  does make a point, we work in a very peculiar and unique environment. And  while it is true that you probably can't teach empathy, just like you can't  legislate against stupidity, I think MPs and people more broadly in the  community can learn from others about the way they see the world and the way  that they listen to people's concerns, and therefore the way in which they  should react to those concerns. I don't think any of us are incapable of learning.  We should learn every day and there's no harm in taking some professional  guidance.

BARR: Okay. Well, we thank you for your time. Appreciate it. And wherever  you're driving to Barnaby, I hope you get there. Thank you very much.

JOYCE: I had to find where 4G works near Bendemeer. It's beautiful. Have a  look at this, there you go.

FITZGIBBON: Double demerits, Barnaby.

BARR: No, well, yeah well, hopefully we'll let you off the double demerits. You  haven't got your hands on the phone, have you?



JOYCE: I'm not going anywhere. That's what I'm trying to hold it up with. A  present. My son's present.

BARR: Life in the country. Okay.

JOYCE: That's it.

BARR: Thanks very much. See you next week.

ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: FITZGIBBON OFFICE 02 4991 1022





Authorised by Joel Fitzgibbon, ALP, Cessnock, NSW.



