

The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

The Hon Sussan Ley MP  Minister for the Environment  Federal Member for Farrer

The Hon Warren Entsch MP  Special Envoy for the Great Barrier Reef  Federal Member for Leichhardt



MEDIA RELEASE





22 February 2021



IN-WATER CONSERVATION AND MONITORING KICKS OFF ON  THE GREAT BARRIER REEF

Seventeen marine tourism operators along the Great Barrier Reef will take to the water from this week  for reef site monitoring and maintenance, supporting up to 300 existing frontline jobs in the Reef’s  tourism industry.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the $3.2 million initiative is part of the Australian Government’s $1 billon COVID-19  Relief and Recovery Fund, which supports regions, communities and industry sectors severely affected  by the coronavirus crisis.

“Supporting local jobs on the Reef will be vital for getting Queenslanders back on their feet, especially  considering the tough times the tourism sector has faced because of the global pandemic,” the Deputy  Prime Minister said.

“The Great Barrier Reef is one of our most valuable tourist destinations with its remarkable coral reefs  and beaches and this initiative will be vital for ensuring we correctly manage its health into the future.

“The Australian Government is proud to be supporting tourism operators in the Great Barrier Reef who  are passionate about its preservation through the Relief and Recovery Fund, which is laying the  foundations for economic recovery following the pandemic.”

Minister for the Environment Sussan Ley said the initiative helped ensure business continuity for the  tourism industry as well as helping conserve and protect high-value reef tourism sites.

“We’re delighted to support our passionate tourism operators to monitor reef health, control native  pest outbreaks, and conduct restoration activities at local reef sites,” Minister Ley said.

“We’re aiming to encourage people to come and see the Reef when it is safe to do so, fall in love with it  and do their bit to protect the Reef for future generations to enjoy.   “The initiative engages the Reef tourism industry to undertake in-water conservation and monitoring  activities — such as reef health and impact surveys, coral gardening or protecting coral cover by culling  coral-eating crown-of-thorns starfish.

“This important work will help ensure key tourism sites are properly maintained and ready to welcome  guests as COVID-19 travel restrictions are eased.”

Special Envoy for the Great Barrier Reef and Federal Member for Leichhardt Warren Entsch said the  project would support about 300 existing frontline Reef tourism jobs.

“The project aims to provide a degree of business continuity for tourism operations through the  provision of key services at 243 high-value tourism sites,” Mr Entsch said.

“Operators will undertake in-water conservation and monitoring activities, including reef health and  impact surveys, coral gardening and culling crown-of-thorns starfish.

“Imagery captured of the Reef during these activities will also be used to help keep the Reef top of mind  for people nationally and internationally and support tourism recovery campaigns both domestically and  overseas.”

Operators will collect important data from in-water surveys through the Authority’s Eye on the Reef  system, improving knowledge of reef impacts and recovery.

They will also capture videos and photos to document their activities and enable the Marine Park  Authority to share their images with the world, highlighting the beauty of the Reef and our efforts to  protect it.

Participating tourism operators were selected through an open tender process run by the Great Barrier  Reef Marine Park Authority. The activities will occur at 234 reefs until 30 June 2021.

In-water activities under this initiative directly support the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority’s  Reef Blueprint, which outlines what actions can support reef resilience.

More information on the $1 billon COVID-19 Relief and Recovery Fund can be found  at www.regional.gov.au/regional/programs/covid-19-relief-and-recovery-fund.aspx.

Ends.

Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Jo Williamson 0418 475 668 | Dean Shachar 0418 202 860

Minister Ley - John Brady 0427 867 638  Special Envoy Entsch - Adam Davies 0417 010 702

