

TERRI BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT AND WATER  MEMBER FOR GRIFFITH



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  CAIRNS  WEDNESDAY, 13 JANUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Great Barrier Reef; Great Barrier Reef Foundation grant;  Cairns economy; JobKeeper cuts; Michael McCormack; tourism; sharks;  James Cook University; COVID 19; Warren Entsch; climate change;  international borders.

TERRI BUTLER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT AND  WATER: I'm Terri Butler, Member for Griffith and the Shadow Minister for the  Environment and Water.

Well, it is so great to be here today in Cairns, my hometown. I always come  back to Cairns as much as I possibly can, having grown up here. But today, I'm  here to be here in my capacity as the Shadow Minister for the Environment and  Water.

I’m in Cairns today, and we were here yesterday, to visit the Great Barrier Reef,  a wonder of the natural world, such an important place for the entire globe, an  important place of course for Australia, and for Queensland.

We went to the reef yesterday, had a snorkel and went out Association of  Marine Park Tourism Operators to talk to them about how their experiencing  things at the moment.

The reef was absolutely beautiful, as is so often is when you go out, beautiful  day, get out there with the snorkels, check out the coral and the marine  environment of course, and the fish, the marine life. We had a beautiful  experience at the Great Barrier Reef. Of course, everyone knows that it is facing  significant environmental challenges.

The reef is facing significant environmental challenges. First and foremost, the

greatest challenge to the reef is climate change. And it's also important that  people know that the reef is very much alive and a beautiful place to visit.  Because it's important for both the tourism sector, which supports tens of  thousands of jobs and it's important for conservation efforts that people do  continue to visit the Great Barrier Reef.

The more that people come here, the more inspired they will be to support  conservation efforts on the Great Barrier Reef. So I want to encourage  Queenslanders and Australians, COVID restrictions permitting of course, to  come up to Cairns, to come up to anywhere along almost the entire east coast  of Queensland, the reef is a massive property, we’re talking a thousand islands  three-thousand reefs, more than that in fact, to get up to Queensland and visit  the reef, to Cairns COVID restrictions permitted. And of course, Queenslanders,  people who live in Brisbane like I do, wherever you are in Queensland, if you  can get to the reef, please do so because it's important for this tourism sector  and it's important for conservation.

Tourism operators told me yesterday, they are really worried. They’ve obviously  been hit so hard by the COVID pandemic. And of course, they're always  concerned about making sure that their economy here is actually thriving.

They're super worried about what's going to happen at the end of March.  JobKeeper is going to be shut down. It's already been cut in January, it will be  closed down in March at the moment is the current arrangements from the  government. They're worried about their economic support and regional  economy just falling off a cliff at that point.

So tourism operators and the entire economy here in far north Queensland and  up and down the reef, need to know, they need some certainty from the  government about what they're going to do to continue to support our economy  once we get to the end of March when JobKeeper is due to expire.

They want to know what this government is doing. The government needs to  stop stuffing around and actually give people some certainty. There needs to be  targeted support, there needs to be support for our economy and there  particularly needs to be support for trade exposed economic issues, like tourism  and of course, we all know that here in Cairns we’re particularly interested in  international tourism, it’s been so important for the economy for such a long  period of time.

So we need strong conservation efforts from the Morrison government, they  need to do better. Now they've had a major scandal with the reef, with the  awarding of $444 million to a not for profit, private foundation, done behind  closed doors. They need to do better when it comes to conservation. And they

need to provide much greater support for real action on climate change. And  really importantly, right now, they need to provide economic certainty to tourism  operators.

Thanks everyone, I’ll take questions.

JOURNALIST: Given that JobKeeper is due to expire in March, how certain  should they be giving certainty around (inaudible)….for Cairns?

BUTLER: It's not good enough for people to have to wait and wait and wait. You  know, I noticed that the local member Warren Entsch, who has not done  enough to stand up for the region, is saying oh we’ll let people know closer to  the time. Well, businesses and communities and households, need to plan for  their future. It's not good enough to say just trust us we’ll sort it out down the  track, they need to know now.

JOURNALIST: Just back to climate change, JCU (James Cook University)  studies found baby sharks are being born smaller and malnourished if the  ocean continues to warm. How alarming is this and what should be done?

BUTLER: Look, it's really important research coming out of James Cook  University, a university I attended, an excellent university and really a world  leading university when it comes to marine science. I want to congratulate  James Cook for the work that they're doing in relation to marine science. This is  an alarming study, sharks are important to marine ecosystems they’re an apex  predator. We need to know that the government is doing everything it can to  support real action on climate change because of this and so many other  studies. We also need to know that the government is going to do the right thing  by our research universities and our universities generally which they haven’t  been doing to date.

Most significantly, when it comes to marine life, we have to recognise that all of  our ecosystems are so interrelated. Sharks are important, marine life is  important, the government needs to step up and take notice of this study and so  many others.

JOURNALIST: We also have acting PM Michael McCormack, in Townsville  today, or just outside of Townsville, talking about the satellite expansion for  AIMS do you see that as an important step for their work in conservation?

BUTLER: I'm glad to hear that Michael McCormack is taking an interest in  marine science. But what I do want to say about Michael McCormack, is that he  needs to actually take some responsibility. He's the Acting Prime Minister of this  country, it's not good enough for him to just think it's okay for members of the

Morrison government, to be out there mounting crackpot conspiracy theories.  He needs to be saying in the interest of public health and the interest of public  policy in support for our country, that members of his government should be  doing the right thing and not spreading disinformation.

JOURNALIST: Just in terms of that announcement though, is that going to be  beneficial for the work that AIMS is doing in marine conservation?

BUTLER: We obviously welcome any support and funding for marine science in  the Great Barrier Reef, it has to be done the right way and it has to be targeted.  As I've said, the government has a bit of form when it comes to scandals with  reef funding. Massive amounts, massive amounts of 444 million dollars in  funding, behind closed doors, in a backroom deal with a not for profit foundation  that at the time had only a handful of staff, I think rightly worried people.

Now of course, we want to see, funding going into marine science, going into  the institute, going into GBRMPA, going into projects that will actually assist. I  know that the tourism operators here in Cairns and up and down the reef, want  to see greater support for conservation, as well, because of course they know,  conservation assists the ecosystem and assists the economics as well  (inaudible). So of course we would welcome any tourism support, but we want  to see it done properly. We want to see Australian’s being able to have  confidence in the money that is being spent.

JOURNALIST: Just back to JobKeeper, would you envisage that it’s only FNQ  (Far North Queensland) that gets extended support or other communities as  well affected by the tourism downturn?

BUTLER: Look FNQ has been very hard hit. I know that the Cairns Post, for  example, today was saying that this is the area, Cairns is the area, which has  the most JobKeeker recipients in Queensland.  It’s in the top five areas in the  country for JobKeeper. It’s important that we do take serious notice of the  economic challenges here in Cairns, its particularly international trade exposed  as an area.

But of course, we've been saying and along that the government needs to be  really careful, not to withdraw support from the economy too soon. We’re in one  of the worst economic situations we’ve been in for almost a century. First  recession in nearly three decades but the worst in almost a century. Removing  economic support too soon, is bad for the economy, and will make the downturn  last longer than otherwise would.

That's why we've been saying the government shouldn't be rushing to take  support out of the economy, they need to do it at the right time. And at the

moment, we're very concerned that they're moving too swiftly. We've also been  saying they of course need to have targeted economic support, when need  them to be thinking about how they can spend the money, where they can  spend the money, in order to maintain support for the economy and avoid  prolonging the downturn, and making it deeper than it otherwise could be.

So what the government needs to do in relation to Cairns and JobKeeper, and  in relation to every sector of our economy that’s is struggling, every area where  they’ve been hit really hard, is give them some certainty, and a well-designed  targeted economic support, that will avoid prolonging or worsening downturn.

JOURNALIST: There seems to be some encouraging signs of improvement in  the July markets within the South East but Cairns (inaudible) we rely on fly in fly  out tourists, more so than pretty much any other region. Though our Chamber of  Commerce president has attracted some criticism from the state government  over that attitude. Do you think that’s right to try to detract that criticism for  pointing out that we are so far away?

BUTLER: The fact is, we need Australians when they travel domestically to be  coming to our tourism areas.

Cairns is a beautiful place, I was so lucky to grow up here, I spent my childhood  going out to the Great Barrier Reef, going to Fitzroy Island, the other islands  that are around here, the outer reef as well. We are so lucky to have one of the  natural wonders of the world on our doorstep. So I do encourage people to get  here and of course, I encourage our airlines to make sure that they're  supporting tourism in the area as well.

We have to also recognize that during the pandemic, areas like Cairns with a  reliance on international trade, on international tourism, have been hard hit. It's  just a fact. We need a situation where our Commonwealth Government, the  Morrison Government, are stepping up to do what they can, to support regions  that are exposed because of international border closures and Cairns is one of  them.

It's not good enough to say just trust us we'll sort it out down the track when it  comes to economic support. Tourism operators particularly, but the entire  region, because let's face it, it's all connected. And this region's main industry is  tourism, the entire region needs some certainty, they need to hear what the  Commonwealth Government is going to do to provide that economic support.

And yes of course Queensland’s a massive state. It's a decentralised state. You  know, if you were going to drive from here to my electorate in Brisbane, it’d take  you about 20 to 24 hours, it’s a big state. In fact, one of the great things about



Queensland is that it is so big, it is so diverse but having grown up here I know,  it can feel like you are absolutely a long way away from anywhere else.

That's why we need support from the Morrison Government to support to the  economy and to support tourism into the future. And we also need Australians  to know that the reef itself it’s facing environmental challenges, we must engage  in conservation efforts and those conservation efforts will be assisted by people  coming to visit, by being inspired to support calls for greater conservation and a  range of things that (inaudible) need support in Cairns and the local area.

Thanks everyone.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: RICHARD ALCORN 0438 804 563









