

THE HON KEN WYATT AM MP

Minister for Indigenous Australians  Member for Hasluck

TRANSCRIPT

AFTERNOON BRIEFING  15 February 2021



Topics: National Apology to the Stolen Generations, Closing the Gap, ILSC, Tasmanian  Apology, COVID-19 Vaccine, Liberal Staffing

E&OE…

Patricia Karvelas Political leaders have marked the anniversary of the National  Apology to the Stolen Generations today in Canberra. Federal Parliament paused  from normal business to acknowledge the 13th anniversary of the apology from  former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd. That statement, which was first made on the 13th  of February 2008, expressed regret for past government policies that resulted in the  forced removal of Indigenous children from their families can. Why does the Minister  for Indigenous Australians and he joins me this afternoon. Minister, welcome.

Minister Wyatt It's great to be with you, Patricia.

Patricia Karvelas Do you regret that the Closing the Gap report is not being  delivered on the anniversary of the apology for the Stolen Generations?

Minister Wyatt Now, look, I think the separation of the two give it significant focus in  terms of what both are required to do. But in developing the Closing the Gap  strategy, the joint council considered when to report the need for data. But this time,  every state and territory parliament will table their achievements within their own  parliament. So this was to allow them time to do that. The Commonwealth will report  at the same time. But I think the emphasis on the Apology and the work of the  healing foundation and our past history being separate and distinct from it, is far  more effective and better.

Patricia Karvelas Will a status report be delivered in July?

Minister Wyatt Yes, it will be. And work has already commenced on the  implementation plans. Now the implementation plans, the frameworks for how we will  address each of the targets in terms of the Commonwealth ministers with  responsibility for those areas will provide all of the data and programmes and  services that are being provided to achieve the outcomes against those targets, of  which the Prime Minister will then table the first report under the new system in July  in the House of Representatives.



Patricia Karvelas How much progress have the states and territories made in  formalising partnerships with Indigenous peak bodies?

Minister Wyatt I see I know from talking with Pat that she has engaged with various  state and territory governments, but her peak bodies at the local level are heavily  engaged. And every Minister for Aboriginal Affairs I've spoken to at various points  have indicated the progress that they're making in ensuring their peak bodies and  Aboriginal communities are involved in working together to achieve improved  outcomes. So it's a quantum shift or a significant shift from the past.

Patricia Karvelas Are you arguing, arguing, rather, for an increase in the 47 million  set aside in the October budget for Closing the Gap initiatives? Is that what's going to  be delivered in this budget coming?

Minister Wyatt Well, I think what we will be looking at is certainly that commitment is  on the table, but we're looking at all of the implementation plans. What is in them, the  existing resources that Indigenous identified, but also resources that are within the  mainstream areas of each portfolio with ministers leading that work, but then  identifying what are the initiatives that require more funding? So it's it's a very  different process. And I think it's a much more effective way of ensuring that  government services reach Indigenous Australians in a way that they haven't before.

Patricia Karvelas OK, I know there's been a lot of criticism from Indigenous leaders I  talk to who say that this new system creates basically takes away responsibility from  the Commonwealth. It dilutes responsibility and that it's not in the sort of spirit of the  1967 Referendum, the idea that the Commonwealth is responsible for Indigenous  affairs. What's your response to that, Minister? Because obviously states and  territories will be doing report backs here, too. Does it take the scrutiny away from the  federal government?

Minister Wyatt No, it doesn't. Patricia? Far from it. But I think what people have to  consider is states and territories deliver all of the programmes from education, health,  out-of-home care, the way in which they deal with domestic violence or community  safety in many other facets of what is taken for granted. The Commonwealth  provides Commonwealth funding, but the levers with states and territories. So this is  a combined effort by states and territories and the Commonwealth. And at some  point local governments will become involved. So and then with the pigs being part of  that design process, they are all going to be accountable in a very different way that  we've not seen in the past. So it doesn't diminish the Commonwealth's commitment  nor our responsibility.

Patricia Karvelas And will there be specific new money for Indigenous housing in  the budget that we're seeing in May?



Minister Wyatt But I know those discussions will be occurring with the minister  responsible for housing and in the agreements we've had, particularly with the  Territory, Western Australia and Queensland. We've come to the end of that  agreement. But further discussions will be ongoing with the respective  Commonwealth ministers who will take on responsibility within their portfolios for the  very things that are important but make up Closing the Gap so it doesn't just sit any  more with just the minister for Indigenous Australians. It is a collective ministerial  approach to achieving closure in those gaps.

Patricia Karvelas Who does the buck stop with, though, when you dilute the  responsibility, Minister? You know what the what the risk is. It's no one's fault. It ends  up being no one's problem.

Minister Wyatt No, no, no. It won't be like that. Let me tell you that the 51 peak  Aboriginal organisations are in agreement with us would not support that approach.  So we won't see the dilution. In fact, we will see areas that require further work in  order to achieve closures in those areas that we've identified collectively.

Patricia Karvelas Minister, want to change the topic to something very important.  Obviously, we've got the Pfizer vaccine which has made it to Australia today, and  that's significant. So I want to know where Indigenous Australians sit in terms of  priority groups being vaccinated. I know you're working on this show. What can you  tell me?

Minister Wyatt Well, what I like is the fact that when you look at vaccination rates in  every category, Indigenous Australians do better than non-indigenous counterparts  right across this nation, even in remote communities. And we are working very  closely with the Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Services and other points  that engage with Aboriginal people. And so the take up within that tranche of work  will see the most vulnerable, targeted. And certainly we will see a coordinated  approach to ensuring that we vaccinate every single Indigenous Australian to a level  that is commensurate with our current rates of vaccination, which are about 97.4%.

Patricia Karvelas So how will the vaccine be rolled out across remote indigenous  communities?

Minister Wyatt Well, actually, Minister Hunt is working with the National Aboriginal  Community Controlled Health Organisation, developing that strategy to ensure that it  is rolled out in remotes. But I think the other thing that's important is the state and  territory health systems will also be critical in ensuring that remote and isolated  communities are part of the vaccination programme. So we won't miss people.

Patricia Karvelas Can the Pfizer vaccine be safely transported to remote  communities or will they get the AstraZeneca vaccine?

Minister Wyatt So that's a question that Minister Hunt will identify as to which ones  are rolled out across. But the one that is most easiest is the one that he will focus on,  an either or. Whatever the decision is, we have to consider the cold chain for the  storage of vaccines and where it is suitable, then the appropriate one will be chosen.

Patricia Karvelas Minister, changing the topic again, can you explain why you've lost  confidence in Eddie Fry as the chairman of the Indigenous Land and Sea  Corporation?

Minister Wyatt Well, there are some matters. There was a report by a consultant in  Thom's report was provided to me. There have been other matters, but we've had  discussions and the board have raised issues and I've provided it provided the  organisation with the opportunity to deal with its governance arrangements and focus  on the investments that are absolutely critical for the development of the land assets  that Aboriginal communities and people hold. And the government remains  committed to looking at job opportunities and economic development from those  assets so that we realise a better outcome for future generations.

Patricia Karvelas What can you do about this, given Mr Fry hasn't reached the  threshold for termination?

Minister Wyatt Well, I would hope that we continue having discussions and that the  board and Mr Fry work together to ensure that the task that they have been charged  with are met with due diligence and in the manner that you would expect of a  government, a governing body.

Patricia Karvelas Are you disappointed it's taken the Royal Society of Tasmania and  the Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery until now to apologise for stealing Aboriginal  artefacts and desecrating graves?

Minister Wyatt I was surprised when I saw this story because I would never have  thought that in this country we would do what I've seen portrayed in the media today.  But right across the nation, we have the museums and institutions that have  Aboriginal artefacts that really don't belong there because they belong back in the  hands of Aboriginal people at the community level. I know in one institution there are  10 skulls and I would prefer to see a proactive approach by all of our institutions in  returning back to country, the human remains or artefacts that are culturally important  and in some cases extremely sacred.

Patricia Karvelas Minister, you mentioned the 10 skulls. Could you tell me what that  institution is?

Minister Wyatt No I won't share that with you, but I am hoping that they will make  the right decision. There has been a very brief discussion with them and certainly in  my session with AIATSIS about repatriation, part of the discussion has been about  the local domestic areas and institutions. So this I know that we are successful in  bringing them back from overseas, but I also want to see a focus on Australia.

Patricia Karvelas So at the moment, just to be clear, you're working as the Minister  for Indigenous Australians on other institutions across our country doing the right  thing when it comes to Indigenous artefacts. And obviously, in this case, as you  mentioned, skulls, which is pretty devastating for communities.



Minister Wyatt But I'll continue working on this issue with the relevant institutions  and with each state and territory government where ministers who have responsibility  would give serious consideration to the cultural obligations that Aboriginal people in  communities have towards their artefacts, but in particular the human remains that  are part of collections.

Patricia Karvelas Minister, just finally, what was your reaction to the allegation that a  Liberal staffer was raped by another staffer in the Defence Minister's office?

Minister Wyatt I was horrified, but I'm pleased to say that the police are investigating  the matter and. Let's see what measures are taken in that process because. It's not  appropriate to do that to any individual, let alone a young lady.

Patricia Karvelas Is it is it enough in these instances for the person who's been  assaulted to be told to go to the police, given we know that this woman and other  women have told us this, they worried about the consequences here on their job and  their future?

Minister Wyatt Well, I don't think any person in this place on any side of politics. I  would want to not provide that advice and give the counselling and support that is  necessary for a person who is a victim of any form of assault. So AFP are involved.  So let's let them take the actions that are necessary and will await the outcome of  that. But we've got to do things better.

Patricia Karvelas Yeah, there's no doubt about it. Minister, thanks for coming on.

Minister Wyatt Thank you, Patricia.

Patricia Karvelas Ken Wyatt is the Minister for Indigenous Australians.



[ENDS]

Authorised by K. Wyatt, Member for Hasluck

