



The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

Senator The Hon. Michaelia Cash  Minister for  Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

Tuesday 9 March 2021

THOUSANDS OF NEW APPRENTICE AND TRAINEE JOBS

Tens of thousands of new job opportunities will be created for apprentices and trainees across Australia  with the expansion of the targeted wage subsidy program as part of the Morrison Government’s  National Economic Recovery Plan.

The Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements wage subsidy program is fully subscribed, helping to  create 100,000 apprenticeships in less than five months.

The Program will now become demand driven and expanded for a full 12 months for new apprentices  and trainees signed up prior to 30 September 2021.

It is estimated that this demand driven expansion will generate around 70,000 new apprentice and  trainee places, with the Government investing around $1.2 billion.

Prime Minister Scott Morrison said training and skills were at the core of the Government’s response to  the economic challenges faced by the COVID-19 recession.

“Creating jobs, generating economic opportunities and boosting the skills of workers right across  Australia are at the heart of our National Economic Recovery Plan, as we build back from the COVID-19  recession,” the Prime Minister said.

“Last week’s National Accounts showed the comeback of the Australian economy is underway, however  many businesses still need support and it’s important our apprentices and trainees get opportunities to  boost their skills and stay employed.

“With 100,000 new apprenticeship positions already snapped up, it highlights the confidence businesses  have in the future of the Australian economy.”

Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business Michaelia Cash said this will help more  people into jobs.



“Growing our skills pipeline is an incredibly important part of helping our economic recovery,” Minister  Cash said.

“The Boosting Apprentices Commencement program has to date assisted almost 40,000 businesses to  take on a new Australian apprentice or trainee.

“This initiative has supported the creation of more than 8,000 bricklayers, 6,000 electricians, and almost  11,000 people in retail and hospitality work.

“I’m so pleased that we’ve helped create 100,000 new registered apprentice and trainee places so  far and we intend to help even more people get the chance to upskill or reskill.

“By expanding this wage subsidy for another 12 months, we’ll be helping businesses to create even  more jobs, further supporting our National Economic Recovery Plan for Australia.”

The Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements was one of the COVID-19 skills measures announced as  part of the $4 billion in apprentice wage subsidies.

The Morrison Government is providing record levels of support to the vocational education and training  sector in 2020-21, which is not only helping rebuild our economy but preparing for the future.

This includes the $1 billion JobTrainer Fund, which is supporting more than 300,000 additional free or  low-fee training places for job seekers and young people.

We have also established the National Skills Commission which harnesses contemporary data with  labour market analysis to forecast the skills needs of the economy and inform the qualifications and  skills Australians need to train for.

We have also funded the National Careers Institute which provides future apprentices, trainees and  Australians looking to reskill or upskill with the information and support they need to take the next step  in their career.

Further information on the support available to eligible businesses and employees is available at:  https://www.dese.gov.au/boosting-apprenticeship-commencements

[ENDS]

Media Contacts:   Prime Minister’s Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  Minister Cash’s office, Guy Creighton 0438 815 302  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

