

The Hon. Scott Morrison MP  Prime Minister

STATEMENT

Friday 5 February 2021

NATIONAL CABINET

The National Cabinet met today to discuss Australia’s COVID-19 response, the Australian COVID-19  Vaccination Policy and management of Australia’s borders in the context of the emergence of new  variants.

National Cabinet continues to work together to address issues and find solutions to the health and  economic consequences of COVID-19.

National Cabinet also received a detailed briefing on the economic and jobs outlook by the  Commonwealth Treasury Secretary Steven Kennedy outlining how the Australian economy continues to  recover as we head into 2021.

The Chief Medical Officer, Professor Paul Kelly, provided an update on the latest epidemiological data  and medical advice in relation to COVID-19.

There have been 28,842 confirmed cases in Australia and, sadly, 909 people have died. There are  currently 9 people in hospital. More than 13.1 million tests have been undertaken in Australia.

To date Australia’s existing systems built around social distancing, testing, tracing, local health responses  and quarantine have effectively mitigated the broader spread of COVID-19 virus and new variants of  COVID-19 into the Australian community. COVID-19 vaccines will further strengthen Australia’s ability to  control the virus.

Australia has done well on both the health and economic fronts compared to most countries around the  world. National Cabinet noted the significant increase in COVID-19 cases in many countries and the  comparative strength of Australia’s effort in addressing COVID compared to most other developed  economies. Globally there have been over 104 million cases and sadly over 2.2 million deaths, with  around 489,000 new cases reported in the last 24 hours.

National Cabinet reaffirmed commitment to the Australian COVID-19 Vaccine and Treatment Strategy  and the Australian COVID-19 Vaccination Policy, which sets out the roles and responsibilities of the  Commonwealth, states and territories in rolling out COVID-19 vaccination.

National Cabinet will meet again on Friday 5 March 2021.

Australian COVID-19 Vaccine Strategy

National Cabinet received a detailed update from Adjunct Professor John Skerritt, head of the  Therapeutic Goods Administration, Professor Brendan Murphy, Chair of the Science and Industry  Technical Advisory Group, and the Commonwealth Chief Medical Officer, Professor Paul Kelly on the  Australian Vaccination and Treatment Strategy and noted detailed roll out plans developed by states  and territories for COVID-19 vaccination.

Professor Paul Kelly outlined the importance of new COVID-19 vaccines in preventing severe disease and  potentially transmission. A COVID-19 vaccination program which prevents severe diseases will ensure  Australia can manage the virus in the same way as we manage other common diseases in society and  will change the risk environment in Australian to COVID-19.

Professor Brendan Murphy reiterated the latest guidance that the COVID-19 vaccination rollout is on  track to commence in late February 2021.

National Cabinet further noted that the Commonwealth Government had entered an Advance Purchase  Agreement with Pfizer/BioNTech for an additional 10 million vaccines in 2021. Australia now has access  to over 150 million COVID-19 vaccine doses, with spare capacity (after Australians have been offered  vaccines) to be made available for partners in the Pacific and South East Asia.

National Cabinet further welcomed the extension of the free access to COVID-19 vaccines for all visa  holders in Australia. It is vital that we offer vaccines to all people living in Australia in order to achieve a  maximum level of coverage for all Australians.

New Taskforce to assess the risk environment of COVID-19 in 2021

National Cabinet agreed that in order to bring together economic and health considerations and to  provide increased certainty and confidence to the Australian community, all States and Territories will  establish a taskforce to work together to provide recommendations to the National Cabinet about  consistent and coordinated COVID-19 responses across jurisdictions in the new risk environment.

The new Taskforce will consider the changed risk indicators associated with new strains of the COVID-19, alongside the strength of risk responses to date and in the future, including most significantly the  impact of the vaccine rollout commencing in late February 2021. The Taskforce will be led by the  Commonwealth Secretary of Prime Minister of Cabinet Mr Phil Gaetjens and his counterparts in each  state and territory.

The Taskforce will report to National Cabinet at each meeting.

Quarantine Arrangements

National Cabinet noted the update on implementation of recommendations to the National Review of  Hotel Quarantine arrangements and the continuous improvement to processes and procedures  surrounding hotel quarantine.

To date over 211,000 people have returned to Australia through hotel quarantine since March 2020. The  system implemented under state and territory public health orders has to date successfully mitigated  the broader transmission of COVID-19 into the Australian community.

National Cabinet agreed that hotel quarantine will continue to be the model used to quarantine  returning Australians. The Centre of National Resilience at Howard Springs will continue to operate as an  emergency national facility for quarantine as per the National Review of Hotel Quarantine undertaken  by Ms Jane Halton AO PSM and agreed by National Cabinet.

To date there have been a small number of instances of COVID-19 linked to hotel quarantine in  Australia. Recent positive cases of quarantine workers in Western Australia, Queensland and Victoria  have to date not seen seeding events into the local community. This highlights the continuously  improved hotel quarantine processes and procedures, including daily testing and mask wearing.

The Commonwealth and the Northern Territory agreed to work together on options to increase  quarantine capacity through an expansion of the Centre of National Resilience at Howard Springs  quarantine facility. The Commonwealth and Queensland Government will work on further defining the  Queensland proposal for a bespoke facility in Toowoomba. Any other changes to quarantine  arrangements would be conditional on the work undertaken by the Taskforce led by the Commonwealth  Secretary of Prime Minister of Cabinet Mr Phil Gaetjens.

International Passenger Arrival Caps

National Cabinet reaffirmed a shared priority to supporting Australians to return home through  increased international passenger arrival caps.

National Cabinet agreed that caps would return to pre-8 January levels in New South Wales (430 per  day) and Queensland (1000 per week) as planned from 12:01am on 15 February. The current cap in  Western Australia (512 per week) will remain in place pending further review. From 12:01am on 15  February the cap in Victoria will increase from 1120 to 1310 arrivals per week with additional increases  to be considered, and South Australia will increase from 490 to 530 arrivals per week.

National Cabinet noted that the agreed arrangements for international passenger arrival caps would  continue until 11:59pm on 30 April.



[END]

Media Contacts: Press Office, (02) 6277 7744  The Hon. Scott Morrison MP, Sydney

