

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

MEMBER FOR HUNTER

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SUNRISE   MONDAY,15 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECT: COVID-19 vaccine; Victoria’s lockdown.

DAVID KOCH, HOST: Now the first shipment of COVID-19 vaccines will arrive in  Australia within 48 hours in what the Health Minister has called a high security  operation. 80,000 Pfizer vaccine doses will be tested by the Therapeutic Goods  Administration and then distributed to hospital hubs and aged care centres right  around the country, with the first jabs likely to be administered early next week. For  their take, we're joined by Nationals MP, Barnaby Joyce, and Labor MP, Joel  Fitzgibbon. Gents, morning to you. Barnaby, how confident are you that the vaccine  rollout will start successfully?

BARNABY JOYCE, MEMBER FOR NEW ENGLAND: Well, I'm absolutely confident  that if we can get more people vaccinated, we've got more chance of controlling the  disease and more chance of bringing down our debt, and more chance of making sure  the economies and small businesses are going again. Australia has been lucky that we  haven't had the incidents like they've had in the United States or in Brazil, or in  Europe. So, as soon as we can do it, the better. But we're not in the condition that  they're in. And might I also say I'd like to congratulate both the Duke and the Duchess  who are both pregnant. That is a turn up for the books.

KOCH: You were expecting them to have another baby Barnaby?

JOYCE: Well, when the Duke has a baby - when the Duke has a baby, I will be telling  my Dad, who is vet, that this is a remarkable event truly worth celebrating.

KOCH: All right, ok it's a lockdown baby. All right let's get back on the vaccinations,  and Joel, biggest vaccination campaign in history. More than 172 million doses have  been administered around the world. And we're doing this pretty well aren't we? So,  we should be able to get it right?

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: It's great news, Kochie, that we're  close to rolling out the vaccination. That's a good thing for the economy. It's good for  all the Australian people. Many other countries, of course, have been doing it for many  weeks. We seem to be slow off the mark. But getting it right is the main thing. And let's  hope that it's the next step to getting the economy back to some normality, because  there were a lot of people out there doing it very tough.

KOCH: Yeah, and Barnaby, this is the vaccine that's got to be transported at minus 70  degrees. So, a huge logistical exercise to get it around the country. And it's a big  country, and a long way to come here.

JOYCE: It is, Kochie, but there are other ways we can assist with this. I've been  speaking to vets and there are a lot of vet practices that have the capacity to store that  vaccine as well. So, I think if we just coordinate and use our heads, we're going to be  able to do it. And so, if both in hospitals and some doctors’ surgeries and some vet  surgeries - and because we're not expecting to vaccinate everybody immediately, but  the more we get vaccinated, the more we have a capacity to get an immunity across  the community.

KOCH: Yeah. Joel, you bring up one of the criticisms that we've been a bit slow  compared with the rest of the world to get these vaccines going. Has the government  also done enough to convince everyone to get the jab when it eventually gets here?

FITZGIBBON: Look, I support the marketing campaign, Kochie. It is important that  people have confidence in the vaccine, we can't expect them to have that confidence if  we're not selling it. That's a good thing. Still disappointed, of course, the number of  MPs running interference on this process and undermining that, that public  conference. But look, Australians are eminently sensible. They'll be watching what's  happening around the rest of the world. Many Australians have told me that, of course,  they are not in a hurry to be vaccinated. They'd rather sit back and wait to see how it  runs on other people. I understand that and that reinforces the need to have a strong  marketing campaign to work together to ensure that public confidence is built.

KOCH: Yeah. And that public confidence, Barnaby, sort of has been a bit shaken with  the - with the lockdown situation in Victoria at the moment. They've stopped taking  Australian overseas arrivals. Dan Andrews sort of floating the idea last week that we  should stop all international arrivals, even Australians, wanting to return from overseas  that - that's a bit extreme isn’t it? Shouldn't we just focus on getting hotel quarantine,  right?

JOYCE: Yes, of course. And we should focus on getting other facilities, especially in  regional areas, going. Dan Andrews, to be quite frank, is - I don't know what game  he's playing but it's over the top. You see an example of it today where Melbourne -  fair enough areas absolutely in lockdown. No problems about that. But Mildura 600  kilometres away. I mean, it's just illogical. I mean, why would you do that? The  epidemiological consequences and issues for Mildura - you may as well be in Perth.  You could as well be, you know, in the Northern Territory and this is what's really  kicking the economy down and unfortunately, Victoria's had the worst result and  getting people off JobKeeper. We've got 2.3 million people off JobKeeper, but not  Victoria. And sure enough, you wait, Chairman Dan will be ringing up saying I need  more money, things are tough. Well, Dan Andrews, just like Anastasia Palaszczuk,  you're doing it to yourself. Follow the epidemiological issues, follow the reasoning  behind the disease, and don't follow the parochialism. And another form of  parochialism, saying no more international travels. What - what are we going to live as  - how does Australia work? You can't do that. You're going to crash the economy.

KOCH: Yep, alright Gents. Thank you for that. Have a good week. See you next week.

ENDS





MEDIA CONTACT: DAVID BULLOCK - 0405 408 871





Authorised by Joel Fitzgibbon, ALP, Cessnock NSW



This email is confidential and may be privileged. If you have received this email by mistake: (1) please

notify me immediately and delete the email; (2) you must not use this email or its contents; (3) client legal

privilege is not waived.













