

JIM CHALMERS MP  SHADOW TREASURER  MEMBER FOR RANKIN

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  ABC RN BREAKFAST WITH FRAN KELLY   MONDAY, 29 MARCH 2021

SUBJECTS: Morrison’s JobKeeper cuts will cut jobs; patchy and uncertain economic  recovery; Morrison Government’s failure to listen to what is happening in local  communities and economies; Andrew Laming; historical sexual assault allegation.

FRAN KELLY, HOST: The Shadow Treasurer, Jim Chalmers joins us from  Brisbane. Jim Chalmers, welcome back to Breakfast.

JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: Thanks very much, Fran.

KELLY: About 2.8 million people have already moved off JobKeeper,  unemployment is going down not up. Hasn't it done its job, which was to stem  the worst of job losses at the height of the recession?

CHALMERS: One of the reasons why we proposed Jobkeeper in the first place  Fran was precisely for that reason, to support people and keep them connected  with their employer. But this week is not about those Australians who've come  off JobKeeper, it's about the Australians who still need it. As you rightly pointed  out, a million Australians were left in the lurch yesterday when the Government  cut JobKeeper. For too many of those Australians, the end of JobKeeper means  the end of their job. And that's why today's a really difficult day for a lot of  employers and a lot of workers trying to make decisions about what the future  might hold. Already we’re seeing concerning reports about businesses closing  down and workers being laid off. I'll be in Cairns later today, and I suspect I'll  hear more of those stories.

KELLY: It is no doubt a tough week this week for a lot of Australians. But if we  listened to the Treasury Secretary Steven Kennedy, he told Estimates last week  that somewhere between 100,000 and 150,000 people Treasury thinks might be  cut loose from their jobs - lose their jobs - now that JobKeeper has ended. But

he also said there's “reason to believe the effects will be moderated by the  strong economic and labour market recovery”. Doesn't that suggest that the  unemployment numbers will rise, but temporarily and the economic recovery  has enough momentum to pick up a lot of the slack - do you agree with that?

CHALMERS: Well, a couple of things about that Fran  Yes, the economy is  recovering from the deepest, most damaging recession we've had in almost a  century. And when jobs are created, we welcome those and we say so publicly.  But there are still 2 million Australians who either don't have a job or can't find  the hours that they need to support their loved ones. A million on JobKeeper.  And as you say, the Treasury Secretary thinks something like 100,000 to  150,000 Australians might lose their job as a consequence of this decision to  cut JobKeeper yesterday. So that's very concerning for a lot of Australians. Yes,  the economy is recovering in aggregate but for hundreds of thousands of  Australians, it still feels like a recession. Some of these businesses, which  would ordinarily be successful in ordinary times, are still dealing with the closure  of the international borders, we’re still nowhere near the 4 million vaccinations  that the Government promised they'd have away by the end of this month,  there's still social distancing, there's still a lot of uncertainty in the economy. And  so all we're asking for is that the Government should have had a temporary,  responsible, targeted extension of the JobKeeper program, not for everyone  and not forever, but for those businesses which are still impacted.

KELLY: Yes, because the flip side of what you just said, some of these  businesses will be successful in normal times. We do know too, from the  statistics that some businesses which might have gone bankrupt in normal  times have been kept afloat by JobKeeper. So there's always going to be a  number of businesses that go belly up, because they're not viable businesses.  That needs to happen, doesn't it?

CHALMERS: Well, the priority here needs to be the jobs of Australians. We’re  going through a very difficult period in the economy. As I said, 2 million people  are doing it especially tough and millions more are doing it tough on stagnant  wages. And I think one of the issues here, the Government talks about how  there's no blank cheque forever and all the rest of it, and what makes people  really angry that I speak to - and I spent the weekend at a lot of community  events - is this Treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, wasted hundreds of millions of  dollars on companies that are really profitable, that actually saw their profits  increase during the COVID crisis. It wasted all that money there and now he  says it can't afford to support the workers and small businesses that still need it.  What we're saying is that if there hadn't been so much waste on those  companies that didn't need JobKeeper, he could afford to support workers and  small businesses that still need it.

KELLY: Okay, I know you've got to catch a plane. So I'm just going to move on  to another issue. Your fellow Queenslander, Andrew Laming, LNP politician -  this backbencher has announced he’ll leave politics at the next election  following the revelations of how he's been harassing women over the last few  years, it would seem. Labor is calling for Andrew Laming to quit the parliament.  Is that what you want - quit the parliament or quit the Coalition?

CHALMERS: Well, I don't think there's a place for him in the parliament, Fran.  Andrew Laming’s got a long history of bullying and belittling and abusing and  trolling his own constituents. There are potentially criminal issues at play as well  here. The Government's already in a precarious position in the parliament,  they've been there eight years in office, the wheels are falling off the  Government. It’s a crucial time for the economy as we've been discussing, and  for gender relations, and the Government's consumed by managing the political  fallout. So all of this is in the Prime Minister's hands. If we need to make  decisions about how we handle Andrew Laming in the parliament, we'll make  those decisions between now and when parliament resumes.

KELLY: You’re talking about pairing, but that do you think Scott Morrison should  do now then?

CHALMERS: Well, there's no role for Andrew Laming in the parliament with this  history of abusing people and trolling people and bullying and belittling people  and potentially criminal issues at play. So we've made our view clear about that.  That's in the Prime Minister's hands. Parliament doesn't come back for another  six weeks or so. And so he needs to make the Andrew Laming situation clear.

KELLY: This is just the latest in a long list of really horrific revelations, but the  Australian newspaper reports today an anonymous historical sexual assault  allegation levelled against an unnamed senior Labor figure, which has now  been referred to police by that unnamed figure, as they've reported. How  seriously is Labor taking this allegation?

CHALMERS: Well, we take all allegations seriously, Fran. I saw that story in the  paper, that's the first that I heard of it. I'm not aware of any of the details beyond  the details contained in that story. So I'm a bit reluctant to go any further on it.

KELLY: What it tells everyone though, is bad behaviour is not just limited to one  side of politics, perhaps.

CHALMERS: We said that all along Fran. There are cultural issues and  structural issues at play here that are not limited to one party or another. We all  need to do much better. We can do that and we will do that.



KELLY: Jim Chalmers, thank you very much for joining us.

CHALMERS: Thanks for your time, Fran.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: BRETT MASON 0419 239 811



