

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER  SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE PUBLIC SERVICE  CHAIR OF THE SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON COVID-19

SENATOR FOR THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AFTERNOON EDITION  TUESDAY, 23 MARCH 2021

SUBJECTS: Scott Morrison’s Press Conference; Brittany Higgins matter; Parliament  House Culture.

KIERAN GILBERT, HOST: Katy Gallagher is with me now, the Manager of Opposition  Business. So, explain to us why, in your mind, the Prime Minister's reaction to Andrew  Clennell's question was inappropriate, because he seemed to be making the point that it's not  just his party that has issues basically.

SENATOR KATY GALLAGHER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR FINANCE: I was really shocked  actually watching that press conference unfold. Because I thought it was a moment where we  were going to see a Prime Minister stand up, take leadership after all of these terrible, terrible  stories of alleged rapes, last night stories about terrible lewd conduct within government  staffing ranks. And it became clear to me that it was just a defensive ploy. It was a press  conference that in a way was designed to say, look, all of you have problems, don't come at  me and I'm going to make sure I smear all of us in this. I was just so shocked that he was  prepared to use a woman and a complaint that he's aware of from another organisation and  toss it out for news fodder, as a way of protecting himself and a way of taking responsibility for  what has happened on his watch. It was a really low moment, and I don't usually lose my call  very often. But I was really, really shocked, disappointed. And I think it sent the really wrong  message to women at the moment, which is, we've been trying to say, women stand up, don't  accept terrible conduct, sexual harassment and assault, and violence is not okay. Come  forward, be supported. We're going to create this environment. That's one message. And then  in the same breath by the way I know about this, and I'll chuck it out there on the national  news, as fodder. And I just think that's incredibly damaging to the overall message to women,  and trying to change the culture not just in this place, but everywhere.

GILBERT: Did you think that though, the Prime Minister in that initial speech that he gave that  he was saying that he did listen, that he processed and that he was getting the message? Do  you think that that was - it appeared a very authentic start to that news conference? Are you  saying that - what's your argument in terms of when he then answered Andrew Clennell's  question, what when on there, do you think?

GALLAGHER: I don't think he had a script for that. I think he'd come out with a script, he'd

been told it's obvious the pushback against some of the things he said. When he said women  were lucky not to get shot, when he said Jen told me think about it, if it happened to your  daughters - so your daughters matter but what about the rest of us? I mean, when he made  those missteps, I think he's realised that he's got to make amends for that, that there was  significant pushback. That women are angry - 110,000 women don't take to the streets on  every other day, like women are really feeling this moment. So, I think he came out with a  script prepared, he stuck to that. And when the questions started flowing, he reverted to type  which was get defensive, and get spiteful, push back and try and blame everybody for his own  failings. I thought it was disgraceful. And, again, I'm not here just to throw stones at the Prime  Minister just because that's what politics does. I have been looking to this moment to really  create the opportunity where we can change this building and more broadly, what happens,  what's women's experience around the country, and he failed that today in the most  disgraceful way, because I think he used a woman and a complaint - I don't even know if it's  real. But the message she sent out by throwing that other complaint out, that he knew about,  was if you do come forward, it'll be used for this purpose - as a defensive strategy. And I just  thought that was a really low, low act.

GILBERT: When you look at the latest information on the Brittany Higgins case, the security  guard that has spoken to the ABC - the 4 Corners program last night that she hadn't been  interviewed, prior to that was surprising to say the least. And then the shocking story on the ten  network as well. That was bizarre and crazy, sickening suggestions on that story. It's hard to  fathom in some respects, isn't it that it happens. It is happening. Obviously, it has happened.  But a place that you and I've worked for many years.

GALLAGHER: Yeah, absolutely. And you know, this should be the best workplace in the  country. It should lead the way. It's full of legislators creating the law that everyone else has to  abide by. And I think the picture that's been sent to the rest of Australia is it's the worst  workplace and it's terrible. And the worst thing is nobody's been able to come out and say  these things never happened or this is not true. We're all having to, I guess process it in real  time that this has been happening here. It's got to stop. There has to be zero tolerance. But we  need leadership for that. And we need to accept the hard reality in this country is that I think in  any workplace, if you ask women to put up their hands and say, have you been sexually  assaulted, sexually harassed, or know someone who has, I would doubt every single woman  would probably put up their hand. That's the reality of the country we're living in today. And it's  got to be better than that. And I think the message the Prime Minister sent today - he wanted  to send a message, it backfired. And he ended up sending the exact opposite message that  should have been sent today, which is I will use complaints like this for political purposes. And  that's what sends women back behind doors.

GILBERT: And just finally, in terms of some of the changes that Labor wants to see off the  back of this, there needs to be obviously, complaint mechanisms and support for staffers and  others in the Parliament, but also things like domestic violence leave, can this be a catalyst for  proper reform?

GALLAGHER: You would think so. I mean, if what the Prime Minister said at the beginning of  his press conference is true, then it's going to need a massive turnaround from the way they  fund legal services, women's services, training, domestic violence leave, I mean, a whole  range of things if he's and how he's going to promote women in his party, but he's going to  have to live up to that.

GILBERT: Katy Gallagher, thanks. Appreciate it.





GALLAGHER: Thank you very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: PAT CRONAN 0432 758 224



