

MATT KEOGH MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE INDUSTRY

SHADOW MINISTER ASSISTING FOR SMALL BUSINESS

MEMBER FOR BURT





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA

THURSDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: JobKeeper; Future Submarines.



MATT KEOGH MP, SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE INDUSTRY, SHADOW MINISTER

ASSISTING FOR SMALL BUSINESS: It's now 31 days until the end of JobKeeper and the

Morrison government is still failing to provide any certainty to business across Australia and

the 1.3 million employees working for those businesses that are still relying on JobKeeper.



Josh Frydenberg in question time yesterday, went to great lengths to talk about all of those

businesses that are no longer relying on the JobKeeper payment. And that's a great outcome

for those businesses. But he completely ignored all of the businesses, and the people working

for those businesses that are still relying on JobKeeper, and are clearly going to require

ongoing support after the 28th of March. I think everybody's happy to see that the economy is

recovering after the worst recession in a century. But what Josh Frydenberg is failing to see,

are all of those workers and businesses in the cinema industry, in the aviation industry, in the

tourism industry, in the hospitality industry, in so many different sectors across Australia, those

businesses in our CBD’s that have still not come completely back to life, they're still relying on

JobKeeper. They still require ongoing support after the end of the 28th of March, and the

government is failing by not providing them with any certainty. We've now got a whole host of

organisations, peak bodies for business, industry groups, coming and telling the government

that their sector or businesses across the board - small business require ongoing support from

the government after the 28th of March, and the government is giving them not only no

confidence, but no certainty, no security, about what will happen after the 28th of March when

JobKeeper comes to an end, and what plans therefore those businesses should be doing.

Some of them are just hoping that there's going to be some form of targeted support. And they

may be found wanting when that support is not there. Some businesses though, they’re seeing

the writing on the wall now, they’re having to make calls about letting go employees and

winding up their businesses. The Treasury Department has already told government 100,000

people are going to lose their job when JobKeeper comes to an end in 31 days time, if the

government doesn't do something to continue to support small businesses and the people

working for them around Australia.



I just want to make some comments in relation to the reporting on the Future Submarine

Project.



The Future Submarine Project is the biggest project that the government has ever embarked

on, it is the biggest thing an Australian government has ever purchased. We've seen a huge

cost blowout to $90 billion on the project. We've seen a time blowout of around seven years

delay in the future submarine project. And now, we see that Scott Morrison is looking to

torpedo the entire future submarine project itself.



It appears he has no confidence in the way in which his Defence Ministers have handled the

future submarine project looking at bringing in an entirely different supplier. This causes huge

problems for Australia, it means that there's a lack of confidence in government about the

capability for a submarine programme. But importantly, this government has failed defence

industry here in Australia. It's failed Australian workers by not having any commitments in its

future submarine contracts for at least a minimum Australian industry capability requirement.

The government over a year ago, said that it would negotiate a 60% minimum, but it's done

nothing to actually deliver on that. And now it looks like it's going to torpedo the entire future

submarine project.



This is why Australian Labor has made the commitment that we will have minimum Australian

industry capability requirements in major defence procurement projects, so that we employ

more Australians on those projects so that we build defence industry businesses and support

them, and that we build critical sovereign capability here in Australia for our defence projects,

our defence industry and our skilled defence workforce.



JOURNALIST: Just on Defence firstly, I mean, obviously, cost blowouts aren’t great, but I

mean, it seems like a lot of submarine projects have cost blowouts, for example, the Collins

Class submarines were famously late. How would Labor actually stop those kind of blow outs,

these late entries coming through? And it seems like no Governments have been capable of

getting these programmes to run on time.



KEOGH: It's quite clear there's been a dramatic failure under this government in its

procurement process. So I think we now have something like a cumulative delay of some 87

years on the defence projects that are currently under procurement under this Morrison

government. They cannot manage any of these projects. They clearly don't have the capacity

to do it. The Collins Class programme - whilst yes, it did suffer from delays and problems at the

beginning, it is now the poster child of Australian industry capability. We've built the capability

around the Collins Class Submarine Programme, so that we can have Australian workers, the

Collins class programme at the end demonstrated what Australia can do, what we can do here

and what we should be supporting, and highlights effectively the failure of the Morrison

government by not supporting Australian industry as part of the Future Submarine Project.



JOURNALIST: You mentioned as well that 100,000 - Treasury thinks 100,000 people will lose

their jobs at the end of JobKeeper. Is there any possibility that that might climb because there

are around about a million workers relying on it. Still those businesses are still struggling and

things could get worse.



KEOGH: We certainly face the problem right now with only 31 days to go until the end of

JobKeeper that not only will we see job losses of around 100,000 people as Treasury predict,

once JobKeeper comes to an end on 28th of March. But over time, as more businesses suffer

from not getting support while we’re still seeing the economic ravages of the COVID pandemic,

there'll be further and further closures of those businesses and more people will become

unemployed as a consequence. I think that is something that is a real possibility. And it just

exemplifies why government needs to provide more targeted support and clarity to businesses

that are relying on JobKeeper. They need to provide that clarity and support after the 28th of



March.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHANIE MATHEWS 0430 595 700



