Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg







THE HON KEITH PITT MP

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia  Member for Hinkler

THE HON DAVID BASHAM

SA Minister for Primary Industries and Regional Development

TONY PASIN MP  Member for Barker

ROWAN RAMSEY MP  Member for Grey

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE  18 February 2021

SOUTH AUSTRALIA LEADING SUPPORT FOR DROUGHT AFFECTED FARMERS

The South Australian Government is leading the way in supporting drought affected farmers  in their region after signing on to the $100 million On-farm Emergency Water Infrastructure  Rebate Scheme.

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt said this is a great outcome  for farmers and he urges other states that have not yet shown their commitment to this  scheme to act swiftly and sign up.

“The rebate scheme is about delivering practical support for our farmers to complete critical  on-farm water infrastructure projects on the ground in order to maintain a more reliable  and sustainable water supply into the future,” Minister Pitt said.

“Primary producers and horticultural producers in SA will be able to get on with important  drought-proofing works including improving water storage on their farms through the  installation of tanks, troughs, pipes, pumps and drilling new bores.”

The expanded investment recognises the popularity of the scheme. Eligible farmers can  claim up to 25% of the eligible infrastructure costs, capped at $25,000 with the state and  the Australian Government contributing half each.

South Australia’s Minister for Primary Industries and Regional Development David Basham  was thrilled to support South Australian farmers who are still doing it tough.

“Our farmers are the backbone of South Australia’s economy and the importance of  agriculture across the country has been further highlighted during the COVID-19 pandemic,”  Minister Basham said.

Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg





“Many parts of the state are still suffering through drought and we are proud to continue to  support those farmers doing it tough.

“This funding boost will allow more drought-affected farmers to access help and install vital  on-farm water infrastructure such as water storages, pumps, pipes, distilling dams, and  associated power supplies such as generators.”

Member for Barker Tony Pasin welcomed the South Australian Government’s cooperation  with the scheme.

“Over 500 legacy projects in South Australia alone will immediately benefit from the State  Government’s decision to match the Federal Government’s $3.7 million provided for under  this scheme,” Mr Pasin said.

“We’re giving farmers the tools to better manage future droughts so we can keep producing  best quality food and fibre for the world, and keep regional economies going.”

Federal Member for Grey Rowan Ramsey said the scheme was making great inroads into  reducing the impact of drought and improving drought resilience.

“This scheme had been over-subscribed, and farmers had spent money in good faith and  been unable to get a refund,” he said.

“So it is very pleasing that those who have already committed will be able to be supported  and that we will see further investments in one of farming’s most limiting factors, water  supply.”

Minister Pitt has written to each of his ministerial counterparts encouraging their  participation in the scheme.

To date, South Australia, Western Australia and New South Wales have indicated  commitments to the scheme.

For more information about the On-farm Emergency Water Infrastructure Rebate Scheme  visit the Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment’s website.

ENDS

Media contact:    Minister Pitt - Matt Dunstan 0411 535 072, Marnie Hobson 0407 090 230  Minister Speirs - Ryan Smith 0466 498 060  Tony Pasin - Anna Hawkins 0439 651 016  Rowan Ramsey - 0417 827 523













Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg











