

MATT KEOGH MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE INDUSTRY  SHADOW MINISTER ASSISTING FOR SMALL BUSINESS  MEMBER FOR BURT



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  MONDAY, 22 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: JobKeeper; Newspoll; Vaccine Rollout.

MATT KEOGH, SHADOW MINISTER ASSISTING FOR SMALL BUSINESS: It’s 34 days  today until JobKeeper comes to an end, leaving small businesses across Australia high and  dry. There are 1.3 million Australians employed by businesses that are receiving  JobKeeper to support their jobs. We have hundreds of thousands of small businesses  across the country, across all sorts of different areas. We’ve seen the Tourism Industry  obviously for over a year calling for more government support. We’ve now got reports that  the Cinema industry has seen an 80 per cent decline in it’s revenues and they’re suffering  hugely. Whether it’s hospitality, accommodation, whether it’s aviation, small business, mum  and dad businesses across the country are potentially going to slam into the wall at the end  of March. The Government has given small business no certainty. Businesses right now,  with 34 days until the end of JobKeeper are having to prepare to let their staff go, having to  prepare to potentially wind up the small business they’ve built. This is a shocking situation  the government has let small business come into. Unfortunately there are also a number of  small businesses I’m aware of that are just assuming, just hoping that Josh Frydenberg is  going to come up with some sort of plan for JobKeeper and haven’t made any preparations  at all and those businesses absolutely could get slammed into a wall with no certainty of  government, no clarity of who might be supported at the end of March, those businesses  who might have some changes to support after the end of march. It is absolutely incumbent  now, with 34 days to go until the end of JobKeeper for Josh Frydenberg and the Morrison  Government to be clear to small business and business across the country and those 1.3  million people that are employed by them. Treasury is already saying they’re expecting 100  thousand of those people to lose their jobs when JobKeeper comes to an end. The  government must be clear with small business across Australia - what is going to happen  at the end of March, are they going to extend JobKeeper, are there going to be changes in  eligibility requirements and will there be some form of support for those businesses that are  still suffering the economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic here in Australia.

JOURNALIST: The Newspoll out today shows that your leader Anthony Albanese has  fallen further behind Scott Morrison, are you disappointed by that?



KEOGH: I think the interesting thing about Newspoll today is despite the fact that  oppositions across the states have not been performing well at all, the Labor Party here  Federally is 50/50 with the Morrison government after a year of a national, an international  pandemic to be in a situation where Labor is 50/50 with the Government shows the strength  of the opposition and the fact that we’re talking about the issues that actually matter to  Australians across the country, just like this issue of there being 34 days until the end of  JobKeeper with no plan from the government in sight.

JOURNALIST: Matt obviously the next big step for the vaccine rollout is today for many of  the states. This is a massive logistical task given the size of the country. You’re from WA  the biggest state in the country, what is it you’re concerned about when it comes to the  rollout.

KEOGH: I think it’s absolutely fantastic we’ve seen the rollout start, we know it’s been  delayed, we know that Scott Morrison said Australia is at the front of the queue but turns  out we were nowhere near the front of the queue when it comes to the vaccine rollout, but  it’s excellent the vaccine rollout has now started and that’s a good thing and I encourage  people to go out and get that vaccination as they become eligible to get that. We’re going to  see a huge logistical exercise, people should be prepared for that, the government’s been  talking for a long time now about this vaccine rollout coming and we look forward to that  running as smoothly as possible.

JOURNALIST: Should Scott Morrison have gone first? There’s been a bit of talk around  about him being at the front of the queue, do you have any problem with him being one of  the first ones to get vaccinated?

KEOGH: No difficulty with the Prime Minister going first with this rollout, it’s not like he took  100 vials with him. It was one shot and it makes a very clear demonstration to everyone  across the nation that this is a safe and effective vaccine and it encourages people to take  up that vaccine and that is an important message for our political leaders to be sending.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: STEPHANIE MATHEWS 0430 595 700









