









THE HON. CHRISTIAN PORTER MP  Attorney-General  Minister for Industrial Relations  Leader of the House

Media Release   Monday, 29th March 2021

Statement from Christian Porter

It has been a great honour and privilege to serve as Attorney-General and, since the 2019 election, as  Minister for Industrial Relations.

Much has been achieved in that time, including significant new laws to keep Australians safe through  the espionage and foreign interference regimes as well as the establishment of the Foreign Influence  Transparency Scheme.

In Industrial Relations critical reforms have helped support Australians through the economic impacts  of COVID, most notably the provision of JobKeeper IR flexibilities which saved businesses and jobs.  More recent reforms will give casual workers greater opportunity to switch to permanent work, if they  choose.

Accepting and understanding that commencing defamation proceedings against the ABC now requires  my replacement as Attorney-General does not change anything in respect of the crucial principle that  required me to instigate defamation proceedings.

Given the false claims made about me by the ABC I had no alternative but to launch the defamation  proceedings and I have no regrets about taking that course of action.

The Federal Court action will allow for the truthfulness of the claims made by the ABC to be tested.  I  look forward to having these issues determined in a procedurally fair process with actual rules of  evidence.

I thank the Prime Minister for my appointment as Minister for Industry, Science and Technology and  congratulate Senator Michaelia Cash on her new role as Attorney-General and Minister for Industrial  Relations.  I wish Senator Cash well in her new portfolios.

As I have done in all my previous portfolios I will give this important portfolio all the energy and  commitment I have.

As Attorney-General and Minister for Industrial Relations I, like all my colleagues, have been focused  over the last year on keeping Australians safe through the COVID-19 pandemic and working to  minimise the economic impacts of the pandemic.









…/2







-2-



This will be my priority going into my new portfolio, particularly ensuring support to industry to ensure  we have a strong, vibrant manufacturing sector which is growing and creating more jobs.  The  opportunities created by Australia’s strong focus on the science and technology sectors will be crucial  to making sure that we are building the industries of the future with the long-term sustainable  employment these sectors can provide.



Authorised by Christian Porter, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

