

JOSH BURNS MP  MEMBER FOR MACNAMARA



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  WEDNESDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Craig Kelly; Scott Morrison’s failure of leadership on far-right conspiracy  theories and extremism; vaccine rollout; economic recovery.

JOSH BURNS, MEMBER FOR MACNAMARA: Morning all. Well, Craig Kelly's politically  motivated conspiracies are dangerous. They are dangerous and they need to stop. We saw  the consequences of conspiracies and politically motivated falsehoods being spread in  America in the United States. And we saw the consequences on January 6 in Washington. The  sort of far right conspiracies that are being peddled right now by a member of Scott Morrison's  team have real consequences. Craig Kelly should have been pulled into line by Scott Morrison  when he was attacking the Bureau of Meteorology, but Scott Morrison failed. He should have  been pulled into line when he was giving false medical advice around hydroxychloroquine. But  Scott Morrison failed. He should have been pulled into line when he attacked offensively the  Victorian health authorities and compared them to Nazi Germany. But Scott Morrison yet again  failed. But surely, surely the moment where Scott Morrison should have pulled Craig Kelly into  line was when Mr Kelly sat down with a figure who shared Neo-Nazi imagery on his platforms.  It is enough, it is getting serious, it is dangerous and Craig Kelly needs to stop and Scott  Morrison needs to pull him into line and show some leadership. Instead, all Scott Morrison is  doing is being indifferent to the consequences of Craig Kelly's politically motivated  conspiracies.

JOURNALIST: Do you believe that this could lower the amount of people that take up the  COVID vaccination and potentially put herd immunity that we'd get at risk?

BURNS: What we need right now is everyone pushing for this vaccine because it is going to  save lives. And Craig Kelly has not only undermined the confidence in vaccines, but he's also  peddled his own misinformation around the Coronavirus and around the COVID pandemic.  He's given false medical advice when he is in absolutely no place to do so. He is not a doctor,  he does not have any medical qualifications. And we should be working towards the vaccine.  It's now almost 10 days since we've had an approved vaccine in this country. And yet we still  have no vaccines being rolled out. Scott Morrison and Greg Hunt said that we were ahead of  the queue. But we have an approved vaccine, the Pfizer vaccine is approved in this country,  but unfortunately, we don't have any jabs rolling out. We need all hands on deck to get the  vaccine rolling in this country.

JOURNALIST: Craig Kelly says he doesn't necessarily agree with everything that Pete Evans  says but that he wants to debate things, is there any justification for talking to someone like



that even if you say you don't agree with it?

BURNS: There's a difference between not agreeing with someone and sitting down with  someone who shared Neo-Nazi imagery on his Facebook page. To share the sort of hate-filled  imagery that Pete Evans has done, surely should have been the trigger for Mr Kelly to say,  ‘well, I might not agree with everything he says. You know, he can talk about salads all he  wants’ but when he starts talking about Neo-Nazi imagery on his Facebook page, surely that's  the point at which Craig Kelly says, ‘You know what, I shouldn't be doing a podcast with this  guy.’

JOURNALIST: The government's got a one seat majority. Do you think that's the real reason  that Mr Morrison won't tear Mr Kelly down?

BURNS: This is far-right, politically motivated conspiracy theories being peddled by Craig  Kelly. He revealed last night that the Prime Minister has not made one attempt to intervene. No  one attempt to stop Mr Kelly. And this is a sign that Scott Morrison is failing in this leadership  test. He's failing to pull in the far-right of his party. He is failing to pull in and stop these  dangerous conspiracy theories. And there are real consequences we saw on January 6 in  Washington.

JOURNALIST: Kelly has told the ABC that he did get a call from the Prime Minister before  Question Time. Morrison is understood to have expressed his unhappiness but Kelly's  remained defiant. Does there need to be some sort of more public reckoning for him? Does he  need to be publicly dressed down?

BURNS: We have been pushing for months for Craig Kelly to stop his false medical advice. He  is not a doctor. He is not in a position to give medical advice, especially during a global health  pandemic. And yet, Scott Morrison, if it's taken till yesterday's Question Time for Scott  Morrison to just at least make a phone call behind closed doors well, then it's simply not good  enough. What Scott Morrison needs to do is come out clearly to the public and say Mr Kelly  needs to stop this. It is not true what he's peddling. It is false and dangerous conspiracies and  he should do it today.

JOURNALIST: The government, the RBA governor is appearing in Parliament today and it's  emerged that the Australian economy is going to be back at the size it was pre-pandemic,  midway through this year, which is an improvement. How do you think the economic recovery  is going? Good job by the Government?

BURNS: Well, there is a patchy economic recovery and while some people are returning to  work, there are 2 million Australians who are still looking for work or are looking for more work.  What we want are good secure jobs, what we want are people who can go to work and be able  to pay the bills. At the moment, there is a patchy recovery. So we're on the side of workers.  We're on the side of people who are looking for jobs. And we want to make sure that they can  get back to work and pay all the bills, not just those who are benefiting already from the  recovery. Thanks, guys.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DEAN SHERR 0423 394 949



