





MARK BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING

MEMBER FOR HINDMARSH





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC NEWS BREAKFAST

TUESDAY, 13 APRIL 2021



SUBJECT: Vaccine rollout failures; Johnson and Johnson vaccine.



MICHAEL ROWLAND, HOST: Welcome back this Tuesday morning you're watching News

Breakfast. Great to have your company. Now we come to the vaccine rollout that’s already in

disarray. The Federal Government has moved to reject Johnson and Johnson's Coronavirus

jab. The Government had been in talks with the global pharmaceutical giants and Johnson and

Johnson had even sought provisional registration for use of its one shot vaccine here in

Australia.



MADELEINE MORRIS, HOST: But late yesterday a spokesman for Health Minister Greg Hunt

confirmed the product wouldn't be part of the national vaccine program, at least for now. The

similarity of Johnson and Johnson's product to the troubled AstraZeneca jab was the main

reason for ruling it out. Mark Butler is the Federal Opposition's Health Spokesman. He joins us

now from Adelaide. Good morning to Mr Butler. So what do you make of this development,

rejecting J&J?



MARK BUTLER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING: Good morning

Madeleine. First of all, it is simply not good enough for Australians to receive this information

from the minister’s spokesperson without any background explanation. We've been making the

point now for some time, Australia needs more vaccine options on the table. Most other

countries have been looking at five or six vaccines. The UK, for example, has seven deals.

And so with this very important vaccine that's rolling out in the US, will start rollout for the

United Kingdom very soon, if there is a decision not to go with it what are the reasons for that?

I think this is the problem Australians and Australian businesses are having right now. The

communication channels from the Government have shut down. We've got a Prime Minister

that's retreated to Facebook, and a Minister who's making announcements through a

spokesperson without clear background information.



MORRIS: I mean, the Minister did go on 730 last night, but what do you make of the Prime

Minister using in a 48 hour period Facebook twice to speak to the nation about the vaccine?



BUTLER: This is a critical juncture the nation faces at the moment. We've got a vaccine roll

out that's run off the rails and the Prime Minister needs to come clean with Australians about

what the new plan is, what the new timelines and targets are. Business groups, the Chamber

of Commerce, the Australian Industry Group has made it clear this morning that the strength of

our economic recovery depend on a clear plan that has clear milestones, clear targets, and

without that business simply won't be able to plan the future.



MORRIS: Can I just ask you about Astra and the shift to Pfizer for under 50? There is a couple

of implications here. So the AMA this morning is saying that there may need to be a shift to

larger mass vaccination sites because GPs simply don't have the freezer storage capacities to

be able to look after the Pfizer vaccine is that a major concern of yours?



BUTLER: I think it is something that needs to be replanned, because the Pfizer vaccine is

going to have to be used for the younger populations in a way we didn't understand before the

AstraZeneca decision. We do know that Pfizer does last for two weeks, up to two weeks now

in standard freezers so that makes it a little easier to distribute through the community. But

again, this is something we need some detail from the Government. I've been saying for some

time that we need to do what pretty much every other country around the world is doing that is

proceeding with a successful vaccine rollout and that is have a greater reliance on larger

vaccine centres, the sorts of things particularly that state governments are very well equipped

to deliver.



MORRIS: Just going back to that Greg Hunt interview last night, he made clear that we have

actually received 3.7 million doses of vaccine in total, yet we've only rolled out 1.2 million

doses. Now he said that's because of a clearance and release process is that process clear to

you about why it takes this period of time? And why effectively we've only rolled out a third of

the vaccines that we currently have in this country?



BUTLER: No it's not clear. What is clear is that there are about 2.3 or 2.4 million doses that

have been cleared and batch approved by the TGA for many, many days. It's not clear to

anyone I don't think, certainly not to me, why those are not in people's arms already. There is

another million or more that have been produced by CSL in Melbourne and ready for batch

approval that have been sitting there for some time not approved. So again, we just need

clearer answers from the Minister and the Prime Minister that we're getting. One million is

simply not enough doses, the Americans are up to almost 190 million compared to our one

million the UK 40 million, 60 per cent of their adult population vaccinated. They're in a very

strong position to deal with the possibility of mutations or variants to this virus needing booster

shots later this year and their economy their jobs will recover much more quickly than

Australia's if we're left behind with this third rate vaccine roll out.



MORRIS: And just on those economic implications. We've been hearing implications for

Qantas in terms of resumption of international travel and other tourism businesses as well also

universities. Is it too soon to start thinking if this vaccine rollout is going to be delayed do we

need to look at more economic support?



BUTLER: That's the point a number of business groups are making this morning. If the

Government and particularly the Prime Minister's is raising the white flag on producing a plan

with clear timelines and clear targets that give businesses the confidence about when they'll be

able to restore their interaction with overseas, then I think the Government is going to have to

look at what it does to support those businesses. Really the first option though, should be a

clear plan, clear timelines, clear targets that tell Australians when and how they're going to be

vaccinated.



MORRIS: Mark Butler, thank you very much for joining us from Adelaide this morning.



BUTLER: Thanks Madeleine.





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LUCY CARUSO 0408 803 428



