Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.







The Hon Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health and Aged Care



TRANSCRIPT

12 January 2021



DOORSTOP  MOUNT MARTHA

E&OE…

Topics: $38 million for diabetes and cardiovascular research, International and domestic COVID  vaccination update; Vaccine rollout - open call for general practice vaccinations next week;  Emerging strains posing risk to vaccine development; Pregnant women and COVID vaccination;  Acting Prime Minister’s comments; Craig Kelly; National approach to traffic light system; Health  infrastructure; Vaccine rollout targets; Herd immunity; Suppression vs elimination; Emergency  vaccination approval.

GREG HUNT:  Thank you very much for joining us today. I’m joined by Dr Karen Price, who’s the President of the  Royal Australian College of General Practitioners and it’s a real privilege to have you here.

And I want to start by thanking our extraordinary medical community, our doctors and our nurses,  our incredible Australian medical family. They've kept us safe. They've been courageous during the  height of the pandemic.

We've seen the enormous challenges that doctors and nurses and other medical professionals have  faced overseas at the height of the risk during the March and April waves in Australia and in  Victoria during the second wave.

They’ve put themselves on the frontline and I want to take this opportunity to thank Karen and  through Karen, all of our GPs, our doctors, our hospital workers, our pharmacists, our pathologists,  our allied health workers, everybody associated - and especially our aged care workers - everybody  associated with health and medical care and protection in Australia.

And indeed, today is about two things. One is our general health, and secondly, acknowledging the  steps forward and the steps we're taking with regards to the coronavirus vaccine.

Now, in particular, I'm delighted that we are jointly able to announce $38 million of Australian  Government funding for diabetes and cardiovascular care. That's an immensely important step  forward, and that will involve three elements.

Firstly, $10 million for a National Diabetes Research Centre. This will be a competitive program. It  will be open and peer reviewed, and that will focus on diabetic kidney disease, limb diseases which  are complications from diabetes, hypo and hyper glycaemia and related conditions.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





$10 million for a national cardiovascular disease research centre, and that will include a focus on  coronary artery disease, heart failure and stroke, amongst other conditions.

Then we have $18 million for competitive grant programs for different projects. They could be  clinical trials. They could be primary research. They could be development of devices. All of these  elements will be through competitive programs.

So that's what we're doing with regards to health because, through COVID, one of the things that  has been very important - together we’ve created telehealth and rolled it out to maintain the day-to-day health of Australians.

And we know that that challenge has been a global one, but because of the advent of telehealth in  Australia, we have a particularly strong outcome.

Now, with regards to COVID-19, I think the important facts today are that there are six community  cases across Australia, and I'm advised by the National Incident Centre that this compares with over  600,000 cases globally. Six cases in Australia. Over 600,000 cases globally.

And in particular, there are zero lives that have been lost in Australia. There is one Australian in  ICU with COVID. And 9765 lives that have been lost, agonisingly, at the global level.

We know that that means that we're in a situation where the world has over 90 million cases. Over  1.9 million lives lost, and each of those are growing at an extraordinary rate. And all of this is  against a background where we have borders, international, testing, tracing and distancing.

In terms of tests, there have been over 60,000 tests in the last 24 hours, which takes us to over 12.1  million tests Australia-wide. That's a national average of 476 per 1000 Australians, which is an  extraordinary result.

In Victoria, the highest rate of testing in the country, that's 507 tests. And in Western Australia, the  lowest rate of testing in the country, that's 253 per 1000. So in those jurisdictions which have lower  numbers, we understand why, but we would nevertheless encourage the authorities there to work on  the testing rates.

We have, in recent weeks, tested over 326 aged care facilities with zero cases amongst staff or  residents.

So, those are extraordinary steps, but we know in a world of six cases within the Australian  community, and 600,000 plus within the global community, that we won't be fully safe until the  world is safe, and that's part of the global vaccination rollout but it's also part of the Australian  vaccination rollout.

And last week, with the Prime Minister and the Chief Medical Officer and the Secretary of the  Health Department, who is also the head of the medical expert group on vaccines, we announced  the national rollout plan that in particular was focusing on the population groups.

One fundamental part is the distribution process. And so we will have hospitals, most especially  within the context of the Pfizer vaccine, because of the -70 cold chain.

But we will also have the very strong community rollout.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



Australian Government vaccination centres, state-based vaccination centres - and we've been  working with all of the states and territories on those, and they're doing a tremendous job -  Aboriginal community-controlled health organisations, but also general practices.

We have a national vaccination network, which last year saw us deliver 17 million vaccinations for  flu, approximately.

And that vaccination network is built around our general practices with support from our  pharmacies. And so our general practices will commence when the AstraZeneca vaccine  commences as part of Stage 1B.

And next week, we'll be inviting all Australian general practices to participate if they wish. That  will involve making sure that they're able to participate in the Australian Immunisation Register and  record all vaccinations, to undertake the appropriate training, and if they wish, if they see  themselves as a vaccinator, to participate in that program.

And we'll open that call for general practice vaccinations next week, which is what I'm announcing  with Karen today, as well as this focus on diabetes and stroke.

So we're doing extraordinarily well. There's more to be done, but when we compare the  international with the Australian outcomes, we see that our doctors and our nurses have not only  kept us safe, they have delivered an outcome that is, in so many ways, the envy of just about all of  the rest of the world.

And we owe Karen, you, and your fellow practitioners, a deep debt of gratitude. Thank you. Karen  Price.

KAREN PRICE:  Thank you for that vote of support and I know that Australia's general practitioners are very happy  to hear that Government is supporting general practice in this challenging time.

I’d like to acknowledge the traditional custodians of the land and sea in which we work and live,  and here we are in the lands of the Boon wurrung and Bunurong peoples. I'd like to pay my respects  to elders past and present.

But thank you, Minister. What a time we have had in these times. Thank you to the media, also, for  sharing in this historic moment.

We are about to rollout the largest vaccination program in recent history. Immunisation has made an  enormous contribution to global health, along with clean water and sanitation.

And this COVID vaccine is vast. The head of the Therapeutic Goods Administration has expressed  it as a significant major national effort, which requires all of us to cooperate together, which I'm  pleased to say has, for the most part, been occurring.

And that includes you, the media, and clinicians like myself, and nursing staff and so forth, the  general public who’ve been following the guidelines from the chief health officers, our scientists -  I'm rather proud to have Sharon Lewin as one of my medical student colleagues. She was brilliant  then and she's brilliant now - and, of course, our politicians, have all played a part in the fight  against COVID. So thanks for the communications and the regular updates, because as Minister  Hunt has just declared, the Australian response has been lifesaving.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



We cannot emphasise enough, as general practitioners, that we still need to comply with all of the  public health measures, which do change regularly and it is challenging to keep up, but thank you to  people for continuing to review that information as it comes through.

And really good job, Australia. Now we’re ready to roll out the vaccines, so I’d like to say: take  that, 2020. It was a tough year. It was a tough year for so many. All of us have probably had  experiences where we’ve suffered some degree, some hardships.

But I’m really proud to say that Australian general practice stands ready to support our communities  from the rural and remote places, to the big city communities. GPs are ideally placed all across  Australia and are highly trained and trusted members ready to inform our members of the public,  ready to go through a consent process, and ready to vaccinate.

And your GP will be able to assist you with that information and help to create an understanding to  the available evidence.

The RACGP is working constructively with the Government to ensure a confident vaccine rollout.

And thank you to the media for participating in responsible science communication, which is so  important at this time.

Australia has historically and previously achieved around a 92 per cent immunisation coverage and  I see no reason for that to change with this COVID vaccination program.

GPs also can specially help those communities with culturally, linguistically, and diverse cultures  navigate the vast trust issues that we have built over the decades of our care.

So I have confidence in this vaccine for my patients, for my family, and I know it will all help us  avoid hospitalisations and severe COVID disease, and help protect our community.

There are challenges, but let's not forget that we are so fortunate to be where we are right now in  Australia. We really have done an amazing job.

We're able to follow quickly the overseas data and we have secured the supply chain of the vaccine  with a local manufacturer, which is a really important part of a public health response.

And Australia will continue to respond as vaccines go through the regulatory TGA processes in  which we can all have confidence.

So this is a historic moment, but for all the right reasons this time. Perhaps we can move on perhaps  from the hardships and we can have hope. The year 2021 is a bit corny, but the year 2021 is a year  of vaccination.

And GPs stand ready, willing, and able to help. So thank you very much. Thank you, Minister Hunt.

GREG HUNT:  Thank you. Happy to take any questions in the room and then turn to those on the phone.

JOURNALIST:  Do the new and emerging strains of coronavirus pose a risk to the vaccine development and rollout?

GREG HUNT:  The best advice we have is that our vaccination program is unchanged and unaffected.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





Obviously, we'll keep that under review. But that's a discussion which the Prime Minister and I  have been briefed on by both Professor Paul Kelly, the Chief Medical Officer, and Professor  Brendan Murphy, who is not only the Secretary of the Department of Health, but also the Head of  the Vaccines Advisory Group.

So at this stage, there is no sign that these strains do affect the vaccination program. In other words,  our vaccinations are strong and effective.

We'll keep this under review. The world is learning every day about that, but that appears to be not  just the advice in Australia, but the international advice.

JOURNALIST:  What's the current advice for pregnant women who may be considering accepting the vaccine and  what is the science informing these policy positions?

GREG HUNT:  Sure. So the Therapeutic Goods Administration, to which Karen referred, that's Australia's medical  regulator, will assess the advice from the vaccine manufacturers and make a definitive decision on  that.

So, we don't have a final position yet, and I apologise for that. But that's simply a function of  Australia taking the swift but full safety processes.

And this is one of the reasons exactly why, along with Japan and South Korea, and New Zealand,  Taiwan, and others, we've chosen to go down the full safety assessment process; precisely so as  when it comes to the time for vaccination, we have the best advice in the world from the best  medical regulator in the world.

So, that question will be answered by the TGA when they complete their assessment.

JOURNALIST:  And on a slightly different note, do you agree with your colleague Minister McCormack that some  facts can be contentious and his refusal to rebuke a Coalition MP who likened mandatory masks to  child abuse?

GREG HUNT:  Look, there’ll be very different views. We listen to our medical advisers. That's what set Australia  apart. I'm standing next to one of Australia's leading medical advisers for precisely that reason.

And so we followed the medical advice. We've always lent in to make sure that we're getting that  medical advice at the earliest possible time.

I know there are differing views. There are some widely quoted commentators who may have  predicted 400,000 lives lost, and that was clearly incorrect, and yet they're still widely quoted by the  press.

There are some widely quoted commentators who said we would run out of ventilators in April,  only three weeks after they were making their comments, and that was clearly false. There were  approximately 7500 ventilators that were built into the Australian- into the Australian arsenal of  protection, and that was never even remotely close.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



And that there are some commentators that predicted that there'd be 3000 cases in New South  Wales on the 8th of January, and I believe there was one case detected that that day.

So there will be different views from many people. Our advice comes from what I believe are the  best medical advisers in the world. That's what's protected Australia and that's what we're going to  continue to do. I'll take them now-

JOURNALIST:  Just on that, sorry. Will you look to censure Craig Kelly for championing those unproven  coronavirus treatments and likening mask use by children to child abuse?

GREG HUNT:  Look, we follow the advice of the medical advisers. And many people, as I've just said, will put out  differing views. Many of those views have been shown to be wrong.

And I would urge everyone to listen carefully to the advice of the Australian medical regulators and  Australian Government medical advisers.

They are the ones who, in my view, are the best in the world. The most credible in the world, and  have helped deliver the best outcome; or arguably one of the best outcomes in the world.

And how is it that Australia is at a point with six cases of community transmission versus over  600,000 worldwide? Because as a Government, we have focussed on a medically driven, but  politically led approach where we listen and then we act.

And I think that's been a real hallmark of what Australia has done.

And I'll just take the take the (dial-in) questions. I think the first one is Jonathan Kearsley.

JOURNALIST:  Thank you, Minister. Just in relation through the last 24 hours or so, we’ve seen in Victoria issue  this traffic light permit system to allow people, Victorians, to essentially get home again. What do  you make of that system? And given the failures that took place over the first (inaudible) hours or  so with it not working, is there a need for a national sort of approach, a national permit system?

GREG HUNT:  Look, firstly, it's a matter for Victoria. I know that's a system they have developed themselves.  That's very much a Victorian approach.

The Commonwealth Chief Medical Officer has laid out a national hotspot definition, and that's the  one which we have put on the table. And in relation to, for example, the Northern Beaches area or  Greater Brisbane, and that's provided national advice.

Some states and territories have been very clear that they reserve the right not to adopt that national  approach. That is their choice and a matter for them to explain.

But we have set out a clear, singular, precise national definition, and we would invite all to feel free  to use that. But we respect it if others choose to go a different way.

If I could have Josh Butler please.





Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



JOURNALIST:  Yeah, thank you, Minister. I appreciate it. You kind of touched on already in your introductory  remarks, but on the vaccine roll out, the Prime Minister said last week he hopes 4 million people  will be vaccinated between mid-to-late late February and the end of March.

That'll be about- an average of about 100,000 people per day taking jabs. We might need similar  numbers each day for that whole rollout until October perhaps. I know that you said you're ramping  up from 80,000 a week to start with, but do we currently have the health infrastructure right now to  administer 100,000 vaccines a day for weeks on end?

And a second one, if it’s okay, on the far away end of the rollout, you’ve said you want every  Australian who wants a vaccine to get one by October. What is the ballpark of total vaccinations  you'd like to see? Is it 10 million Australians, is it 15? Is it 20 million? Even a rough figure.

GREG HUNT:  Sure. So firstly, in terms of vaccination rollout infrastructure, I'm standing next to the leader of that  process. So the general practises of Australia for phase 1B going forward. The pharmacies from  phase 2 are expected to join.

And we were speaking today with the head of the Pharmacy Guild. And last week, I spoke with the  AMA as well. And so they're all pitching in.

And so we actually have a network which produced 17 million vaccinations last year.

And I think that's one of the things which is sometimes not realised. Karen referred to the fact that  we are a great vaccination nation, and that's absolutely right. We've gone from eight million flu  vaccinations only a few years ago, to 11 to 13 million and then to 17 million.

So we've been able to achieve extraordinary, extraordinary outcomes. And we saw the flu deaths in  the last year plummet, absolutely plummet. And I think that's an incredible outcome.

So we can do this because we did it last year and we did it the year before.

But the difference this year is twofold. One, the vaccines can be more complex because they come  in vials which have multi doses, and that's, in the case of the Pfizer, a minus 70-degree vaccine.  And so that is more complex why we're using the- and that's why we're using the hospital hubs.

In the case of the AstraZeneca vaccine, it's not difficult to administer, but it is a multi dose vial.

And so that adds to the traditional complexity. But we have the existing vaccination network of  general practises and subsequently pharmacies. We have the state-based vaccination clinics, the  Commonwealth vaccination clinics, the Aboriginal community controlled health organisations and  the hospitals, all of which will deliver that.

In terms of the total number, we'd like to see as many Australians as possible be vaccinated. It's  free, it's voluntary, but it's universally available. And on the ability of the General Practice Network  and the general practitioners of Australia to deliver it, I might ask Karen to have a few words.

KAREN PRICE:  The Australian general practise community, as I said, is ready. And Minister Hunt has already said  that we delivered 17 million flu shots last year. So this is well within our capacity.

We've also got an ability to, with government support, fulfil the infrastructure required to do that.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





And we've got an enormous surge capacity in general practise. It's not often realised that we are all  around the country in remote from remote areas right into the cities, of course.

And GP's are looking for details and we've been already talking about it on the forums and so forth,  and various doctors have been putting up models and how to do it.

So we're already thinking well ahead about how are we going to do this for the Australian public.

So the planning is underway as new information comes to light. We make adoptions and we're  ready to help.

We know there's going to be a lot of education required, and that's part of our super strength as GPs.

So it's what we do every day. We help with health literacy and help people understand what might  be a complex public health situation, we reduce down for that particular person's personal  circumstances.

And we go through all of the difficulties and challenges they may have in being able to understand  that message. So that is what general practise does. We do it every day.

This is something that we're well within our capacity to do and we can do it safely.

We are aware of making sure we've got safe practises. Our nurses are highly trained to be able to  help us and support us in this process.

As I said, we stand ready, willing and able to say good bye to COVID as much as possible in this  year and get the nation vaccinated.

GREG HUNT:  There we go. Great. And I’ll go to Liam Mannix.

JOURNALIST:  Minister, the government appears to have committed to rolling out AstraZeneca’s vaccine, but the  clinical trial evidence suggests it's only 62 per cent effective. That's obviously below the threshold  needed to achieve the herd immunity.

By rolling this out widely, is the Australian government essentially conceding our vaccine strategy  is not going to provide herd immunity?

GREG HUNT:  No, not at all. And respectfully, I've heard that argument put by one of the people who predicted  400,000 deaths in the last year, I think the 28th of February was the prediction.

And secondly, that same person predicted 3000 cases on the 8th of January in New South Wales  rather than the one which actually occurred.

So we're listening to the Australian Government medical experts, and they're the ones choosing the  vaccines, and they've chosen on the basis that an mRNA vaccine has never, ever been done before  for anything. So there's an important role.

Minus 70 means that there are challenges and that there is a very strong history of different types of  conventional vaccine being rolled out with high effectiveness.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





And it's important to note that the results also show up to 90 per cent effectiveness more generally  with final results to come on AstraZeneca, and up to 100 per cent in relation to the severe illness.  And so all of those things come together.

The advice again, and I spoke with the Chief Medical Officer only last night, is that this is what the  medical expert panel of Australia, the one that has helped keep us safe, has recommended.

And of all the different things on which to follow the advice of the medical experts, the choice of  vaccines is probably the most important.

And the one in which I think it's most absolutely fundamental that we follow the advice of the  group that every year helps identify the flu, that helps identify the childhood vaccinations that keep  us safe.

And only in 2020, we reached record five-year-old vaccination rates, where our families and our  communities were coming together with the medical community to vaccinate our young  Australians.

And the fact that we rose to record levels in the midst of lockdowns I think is an extraordinary  outcome. I think, Chloe.

JOURNALIST:  Hello Minister, there’s a lot of debate today over virus elimination versus suppression. How  confusing is it that the states have different approaches and who’s got it right, New South Wales or  most of the other states?

GREG HUNT:  Look, I think Australia as a whole has done incredibly well. And I think the difference here is that  we have a zero community transmission goal for Australia, and we achieved that in June, and we  achieved that for multiple days in December.

But the risk is not of transmission from one state to another in any material or significant way.

The only way you could eliminate any threat of the virus is if you closed all of the international  borders, no export of wheat or wool or iron ore.

No import of critical foods or critical medicines. No families being reunited, loved ones, sons and  daughters, brothers and sisters, mothers and fathers, people coming home for weddings, for  funerals, people coming home potentially to palliate, people coming home for births.

All of these are the basis upon which we bring people home. And just to put that in context, as I say,  six cases in Australia today, 600,000 globally.

And as an example of that, the threat isn't domestic, but it is global. And so the advice I have from  the National Incident Centre only today is that we've had 6300 cases of overseas-acquired COVID,  which have been identified over the course of the last year, and I think 779 in Western Australia and  nine in the last week, for example.

And so you won't be able to have true eradication unless you close international, not state borders.

That's where the point of challenge and risk is and that's why we have very strict and in many cases  heart wrenchingly difficult limitations on people coming to Australia. But they've kept us safe.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





But that's the fundamental challenge. And we know that the cases that have occurred, whether it's  been in South Australia, or we've seen in Victoria, in Queensland or New South Wales, have come  from people returning from overseas.

We also know, for example, in Western Australia, there were two recent breaches. One, somebody  in Albany who jumped ship, another case of PPE breaches, which led to people being quarantined.

And so that risk is permanent. And it's very important to be honest about that. There will be  outbreaks so long as we engage with the rest of the world there will be outbreaks.

But our goal is zero community transmission. That's the unifying national focus. That's what comes  from the national cabinet. That's what we've achieved.

But to imagine that that will be a permanent state until the world is broadly vaccinated and  Australia is widely vaccinated is not something that anybody can promise.

But we can promise that with borders, testing, and therefore we encourage those states that have  low testing rates to lift them, tracing and distancing, we can keep Australia safe from those  outbreaks that everybody I think needs to acknowledge are inevitable whilst we maintain the  pathway of bringing home loved ones who are separated from their family.

JOURNALIST:  To clarify, though, the Federal Government has always said a suppression would be the way to go.  Do you think the states are disrespecting the Federal Government by not being on board with a  suppression model?

GREG HUNT:  No, I don’t think there’s any significant difference here. Our goal is zero community transmission.

Zero community transmission comes from aggressive suppression.

True elimination means that you have to close the international borders. The threat is not domestic  borders with six cases; the threat is a global challenge with 600,000 cases, and I think that’s widely  acknowledged.

And that’s why when we say zero community transmission, we’re saying, that’s our goal, that’s  what we’ve achieved, we’ll achieve it again.

But nobody can promise that that will be maintained, not because of transmission across state  borders, but because of the challenge of interacting with the global community, where we’re seeing  a global pandemic, the greatest pandemic that the world has faced since the Spanish Flu, the  greatest pandemic in 100 years. And that’s raging outside our borders. It’s just not raging within  them.

And then I will take Paul Karp, I think.

JOURNALIST:  Thanks very much, Minister. Craig Kelly stands by his advocacy of hydroxychloroquine and has  suggested that anti-parasitic drug ivermectin is more effective than COVID vaccines.

Is that helpful? And why aren't you using your free speech to contradict him?

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



And secondly, for the general population, you've explained why we're waiting for a full vaccination  approval. But why aren't we using an emergency authorisation for frontline workers like border  quarantine and healthcare workers in the meantime? Thank you.

GREG HUNT:  Which step would you have us skip, Paul?

JOURNALIST:  Well, I'm asking you the question about if other jurisdictions have judged that it's safe and those  frontline workers want to take the vaccine, is there an issue that you see with having emergency  approval?

GREG HUNT:  If there's a particular step you would wish Australia to skip, please let me know.

JOURNALIST:  Well, a minute ago you were criticising people who weren't public health authorities for making  predictions, so I'm not going to tell you how to do your job, I’m just asking a question, why, if  frontline staff want that extra protection, they don't have that option.

GREG HUNT:  Well, as I say, I'm not supporting Australia skipping any steps. And if you are, please feel free to  tell us.

But in the absence of that, our medical advisers, the Therapeutic Goods Administration, the Chief  Medical Officer of Australia, Professor Paul Kelly, the head of the Vaccines Advisory Group,  Professor Brendan Murphy, the head of the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation,  Professor Alan Cheng, are clear and absolute, clear and absolute, that a full safety process is a  fundamental step forward.

There are other countries that are in extremis where we are seeing in some cases over a thousand  deaths a day, in some cases over 3000 deaths a day, where we have over 50,000 cases a day in the  UK, where we have over 200,000 cases a day in the United States.

And those are conditions which we hope we never face.

But sometimes people are urging us to follow what those countries with the greatest challenges are  doing, rather than to join with those countries that have been the most successful.

Australia, New Zealand, Japan, South Korea, the jurisdiction of Taiwan. All of these are following a  very similar timeframe, and all have been successful.

I know a couple of them at the moment are having their own challenges with significant outbreaks,  but that commitment to safety is important to protect Australians.

It's important for confidence, and confidence is important for uptake, and uptake is ultimately what  provides the best protection for Australians.

So we've listened to the medical advisers, and we’ll continue to listen to the medical advisers.

And I have said on many occasions, for those who have different views, our advice, our advice  comes from the Australian medical advisers.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



And there'll be others with different views, but we've kept Australia safe and will continue to keep  Australia safe by listening to them. I'll finish with that and say thank you very much.

JOURNALIST:  (Inaudible) on why you aren’t contradicting Craig Kelly? Why aren’t you using your free speech to  put down ideas that say the vaccine isn't necessary?

GREG HUNT:  I do believe the vaccine is necessary. I couldn't be clearer. This press conference is about precisely  that.

And let's step back for a minute - and I'm not going to enter into a debate, respectfully - what we  have done in a world of 600,000 cases and a country of six cases is work with the best medical  advisers and the best medical regulators in the world.

You were just asking us to potentially override our medical regulators, and I respect your right to do  that. But I happen to disagree with you, Paul. Slightly quizzical that when you're talking about  medical regulators, your previous question was about overriding the medical regulators. But I  respect your right to do that.

And I may disagree with people, but my job is to set out our advice. And our advice is that the  vaccines that our medical regulators have chosen will keep Australians safe.

But they'll do that on the basis of a full assessment. And that assessment allows us to have  confidence.

And that confidence allows us to have take up. And take up allows us to protect as many  Australians as possible, not just those that take it, but those that will be protected by those that have  taken it.

And there will be many who have different views. But our view is that our medical advisers are  strong and clear and the best in the world.

I want to finish by thanking our medical advisers and in particular Karen Price and our general  practitioners.

They'll have a huge role to play going forwards in protecting Australians.

But we're in the best hands in the world with some of the best results in the world. And we'll  continue to keep Australians safe in 2021. Thank you.

JOURNALIST:  Minister Hunt, what was your reaction to Mr McCormack’s comments this morning about- do you  think he went too far in comparing likening the Capitol Hill incident to the Black Lives Matter  protests in America earlier?

GREG HUNT:  I'm sorry, I haven't heard those, so I won't respond to a summary. I'd rather see the original. All  right. Thank you very much, everybody.

ENDS

