

Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash  MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, SMALL AND FAMILY BUSINESS  DEPUTY LEADER OF THE GOVERNMENT IN THE SENATE  SENATOR FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA



Senator the Hon. Amanda Stoker  Minister Assisting the Attorney-General



JOINT MEDIA RELEASE



24 March 2021

STRENGTHENING PROTECTIONS FOR DOMESTIC VIOLENCE  VICTIMS

The Morrison Government is strengthening the ability of the family law system to protect  victims of domestic violence.

The Family Law Amendment (Federal Family Violence Orders) Bill 2021, introduced today  in the House of Representatives, will establish criminally enforceable federal family violence  orders, with breaches carrying a maximum penalty of up to two years in prison.

The orders will operate in the same way as state and territory domestic violence orders, and  could include restrictions of a person’s behaviours, communications or movements.

“The family courts routinely see matters involving allegations of family violence, but victims  currently have to commence separate proceedings in a state or territory court to access  criminally enforceable protection orders,” Acting Attorney-General, Senator Michaelia Cash,  said.

“The availability of federal family violence orders will mean that where vulnerable people  have matters before the family law courts, and don’t already have a state or territory domestic  violence order in place, they can apply for a protection order without navigating a separate  court system, and receive the protection they need, when they need it.”

Assistant Minister to the Attorney-General, Senator Amanda Stoker, said the federal family  violence orders offered stronger protections than existing family law injunctions, which  require the protected person to bring a private action in a family court in response to a breach.

“Bringing a separate civil matter against a former partner can be extremely difficult for  victims of family violence, can escalate risks, and be costly, time consuming, and stressful,”  Senator Stoker said.

“Criminalised orders for family violence would place responsibility for enforcing the orders  with police, rather than the victim.”

The Government has worked with states and territories to have federal family violence orders  recognised on the National Domestic Violence Order Scheme, to allow local police to enforce  conditions in the order regardless of where the order was breached.

“State and territory law enforcement have a key role to play in protecting people from family  violence and we are working with states and territories to ensure that local police officers will  have access to information and structures that allow enforcement action to be taken if a federal  family violence order is breached,” Senator Stoker said.

The Government has committed $1.8 million to successfully implement the measures in the  Bill, including ensuring that police can access the information they need to enforce the new  orders.

This measure builds on the $340 million the Government has already invested in initiatives  under the Fourth Action Plan of the National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women and  their Children 2010-2022.

Additionally, more than $170 million has been committed to respond to domestic violence  since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, which includes $20 million specifically dedicated  to the delivery of legal services for people impacted by family or domestic violence.

Since 2013, the Government has invested over $1 billion to prevent and respond to violence  against women and their children.

For more information on the range of measures in place to improve the family law system visit   https://www.ag.gov.au/FamiliesAndMarriage/Families/FamilyViolence/Pages/default.aspx

If you or someone you know is in immediate danger, call 000. For sexual assault, domestic and  family violence counselling services call 1800RESPECT on 1800 737 732 for 24/7 phone  services.

MEDIA CONTACTS  Guy Creighton - Guy.Creighton@dese.gov.au - 0438 815 302





