

MARK BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING

MEMBER FOR HINDMARSH





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

ADELAIDE

SUNDAY, 4 APRIL 2021



SUBJECTS: Vaccine rollout failures



MARK BUTLER MP, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING:

Thanks for coming out. I wanted to make a few remarks about Minister Greg

Hunt’s latest report on COVID, particularly on the vaccine rollout that was given

about half an hour ago. Can I first before I go to the vaccine rollout, say a few

things about the latest advice from the technical advisory group on

immunisations (ATAGI) and the TGA, about the clotting event that happened in

Melbourne and the issue, generally, around potential clotting events associated

with COVID-19 vaccines. We are told that the advice from ATAGI and the

Therapeutic Goods Administration and other health experts in this area has

been for Australia to continue with its vaccine rollout with the AstraZeneca and

the Pfizer vaccine for people who are susceptible to clotting events to seek

health advice before taking one of those vaccines. This is advice that we

strongly support. Labor's position, along with the Government, has been that

Australia has been very well served by our extraordinary public health experts

in the TGA, our Chief Medical Officers and the technical advisory group on

immunisations and Australians should continue to follow that advice. We

understand that further consideration will be given particularly to the Melbourne

case by the TGA over the coming days and we'll continue to monitor that

advice.



I also want to say a few remarks about the vaccine rollout. Greg Hunt reported

only about half an hour ago that Australia has got to about 841,000 doses of the

COVID-19 vaccines being delivered, as of yesterday. We remember that Scott

Morrison committed to there being 4 million vaccinations by the end of March

several days ago. We haven't even reached 1 million yet. Per head of

population Australia is not even in the top 100 countries, in terms of vaccine

delivery. We're running at about 108 so far in spite of Scott Morrison promising

Australians last year that we would be at the front of the queue. Greg Hunt also

reported that only 345 aged care facilities have received both doses of the

vaccine. Now the Government said that aged care along with the rest of phase

1a  would be completed by last week. Only 14 per cent of aged care facilities

and the residents within them have received the full vaccination. Only 14 per

cent of a sector that was supposed to be finished last week. We still have no

data from the Government. The Government still refuses to tell us how many of

the frontline workers, working in those aged care facilities have been

vaccinated. But the reports indicate that that is a very, very low number even

lower than the number of residents that have been vaccinated.



Time and time again through the press conference Minister Hunt just did he

was asked when will phase 1a be completed? When will the most vulnerable

people in this pandemic be fully vaccinated? And he steadfastly refused to give

a date. Well, we were told that 1a  would be completed last week that obviously

hasn't happened. The states have made very good progress in vaccinating their

own frontline health workers and others within their jurisdiction. But the

Commonwealth has made a mess of its responsibilities to vaccinate the most

vulnerable people in our community, residents of aged care facilities, and the

hundreds of thousands of people who work so hard caring for them.



We need to know what the new target dates are for this vaccine rollout. Clearly

the ones that Scott Morrison gave Australians have fallen by the wayside.

They're no longer even discussed by Minister Hunt or the Prime Minister. The

Morison Government is making a mess of this vaccine rollout and Australians

expect and deserve clearer answers on when they are going to get the vaccine.



JOURNALIST: Is the Federal Government putting too much emphasis on GPs

delivering the vaccine?



BUTLER: What we said a couple of days ago was that the Government should

consider the offers made by, particularly Gladys Berejiklian and her government

in New South Wales of using state facilities to start to speed this rollout up. GPs

are very frustrated, you would have heard the reports across the country of GPs

being told that would only get 50 doses per week when they are set up to

deliver hundreds and hundreds of vaccines to their patients per week. We’ve

heard cases and cases of patient's ringing GP surgeries trying to make

appointments and very understandably being told by their GPs they can't make

appointments until they know when they're going to receive the vaccine doses.

There are hundreds and hundreds of thousands of vaccine doses that have

been in country in Australia now for some considerable time that have not yet

been pulled into people's arm. So we need clearer answers from the

Government about this. I think the Government's decision to accept Gladys

Berejiklian’s offer is correct. They're making a mess of doing this on their own.

They need all the help that they can get. But the decision by Scott Morrison to

accept New South Wales’ offer is an admission that they are simply not up to

the job of delivering their own vaccine rollout.



JOURNALIST: Do you expect states and territories to start setting up large

vaccination hubs and when should they start?



BUTLER: The New South Wales Government has said that they would start

that, I imagine other state governments will consider their capability of doing

that, particularly once they complete their task of vaccinating their own frontline

health workers, emergency services workers, border force and quarantine

workers and such like because it's quite clear the Commonwealth is not

capable of delivering its own vaccine rollout strategy without help from the

states. We've seen this right through the pandemic. Scott Morrison has relied

time and time again, on the state premiers, state governments, bailing him out

because he's been incapable of doing some really critical tasks himself. Hotel

quarantine is one of them, for example.



JOURNALIST: Can I just ask you about borders, when it comes to WA is it still

appropriate that they are making people quarantine?



BUTLER: We've taken the view that states and territories have to take their

own public health advice and make decisions accordingly. I think one of the

things that served Australia so well right through this crisis and marked as out

from a number of other countries is the government's have taken the advice of

their own chief medical officers and made decisions accordingly.



JOURNALIST: Just back to vaccines, do you think that there needs to be more

transparency in the data?



BUTLER: We do need to see as much data as possible. We are so far behind

schedule. Australians are asking when they're going to get the vaccine.

Australians want to know when their loved ones who might be in an aged care

facilities are going to get vaccinated because they know they are the most

vulnerable people in our community. And yet we get answers from Minister

Hunt that provide no clarity about when these dates will come to pass. We still,

for example, receive no data on how many aged care workers have been

vaccinated. This is a group of 318,000 people in phase 1a, they were supposed

to be vaccinated by last week. We have no idea how many of them have been

vaccinated. We know, through tragic experience last year, particularly in

Victoria, how critical it is that those workers who look after our most vulnerable

members in the community are kept safe and vaccinated from this pandemic.



JOURNALIST: You've touched on it, but does there need to be timeframes for

when 1a and 1b are going to be completed?



BUTLER: There were clear timeframes, 1a was supposed to be completed last

week. Minister Hunt was asked several times at his press conference an hour

ago, when will 1a be completed and he refused to give a timeline. That's simply

not good enough. Australians deserve to know when they will get their vaccine

and until we've completed these early phases, the other phases will simply not

be able to commence.



JOURNALIST: Minister Hunt just said that the roll up has accelerated now.

He's said that Thursday was a record day and now we're starting to get CSL

rolling out. Do you have confidence that this was always a supply issue? And

second question, how likely do you think it is that all Australians will have their

first job by October the Minister was clear about that target today?



BUTLER: First of all, the October target was very clearly that Australians would

have been fully vaccinated by the end of October. I know the Government has

now shifted the goalposts yet again and now say that it's simply a first dose that

will be received by October but Scott Morrison only a couple of weeks ago

again reiterated, I think on Sunrise, that it would be a full completion by

October. Leaving that aside, though, it is pleasing to see the numbers

accelerate over the course of last week. But still the highest we've received is

79,000. That was the number of vaccinated or given a dose of the vaccine on

Thursday. The UK, for example, is quite regularly, vaccinating 750,000 in a

single day. We have a long way to go to get to the sorts of numbers that will see

Australia vaccinated by October, it needs to be a multiple of 79,000.



Now, just to your other question Chloe, is this a supply issue? We've known

that there have been about 2.4 million doses of the vaccine in Australia

approved by the TGA so that they have their batch approvals by the TGA for

some time now, and yet still, we're substantially short of 1 million doses having

been delivered. So it's not just a supply issue. It is it is a question of whether the

Commonwealth has organised its responsibilities for the rollout effectively and

it's pretty clear that it hasn't done that.





JOURNALIST: Is it acceptable that a report into workplace safety from sexual

harassment has been sitting on the government's desk for a year?



BUTLER: We've been saying for some time over the last several weeks,

including within the Parliament, that it is unacceptable for such a critically

important piece of advice not to have received a response from the

Government.



Thanks everyone, enjoy your Easter.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LUCY CARUSO 0408 803 428



