The Hon Scott Buchholz MP Assistant Minister for Road Safety and Freight Transport

Works underway to boost safety on Mount Lindesay Highway at Munruben Works have started on the upgrade of the Mount Lindesay Highway between Stoney Camp Road and Chambers Flat Road, with Queensland-based HullSee JV awarded the construction contract.

The $75 million project will widen the highway from two to four lanes, build new northbound and southbound bridges across Norris Creek, install safety upgrades and improve fauna connectivity and protection.

Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, said road safety is everyone’s responsibility, which is why the Morrison Government is playing a key role in delivering road safety upgrades across Queensland.

“This is all about getting Queenslanders home sooner and safer while we create more jobs during this difficult economic time,” Minister Fletcher said.

“This investment is part of our $110 billion, 10-year infrastructure plan, which is laying the foundations for the nation’s ongoing recovery from COVID-19.”

Queensland Minister for Transport and Main Roads Mark Bailey said the upgrade was another example of the Palaszczuk and Australian governments’ $5 billion for road stimulus across Queensland, supporting jobs and the state’s economic recovery plan.

“After completing the Park Ridge section ahead of schedule last year, this project will see important construction jobs roll on with another 80 to be created through this upgrade,” Minister Bailey said.

“The Palaszczuk Government upgraded the Camp Cable road intersection, we transformed the stretch through North Maclean, built the Beaudesert bypass, and we’re continuing that work to create more jobs and better roads.”

Assistant Minister for Road Safety and Freight Transport and Federal Member for Wright, the Hon Scott Buchholz MP, said the Morrison Government was delivering a more reliable road network through life-saving treatments.

“As a former transport operator, I know first-hand that any upgrade, no matter how big or small, is critical to ensuring a quicker and safer journey for motorists,” Assistant Minister Buchholz said.

“My residents from Beaudesert to Greenbank and everywhere in between will welcome this congestion busting upgrade on the Mount Lindesay Highway.

“I thank local motorists in advance for their patience as we get on with the job of building better local roads, and we know there is more to do.

“This project is part of a $4 billion nationwide investment through the Urban Congestion Fund to bust congestion in urban areas and ensure commuters get home sooner and safer.”

Federal Member for Forde, Mr Bert van Manen MP, said research shows that we dislike traffic jams so much that we would trade away five minutes of leisure time for one fewer minute sitting in a car in traffic.

“I welcome the start of the upgrades and new safety measures on the Mount Lindesay Highway which will provide twin benefits of less time in the car and a safer road,” Mr van Manen said.

“The benefits flowing from this Government’s infrastructure investments will leave a lasting legacy that will serve us all into the future.”

State Member for Logan, Mr Linus Power MP, said the highway is a critical connection for thousands of families in the growing region, and that the upgrade would make the trip quicker for people travelling between Jimboomba, Logan and Brisbane, as well as those who regularly used the Stoney Camp Road and Chambers Flat Road interchanges.

“Because Queenslanders have stepped up to manage the health impacts of the pandemic, we’ve been able to locked in more works and funding for the Mount Lindesay Highway,” Mr Power said.

“Upgrading the capacity and safety on the through this stretch delivers massive benefits for our community’s families and tradies, and will provide a critical shot in the arm for our region’s recovering economy.

“The Queensland Government has a 10—year plan for the highway. We’ve hit the halfway mark on that plan and we’re committed to keeping that progress rolling.”

The project is jointly funded, with the Australian and Queensland governments each committing $37.5 million.

Media contact:

Minister Fletcher: Imre Salusinszky | 0432 535 737 | Imre.Salusinszky@communications.gov.au

Minister Bailey: Toby Walker | 0439 347 875 | Toby.Walker@ministerial.qld.gov.au

Assistant Minister Buchholz: Scott O’Connell | 0413 424 384

