

DON FARRELL

SHADOW MINISTER FOR SPORT AND TOURISM  SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA

NITA GREEN

SENATOR FOR QUEENSLAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  CAIRNS  THURSDAY, 11 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Tourism in Cairns; need for support for tourism businesses  beyond the end of JobKeeper.

SENATOR NITA GREEN: Well, thank you everyone for coming today. And can I  say a big thank you to Ben and Sam here at the Cairns Wildlife Dome. Can I also  say thanks to Ben, the Wildlife Director here and to Pavlova the koala, who we just  had the opportunity to meet. I am here today with Labor's Shadow Minister for  Tourism, because we are again talking about tourism in Cairns, and how  desperately this industry needs assistance from the Federal Government. This is  something that we are going to continue to talk about until the Federal Government  comes up with a plan on what support they are going to provide to the industry  after JobKeeper ends in about 40 days’ time. The thing about the Cairns industry  here is that a lot of the businesses are community businesses, they are family  businesses, and they are doing the best to get through this very difficult time. But  right now, they're making decisions about whether they need to make jobs  redundant, whether staff will have jobs in 40 days’ time. And that is because the  Federal Government has not come up with a plan. They've come to Cairns and  they've listened and consulted. But that's something that they should have done  weeks ago. What they should be doing now is outlining to these businesses and to  these workers, what their plan is, what the package of support might look like. And  if they can't come up with a plan, then they need to extend JobKeeper. Because  we know that JobKeeper is absolutely the best way to keep these jobs right here in  Cairns. It's been great to be joined by the Shadow Tourism Minister, Don Farrell,  and to show off all of these amazing assets here. We want to encourage as many  people to holiday at home, we want to encourage as many people to come and  enjoy the assets that Cairns has to offer. What we want to do, though, is make  sure that these jobs and these tourism businesses are here for the long run. So,

it's great to have Don here to listen to these businesses, and to speak to you about  what Labor's campaign has been about.

SENATOR DON FARRELL: Thanks Nita, and thanks very much for inviting me up  from Adelaide. I left the 39 degrees in Adelaide today, but can I tell you it's a lot  hotter up here and I've been up here at the insistence of Nita. She's had our leader  Anthony Albanese here earlier in the week and she's insisted that I come up too, to  talk with directly all of the tourism operators who have been so badly affected by  this terrible COVID pandemic over the last 12 months. And the important message,  I think, that we need to get to the Federal Government is that they need to make a  decision quickly. They need to make a decision now on what is going to replace  JobKeeper. Either, JobKeeper is extended, or there's another special package for  the tourism industry. There's no doubt that the tourism industry, particularly the  tourism industry in Far North Queensland has been affected more dramatically  than any other industry in this country. And we've the Minister up here earlier of the  week. What are they waiting for? They know the problem. They can talk to any of  the tourism operators up here. They'll tell you exactly what the problems are, what  they need, but they need to make a decision now. They can't wait. They can't  waste time. They can't leave these businesses dangling. And more importantly,  they can't leave these workers dangling. These workers need to know in just over  40 days, what's going to happen to them when JobKeeper ends. And I simply can't  understand, given that the Minister has come up here and he knows the problems,  why the government hasn't made an announcement about what will replace  JobKeeper. Now, why is it important that the Federal Government have a role  here? Because unlike most of the rest of the country, Far North Queensland relies  far more heavily on overseas tourism than anywhere else in the country. And of  course, it's the Federal Government that has responsibilities for the national  borders and it's the Federal Government that is keeping these borders closed. So,  they have a special responsibility to people in Far North Queensland and we want  them to act. We want them to act now and we want to give some security both to  the businesses and to the workers who work in this industry. We don't want to lose  the skills. The pandemic will eventually end. There'll be a vaccine and people will  start coming again. We want to make sure that we've got all of these terrific places,  like the Wildlife Dome, for these overseas visitors to come to. But you've got to  keep going. You've got to keep going until the pandemic is over and you've got to  make an announcement now.

JOURNALIST: How long would you like to see the JobKeeper or whatever they  call the package extended for? How long?

FARRELL: Well, it's a pretty simple question. Sooner or later, this pandemic will  end, and things will return to normal. We want to make sure that when that  happens, places like Wildlife Dome are still open and they've got experienced staff  who can give the wonderful experience that international travellers demand.  Japanese travellers, Chinese travellers, they've been coming here in huge

numbers for a long period of time. We need to make sure that when the pandemic  ends and these people start coming again, these tourists coming again, we've got  a business to provide to them. So, we say we say you need to keep this open for  as long as necessary until we return to normal.

JOURNALIST: What do you see as a workable alternative to JobKeeper beyond  March?

FARRELL: Well, either the government extends JobKeeper, because there are  other industries that are badly affected - the aviation industry. So, if the  government can't do anything else, they ought to keep JobKeeper going. But they  shouldn't keep these businesses hanging, that's the issue. These workers are  entitled to know, is the government going to do something about it? I mean, they  make they make all the noises that suggest to you and I'm sure when the minister  is up here earlier in the week, he made positive noises. But that's not enough.  You've got to make a positive announcement and you've got to make it now.  Because these workers, these businesses are entitled to know what's happening  when JobKeeper ends in 40 days’ time. They need that certainty and they need it  now.

JOURNALIST: Would you like it to stay at the same rate, if they do extend  JobKeeper just to tourism, at the current rate it is?

FARRELL: You either keep it at the same rate to make it nice and simple. People  understand JobKeeper at the moment, they've appreciated it. This business has  certainly appreciated the support that JobKeeper has provided to them and I'm  sure their workers have supported that. You can either keep JobKeeper going as it  is, that's nice and simple. Or you come up with a package specifically for the  tourism industry. I'd be comfortable either way. But what's important right now is  the government has to make a decision. They have to say, look, what are we doing  when JobKeeper ends and they can't wait.

JOURNALIST: Hospitality has obviously been badly hit by the pandemic as well. It  relies on quite a lot of casual staff and a lot of people have said that they've not  been able to actually replace staff who have left their businesses. Should any new  iteration of the JobKeeper, or whatever it may be, should it have more flexibility for  casuals?

FARRELL: I don't have any objection to the government refining JobKeeper to  make it more fit for purpose. It was an across the board thing. It was an  emergency. Time has allowed you to get more information, more data, and  perhaps to make it more fit for purpose. But the government can't wait. We can't  delay. We can't delay this decision. The decision needs to be made now. Not in  two weeks’ time or three weeks’ time or in the next budget. That's too late. These  people need certainty and they need it right now. So, whatever the government is



proposing to do, Labor will obviously back it because we've backed it all the way  through. In fact, JobKeeper was a Labor idea. Labor came up with the idea. It took  a couple of days for the government to latch on. So, we'll back the government's  proposals, but they've got to make a decision. We’re the opposition. We don't  control the Treasury benches. The government does and they've got to make a  decision.

JOURNALIST: Given that we're very likely in an election year, do you think that  this will be a last-minute decision so [inaudible]?

FARRELL: Look, I hope the government isn't simply doing this because an  election is around the corner. These are the livelihoods of people. People have  come up here, they've set up businesses. This is a family owned business right  here at the Wildlife Dome. They've put their own money into this business. They've  invested in getting people from overseas. They've invested in jobs. These people  shouldn't be fodder for political parties in an election year. These people need  help, they need it now and it shouldn't be conditional on the fact that there's an  election around the corner.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: TOM ZED (FARRELL) 0419 227 286



