

PETA MURPHY MP  MEMBER FOR DUNKLEY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  WEDNESDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Sacrifices of the Australian public; compromised vaccine messaging; Craig  Kelly and Pete Evans; Prime Minister’s lack of leadership.

PETA MURPHY, MEMBER FOR DUNKLEY: Good morning everyone.

I’m here today to talk on behalf of the millions and millions of Australians who last year and  now this year - particularly in WA and NSW - have sacrificed in order to help to supress the  virus. We have had people from the Prime Minister, to the Premiers, to all the Chief Medical  Officers saying to Australians, ‘follow the medical advice, we are listening to the scientists,  follow the medical advice’. And that’s what we did.

In my home state of Victoria and in my electorate of Dunkley, people stayed home for weeks  and weeks and weeks on end, only going outside for one hour a day for exercise. They missed  birthdays and funerals and weddings, they couldn’t see their grandparents and loved ones in  nursing homes, in order to suppress the virus. And now, today, we have a situation where we  have a Prime Minister who urged all those people to do that and they listened, who now will  not shut down Craig Kelly and other MPs who want to spread conspiracy theories about  COVID not existing, about medicines that aren’t approved to be taken, and, particularly  insidiously, about the vaccine. It is beyond belief that we could have a government that would  spend some $28 million or so on an advertising campaign to tell Australians to ‘have  confidence in the vaccine, take the vaccine, we need people to take the vaccine for our public  health, and for our economy to recover’ - and yet free rein is given to members of the  government to give the opposite message.

Is it any wonder that Craig Kelly went on Pete Evans’ podcast? Is it any wonder that he is on  TV news shows promoting himself and spouting these conspiracy theories? Saying things on  his Facebook page like Chief Medical Officers are akin to war criminals, when the Prime  Minister won’t show leadership? Now, I saw some reports last night that perhaps the Prime  Minister called Craig Kelly before Question Time to say ‘hey mate, tone it down a bit, I’m going  to get asked about this in question time’. If that is right, and if the only motivation of the Prime  Minister to finally talk to his government member about the dangerous things he is saying is  that the Prime Minister doesn’t want to be put under political pressure in Question Time, that  says it all doesn’t it really about this Prime Minister?

It is beyond time, on behalf of everyone who has worked so hard and has sacrificed so much  that the Prime Minister comes out publicly - publicly - and says ‘this has to stop’. Because it is



one thing to say, ‘oh don’t take your medical advice from Facebook’. That shows either a  complete ignorance or a wilful disregard for how important social media has become,  particularly over the pandemic, where people couldn’t get out and talk to other. We have a  Prime Minister who does Facebook Live and gives information to the public and wants people  to listen to him, and then says, ‘well don’t listen to what members of my government say on  Facebook’ and ‘look, they might spread conspiracy theories that are dangerous and bad for  public health, and lead to people having less faith in government and politicians - but gee, they  are a good member for their electorate’.  You can not be a good member for Hughes and be  telling your constituents that it is not really clear that they should take the vaccine that the TGA  has approved and that the Prime Minister and health officials say we need to take for  everyone’s sake.

So, that is what I say to the Prime Minister today, and the Minister for Health - come out  publicly, stop being mealy -mouthed and disavow what is going on and tell him and others they  have to stop.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DYLAN STEED 0400 615 862



