ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS AFTERNOON AGENDA  MONDAY, 25 JANUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Labor leadership; Federal Election; quarantine; coronavirus pandemic; Scott  Morrison not taking responsibility during the pandemic; international and state borders;  Aussies stranded overseas; Federal Government handing over decision-making to the states;  Labor’s policy agenda; people being left behind.

ANDREW CLENNELL, HOST: He may be the guy with the baseball cap, shearing sheep as you put  it, but he seems to have the political wood on you at the moment if polls have anything to say,  doesn’t he?

ANTHONY ALBANESE, LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY: No. What we have had  is a pandemic. And this time last year when we spoke, and before the pandemic, I was preferred  Prime Minister. If you look at the polls, it is up to you to comment on the polls, but the fact is our  primary vote is up in every single published poll.

CLENNELL: It is still rubbish, isn’t it?

ALBANESE: I don’t think that it is rubbish, a three per cent increase on our primary vote which is  there.

CLENNELL: It is not an election-winning primary vote, is it?

ALBANESE: Well, it puts us at 49 per cent, two-party-preferred in a context of this, Andrew, in a  context of a pandemic where it is impossible to see how the Government could have had more  advantage than they have up to this point.

CLENNELL: Isn’t that why you lose, though? Is it for that exact reason that you cannot win?

ALBANESE: No. If you want to see a boost, have a look at Jacinda Ardern. She had a primary vote,  in actuality, not in theory, in actuality, above 50 per cent, and the two-party-preferred vote nearing  two thirds.

CLENNELL: She was in Government.

ALBANESE: That is right. With a six in front of it. Scott Morrison hasn't had that boost. I have been  with the only, I think, one exception, in positive territory in terms of my standing. We come out of a  pandemic having been constructive, having shown that we will put the national interest first, having  been responsible, and being in a position to engage directly into who is best, not to build back to

what was, but to imagine a better future and set about creating it. And that is our task. And the  problem for Scott Morrison is that this Government have been in office for three terms. And they  have no plan, no policy vision for a better future on the economy. They have no plan for social  policy. They dismiss areas that we raised, like childcare, like even the superannuation policies about  a better future, whether it be social policy of making sure people can get education and skills,  whether it be a national agenda, such as a Future Made in Australia. The plan that we have for  Rewiring the Nation, that's a practical plan to lower prices of energy for manufacturing to allow  growth of new industries. We could be a renewable energy superpower

CLENNELL: You painted a picture of the Government then which wasn't very complimentary. It  must annoy you to know that they could still beat you despite that picture you just gave. That they're  still in a position to beat you. History says that oppositions are usually ahead like 53-55 by now if the  Government's going to change.

ALBANESE: Well, that's not right.

CLENNELL: Tell me where it's not right. 2013, 2007, 1996.

ALBANESE: That's not right. What occurs is that in terms of an election, if you look at where we're  at compared with, and where I'm at, compared with other opposition leaders around the country, the  only place in the world whereby opposition leaders have done well is where the pandemic has been  completely mismanaged, such as in the United States.

CLENNELL: So, Scott Morrison has managed this okay?

ALBANESE: No, the Australian people have managed it okay. And Labor has worked with the  Government constructively. And at the next election, we'll be able to say that we'll be able to put  forward the case, which you know is true, that it was Labor that was arguing for wage subsidies  when Scott Morrison was saying it was dangerous. It was Labor that's continuing to argue that the  Government is evading its responsibility for quarantine, for a range of issues.

CLENNELL: Should there be remote quarantine? Should it be in remote areas?

ALBANESE: Well, it makes sense that Jane Halton has put forward remote areas away from the  populations. Howard Springs in Darwin has been left virtually empty, certainly nowhere near  capacity, for many months now, at the same time as 40,000 Australians can't get home. They're  stranded. At the same time as when visitors have come back, they've quarantined in the middle of  CBDs, they are in the middle of cities. It makes sense to have a practical plan. Scott Morrison has  preferred to not take responsibility, even for areas, I mean, he's responsible for quarantining since  1901. It's in our Constitution. Scott Morrison obviously is in charge of international borders. We have  a time whereby there's never been more vacant planes sitting in the middle of deserts, but they're  not being used. Scott Morrison, of course, could authorise Mathias Cormann to use the VIP jet  around Europe. But when I suggested that VIP jets could be used, the RAAF fleet, a national asset,  could be used to bring Australians home, that was dismissed. Why?

CLENNELL: Well, let's talk about people not being able to get home. What about Dan Andrews? He  wouldn't let Victorian people come back home. And he had the Aus Open about to happen. That is  not ideal, is it?

ALBANESE: This is one of the issues, Andrew, is that the Federal Government, the Federal  Government, have handed over all the responsibility for the decision making to the states, and have  then been selectively critical not of Liberal and National governments such as the one in New South  Wales, or South Australia, or Tasmania, that had their borders closed as well, that still have their  borders. I can't, as of today, as we speak, I can't travel to any state or territory in Australia without a  permit [sic - prerecord]. And that's not a partisan issue, that's across the board. That's something  that Scott Morrison has allowed to happen. And Scott Morrison, of course, has also been prepared  to join, as he did, the court case with Clive Palmer against the Western Australian Government,  something that won't be forgotten by them come the next election.

CLENNELL: I'm sure that's the case. But what's right and what's wrong in terms of where Australia  should be at the moment? I mean, are you going to piggyback off these hard border closures with  the Labor premiers? Or do you have a view that the New South Wales model can work where  contact tracing, as long as there are small numbers of the virus, can keep things such as borders  open?

ALBANESE: My job is to be the alternative Prime Minister and to put forward constructive ideas, to  put forward a critique and alternatives to the national Government. And one of the things that I know  is that the state premiers, regardless of whether they're Labor or Coalition, have done their best  based upon the medical advice that they've received. And they've also had responsibility for a range  of things that they shouldn't have, that are clearly Federal responsibilities.

CLENNELL: Do you believe in these border closures?

ALBANESE: Now, I go back to a year ago. Let me make this point, Andrew. I go back to a year ago,  Scott Morrison's infamous comment, 'I don't hold a hose, mate'. That will characterise him in terms of  the way that he provides national leadership in this country.

CLENNELL: Do you believe in these border closures? State border closures?

ALBANESE: I believe that state premiers are entitled to make the decisions because they've been  handed that responsibility by the Federal Government. And I'm not going to be critical of any of the  state premiers. I haven't been. Unlike what the Coalition have done, which is for Scott Morrison to  want to hug the state premiers except when it's inconvenient and send out Josh Frydenberg and  Greg Hunt and others to attack Daniel Andrews. He went up himself to the Queensland election and  campaigned there. I've got to say, everywhere Scott Morrison went, the Labor vote for Annastacia  Palaszczuk went up. And he even cancelled a National Cabinet to prioritise campaigning for the  LNP. And we know how that worked out.

CLENNELL: I want to read you this tweet from the conservative commentator in The Australian,  Janet Albrechtsen. Now, you may say to me, 'Well, come on, it is Janet Albrechtson'. But look, she's  been criticising Scott Morrison lately. And she said yesterday, 'Listening to Anthony Albanese on  ABC Breakfast. The sooner Labor changes to a Labor Opposition Leader who cuts through, the  sooner we might get a better Liberal Government. Scott Morrison is getting a free ride at the moment  and it’s bad for the country'. Do you concede you could be a bit briefer and punchier with your media  performance? Kim Beazley used to describe himself as prolix. Is that an issue that you've got?

ALBANESE: No. Janet Albrechtsen, you expect the conservatives to be out there. I mean that  publication, The Australian, was out there backing in a poll commissioned by John Setka's mates

just this week.

CLENNELL: Do you talk too much, though?

ALBANESE: I have big ideas.

CLENNELL: So, they need a lot of words to express?

ALBANESE: No. I have big ideas. And I put forward Labor's arguments. I'm interested in advancing  those arguments. You yourself requested a long-form interview today.

CLENNELL: I guess you got me there. The Labor review of the election loss kind of found, and this  is a bit of a black and white portrayal of it, but it found that more rich people were voting Labor, more  people in the inner suburbs of Sydney and Melbourne, and more of the poorer people were voting  for the Coalition. Do you accept that's a problem? And how do you get past that problem? Do you  accept there's people in the outer suburbs there who feel left behind by your side of politics?

ALBANESE: Well, they've been left behind by this Government. And that's one of the themes that  we have is people being left behind. They feel disappointed that this Government doesn't have a  plan for them. We're reaching out to them.

CLENNELL: You've still got that challenge. How do you get the outer suburbs? How do you get the  regions? How do you get that support? I mean, Morrison killed it in Queensland last time. Can you  get those people back?

ALBANESE: Well, Queensland, of course, historically, has swung big. And I'm convinced it can  swing big again, as it did towards the Palaszczuk Government, as it has in the past towards Labor.  We will have a plan for regional economic development. I'm a former Regional Development  Minister. I'm someone who's engaged in Queensland over a long period of time. And one of the  advantages that I have of having a track record is wherever I go, I can point towards projects and  major infrastructure that I supported and delivered when in Government.

CLENNELL: Will you visit a coal mine?

ALBANESE: Look, I will visit a range of activities around the country. We'll wait and see where I go  during the election campaign. But I've got no problem at all talking to workers at any time. I certainly  will be talking to the Miners’ Federation as their special guest at their conference and I've been the  guest speaker at the Miners Memorial. I've been to Mackay and spoken, launched a report about  what's happening with the undermining of working conditions in coal mines. And I'll continue to  engage with workers, whether they're coal miners, whether they work at a local bank, whether they  work in retail, stand up for workers and respect the job that they do, whatever that task is.

CLENNELL: If you lost this election, would you run as Leader again?

ALBANESE: I'm not considering those options. I'm considering just one, which is winning.

CLENNELL: There's a danger for you, I think, that you're essentially an institutionalised opposition. I  mean, you've been in the Parliament for 25 years this year. You've been in Government for six  years. And one of the stunning things for me when I came back to Canberra last year was Shadow

Ministers have Chiefs of Staff. Opposition is supposed to hurt, isn't it? I mean, if you give someone  that status, and they're only in charge of three people, are you concerned about Labor's future? I  mean, this election really, you've sort of got to win, don't you? For Labor's future federally?

ALBANESE: I'm confident we will win. And I'm confident that we not only will win, but by the nature  of the way that I'm conducting myself as Opposition Leader, one of the things I've said is that the  weakness of the Abbott Government, that is still going, this current Government, is that they just  opposed everything when they were in opposition. They said no to everything. They didn't develop a  plan. They behaved in a destructive negative way. I haven't done that. I think the way that you  conduct yourself in opposition will reflect the sort of Government you are, whether you're inclusive,  whether you're prepared to listen to ideas and reach out. The lessons of the Rudd and Gillard  Government, as you know, I despaired at some of the internal actions that we did. And we  committed some errors.

CLENNELL: You guys completely blew it, really. A chance for Labor to be in Government doesn't  happen that often.

ALBANESE: Look, one of the things that I'm determined is that Labor, in order to achieve long  lasting reforms, my model is the Hawke and Keating Governments. A long-term Government that  entrenches reform, like superannuation, like Medicare, like the things that came out of the Accord,  like the environmental program they had. You need to be in Government for the long term in order to  entrench those reforms. Now, I'm proud of the Rudd and Gillard Governments. And many of the  reforms have lasted. But some of them haven't.

CLENNELL: Just finally, you mentioned before the Rudd and Gillard years and the problems there.  There's obviously speculation about your leadership around the place, not just on Sky News.

ALBANESE: Only on Sky, mate.

CLENNELL: You are asked about it. There are there are others who would love your job, obviously.  How secure do you feel?

ALBANESE: Look, absolutely. I'm one of the few people to ever be elected to lead a major political  party unopposed. That is something, Scott Morrison had to knife Malcolm Turnbull and then compete  with Peter Dutton and Julie Bishop to get there. I didn't have to do any of that. I had the support  across the states, across the groups, men and women, I had the support of my team. And I showed,  a few years ago when there was a ballot, I had the support of the Party membership as well. So, I'm  very confident in my position. I have the support of my team. And my team is also focused on one  thing and one thing only, which is making sure we get into Government with an agenda to change  the country for the better.

CLENNELL: Anthony Albanese, thanks for your time.

ALBANESE: Thanks very much, mate.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053

