

JULIAN HILL MP

DEPUTY CHAIR, JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

AND AUDIT

MEMBER FOR BRUCE





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2SM MARCUS PAUL IN THE MORNING

WEDNESDAY, 17 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Brittany Higgins and Prime Minister’s response; Falling Behind Report;

wage growth; inequality; productivity; Marcus’ engagement.



MARCUS PAUL, HOST: Yep, alright, well, that's courtesy of the 7:30 Report last night as this

story continues to develop. The fallout from shocking allegations that a young woman was

raped in a Federal Minister’s Canberra office two years ago. It certainly dominated politics

yesterday. It will continue to dominate today, as it should. There are real questions to be

answered about how an alleged serious crime could have taken place in that location and who

was aware that it had occurred - a full reflection on the culture inside Parliament House.



Julian Hill MP, like the Prime Minister is a father. That's completely irrelevant to understanding

that violence against women is never acceptable. Julian's on the programme. Hello, mate.



JULIAN HILL, MEMBER FOR BRUCE: G’Day mate. How are you?



PAUL: I'm okay. Thank you. I was embarrassed yesterday. I was embarrassed, by my Prime

Minister. I don't buy for a moment - I'm sorry, and it upsets people, I said - I believe that Scott

Morrison lied to the Australian public yesterday. I believe he would have known precisely what

had occurred and what the allegations were inside a Senior Minister’s office within his House,

Parliament House.



HILL: It is beyond belief that he didn't know. It's implausible. But, like everyone or every decent

human, I think I was just shocked and appalled when I heard these allegations. They're

heartbreaking, and you don't have to be a father. You just need to be human.  I can only

imagine how difficult this must be for Brittany. And, you know, as the years go on and we get a

bit older, many of us know family friends and others whose lives have been touched by sexual

assault. And you learn just a little along the way. Um, but I'm in awe of how strong Britney is.

It's hard enough for so many people to come forward and report sexual assault in any

circumstance. But to do that in the full glare of the national media - hats off to her for her

courage and strength.



But the Prime Minister's response was just beyond belief. He just doesn't get it. There's

something not quite right about the guy when you see that sort of response. As one of the

journalists so aptly said yesterday, Tegan George. She hit the nail on the head. She put a

question: Shouldn't the PM have acted on Monday? Not waited to talk to his wife that night?



PAUL: Absolutely. I mean the whole playing of the Jen and daughters card, the family card. I

see right through it. I see again, it's all a part of the spin. It's all a part of the marketing of a

man who, quite clearly lacks any empathy in my opinion. He's a political animal who will stop at

nothing to retain power, and he's been found wanting on this. I mean yesterday he publicly

rebuked the Defence Minister, Linda Reynolds. Well, how about getting rid of her, Scott? I

mean, for goodness sake. It's almost as if there's been a cover up from the get go on this.



HILL: Well, it is, as you say, it's just beyond belief that this could happen two years ago and no

one mentioned it. It's implausible that the Prime Minister, nor his advisers, knew of this. They

all move between office. It is such a shocking incident.



But let's just pretend for a moment that that's true. Let's just take him at his word. The only

thing to do then is a full, independent inquiry into what happened. I mean, you know, if that's

what's going on in the Prime Minister's office - “Oh no one tells me anything” - what is the guy

a mushroom? He sits in the corner in the dark and, you know, gets fed what mushrooms get

fed It. It is just outrageous.



PAUL: Well, it is, and you’ve got to remember as well that Linda Reynolds’ Chief of Staff at the

time of the alleged incident, Fiona Brown, has worked in Scott Morrison's office since after the

2019 election. And she had prior knowledge of the alleged assault, having managed Higgins

directly in the aftermath. ‘Managed’ - isn't that a great word? For goodness sake it was like a

box ticking exercise. And I'm sorry this is just not good enough. If this is the standard of how

we deal with alleged sexual abuse inside Parliament House, the core of our democracy in

Australia, then we are just not doing well enough at all.



HILL: Well, absolutely. And clearly there needs to be significant changes to the procedures so

that all staff, whatever the gender, whatever their age, whatever their role, that everyone who

works in this building, like any workplace, should deserve to feel safe. And if there is an

incident, if something inappropriate happens, that people have proper independent channels to

go to and feel safe and report that.



But that reaction yesterday [from the Prime Minister], I mean, daughters and wives don't exist

to teach men to respect women and have empathy. If the prime minister didn't instantly

understand how appalling this crime is, then as someone said yesterday, no wonder the

government hires empathy consultants.



PAUL: $190,000 bucks a year is what I am lead to believe. For what? I've been told that this

so called empathy advisor is paid by taxpayers. I mean, that's money, obviously well spent.

Look, we could talk about this, uh, at length, but let's move on to something else. I'm I'm very

impressed by this work you've been doing on Australia's Global Performance: Falling Behind. I

have a full copy of your report here, and it's not good reading. It's really not. You've assessed

our nation's wellbeing and progress after seven years of Liberal government referencing data

that's reputable and global rankings and research. Basically, it's a report card, if you like on

how we've dealt with things like our economy, COVID-19, wage growth, economic productivity,

quality, a whole range of core issues that are of importance to Australians. And overall, it

doesn't look like a very good report card at all.



HILL: Well, I nerd it out to be honest over summer, and the more you scratch into it - I looked

at dozens of international benchmarks, these are publicly available, reputable data from, you

know, transparent sources, and they measure how countries stack up against each other. If

you like, it's kind of like the World Olympics. The tables for how we do on economic growth and

wage growth and environment. And it isn't good reading.



Quite frankly, Australia is falling behind under the Liberals, in their eighth year of government.

They hate talking about this stuff because it's their brand propaganda that they are great

economic managers.  You know - “we might be nasty, mean and cruel and whatever else. But

we're good at the economy”. Well, the facts don't bear that out.



In the six years between 2013 and 2019, real wages in this country went backwards in real

terms. People had less money in their pockets in real terms than when the Liberals were

elected. That's not good economic management.



You mentioned the word productivity. Everyone always talks about productivity. It's like the

secret sauce in the economy that creates wealth - how much we squeeze out of what we have.

Our productivity growth was fifth last out of the 37 0ECD countries - negative growth.



PAUL: So we're going backwards. You know.



HILL: We are going backwards.



PAUL: On other outcomes. Health. We now rank sixth worst in the OECD for obesity rates in

2017 2018. Two thirds or 67% of Australians were over weight or obese. That's an increase of

4% since 2014-15. We have suicide as the leading cause of death for Australians age 15 to

49, and the second leading cause of death for Australians age 50 to 54. I mean, on a global

scale, we have one of the world's best universal healthcare systems. But that's all thanks to

previous governments Hawke-Keating, Rudd-Gillard, and despite the Liberals long held desire

to undermine it. Well that undermining continues. And you only have to look here in New South

Wales at the states of regional hospitals. We've got an inquiry going on right now, Julian.



HILL: I've heard your campaigning on this, Marcus. It's terrific, and it's too often overlooked.

Regional communities need that voice to speak up very strongly. But you're right on health. I

mean, out of 11 high income countries, we now rank only eight for health care affordability.

Health care is getting more expensive under this mob.



It's so important as we enter an election you that people have the facts. The report is clear, it's

easy to read. I have put references there. If you don't believe the data, go look it up. You have

lots of weird stuff on the internet. I'll post it on your Facebook page if you like so people can get

the facts themselves.



PAUL: Yeah, if you wouldn't mind. I'll put up a podcast of our discussion this morning on these

very serious issues. And then we'll put the link up to your report as well. Because Australia's

Global Performance quite clearly shows that we are falling behind in a number of areas.



Look at equality or inequality. Australia has become a more unequal society under the

Liberals. This means wealth has become more concentrated in Australia, the poorer basically

becoming poorer, while the already are gaining more wealth. I mean look at the stats. Nearly

two million working Australians in 2020 were forced to rip $35.9 billion from their

superannuation simply to survive



HILL: There's hundreds of thousands of Australians, low income Australians, that now have

not a dollar left in superannuation for their retirement. And yet the same 12 months covered

has been great for Australian billionaire. They're combined worth was assessed to be 52.4%

higher. 50% higher over 12 months during the COVID-19 recession. Yet the government

forced the people on the lowest incomes to withdraw their super just to survive. That's not a

fair country. We can do better than that. We're a better society than this.



PAUL: Absolutely. Alright. Always good to talk to you, Julian.



HILL: Can I just congratulate you on your engagement? Valentine's Day, I heard? How terrific!



PAUL: I'll be honest with you. I couldn't, I didn't make Valentine's Day. That was the original

plan - Sunday morning after a nice breakfast - and, you know it didn't work out that way. I kind

of couldn't hold my nerves and I went early. Thank God she said Yes. God knows why, but she

said yes.



HILL: It's a beautiful thing. I can't imagine you being nervous. That's just lovely to hear.

Congratulations



PAUL: Trust me, I was. Because she's one in a million. My Ashley. She really is. Thank you

very much, mate.



HILL: Terrific!





ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: CAM GREEN 0406 507 727



