

SHAYNE NEUMANN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR VETERANS' AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE PERSONNEL  MEMBER FOR BLAIR



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  TOWNSVILLE  MONDAY, 12 APRIL 2021

SUBJECTS: Visit to Townsville; Government failures in Veterans’ Affairs; Royal  Commission into veteran suicide; Department of Veterans’ Affairs; Transition from  Defence to civilian life; Ben Roberts-Smith.

SHAYNE NEUMANN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR VETERANS' AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE  PERSONNEL, MEMBER FOR BLAIR: It’s great to be back here in Townsville. When I was  appointed into this role by Anthony Albanese as the Shadow Minister for Veterans’ Affairs and  Defence Personnel, the first place I visited after the last election was Townsville. It's great to  be back up here. I come from Ipswich which is a garrison city like Townsville. We've got the Air  Force and the Army, and you've got the Army and the Air Force here in Townsville. I’ve just  come from having a meeting with the Mayor Jenny Hill, who I've known for a long time, and  also catching up and having a look at The Oasis, which is the veterans’ hub, which is going to  be opened in the next few weeks. There's bipartisan support for that. We've got to do better for  veterans in this country. One thing I'm going to be doing today at the RSL roundtable is to  thank the RSL for their support RSL Queensland, RSL Tasmania RSL New South Wales and  RSL Victoria all support the idea of a Royal Commission into the tragedy, shame and disgrace  of veteran suicide in this country. Veterans are dying at twice the rate of suicide of the general  population. We've got to do better. We've got to get a Department of Veterans’ Affairs, which is  less complex, more simple, easier to navigate. And the current government has outsourced,  privatised and labour hired that department. It's a frustrating experience for veterans. We've  got to do better. We had a resolution that was passed by the Senate without dissent and also  in the House of Representatives without dissent a couple of weeks ago. And I'm calling on the  Prime Minister, listen to the voice of the people as expressed through the Senate and the  House of Representatives and the voices of the RSLs, as well as other veteran advocates.  People like Karen Bird, who lost her son and Julie-Ann Finney, who lost her son as well. Listen  to those voices. We’ve got to do better. We've got to support veterans here in Townsville,  Ipswich and elsewhere. So I'm here to listen and to learn, to listen to the RSL. I’m catching up  with Bill Whitburn, the President of the RSL here in Townsville today and I'm doing a forum  with ESOs. So I'm calling on the Prime Minister to do the right thing and the local MP Phil  Thompson. It's okay making speeches in Parliament, but you're in the Government. Let's have  a Royal Commission. We need a definite timeline. We need Terms of Reference, which are  strong and broad. We've got to do better for veterans. It’s no good saying, it’s weasel words,  that you're not opposed to a Royal Commission. How about you actually call the Royal  Commission and listen to the voice of the people. Happy to answer any questions.

JOURNALIST: Is that the main thing you want?

NEUMANN: Absolutely. We want a Royal Commission. Labor’s listened to what mothers and  partners of our veterans who have tragically taken their lives. Something's going wrong. Half  the rate of suicide when you're in the Defence Force, twice the rate when you're out of the  Defence Force. We've got to make sure the transition into civilian life is better. We've got to  make sure that issues of mental health and suicidal ideation are addressed properly. We've  seen the benefit of a Royal Commission into aged care, institutional child abuse, disability. We  need a Royal Commission into veteran suicide. We've seen 18 veterans take their lives in the  last three months, double the previous three months, 500 in the last decade or so. We think  that's anecdotally too low, we think it's much higher. Let's call the Royal Commission and get it  done. I’m calling on the local Federal MP to also just stop making speeches and saying you're  in favour of it. Get your Prime Minister to call one.

JOURNALIST: So you want them to set a date?

NEUMANN: Yes. A date, timelines, Terms of Reference. That's what needs to happen. Listen  to the voice of the people.

JOURNALIST: And is there anything else you want other than a Royal Commission?

NEUMANN: We want the Government to respond to the Productivity Commission report,  which was released in the middle of 2019. That report said that the Department of Veterans’  Affairs is not fit for the purpose for which it is it was created. It's difficult to navigate the  processes, it's complex, it's causing barriers and difficulties for veterans to process their claims  for compensation, rehabilitation and their assessments. The Government has not responded  properly to the 69 recommendations. They've only responded to 25 of them. The Government  can do their work. I mean, we've responded to COVID-19. The Government's not done a good  job with respect to the economic recovery. It’s done a hopeless job, it’s a complete shemozzle  the vaccination program at the moment. But they can respond also. They've got a Minister for  Veterans’ Affairs. How about he comes up here to Townsville? I've been up here twice. He  hasn't even come here. Apparently he's coming in the next few weeks. Well, I look forward to  him coming to Queensland and coming to town to visit for the first time.

JOURNALIST: Just in regards to the allegations aired by 60 Minutes last night, should Kerry  Stokes remain in his War Memorial roles while these matters are before the courts?

NEUMANN: That's a matter for Kerry to determine, not for me to give advice. I'm not going to  make any comments in relation by these issues. They're currently before the courts. There's  the Office of the Special Investigator looking at it, and the Australian Federal Police are also  looking at those issues. So it's not appropriate for me to do a running commentary in relation to  those issues. But I will say that that what I saw last night would have disgusted most  Australians. It was disgraceful what they did. The photos were confronting. They shouldn't  have done that. It shouldn't have happened. People should behave better if you're in the ADF  and the Australian public expects people to not behave that way.

JOURNALIST: But also, just in regards to the RSL National President. Should they step down  following the recent comments about veteran advocate Julie-Ann Finney?

NEUMANN: Well, he apologised, and it was an apology of sorts. He shouldn't have said those  words. The way it was, it was shocking. And really, it was regrettable he did those words. I

have enormous respect for Julie-Anne, who lost her son David. She's been a fearless,  compassionate and determined campaigner for a Royal Commission. I mean, the President of  the RSL National was out of step with those RSLs I mentioned before and many of them  repudiated and told him he was wrong. I'm glad he apologised. It shouldn't have happened. I  hope he works with people like Julie-Ann Finney and Karen Bird and others to get a Royal  Commission.

JOURNALIST: Can you just talk us through some of the most fresh, I guess, stats that you  have about veteran suicide and how serious it's gotten?

NEUMANN: Well, it is really quite serious. I mean, we've seen 18 people commit suicide in the  last few months, which was double the previous three months. We know from the reports that  up to about 500 people in last decade or so have committed suicide. We know that people who  are former members of the ADF who have moved into civilian life, commit suicide at twice the  rate of the general population. We know that when they're in, serving in Townsville, here in the  ADF, or elsewhere, they're committing suicide at half the rate. So something's going wrong in  the transition. In addition to that, it's not just a male thing. It's a female thing as well. We're  seeing a lot higher rates of female suicide from female veterans compared to women in the  general population as well. So it's not a gender based issue. It's an issue that affects both men  and women. So we've got to address this issue, you know, and it results in all kinds of  problems. One in 10 people who are homeless in this country are veterans. On any given  night, we've got nearly 6,000 people who are homeless in this country who are veterans. And  it's not just that. It's family violence, domestic breakouts. We're talking about dysfunction,  criminality, issues of inequality, that veterans experience. Loneliness, isolation, suicidal  ideation, mental health. This is not everyone's experience, by the way, who leaves the military.  But there’s clearly a cohort there that needs to be addressed. The Government's refusal to call  the Royal Commission has resulted in exacerbating this issue. The longer it goes, the worse it  gets. And it's not getting any better. The figures are quite clear that the problem is getting  worse, not better. And the Government's failure to address it properly is simply failing veterans  here in Townsville.

JOURNALIST: What do you think could be going wrong in that transition between being in the  ADF and leaving?

NEUMANN: There's things like accreditation of qualifications, which should be recognised in  the general public. So if you're qualified to do electrical engineering or have qualifications  there, then perhaps that should be also recognised when you get into civilian life. So people  are being trained with certain skills and talents and abilities, but that's not being recognised.  Also, enough advice in terms of employment and how to get Medicare cards, how to get  involved in civilian and community life. We've got a situation where about 13 per cent of the  population here in Townsville are veterans or serving ADF personnel. It's a very big cohort of  population, not just here in Townsville, but wherever there's a military base, and we've got to  address it. Otherwise, places like Townsville, my home city of Ipswich and elsewhere will be  facing these challenges. We've seen it in Brisbane, in Enoggera army base, or RAAF Base  Amberley, and we've seen it here in Townsville as well, where we've got an army base.

JOURNALIST: Is there anything in addition to a Royal Commission that the Government could  be doing to look at the situation?

NEUMANN: Well, stop labour hiring, outsourcing and privatising the Department of Veterans’  Affairs. 42 per cent of the department is labour hire from 46 labour hire companies. If you



haven't got professional public servants, who are trained and experienced, to deal with  veterans, who understand with sensitivity the challenges that veterans face, if you’re labour  hiring all the time that's not going to be good. The Government should lift the cap and rebuild  the public service. The Department of Veterans’ Affairs is the one of the most outsourced  departments with 50 of the people that work in the department on the front line, on the front  line, dealing with veterans are not public servants. They're labour hire. No wonder veterans are  frustrated with the department like that. So the Government could lift the cap. Every year at  Senate Estimates, every time we have Senate Estimates, the Secretary of the Department of  Veterans’ Affairs, Liz Cosson, says she's applied for an increase in the volume of public  service work in the department. I've said to the Minister, win the argument in Cabinet. Make  sure that the department is actually staffed properly because you can’t cut your way to better  veteran care. And that's what this government is all about.

JOURNALIST: Can you just talk us through a little bit about the forum and some of the things  that you're doing here in Townsville today and tomorrow?

NEUMANN: Yes, I’m doing visits to the bases. I've also caught up with the Mayor this morning.  I caught up with Jenny Hill, I’m catching up with some of the councillors and I'm also doing a  forum here with the ex-service organisations at the RSL today, I'm catching up for a lunch with  them. I'm also catching up with Zac’s Place. I'm also catching up the Vietnam Veterans and a  number of other organisations I’m catching up with to reacquaint myself with. I’ve met them a  number of times before. I’m an old friend of the Mayor, Jenny Hill, for a long time. She's doing  a great job up here in Townsville. But I just wanted to talk to her today and catch up with some  of these organisations. It's about listening and learning. And any politician that thinks they  know everything is kidding themselves. You're here as a politician to represent the people and  advocate our position. And I want to make it clear to the local veterans here in Townsville that  Labor's on your side, the Government's not doing what it needs to do in Veterans’ Affairs, and  we need to do better in this country to care for them and support them and give them the  services they need. But I'm here today to also listen, and that's important for any politician.

JOURNALIST: What are some of the things that you are expecting to hear at the forum and at  these meetings?

NEUMANN: I've done a number of forums around the country and I hear very similar stories.  I'm catching up with Tweed Heads RSL in the next few weeks. And they are issues of  frustration with the Department of Veterans’ Affairs, issues about navigating the waiting times  to get their applications processed. The fact there’s a lack of historical knowledge because the  department's been labour hired out as well, issues of frustration with the Government in terms  of employment issues, housing and homelessness, and the interaction between the  Department of Veterans’ Affairs and social services as well. The lack of support for veterans,  the fact that they feel that they are let go and no one's caring for them, not supporting them.  That transition from military life to civilian life is also why they feel very let down. So there's a  whole range of issues that veterans raise with me at these forums. I'm expecting, if they're  anything to go by, I expect it's going to be pretty similar to what I've experienced elsewhere.

JOURNALIST: Thank you very much.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: CHRIS CONDON 0422 018 616



