



Hon Mark Coulton MP

Minister for Regional Health, Regional Communications and Local  Government

Media contact: Douglas Rodgers 0411 658 056

MEDIA RELEASE

17 February 2021

Stride out to save a life

Australians are being urged to raise awareness about organ and tissue donation by strapping on  their joggers and striding out as part of the 15th annual Gift of Life DonateLife Walk.

Launching the Walk in Canberra with parliamentary colleagues, Federal Minister responsible for  the Organ and Tissue Authority, Mark Coulton, said the long-running event will this year be held  virtually to ensure COVID-safety and nation-wide participation.

“Community events like Gift of Life’s DonateLife Walk offer unique opportunities for Australians  from all walks of life to spruik the benefits of organ and tissue donation and have fun while doing  it,” Mr Coulton said.

“Engaging with community groups helps amplify the voice of donor families and those waiting for  life-changing transplants — giving local communities a great opportunity to be part of the national  push to increase donation.”

The coronavirus pandemic had a serious impact on Australia’s national program to increase organ  donation, including the cancelation of many community events throughout the year.

“The challenges of 2020 saw a reduction in the number of people receiving a life-giving transplant  and it is clear more donors are needed,” Mr Coulton said.

“After such a difficult year, it is critical we each take the important moment to discuss organ and  tissue donation with our friends and family and register to say “yes” to becoming a donor.

“I encourage Australians to sign up for Gift of Life’s DonateLife Walk and walk five kilometres in  teams, small groups, or as individuals at their favourite walking circuit anywhere across the  country, any time between 22 and 28 February 2021.

“By signing up for the walk, sharing your walk online, and registering to become a donor at  donatelife.gov.au, you will be doing your bit to help ensure more Australians can receive a  life-changing organ or tissue transplant.

For more information and to sign up for 2021 Gift of Life’s DonateLife Walk visit: giftoflife.asn.au.

Gift of Life’s DonateLife Walk is supported through a Community Awareness Grant from the Organ  and Tissue Authority.

Applications for the next round of grants close at 5:00pm AEDT on Sunday, 7 March 2021.

