

MADELEINE KING MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR TRADE  MEMBER FOR BRAND



MORRISON MUST SACK CHRISTENSEN AS TRADE COMMITTEE CHAIR

Scott Morrison must remove Coalition MP George Christensen as the chair of  Parliament’s joint standing committee on trade and investment growth due to his  record of incendiary and false comments about China.

At a time when calm and skilful diplomacy is needed to resolve our trade  tensions with China, the Morrison Government is giving Mr Christensen free rein  to spout deplorable comments and spread misinformation.

Mr Morrison has consistently failed to deliver leadership on the China  relationship and has never admonished inflammatory behaviour by Mr  Christensen or his other MPs.

This has made a bad situation worse.

On Facebook this week, Mr Christensen suggested he was opposed to any  form of Chinese economic activity in Australia, in a post about the Government’s  rejection of the sale of construction firm Probuild to a Chinese company.

He also provided a link to an article on the issue published by the Epoch Times,  which is notorious for publishing right-wing misinformation.

Accompanying his irresponsible comments on China this week, Mr Christensen  has been spreading the same lies and conspiracies spouted by the violent mob  who participated in the insurrection in Washington DC.

Mr Christensen, who was appointed chair of the parliamentary committee in July  last year, has ramped up his comments about China in recent months.

He has compared China to Nazi Germany, publishing his views on the right-wing social media site Parler, which was shut down last week after being used  by Trump supporters to promote the deadly riots at the US Capitol.





He has also described COVID-19 as the “Wuhan flu”.

In December, Mr Christensen backed his Queensland LNP colleague Matt  Canavan’s call for Australia to impose a levy on iron ore exports.

Such a move would only worsen the trade tensions with China, damage our  economy-saving iron ore industry and cost thousands of Australian jobs.

As well, Mr Christensen’s website features false and misleading statements  about China.

The website claims “Communist China is Australia’s largest foreign  investor”.  But according to the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, China  is Australia’s ninth largest foreign investor, with only 2 per cent of the total.

Labor understands the relationship with China is increasingly complex.

It is a relationship that must be managed in the national interest and not for  partisan political interests

China is not immune from criticism and we should call out any country that  unreasonably blocks our exports.

But it has become increasingly clear that Mr Christensen is the wrong person to  be heading a parliamentary committee charged with objectively examining our  trade and investment relationships with other nations.

The chair of this committee must act in the national interest.

Scott Morrison should stop rewarding this unhinged behaviour

Mr Christensen should be removed and replaced with a more sensible and  balanced MP who would work to improve Australia’s trading relationships, rather  than make them worse.

Thousands of jobs depend on it.

FRIDAY, 15 JANUARY 2021

MEDIA CONTACT: ANDREW BURRELL 0437 290 112









