

T h e  H o n .  D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T

Monday 22nd March 2021

Minister Littleproud iv Sky News with Peter Stefanovic

PETER STEFANOVIC: Well let's join - we're joined now by David Littleproud, the Minister  for Emergency Management. Minister, good to see you, thanks for your time this morning.  Can I just ask what the latest advice and the latest information that you've received has  been this morning?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, look, it's not good. Particularly in the fact that we're going to  see more weather events today, into tomorrow. So, the Bureau is somewhat concerned  about the front that's coming through, the fact that we've got saturated catchments that are  just overflowing as it is. It's going to put more pressure on flash flooding. So, we're  watching it today; the Bureau this morning are very concerned about the level of rainfall  that will come and that means that people right across from Queensland, down into New  South Wales, need to be vigilant, need to listen to emergency service instructions. They all  have a role to play and when you look at some of the peak areas of the concern, the  Hawkesbury Nepean River. You know, there's 2800 people that have been evacuated  from there now. But, potentially, it's over 54,000 residents, if the weather turns bad today it  could be impacted. So, there's a lot of people that need to understand they have a role to  play in this. And as I just understand, the Kempsey CBD has been evacuated, so this is an  unfolding event that we all need to be cognisant of and the responsibilities we all play in  supporting those men and women that are putting their lives on the line for us and  emergency services.

PETER STEFANOVIC: Yeah, and just on the emergency assistance that is available for  people who have been called up for it. Can you just elaborate and simplify what people  can do to get that money?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah. So, this is initial support and need to understand we'll make  further announcements as we get further assessments. But as of 8am this morning,  residents that have had damage to their homes, that had water through their homes, they  can claim $1000 per adult and $400 per child. Those people who have had their income  impacted by this, can also qualify for up to 13 weeks of income support and they simply  have to contact Centrelink. They can do that from 8am this morning, there's a designated  line for them and from that, they will be able to get those people in Centrelink to have that  money in their account pretty well immediately. This is just about some dignity and  respect, to let them get the essentials of life and just to get through and start the actual  grief process and get back on their feet.

PETER STEFANOVIC: What's the income support? How much is that available to them?

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T



DAVID LITTLEPROUD: That's equivalent to Austudy. So, that's just around those people,  whose income and whether they're casuals and they can't get to work and won't be able to  get to work. It's just about making sure that they continue to get money into their pockets  until such time as roads open and businesses reopen and clean up. So, we're just saying  to people, please don't self-assess. It's important you ring Centrelink, you shouldn't be  ashamed. Your fellow Australian is there to support you in your hour of need. So, we're  just saying, please contact Centrelink, let them support you and work through the process  for you.

PETER STEFANOVIC: And is it still 18 areas that have been declared so far, when it  comes to emergency assistance?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: No, we've increased that now to 34, Peter. The reality is and that  may need to continue to increase. We're working with the New South Wales Government,  who are making these assessments and it's predicated on the damage of the flood water.  And as the waters rise, obviously that may increase. So, it's now 34 local government  areas and we are, probably, potentially, looking at some with Queensland from the events  their last night. The Queensland Government hasn't made application yet, but obviously,  we're working with them to make sure they understand the Federal Government will move  immediately if they request it.

PETER STEFANOVIC: I know this is a state issue, but do you believe water should have  been released from the Warragamba Dam, prior to all this rainfall?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, I think in the cold, hard light of facts after the event, I think  there'll be a review to look at all these things. We can always learn from each one of these,  can we do it better? And I think that's something as a society we shouldn't be afraid to  have a mature conversation about. But, I think, just in the middle of trying to keep people  safe, I think we should just focus on that. There'll be plenty of time for people to review  these types of decisions that are being made and for us to continue to consider and work  with states to actually start digging some holes and building some more dams. Low and  behold, we're going to see more of these larger events, it just makes sense to catch some  of that water. Now, we've got $3.5 billion ready to cut a cheque, to get some bulldozers  and excavators moving. But we need the states to give the approvals, to decide how they  want to do it and its just time that I think we stop talking about it and actually do something.

PETER STEFANOVIC: Are you satisfied with the speed that it has taken? I'm referring to  the three infrastructure projects that were announced towards the end of last year that  relate to new dams. Are you satisfied with the speed that that is taking?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, no and I don't think it's just New South Wales, I think you  can say its right up into Queensland. I mean, we are business cased, we are EISed out of  our brains, just what continues to go on in just doing report, after report. At some point,  someone's going to have to turn the engine on and get a dozer and an excavator moving  to start digging some holes and start plumbing our nation. I mean, this is the frustrating  thing - our forefathers gave ownership of the resources to the states. We respect that and  we've said we'll do our bit, we'll cut a cheque. But we can't even get them to take our  money and this is the frustrating thing that Australians can see the opportunity that's there  for us to start to plumb this country. Particularly, not just for agriculture, but even for urban  centres. You've got to understand, there'll be a 37 per cent reduction in storage capacity,  per person, per megalitre of water, even in metro areas by 2030. Which means, you'll have

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T

trouble turning your tap on when you want to, because the population's increasing but we  can't get the states to dig a whole, to store some water to keep water in our pipes.

PETER STEFANOVIC: And just finally, I know you've got to go. But vaccine rollout today  in some parts of New South Wales. What sort of delays are you expecting?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well that'll be predicated on how quickly the water abates. We're  in no rush, we're in a really good position in Australia, better than anything other country in  the world because we've been able to manage this pandemic. We haven't got people  severely ill in hospitals in any great quantities. So, we've been able to manage it so we can  get this right. But, we're confident that we'll continue to roll out those 6 million vaccinations  over the next six months. We did it last year during the flu season and COVID, we were  able to do that through. We've had twice the number of GPs sign up to this. We're very  confident that we'll work with the medical profession to roll those vaccines out in a COVID-safe way and a safe way in terms of emergencies, once the water abates.

PETER STEFANOVIC: Okay. David Littleproud, the Minister for Emergency Management,  appreciate your time this morning. Thanks for joining us.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks, mate.

Media contact  0455 448 985

