

TONY BURKE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS  SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ARTS  MANAGER OF OPPOSITION BUSINESS  MEMBER FOR WATSON



TONY SHELDON

SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  SYDNEY  TUESDAY, 9 FEBRUARY/WEDNESDAY, 10 FEBRUARY 2021

TONY BURKE, SHADOW INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS MINISTER: Well it’s midnight and right  around Australia right now in a whole lot of industries we’ve got people who are working the  hours most of us want to be asleep. And right now most of those people are in a situation  where they’re being paid penalty rates. If the government gets the legislation through that’s  currently before the Federal Parliament, then the protection that maintains those penalty rates  disappears. Effectively, the safety net, which is the better-off test, will no longer be there for  agreements that come forward. If you get rid of the safety net for workers they will land with a  thud. And you get rid of a test that’s there to make sure people are better off, it’s no surprise  just what will happen. So tonight I thought it was important. Let’s make sure that we get the  message out that most people don’t want to work these hours. Most media conferences aren’t  held at these hours. Politicians’ offices are closed at these hours. But these are the hours that  penalty rates exist. And if Mr Morrison’s pay cut legislation goes through it will be legal to gut  enterprise agreements and make sure that every penalty rate, every overtime rate, every shift  allowance is up for grabs. Right now in supermarkets there are people stacking shelves. They  could face a pay cut of in the order of $8000 each year based simply based on whether or not  this legislation goes through. Be in no doubt, we’re standing in their way. Because right now if  you look at the workforce we have some workers with protections and other workers -  particularly in the gig economy - who don’t have security, who don’t have protections. What  the government is doing is saying well let’s get rid of the protections for the people who have  them. And what Anthony Albanese will be announcing later today in Queensland, will be to say  no let’s not cut standards, let’s lift those people up who currently are earning below what  should be the minimums in Australia. Tony Sheldon’s been at the parliamentary inquiry and  he’s been directly asking questions of some of the employer organisations as to how they’re  likely to use the legislation if it goes through. And I’ll hand over to Senator Tony Sheldon.

TONY SHELDON, SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES: What’s really clear about the  legislation, and the whole question is there a pay cut? We’ve looked at the legislation, we’ve  considered the legislation and quite clearly it’s a pay cut, it’s a pay cut, it’s a pay cut. Now we  put that question directly to employers right from the Hotels Association, the hospitality

industry, right through over to the mining industry, they would not guarantee that no worker  would be worse off. This is quite clearly a government pay cut, and employer association drive  to do it, and it’s going to hit the economy as well as hit your pay packet. We need to have an  economy that can turn around, make sure people can spend in their local community, keep  those small businesses thriving. But what do they want to do? They want the big end of town  to force pay cuts on every hardworking Australian, whether it be midnight, whether it be the  weekend, whether it be public holidays. Whether it’s the most inconvenient time. This is going  to result in a pay cut for tens of thousands of Australians and those employer associations  made it very clear that they will not, that wages will not be less, they will not guarantee that no  worker would be worse off. This is a travesty against hard working Australians, it’s the wrong  time for the economy to make this move and Scott Morrison and this government needs to  back off and start standing with Australians rather than trying to put their hand in their pocket  and ripping money out. A good example of course is the gig economy. Which has workers who  receive no rights, no minimum wage. And what does the government do? Sit on their hands  while the warriors of the pandemic, the people who stood up for us, and are still standing up for  us during the pandemic, these gig workers, workers in the hospitality industry, workers in the  frontline in aged care, right across all these industries, are going to be receiving a pay cut as a  result of this legislation.

BURKE: And I’ll just say before I throw to questions, the government says “oh but employers  wouldn’t do this”. Why would employers impose a pay cut? I’ve quite deliberately held this  media conference today in front of a 7-Eleven. If you allow a race to the bottom you’ll have  employers that run in that race - and Mr Morrison has fired the starting gun. I’m happy to throw  to questions.

JOURNALIST: Are you saying 7-Eleven is going to cut its workers’ pay?

BURKE: There will be employers who do. I mean the first employers we see using this  legislation I think will be some of the worse labour hire companies. And think about all you  need to do. You get a relatively small labour hire company, with not many employees, to get  an agreement like this through. And then they can undercut every competitor in the industry.  It’s very easy to see how this unravels.

JOURNALIST: I notice you didn’t directly say whether 7-Eleven would look to cut its workers’  pay. Is that because a business like 7-Eleven hasn’t really been badly affected by the  coronavirus pandemic, therefore probably wouldn’t be able to get an alteration to an enterprise  agreement below the BOOT through?

BURKE: There’s a presumption in the question that I need to take on. Because the  government has been running a myth that only businesses that have been badly affected by  the pandemic would be eligible for these sorts of changes. That is not what the legislation  says. The legislation says the Commission simply has to consider whether or not the business  has been affected by the COVID pandemic. Now I’ll tell you, you’d be hard pressed finding a  single business in the country that hasn’t been affected by the pandemic. The reason I’m not  nominating specific individual companies for what they’ll do is that’s for them to decide and I  haven’t sat in their board meetings, I can’t speak for them. What I do know is 7-Eleven will be  eligible to act under this legislation. Pretty much every business in Australia will be eligible to  act under this legislation. But if the legislation doesn’t go through, right now for most workers,  not all, but for most workers we have a safety net, that safety net is called the better-off test.  The government says it wants to suspend it for two years. Well let me just say if any  agreements get through during the two years, and they will, we still have agreements in place

today that were put through under John Howard’s Work Choices laws. These agreements  don’t just last two years.

JOURNALIST: This press conference kind of reminds me of something Nick Xenophon would  do, which tried to cut through issues, tried to distil things down to a simple phrase because it  was very hard to get public attention to them. Do you feel Labor is actually cutting through on  industrial relations? Is this press conference a sign of trying to grab some more attention to it?

BURKE: This is about drawing attention to what the government’s doing. I’m completely  upfront about this. This is being held at midnight to make a particular point that the workers  who work at these hours are the most at risk. That’s what the government’s doing. They are  doing it eyes wide open, they are doing it deliberately. And that’s why we’re holding the media  conference now.

JOURNALIST: It’s not a sign that you’re struggling to get attention in other ways?

BURKE: I think you know, it’s easier to get a bigger crowd in the middle of the day. I’m  grateful, we’ve got you Nick here in person, we’ve got Paul on the line. I’m glad you’ve come  along because this is the biggest story in your round right at the moment. You’re both on  industrial relations. It’s not often that a government decides to come forward with a proposal  for a pay cut. And certainly, after the 12 months that we’ve had, we hadn’t thought they’d come  forward with a pay cut for the heroes of the pandemic. But that’s where we are and Labor’s  going to do everything we can to stand between those workers and the pay cut the  government’s wanting to hand them.

JOURNALIST: Tony in his speech Anthony talks about extending employee entitlements to  employee-like workers. Other than food delivery and rideshare, which sectors do you think  should be regulated in that way?

BURKE: You’ve gone to the right area there Paul in terms of the announcement by referring to  the gig economy. But what I’d say is the gig economy is much bigger, and is penetrating much  deeper into the Australian economy, than just the apps you might have on your phone. There’s  a whole series of people in various trades where Airtasker has become a way of their rates  being cut. But also now in the care economy. A huge section of the care economy, and the  NDIS, is done through an algorithm now of various apps that those workers have on their.  Now, we want the technology. I want the technology, I use the technology. Most Australians  use the technology. What I want though is the technology without the exploitation. I want 21st  century technology without the 19th century working conditions. I want to make sure that we  can be a first world country without a section of our workforce on third-world conditions. And I  want to know how on earth it is that we’ve got to the point now that there are some people  working in the gig economy who are being paid less on an hourly basis than the legal minimum  wage in Australia. That needs to be fixed and that’s what the policy is aimed at.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudble)

BURKE: The policy that Anthony’s announcing refers to the power of government in promoting  secure employment. It goes both to the direct employment from government but also to  procurement policies. I’d remind you, John Howard did the opposite of this. John Howard used  the power of government to promote individual contracts. That’s what the Liberals were willing  to do. We want to use the power of government to promote secure work. Because let’s face it,  if you’ve got secure work, you’ve got a secure household budget. If you’ve got secure work,

the bills you’ve been putting off over the last 12 months, you know you’ve got a plan to now be  able to pay. If the public have secure jobs then business has secure income. It’s in the  interests of workers, the interests of business and the interests of the economy that we have a  shift back to more security at work.

JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)

BURKE: The question from Paul goes to the issue of having an objective definition of casual.  One of the problems at the moment is we’ve ended up with a situation where some employers  have completely abused casual employment. And there are other employers who may have  inadvertently used it the wrong way. What we want to do is have it clear, in black and white,  when someone is a casual and when someone is not. But what we don’t want to do is what the  government now has before the parliament, which says ‘well whatever the employer says, if  they say someone is a casual well then they are’. And 12 months later if the casual wants to  get it fixed their only option is to go to the Federal Court of Australia. That is simply a recipe for  insecure work. And so that’s not our path. But having an objective definition of a casual is the  way forward and that’s what’ll be put in the Act.

JOURNALIST: You’re talking about the objective definition of a casual. I was talking to a few  Uber drivers earlier tonight and earlier in the night spoke to some retail workers. None of them  were really aware that this debate was going on. How do you cut through to people like that  and convince them that this is a policy worth voting for?

BURKE: I’ll tell you what happens as this campaign runs. The casuals that you refer to Nick  will realise when they get a payslip and they hear about what’s happening. It’s very simple to  look at a payslip and work out how much of your take home pay is loadings. How much of it is  casual loading, how much of it is late night shifts, how much of it is penalty rates on the  weekend. And when you see that amount and you know the government wants to make that  optional rather than guaranteed? It’s a very short line between that and people knowing the  impact on themselves. With respect to gig workers and riders, I’ll tell you this. I was with some  riders only yesterday. They know they’re being paid less than the legal minimum. They also  knew, the riders I was with, that one of their mates had died on the road. And that the company  had never even bothered to notify Workcover because they didn’t think they had any obligation  to that worker. Those workers know that what’s been happening to them, is wrong. They know  that the protections that they thought might be in Australia aren’t there for them. And they also  know that when they do work to make a quid they’ve got to ride at paces that are unsafe. And  if you drive through the streets of any city, you see it. You see people running red lights, you  see riders going between the lanes, with the risk that a parked car door will open at any point  and all of a sudden they’ll be lying down on a busy road. The workers know exactly what’s  wrong and I think it’s reasonable they don’t yet know what our policy is to be able to fix it. It’s  midnight and it’s not until the other end of today that that officially gets announced in a speech  by Anthony. But we will be talking about every layer of job security right through to the election  and beyond. Because job security is not just casualisation as a threat. It’s gig work, it’s  continued short-term contracts, it’s the misuse of labour hire, it’s outsourcing when it’s being  done to drive down wages. These are all forms of insecure work and it is spreading across our  workforce in a way that is hurting households, hurting demand in the economy at the exact  same point that the Australian economy is going to be more dependent on needing people to  spend than we ever have before.

ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ADAM GARTRELL 0427 008 525



