JIM CHALMERS MP

SHADOW TREASURER

MEMBER FOR RANKIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS AM AGENDA

WEDNESDAY, 13 JANUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: JobKeeper, State borders;

Foreign investment; Superannuation and wages.



DANICA DE GIORGIO, HOST: Joining me now live is Shadow Treasurer Jim

Chalmers. Shadow Treasurer, border closures are of course having a big impact

on a number of sectors, but particularly tourism and hospitality. Should JobKeeper

rules be relaxed for those industries ahead of March?



JIM CHALMERS, SHADOW TREASURER: Good morning Danica.  What we've

said all along remains the case, that JobKeeper and other types of economic

support need to be tailored and responsive to what's actually going on in the

economy. That's the point that we've been making for some time but also the point

that many economists and many representatives of the business community and

industry peak groups have been making as recently as in today's press. So what

we've said is that some parts of the economy are recovering, and that's a good

thing, but other parts of the economy including hospitality and tourism are still

struggling and we want to make sure that the workers in those industries aren't left

behind. That means the Government should be considering targeted support for

those workers, small businesses, industries and areas of Australia who are doing it

especially tough. That's just common sense. The Treasurer actually has it within

his powers under the existing legislation to tweak the rules and eligibility for

JobKeeper in particular and he should be looking at ways to do that.



DE GIORGIO: The Treasurer in the past, though, has said that the federal

government simply can't save every business or every individual.



CHALMERS: He has said that, and of course that's the case. Of course

JobKeeper won't be a feature of the budget forever and nobody's pretending that it

should be. That's a straw man that he's constructed there. What we've said, what

industry is saying, what economists are saying, is don't be too stubborn about it;

don't declare victory over the economic consequences of this virus too

early because a lot of people are at risk of being left behind. More than 2 million

people are still without work or without enough work to support their loved ones

and we don't want them left behind. We want people to be able to work hard and

get ahead. That means being smart about this targeted assistance. It means

keeping it under constant review so that it can be tailored and responsive to what's

going on in the economy. These outbreaks that we've been seeing around

Australia in the last little while will be a feature of our community and our

economies until there is a vaccine that's broadly deployed. So we need to be smart

about it. That's all we’re saying, that's all industry and the economists are saying,

and the Treasurer should listen.



DE GIORGIO: How much of a role does ongoing and rolling border closures play

in terms of Australia's economic recovery? The acting Prime Minister Michael

McCormick said that many of the businesses he's been speaking to don't

necessarily want subsidies or assistance, they looking to go back to pre COVID

normal conditions and a big part of that is border consistency. How big of a role is

that in Australia's economic recovery?



CHALMERS: First of all, it was worse than that. What the acting Prime Minister

said was no businesses that he speaks to thinks that JobKeeper should be

available and that's just obviously a joke. He hasn't spent enough time with

businesses, small businesses in particular in communities like Cairns and around

Australia who are doing it especially tough. So, let's just dismiss that out of hand.

There are still some businesses, towns and workers who need government

support, that's self-evident. When it comes to the normalisation of the

arrangements, of course we want to get beyond what's happening here. Nobody

wants to see borders or businesses closed down for even a day longer than is

necessary. But what is far more dangerous than the difficulty of border closures

and other restrictions would be if we let this virus get out of hand. We've seen

around the world the devastation that it can inflict on communities, on small

businesses and on national economies if this thing gets out of hand. So state

governments of both political persuasions, to be fair, have tried to do their best to

make the right decisions to limit the spread of the virus and limit the damage done

to local economies. That's the sensible way to do it, if it relies on medical advice.

The alternative is worse, which is the kind of devastation that we're seeing

overseas.



DE GIORGIO: It certainly has had an impact on our tourism economy here, that's

for sure. On another matter, the Treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, has knocked back a

$300 million-dollar Chinese takeover of a major building contractor in Australia on

national security grounds. Was that the right move?



CHALMERS: We're not briefed on all of the ins and outs, Danica, of that specific

case. We don't know all the details. We don't have visibility on the advice that the

Treasurer has received in this matter. So, it's a matter for him to explain, where

that's appropriate, why he's reached this decision. I think more broadly, in principle,

foreign investment is welcome in our economy, it's necessary in our economy, it's

frequently approved in the vast majority of cases, but it does need to be consistent

with our national interest, including our national security interests. So, we need to

balance all of those considerations. We need a robust screening process through

the Foreign Investment Review Board. As I said, in the Opposition we don't have

visibility about that advice or that process. So, we need to have the Treasurer

explain these kinds of decisions. But equally we shouldn't pretend that the issues

that we are going through at the moment with China are limited to the rejection of

this one foreign investment bid. They go much broader than that. Similarly, we

shouldn't pretend that the issues with business investment here in Australia are

just about foreign investment. There are broader issues, long standing issues,

around energy policy, uncertainty, all kinds of issues around training, and other

kinds of investment which have meant that we've got business investment

historically weak not just for the last year or so but for the duration of this Coalition

government.



DE GIORGIO: Just finally, Jim Chalmers, the federal government is considering

giving workers the choice of putting more money into their superannuation or

having more take home pay. We know that there's been a deadlock due to the

looming rise in the super guarantee, but would Labor support an opt-in model?



CHALMERS: No we wouldn't, Danica. This government is using the pandemic as

an excuse to cut superannuation and cut wages at the same time. This is not about

giving people a choice between more super or more wages. They're coming after

workers on both fronts at the same time, via their proposed industrial relations

changes and via what they intend to do with superannuation, and Australian

workers will cop it on both fronts if they're not stopped. They should stop

pretending that they want higher wages or that they want higher super -

this Government wants neither. That's what this is all about. It has been about this

for some time now. What we need to do is to oppose and fight tooth and nail yet

another attempt from another Coalition government to come after wages and super

simultaneously.





DE GIORGIO: Jim Chalmers, we have to leave it there. Thank you for joining me.



CHALMERS: Thank you, Danica.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: NATHAN JOHNSTON 0488 176 452



