

The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

TRANSCRIPT

WEEKEND SUNRISE INTERVIEW WITH MATT DORAN  17 JANUARY 2021



E&OE

Subjects: Vaccine; Australian Open quarantining; stranded Australians; quarantining alternatives.



MATT DORAN  Acting Prime Minister, thank you very much for your time here on Weekend Sunrise. This morning, can  we start with questions about the safety of this Pfizer vaccine. I want to put this into context because  public confidence in vaccines is of course vital. Millions have received this without issue around the  world, but it has been enough, Michael, for Norway to review whether in fact it is safe for the frail and  the elderly. What's Australia's advice here yet, if any, will it affect the approval of the vaccine here?

MICHAEL McCORMACK   Well I spoke to Greg Hunt this morning, the Health Minister, who’s has asked the Therapeutic Goods  Administration - they run the rollout of drugs and medicines in Australia - they will ask the Norwegian  authorities, and moreover, they will also ask the Pfizer company for their answers in response to what  has happened. But that is why all the way through the Federal Government has taken the best medical  advice, whether it's from the chief medical officer Brendan Murphy and then of course Paul Kelly,  through the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee, and of course the Therapeutic Goods  Administration. We've asked them, Greg Hunt has asked them to look into this and get back to him  immediately.

MATT DORAN   Yeah that's interesting so Australia is on the front foot to double check whether this is safe for this  subset. The vaccine was tested on tens of 1000s before it was approved. The average age was people in  their 50s, which is interesting. There've been 10 deaths as well reported in Germany, so this is  something that the Government is actively investigating and at least initially concerned about.

MICHAEL McCORMACK   And it's also why, Matt, we've not put all our eggs in one basket so of course we've got other options.  And of course, Astra Zeneca as well, Novavax - we've got other options. We've got enough doses to, of  course, roll out right across the nation, free of charge, and to also provide a vaccine, from February, for

the Pacific Islands as well. So throughout the year, we're going to ensure that the vaccine is swift, yes,  but safe. Absolutely paramount it will be safe.

MATT DORAN   Let’s look if we could at the Australian Open. I love the optimism of organisers here in trying to, I guess,  hope that we're living in some sort of a normal world where an event like this could go ahead. Forty-seven players now told to isolate for 14 days. This was after positive COVID passengers on their flights.  What's your view, Mr McCormack, should this tournament have been approved in the first place, should  it be cancelled now.

MICHAEL McCORMACK   This has been entirely a matter for the Victorian Government and, of course, Tennis Australia and  they've put in various protocols and processes to make sure the safety of players and to ensure the  infection does not … they did not need any COVID cases, they didn’t want any. That’s why they’ve got  their quarantining, that’s why they’ve got their various processes in place.   But if I were a Mildura stone fruit grower, I would be scratching my head how is it that this can happen  when they can't get workers, isolated on their farms and quarantine and going through those various  processes, they must be - and I know they are - very frustrated with the fact that Victorian Government  has allowed the tennis players to come into the State to play in this very important event, it's an  important international event and it does great things for sport and does great things for the economy.  But when you've got already $38 million of produce left to rot, left on the trees. I know those Mildura,  those Sunrayasia growers are very frustrated with the fact that they can't get the seasonal workers in on  on-farm quarantining when we're allowing these tennis players - some with COVID - to come into  Victoria play in a tournament.

MATT DORAN   It's not just the fruit growers, Michael, I can tell you who are scratching their heads. There are families  across Australia who can't get into Victoria at this stage and there are Australians around the world who  are looking at this thinking, oh my goodness how did 1200 sportsmen and women get approval to fly  into Victoria when we can't get home. What's your view on that?

MICHAEL McCORMACK   Look, I couldn't agree more. And that's why we of course have with the situation with Australians  overseas, stranded overseas that's why we've put on another 20 Government-facilitated flights from  Europe, from Asia, from the United Kingdom and from other centres. They’ll start on January 31 and run  for a couple of months and we'll keep assessing the situation. We've got 37,000 Australians registered  with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade who want to come home. And, of course, since the  Prime Minister Scott Morrison urged, encouraged and, indeed, implored Australians to come home on  March 13, we've had 443,000 Australians returned. But I get the frustration as well, understanding of  course that this is a very difficult time for all. And that is why I say again to Australians, thank you for  doing what you've done to keep our nation as COVID-free as possible.

MATT DORAN   Acting Prime Minister just finally could I ask you about an issue that will be put forward to National  Cabinet on Friday. I guess it's about what Australia's called quarantine system looks like and our strategy  moving forward. There have been calls for these remote quarantine hubs, how actively is that being  considered do you think, and is that the way forward as opposed to having the hotel quarantine in our  cities.



MICHAEL McCORMACK   Oh, indeed it has been very actively looked at, and indeed I know that Premier Palaszczuk in Queensland  is looking at setting up one up at Gladstone and that's been an option on the table all the way through.  It's been very difficult indeed more up in Cairns and Townsville and those Tropical Far North holiday  destinations, to have the same restrictions as Brisbane which is a long, long way away. It's been very  difficult for particularly regional Australia. I’m on Wagga Wagga Beach, the ninth best beach in Australia.  You could go to a new beach every day in Australia for 27 years and not have to go to the same beach  twice. This is the ninth best of the 10 beaches in Australia. Regional Australia is a great place to visit,  holiday and go to, but I know that Regional Australians were very frustrated when they're under the  same pressures and same restrictions, as they were in metropolitan areas where COVID was rife. So, it's  been difficult, appreciate that. So I say again, thanks to the Australian community for doing what you've  done.

MATT DORAN   Acting Prime Minister Michael McCormick, I will let you get back to the ninth best beach behind you  there. It looks magnificent. Thank you for your time on Weekend Sunrise today.

MICHAEL McCORMACK   Thanks for any time at all,  Ends



Media contacts:   Jo Williamson, 0418 475 668  Dean Shachar, 0418 202 860







Jo Williamson | Senior Media Adviser  Office of the Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals  Federal Member for Riverina  P 02 6277 7520 | M 0418 475 668 | E Joanne.Williamson@infrastructure.gov.au   MG41, Parliament House | Canberra ACT 2600  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street | Wagga Wagga NSW 2650



