

MERYL SWANSON MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR DEFENCE  MEMBER FOR PATERSON



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  DOORSTOP INTERVIEW  PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA  WEDNESDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Vince Connelly MP on Craig Kellyl Wage cutsl IR Omnibus Bill.

MERYL SWANSON, MEMBER FOR PATERSON: As you can hear there from Vince Connelly  it's a glowing endorsement of his colleague, Craig Kelly. I think that is obviously indicative of  what is going on in the coalition at the moment.

We have a prime minister, who, quite frankly is quite gutless on his captain's pick, he won't  stand up and pull him into line and when you've got elected members of the Australian  Parliament, seemingly coming out, and validating conspiracy theorists, I think that is a real  issue.

But what I want to talk to you about more importantly, is the thousands of people in my  electorate, and in places all over Australia who feel as though they're going to work, they're  trying to pay their bills, and they're just not getting ahead.

Their wages haven't gone up, or they've been put on a roster that's casual, they've taken to  Uber driving, or they're in the gig economy, and there is just absolutely nothing there that  speaks to security for themselves and their family.

Well, this government now wants to cut wages further.

It just absolutely astounds me that under the cover of COVID, this Prime Minister wants to cut  the wages of the people that we have lauded over.

Nurses, police these are the people that have helped with quarantine he wants to cut their  wages, when they are the heroes of our time, it is really unspeakable, I just cannot believe it.

I think that thousands of Australians, when they realise what this Prime Minister and this  government is doing saying to people go to work, but you might not be better off overall will,  your manager might want to talk to you about your roster or cut your wages, it's just not on.  People have struggled in the past 12 months, they've been locked out, they've been stood  down.

They've been really panicking about how they're going to survive and get through this and also  put food on the table for their families, this government has abandoned them but Labor's on



their side, I'm on their side, we want people to do well, and they should be at least as well off, if  not better, and they won't be under this government.

JOURNALIST: Just on the changes, isn't it the case you would have to be a business losing a  portion of turnover, so it wouldn't be nurses or police getting a wage cut?

SWANSON: Yes, but that's the whole point. People in these industries know that in real terms,  they've been going backwards. The New South Wales state government has stuck the knife  into teachers and nurses as one case in point. We know that overall, these people are not  better off.

If you look at the figures, wages are not increasing. Now we've got a government who wants to  give businesses the opportunity to further erode across the board, people just aren’t better off.

JOURNALIST: It's been a bit of talk that labor might go after this at the next election. Do you  think that some of these companies like Uber have exploited contractors in a sense, they seem  to be in a really niche area of the law, they are maybe even getting an advantage over local  businesses?

SWANSON: I think what's happened with the gig economy, it's this big new way of doing  business and working. quite frankly, IR Laws and our norms haven't kept up with what's  happened and people have been exploited I think that that's a real worry, and we need to have  a good look at it.

I also want to send a shout out to those people in Perth. We all experienced the fires last year,  and it was awful, but being in a conundrum of worrying about going to an evacuation centre  and breaking lockdown whilst 59 homes have burned so you have the worry of immediate  safety from a fire but then you're worried about your immediate health and the risk of breaking  locked down, that must be a terrible choice for people to be making.

I think it's probably one of the rarest situations that people have found themselves in, in our  country and I know that my ALP colleagues, have returned back to Perth because of the  COVID situation but now also the fires.

It’s a really is a terrible situation and I just want to say I know the west are a very long way  away but we are thinking of you.

It's a pretty terrible and very frightening situation to find yourself in.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: JAMES BARTLETT 0418 468 072



