

The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina



The Hon Paul Toole MP  NSW Minister for Regional Transport and Roads  Deputy Leader of the NSW Nationals  State Member for Bathurst



MEDIA RELEASE

Wednesday 31 March 2021  *Grabs available to download below

BETTER ROADS AND MORE JOBS FOR THE REGIONS

Communities across New South Wales will see work start to upgrade priority local roads within months thanks  to $150 million in funding from the Australian and NSW Governments.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said Round 2 of the Fixing Local Roads Program would fund more than 100 new road upgrades in  90 local government areas across the State, creating more than 1000 jobs.

“Safe, reliable roads are essential for communities in regional New South Wales - by improving roads, we are  making a big difference to people’s lives in ensuring they get home sooner and safer,” the Deputy Prime  Minister said.

“The funding will improve the safety of roads in local communities, including repairing, patching, maintaining  and sealing local roads.

“We know improved roads are crucial to regional communities - the more than 100 successful road projects  announced today will play a big role in helping residents and businesses recover from the effects of bushfires,  drought, floods and the COVID-19 pandemic.”

State Minister for Regional Transport and Roads Paul Toole said the NSW Government had committed $500  million to help councils repair, maintain and seal priority local roads through Fixing Local Roads with the  Australian Government’s $191 million contribution ensuring even more regional communities would benefit.

“We’re injecting even more funding into the roads in the bush that communities depend on, which means a  safer and smoother journey for everyone,” Mr Toole said.

“Better maintained roads mean safer trips to school, to work and to the shops - and the NSW Government is  committed to helping councils create and support jobs, drive productivity and keep our regional communities  connected.



“Big infrastructure projects might create a lot of headlines but these are small projects that make a big  difference in people’s everyday lives.”

Round 1 of the Fixing Local Roads Program saw $243 million of joint funding allocated to 253 projects in 84  Local Government Areas, and Round 2 will see $150 million allocated to 108 road projects in 90 Local  Government Areas.

All successful projects will be completed within two years to ensure local communities see the benefits as  quickly as possible.

Guidelines and a factsheet for Round 2 of Fixing Local Roads can be found here for the Fixing Local Roads  Program.

*Grabs of the Deputy Prime Minister:  https://www.dropbox.com/s/udt8x9m16ue98aw/Fixing%20Local%20Roads%20001.mp4?dl=0

*Grabs of Minister Toole:  https://www.dropbox.com/s/cgxinm3grb664fz/Fixing%20Local%20Roads%20002.mp4?dl=0



Media Contacts  Deputy Prime Minister - Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Minister Toole - Ella Smith 0428 745 348

