

PETA MURPHY MP

MEMBER FOR DUNKLEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS

WEDNESDAY, 24 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Vaccine rollout; Craig Kelly; JobSeeker.



TOM CONNELL, HOST: Joining me live in the studio Liberal MP Andrew Wallace from the

Labor Party, Peta Murphy, thanks both for your time. Concerned about the vaccine, you've had

it



PETA MURPHY, MEMBER FOR DUNKLEY: I have.



CONNELL: It's all okay?



MURPHY: I'm fine, I've got a little bit of a sore arm, as if, you know,



CONNELL: As if you had a vaccination



MURPHY: As if I'd had a vaccination, or someone's given me a little bit of a punch in the arm.

But apart from this, bearing in mind that when you're in Parliament, you're always a little bit

tired and grumpy. I am totally, I'm totally fine. So I did it. Most people hopefully would know I

got the vaccination because I am immunocompromised. And I wanted to give assurance to

people who have underlying health conditions that you can get the vaccine



CONNELL: Which is a particular risk group that do have heightened concerns about getting it



MURPHY: They do so they have heightened concerns about getting it and also heightened

problems if they do get COVID, you know, harder to fight it off. And concerns about getting the

vaccine and side effects. So I wanted to be part of the public health response to say, look, you

can get it and my message is also if you've got concerns, go and talk to your GP, go and talk

to your treating specialist don't go googling and searching through Facebook. I went and talked

to my GP and she said, Yes, get it as soon as you can, you're getting treated for cancer, so to

other people you can.



CONNELL: You can get front of the queue. So what about this? We heard from St. Vincent's

care services after an, I'm not going to call it an overdose because nothing appears to have

happened, thankfully, so far to the aged care residents. But they had way too much four times

the Pfizer vaccine, that it's St. Vincent's saying that they actually have concerns now about

whether or not there's adequate training, and they're going to raise this. This is gonna worry

you a bit as the federal government, this is the part you're responsible for day three.



ANDREW WALLACE, MEMBER FOR FISHER: Well, I think with any of these sort of rollouts,

Tom, there are always going to be some teething issues. So it's not unexpected to that extent.

I mean, this has happened in the UK, and also in Germany, where people particularly in aged

care facilities have received a larger dose than they should have. And there were no, you

know, greater side effects than there were expected. So look, you know, the the people that

will be administering the vaccines, medical professionals know this, I'm sure that I'm hopeful

that it won't happen again. But, you know, these things do happen from time to time, and it's a

matter of learning from them.



CONNELL: I guess if nothing happens adverse, that will be the number one thing there. Craig

Kelly, is gone. What are you thought, good riddance?



WALLACE: Look, I don't want to speak ill of any of my parliamentary colleagues, no matter

what side of the chamber they sit on.



CONNELL: Even though we've just spoken about the importance of vaccine confidence?



WALLACE: Look, I was, I was surprised when he made his announcement in the party room

yesterday. But look, nothing shocks me in this game anymore. I've been here for five years.

And I think it's pretty safe to say that I've seen just about at all in those five years. You know,

what the people of Australia should understand is that we, as a government, led by Scott

Morrison absolutely committed to their welfare, we're committed to getting them back into

work. And we're committed to the economic welfare of this.



CONNELL: So but on Craig Kelly, two prime ministers intervened, including Scott Morrison to

save him, he was facing defeat in pre selection. And this is his response. Knowing he wouldn't

get saved a third time. It's disloyal, isn't it?



WALLACE: Well, I think it's certainly poor form. I think it's poor form for him to not have

advised the Prime Minister, particularly before he made that announced publicly. But, you

know, ultimately, we all have to live with our own consciences. And we all have to live with our

own decisions. And Craig's made that decision. I think it's regrettable, but he will ultimately,

wear the consequences, whatever they may be.



CONNELL: Is this a time for Labor to talk about instability? Or perhaps you just recognise

they've still got an overall majority, Parliament's not going to crumble? I don't think. And, you

know, we're trying to rebuild from a crisis, attack the policies rather than, you know, focus on

this too much?



MURPHY: Look, it's just, it's just incredibly disappointing and shows the poor judgement, to be

honest of the Prime Minister and the previous Prime Minister who intervened to keep Craig

Kelly in Parliament. And, you know, for him to do what he did yesterday, when there were a

number of us out there promoting the vaccine, trying to get a really positive public health

message and he just stole oxygen and media headlines yet again, in order to promote what he

says is a health response. That is not a health response. It's just a disservice. And if anyone

needs to know my view on it, Mike Bowers took a photograph of my face when I was sitting in

front of Craig Kelly when he was giving a speech yesterday. It's on my Twitter account.



CONNELL: Can you use the face again now?



MURPHY: My Face speaks volumes.



CONNELL: Let's just touch on.



WALLACE: We should play poker one day perhaps



MURPHY: Yep, you'd win, you'd win.



WALLACE: Just joking



CONNELL: Let's just focus on the Newstart, Jobseeker, whatever you want to call it, the Dole.

The government's laid out its plans, we still don't know what Labor's going to do.



MURPHY: We have said clearly that $40 a day is not enough. And I've said over and over

again, people.



CONNELL: So is $44 a day enough?



MURPHY: Well, people need to not be in poverty.



CONNELL: Is $44 a day enough?



MURPHY: In the context of what else is the government doing in terms of housing, in terms of

wages, and we've said clearly, that we will come out with a detailed position closer to the

election. I mean, at the moment, it's



CONNELL: Why would mages matter when we're talking about Newstart?



MURPHY: Because we've got an economy that's struggling, we've got wages for people that

do get jobs that are on incredibly poor wages, incredibly poor conditions. (Inaudible) We've got

1.3 million Australians who are, you know, in danger of not being employed, because of

Jobkeeper going. It's, everything is connected to each other. We've got problems with

affordable housing. And my view has been clear, and so is that of many of my colleagues is

that Newstart isn't high enough.



CONNELL: But is it high enough at $44?



MURPHY: We'll see what the government puts up in its legislation. And we'll see if there is a

package of measures to help people to not only get into work, but not to live in poverty.





CONNELL: What do you say to people out there struggling, that they'll get an extra coffee a

day?



WALLACE: Well, what I would say, Tom, is that it is an absolute furphy to talk about $40 a day

because that is just incorrect. The only people who would be receiving $40 a day on

Jobseeker, are those Australians who are actually living overseas. So if someone is on

Jobseeker, and they are living in Australia, they might have kids, for example, they're receiving

not only Jobseeker they're receiving,



CONNELL: Let's simplify it (Inaudible), let's simplify this a single



WALLACE: Because they are receiving Commonwealth rent, what singles are still receiving

Commonwealth rent assistance, they are receiving energy supplement. So it's (Inaudible)

factually incorrect to say that people are on $40 a day so that we need to get that very, very

clear.



CONNELL: What is also simple is it was increased by $4 when it seems very low. We're nearly

out of time, but that's not going to seem a lot is it?



WALLACE: Well, Tom, we are in a, it wouldn't matter. I mean, we know that there will be

people that will be saying it shouldn't be increased. There'll be people who will be saying the

increase was was too low, or you're you're on hiding to nothing on this.



CONNELL: Okay, we've got the bells ringing



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DYLAN STEED 0400 615 862



