

News release  8 February 2021

First fifth generation F-35   welcomed to BAE Systems   Australia

The first F-35 Joint Strike Fighter arrived at BAE Systems Australia’s Williamtown facility  recently and was officially welcomed at an event today.

The aircraft was welcomed by Prime Minister Scott Morrison, Minister for Defence Linda  Reynolds, Minister for Defence Industry Melissa Price, Chief of Air Force Air Marshal Mel  Hupfeld and BAE Systems Australia Chief Executive Officer Gabby Costigan.

BAE Systems’ Williamtown facility is the Southern Pacific Regional F-35 Heavy Airframe Depot  and will support F-35 aircraft in the region for the next three decades. An initial team of 32  highly skilled F-35 technicians has been recruited to provide airframe maintenance and  sustainment for the depot.

The group has received a mix of training both in the US and alongside Royal Australia Air  Force maintenance technicians at RAAF Base Williamtown ahead of sustainment work moving  to the company’s adjacent facilities.

Maintaining and sustaining the F-35 will create around 360 new direct jobs for BAE Systems  Australia over the next 10 years, develop a specialist supply chain of around 76 SMEs and  contribute some $70 million to GDP by 2025.

As part of the ramp up to support F-35 sustainment, the company recently recruited 25  former Jetstar technicians, who lost their jobs due to the impact of COVID-19 on the  commercial aviation industry.

This arrival of the first F-35 reflects the exceptional partnership and collaboration between  the Australian Government, industry partners, and the F-35 Joint Program Office team.  The  first of 72 F-35A aircraft arrived in Australia in 2018. BAE Systems has provided fast jet  maintenance and upgrades to RAAF aircraft from its Williamtown facility for almost three  decades. The new role builds on the company’s heritage of fixed wing and rotary aircraft  sustainment across Australia.

BAE Systems Australia Chief Executive Officer Gabby Costigan said:



“It is a privilege to contribute to this exciting global program.

“We look forward to delivering a critical maintenance capability, and continuing to partner  with the RAAF, the Department of Defence, Lockheed Martin and Defence industry to support  the global F-35 program.

“Importantly, this new work will deliver a real boost to this region through new jobs and  opportunities for local businesses.”

BAE Systems has been awarded assignments by the F-35 Joint Program Office for the  Regional Airframe Maintenance, Repair, Overhaul and Upgrade (MRO&U), various Regional  Component MRO&U and the Regional Warehouse.

Editor’s notes

As the prime contractor and program industry leader, Lockheed Martin leads the design,  production and sustainment of the global F-35 fleet, with the support of principal partners  Northrop Grumman and BAE Systems and engine manufacturer Pratt & Whitney.



Across our global enterprise, BAE Systems teams in Australia, UK and the US play a key role  in the sustainment of the F-35 fifth generation aircraft and its electronic warfare systems.



With more than 600 jets now in service worldwide, our teams provide a range of global  sustainment services ranging from depot maintenance, procurement to technical support.



BAE Systems teams have had a leading role in the stand-up of facilities at Williamtown and  RAF Marham (UK), tailoring decades of aircraft sustainment experience to support the  readiness and availability of the Australian and UK F-35 fleets.



Figures quoted in this media release are from the BIS Oxford Economic Report commissioned  by BAE Systems in 2020. For a copy click here.

For more information, please contact:  Kaye Noske, BAE Systems Australia

M: +61 (0) 401 121 444

E: kaye.noske@baesystems.com

Issued by:  BAE Systems Australia

www.baesystems.com

@BAESystemsAus











