





JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

MEMBER FOR HUNTER



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SUNRISE   MONDAY, 8 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECT: Increasing the JobSeeker payment; Craig Kelly; Joel reading Lazarus  Rising.

SAMANTHA ARMYTAGE, HOST: The pressure is on the government to lift  JobSeeker payments permanently when the COVID supplement ends in March. This  base JobSeeker rate is set at $576.50 a fortnight - that's $41 a day. A $550 fortnightly  bonus was added to the payment in March last year when the pandemic hit. Now that  bonus was reduced to $250 in September, and then again to $150 in January. It's due  to expire completely on the first of April, with payments reverting to the original rate of  $41 a day. For their take, we're joined by Labor MP, Joel Fitzgibbon, and the  Nationals, Barnaby Joyce. Morning to you both, Gents. Barnaby, you've been quite  outspoken about this before. What do you think right now as we head into this kind of  scary time when JobSeeker and JobKeeper come off? Do you think the government  should permanently raise JobSeeker?

BARNABY JOYCE, MEMBER FOR NEW ENGLAND: Yes. I don't think anybody  could logically say that you can live on, you know, 40 or 45, or what is it?

ARMYTAGE: 41.

JOYCE: …$5 or something, it is not possible. Therefore, if you're going to say you're  going to support people when they're unemployed, then you've got to raise it. Hand in  glove with that, it has to be a strengthening of compliance issues. I'm sick of hearing  stories in my office about 20 people turning up at orchards to pick fruit, and by nine  o'clock, 20 of them have gone, or people turning up - eight people turning up to an  abattoir just to tick the box then by nine o'clock, they're all gone. Because those people  aren't unemployed, they're lazy, and it's no one else's to be somebody else's slave and  to go to work because of someone who doesn't want to work. There is a very big line  between those who are genuinely unemployed - the mother with kids who can't move  away for a job, and a bloke who just doesn't want to do a job. And for those who - you  can't kick them out in the street either, but they should go down to, I don't know, food  stamps and rent stamps and give them real encouragement and say the next time a  reasonable job is offered to you, you will take it because this is your alternative. For

the people who are genuinely unemployed, it's a ridiculous amount of money, it's just  too small, they can't live on.

ARMYTAGE: Yeah, no, let's be clear. We're talking about genuinely unemployed  people here. Joel, we are talk - and we're talking about a million Australians. What's  Labor's policy here? What would you do differently?

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: That's right, Sam. Too many people  chasing too few jobs. But I welcome Barnaby's very clear and concise yes. And I  welcome the emerging consensus on this issue. It is too low. And look, some people  have faced genuine disadvantage and find it very, very hard to get off welfare. But I'd  welcome a more sophisticated debate, one not just about the level of the payment, but  how we might get people into some of those jobs. The other - on the other side of the  equation, I'm constantly hearing from people in the hospitality sector in particular who  simply can't fill their positions, their current positions. So, we need to start matching  people with jobs. So it's not just about the payment, as important as that is, but we  need a good look at how we ensure that people capable of working fill these many  positions that people are struggling to fill.

ARMYTAGE: Okay. All right. Let's talk about Craig Kelly. Barnaby, we want to get your  insight here. What's going on? The Prime Minister did call Craig Kelly in last week; are  they threatening Craig Kelly that they will put someone else up for pre-selection? He  will lose his seat if he doesn't toe the Liberal line on climate change and COVID?

JOYCE: I'd say they are putting the pressure on him, no doubt. I would also counsel  people that as soon as people think that someone's an underdog, they get support.  And all our officers have been absolutely - well, the ones I'm talking to have been run  over with people ringing up in support of Craig Kelly. So, the big concern they have, of  course, is if you isolate someone too much, and they become an independent, then  your majority is down to one. Well, probably - remember he got a 10 per cent increase  the last election. They win their seat back. Now, I'm not endorsing for one second what  Craig says, you know, and I've said that to him I don't think I agree with your  arguments, Craig. But what really worries me is when we start going down this  censorship line, because it proposes that people are too stupid to work Craig's position  out for themselves. And secondly, once Craig's gone maybe on a valid proposition, it's  just going to creep up I know this shows - what, next thing you will be kicked out of the  Parliament if you say the wrong thing about climate change and kicked out of the  Parliament if you say the wrong thing about something else. You can't have that. If  someone says something that's completely noxious, the people who keep them out of  the Parliament and sensor them are voters the next election. Pre-selectors can do it as  well of course.

ARMYTAGE: And, Joel, isn't this the beauty of being a backbencher, you can maybe  say what your party doesn't necessarily think because all I know is that when there's a  media pile on someone, like Craig Kelly, it usually means that he's actually quite  popular with many of the people in his own electorate. As Barnaby said, he got a 10  per cent increase last election. He is popular in that seat.

FITZGIBBON: He's certainly a colourful character, Sam, and we could do a bit more of  that - with a bit more of that in the Parliament. But you know that is Barnaby's pitch to  Craig....



JOYCE: [inaudible].

FITZGIBBON: ... that was Barnaby's invitation to Craig Kelly to come and join the  National Party and I'll watch that with great interest. Of course, Craig Kelly is the  Member for Hughes. Now, Hughes is named after the infamous Billy Hughes, former  Prime Minister, former Labor leader who was known best for jumping from one political  party to the next. There might be an omen in that.

ARMYTAGE: Yes, watch that space. Just quickly because we're running out of time.  But Joel, you were spotted last week in question time reading a book - naughty - but  you were reading John Howard's biography Lazarus Rising. Is there a message in that  for Albo?

FITZGIBBON: Know thy enemy, Sam. It's what all great generals did, but it just so  happens actually that I've been invited to address the fifth John Howard Government  Retrospective at the Old Parliament House, I think if not on Zoom. And of course, I'm  refreshing my memory. I was there for all of the Howard years sadly sitting on the  opposition benches. So, I'm refreshing my memory so that I can share my views about  the Howard years and what was good about them and what was bad about them.

JOYCE: I thought you'd be listening to your leader? I thought you'd be listening to  those marvellous questions by the Honourable Anthony Albanese, Member for  Grayndler. But you're reading a book about John Howard. What does that say? What  does that say?

ARMYTAGE: What’s... Barnaby, what's on your bedside table? What's your reading  material?

JOYCE: Well, there's actually this book about Salvado, who is a priest in Western  Australia. There's also a book about Aboriginal history of my area, which won the  history prize. And then there's G. K. Chesterton, so I've got three. And there's water  and there's a light that goes on. And somewhere around there is the mail that gets  thrown around.

ARMYTAGE: I was hoping that by the looks of that little red car in the background that  you might say you know something from the Wiggles or something. Anyway, that's a  very intense reading list on your bedside table, you need to get some rest.

JOYCE: That's what Joel gets to drive if he gets this wrong, one of those. Out of the  white car into that.

ARMYTAGE: Alright, see you next week. Bye Boys.

FITZGIBBON: Thanks team.

JOYCE: See ya.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAVID BULLOCK 0405 408 871





Authorised by Joel Fitzgibbon MP, ALP, Cessnock NSW





This email is confidential and may be privileged. If you have received this email by mistake: (1) please

notify me immediately and delete the email; (2) you must not use this email or its contents; (3) client legal

privilege is not waived.

















