









THE HON KEITH PITT MP  Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia  Member for Hinkler

GEORGE CHRISTENSEN  Member for Dawson

MEDIA RELEASE

Mineral resources put Australia in strong position



12 March 2021

A new report on the nation’s resources has reaffirmed Australia position as one of the  world’s top producers of key critical minerals.

In Mackay today, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt launched  the 2020 edition of Australia’s Identified Mineral Resources (AIMR) report.

Minister Pitt said Geoscience Australia’s annual stocktake has tracked the country’s mineral  resources since 1975.

“The latest industry report confirmed Australia entered the COVID-19 economic crisis in a  strong position thanks to its mineral resources,” Minister Pitt said.

“At the end of 2019, Australia remained a global leader in mineral exploration and  production, and one of the world’s most desirable locations for investing in the mineral  sector.

“In 2019 our mineral exports were valued at $234 billion, accounting for 47 per cent of all  Australia’s exported goods and services. Investment in mineral exploration increased by 21  per cent, compared to the previous year, reaching $2.6 billion.”

“Gold accounted for 40 per cent of exploration expenditure, with a strong gold price  creating a modern gold rush,” Minister Pitt said.

Member for Dawson, George Christensen, said the report confirms what most regional  Queenslanders know.





“Our resources sector is the backbone of our national economy and will continue driving job  and economic opportunities, particularly for the regional areas of central and north  Queensland,” Mr Christensen said.

“It’s why we’re so committed to supporting the minerals sector, and in this part of Australia  that means coal mining, which will remain a major industry for decades to come.”

Minister Pitt said Australia remained the world’s top producer of iron ore with 36 per cent  of global production and we also produced 56 per cent of the world’s lithium, which is  becoming increasingly important for battery storage technologies.

“Advancements in technology are driving the world’s appetite for critical minerals. Because  of their use in cutting-edge low-carbon, defence, medical and other applications, demand  for commodities like lithium, cobalt and graphite is projected to rise significantly over  coming decades,” Minister Pitt said.

“With more than 300 operating mines producing 26 major and minor mineral commodities,  our strength in this sector has enabled our economy to remain resilient throughout the  global pandemic and recession.

“The Government’s $225 million Exploring for the Future program, led by Geoscience  Australia, is opening up new exploration opportunities across the nation, supporting new  mineral discovery that is essential for Australia’s future economic prosperity.

“Already we’ve seen significant new investment in resource exploration across Northern  Australia because of this program, with over 120,000 square kilometres of greenfield  exploration tenements in the region between Mount Isa in Queensland and Tennant Creek  in the Northern Territory under application.”

The latest edition of AIMR is available at http://www.ga.gov.au/scientific-topics/minerals/mineral-resources-and-advice/aimr

Media contacts:

Minister Pitt's Office - Matt Dunstan 0411 535 072/ Marnie Hobson 0407 090 230



