Authorised by the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, Sydney.

















MEDIA RELEASE

21 February 2021



Netflix’s God’s Favorite Idiot to film in Australia

Netflix comedy God’s Favorite Idiot is coming to Australia with a $10 million grant from the Morrison  Government’s highly successful $540 million Location Incentive program.

Produced by Ben Falcone and Melissa McCarthy, God’s Favorite Idiot is a workplace comedy about a  mid-level Tech support employee Clark Thompson (Falcone) who finds love with co-worker Amily Luck  (McCarthy) at exactly the same time he becomes the unwitting messenger of God.

The series will be filmed in New South Wales with production expected to employ more than 300 talented  Australian cast and crew.

Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, the Hon Paul Fletcher MP, said  the production anticipates to inject more than $74 million into the Australian economy.

“God’s Favorite Idiot will continue the pipeline of Netflix productions being made in Australia with  support from the Government’s Location Incentive, building on the success of Clickbait, Escape from  Spiderhead and Pieces of Her,” Minister Fletcher said.

“These global productions continue to provide opportunities for the Australian screen industry. With the  excellent reputation of our cast and crew, complemented by Australia’s careful management of COVID-19, the Location Incentive is generating return business that is growing and enhancing our sector.”

New South Wales Minister for the Arts, Don Harwin said, “I am delighted that NSW is the go-to  destination to attract significant international productions. With support from our Made in NSW fund, this  exciting new Netflix series will provide highly skilled jobs, bring significant expenditure into regional  areas and will showcase our beautiful Northern Rivers area.”

God’s Favorite Idiot will also engage the services of approximately 1,000 Australian businesses, including  screen industry vendors, construction, hotels, restaurants, and rental car services.

Ben Falcone and Melissa McCarthy said, “To have the opportunity to safely film our show in a beautiful  country like Australia is a dream come true. We love this country, and the talented people who live and  work here. A special thank you to Chris, Luke, and Liam Hemsworth for volunteering to carry us to and  from work with their wonderful powerful arms.”

THE HON PAUL FLETCHER MP  Minister for Communications,   Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts

THE HON DON HARWIN MP  Special Minister of State, and Minister for the  Public Service and Employee Relations,  Aboriginal Affairs, and the Arts, New South

Wales



To date, the Morrison Government has provided $200 million of Location Incentive funding to attract  20 productions to Australia. This is creating $1.5 billion of expenditure in the Australian economy,  providing an estimated 12,100 jobs for Australian cast and crew, and generating work for over 12,700  Australian businesses.

For more information on the Location Incentive Program please visit: www.arts.gov.au/what-we-do/screen/australian-screen-production-incentive.

Media contacts:  Minister Fletcher  Imre Salusinszky | 0432 535 737 | Imre.salusinszky@communications.gov.au  Christine Vanden Byllaardt | 0409 433 357 | Christine.vandenbyllaardt@communications.gov.au   Minister Harwin  Jack Pinczewski | 0428 910 963 | Jack.Pinczewski@minister.nsw.gov.au

