Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.







The Hon Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health and Aged Care

MEDIA RELEASE



03 January 2021



$10 million for high potential COVID-19 related clinical trials

By mid-2021, volunteers aged between 18 and 75 years will be recruited for an accelerated  clinical trial of two ‘next generation’ vaccines against COVID-19, developed by researchers  at the University of Melbourne.

These clinical trials are among six chosen to receive immediate funding totalling   $10.1 million from the Morrison Government’s Medical Research Future Fund’s Clinical  Trials Activity Initiative.

These vaccines offer a number of potential advantages to ‘first generation’ COVID-19  vaccines, and do not require storage in the extremely low temperatures needed for the Pfizer  vaccine.

Following encouraging results during preclinical testing, the Government’s support is  expediting the process to move research efforts from the lab and into human trials.

Among the other proposals to be tested are the use of germicidal ultraviolet light to reduce  infection rates in aged care facilities, and 3D-printed face masks to match facial shape and  prevent leaks.

Mask leak with existing P2/N95 respirators is a major problem for health care workers.   The main reason for face mask leak is the individual variability in the shape of the human  face.

One clinical trial will test the effectiveness and feasibility of customised 3D-printed face  guards used in conjunction with P2/N95 respirators as a way of reducing face mask leak.

This is a rapidly scalable, customised technology that could quickly and feasibly be utilised  around the world.

A further trial will test the effectiveness of an inexpensive and rapidly implementable  germicidal ultraviolet air-treatment strategy, used in conjunction with existing infection  control measures, as a means to reduce rates of respiratory viral infection in residential aged  care facilities.

Each of these extremely promising Australian innovations has the potential to dramatically  shift the global battle against COVID-19, which will begin clinical trials from early 2021.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.





Australian researchers are making such strong contributions to global efforts to reduce the toll  of COVID-19 that a number of other clinical trials have been identified as strong candidates  for possible future funding.

The clinical trials announced today are based in Adelaide, Melbourne and Sydney. They will  deliver high quality evidence that can be rapidly translated for use in this pandemic, and  possibly, future pandemics.

The Government’s Medical Research Future Fund matured at $20 billion in July 2020,  providing a long term sustainable source of research funding. It is transforming Australia’s  health and medical research sector and supporting our best and brightest researchers.

ENDS

Project Recipient Funding

Prevention of SARS-CoV-2 transmission in aged care  (PreSTAC): Effective evidence-based measures for rapid  translation using ultraviolet light

Prof Geraint Rogers,  South Australian  Health and Medical  Research Institute  Limited

$1,366,094

Accelerated phase I trial of targeted and tunable SARS-Cov-2 spike protein receptor binding domain recombinant protein  and mRNA vaccines

Prof Terry Nolan,  University of  Melbourne

$1,588,283

3D-Printed Facial Guards to reduce P2/N95 respirator leak  and protect health care workers from COVID-19

Assoc Prof Anand  Ganesan, Flinders  University

$973,119

Statin Treatment for COVID-19 to optimise Neurological  Recovery (STRONGER) trial - using Statins to prevent  brain complications as a result of COVID-19

Prof Craig Anderson,  University of New  South Wales  $2,375,779

Use of Cardioprotective Therapy to Manage Persistent  Cardiovascular Effects of COVID-19: A Pathway to  Recognition and Treatment of Subclinical Disease

Prof Thomas  Marwick, University  of Melbourne  $2,574,943

The Pomerium Trial: Protecting Aged Care Residents from  the Pandemic via Specialised Nutritional Supplementation.

Prof Gustavo Duque,  University of  Melbourne  $1,189,527

Total   $10,067,745





