



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

Senator the Hon Zed Seselja  Minister for International Development and the Pacific  Senator for the Australian Capital Territory



Andrew Barr MLA  ACT Chief Minister



MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au



27 January 2021

FEDERAL FUNDING TO GET ACT’S COMMONWEALTH AVENUE  BRIDGE UPGRADE ON TRACK

The Australian Government has today announced funding for an important infrastructure project to boost  the nation’s capital - the upgrade of Commonwealth Avenue Bridge.

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said the Australian Government’s commitment of $137 million for the bridge upgrade was a  big win for Canberra.

“This investment ensures this important piece of infrastructure can continue to function safely for the  next 50 years and beyond,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“This investment will also back Canberra’s construction workforce and economy at a critical time, with the  bridge upgrade expected to create more than 700 jobs.

“We are particularly pleased the majority of construction materials to be used for the project, such as the  steel and concrete, are manufactured in Australia.”

Senator for the ACT Zed Seselja said the funding for the bridge upgrade would significantly improve safety  for motorists and pedestrians alike.

“The Commonwealth Avenue Bridge upgrade, which will be delivered by the National Capital Authority,  will strengthen the bridge to prevent structural damage, widen the pedestrian pathways and replace the  vehicle safety barriers to improve road safety,” Senator Seselja said.

“It is infrastructure projects such as these that make a real difference for the day to day lives of  Canberrans and of course for local jobs and the economy at this vital time, which is why we are pleased to  confirm federal funding will flow.”

“This $137 million investment in Commonwealth Avenue Bridge is part of over $1.3 billion in new  investments announced in the ACT by the Federal Government in recent years, boosting the Canberra  economy.”

“This is what the Australian Government’s $110 billion nationwide infrastructure investment program is  all about: getting Australians home sooner and safer while creating jobs and economic stimulus to lay the  economic foundations for recovery following the COVID-19 pandemic,” Senator Seselja concluded.

ACT Chief Minister Andrew Barr welcomed the Australian Government’s commitment to upgrade  Commonwealth Avenue Bridge.

“This significant commitment to upgrade Commonwealth Avenue Bridge is warmly welcomed by the ACT  Government,” Chief Minister Barr said.

“The upgrade will ensure that the Bridge will continue to operate as a critical piece of our city’s transport  infrastructure for decades to come.”

“This project will stimulate our local economy and support the jobs and livelihoods of Canberrans.”

The $137 million Commonwealth Avenue Bridge upgrade is being fully funded by the Australian  Government.

Ends.

Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Jo Williamson 0418 475 668 | Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Senator Seselja - Cassandra Choake 0427 839 164  Chief Minister Barr - Kaarin Dynon 0422 772 215

