



THE HON ANGUS TAYLOR MP  MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND EMISSIONS REDUCTION

MEDIA RELEASE



Tuesday, 5 January 2020

SECURING THE FUTURE OF THE NATIONAL ELECTRICITY MARKET

Securing the future of the National Electricity Market (NEM) is key to the delivery of reliable,  secure and affordable electricity to Australian households and businesses.

The Energy Security Board’s (ESB) Post-2025 Market Design Directions Paper, released today,  marks a significant milestone in the market reform underway across the NEM.

The post-2025 market design is the most critical energy reform governments have been tasked  to deliver by National Cabinet.

The paper sets out the direction of market reforms the ESB will pursue through its post-2025  work.

Importantly, the Post-2025 Market Design Directions Paper includes an increased focus on  addressing the risks to reliability, security and affordability of a sudden and unexpected exit of a  thermal generator.

Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction Angus Taylor said the post-2025 work is an  important step towards developing a new fit-for-purpose market framework that will empower  consumers and support the continued reliability of the interconnected system.

“The NEM is at a turning point, with expanding choices, new technologies and large-scale  replacement of thermal generation needed as older power stations leave the market,” Minister  Taylor said.

“Taking action now is critical and will minimise disruptions, and avoid unintended  consequences.

“The record levels of intermittent generation along with major thermal generator closures  demands a clear focus on reliability and investment in reliable generation.

“The NEM needs to adapt to address risks to reliability, security and affordability, particularly  sudden, unexpected exits of thermal generators. We need long-term signals for private sector  investment in reliable generation and storage, to replace existing generators with like for like  capacity.

“We need a coordinated approach to market design to keep the lights on and costs down. The  commitment of all energy Ministers to the post-2025 process recognises the importance of  working together.

”I look forward to continuing to work with my state and territory colleagues to progress the  post 2025 market design that delivers for Australians.”

The NEM plays a key role in our energy system, efficiently delivering electricity to consumers  across New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania and the ACT.

As Australia recovers from the impacts of COVID-19, the Morrison Government is focused on  ensuring Australians have access to affordable and reliable energy.

The ESB will work with stakeholders to develop the detailed market design ahead of further  consultation in March.

Final recommendations on post-2025 market design are expected to be delivered to energy  ministers in mid-2021.

The ESB’s Post-2025 Market Design Directions Paper is available at: https://esb-post2025-market-design.aemc.gov.au/directions-paper

ENDS

Minister Taylor’s office:                               John Hulin, 0466 443 917



