



The Hon Michael McCormack MP  Deputy Prime Minister  Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development  Leader of The Nationals

Federal Member for Riverina

The Hon Nola Marino MP  Assistant Minister for Regional Development and Territories  Federal Member for Forrest

MEDIA RELEASE



The Hon Michael McCormack MP

Parliament House Canberra| (02) 6277 7520 | minister.mccormack@infrastructure.gov.au  Suite 2, 11-15 Fitzmaurice Street, Wagga Wagga NSW 2650 | michael.mccormack.mp@aph.gov.au



12 January 2021



APPLICATIONS OPEN FOR ROUND 5 OF THE BUILDING BETTER  REGIONS FUND

Applications are now open for local communities across regional Australia for the fifth round of the  successful Building Better Regions Fund (BBRF).

Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Development Michael  McCormack said this round will see local communities share in $200 million.

“Releasing the program guidelines last December meant prospective applicants could begin  preparing their submissions,” the Deputy Prime Minister said.

“The Australian Government is now welcoming those submissions, ready to support community  investments such as local events and strategic regional plans as well as infrastructure projects which  will provide lasting benefits to regional and remote areas.

“This round will see $100 million of dedicated support for tourism-related infrastructure, while  maintaining $100 million for broader community infrastructure and investment.

“The Australian Government is proud to continue supporting our rural and regional communities  with Round 5 bringing our total commitment to more than $1 billion over seven years.”

Assistant Minister for Regional Development and Territories Nola Marino said it is vital the Australian  Government supports regional and remote communities as they continue leading the economic  recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic.

“Our regions once again demonstrated remarkable strength and resilience in 2020, staring down the  challenges of bushfire, drought and a global pandemic,” Ms Marino said.

“Our regions are the lifeblood of this nation and the BBRF will help ensure our local communities  bounce back stronger than ever.

“Since 2016, we have funded nearly 1,000 projects through the BBRF, ensuring our communities  have an opportunity to gain funding and support for locally driven projects,

“The BBRF is about creating jobs and driving economic growth and I encourage eligible applicants to  apply for funding.”

Applications are now open and can be submitted through the online portal at  www.business.gov.au/bbrf.

If potential applicants have any questions regarding eligibility or the delivery of the program, they  can contact the AusIndustry Business Grants Hub on 13 28 46 to discuss their individual  circumstances.

Prospective applicants are also encouraged to contact their local Regional Development Australia  (RDA) committee to discuss their application. More information including contact details for your  local RDA can be found at www.rda.gov.au.

Applications close on 5 March 2021, with successful applicants expected to be announced in mid-2021.

Ends.

Media Contact:  Deputy Prime Minister - Jo Williamson 0418 475 668 | Dean Shachar 0418 202 860  Ms Marino - Anita Shortland (08) 9721 3788

