THE HON JOSH FRYDENBERG MP  Treasurer

THE HON PAUL FLETCHER MP  Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

25 March 2021

AN EXTRA $135 MILLION TO HELP AUSTRALIA'S CREATIVE  SECTOR RISE

The Morrison Government will inject an additional $135 million to support thousands of jobs in the  arts and entertainment sector, as it continues to come back from the impacts of COVID -19.

The Government will provide a further $125 million, available until 31 D ecember 2021, into the already  successful Restart Investment to Sustain and Expand (RISE) fund. This funding will support around  230 projects and up to 90,000 jobs and builds on an original commitment of $75 million. RISE funding  is provided to arts businesses and organisations as competitive project grants towards the cost of  putting on activities such as festivals, concerts, tours, productions and events.

The Government will also provide a further $10 million to the charity Support Act in 2020-21, to assist  with its vital work in providing crisis support to artists and other workers across the creative sector.  This is in addition to the $10 million directed to Support Act by the Morrison Government last April.

Minister for Communications, Urban Infrastructure, Cities and the Arts, the H on Paul Fletcher MP ,  said RISE is helping to drive the creative economy resurgence, as venues reopen and performances are  booked in.

"Our focus has turned to stimulating activity so the work opportunities can flow," Minister Fletcher  said.

"T his new funding comes at an important stage in the resurgence of Australia's arts and entertainment  sector. The purpose of the RISE program is to get shows put on, bringing employment to performers,  crews and front-of-house staff. "

The Government will also update the RISE program's guidelines to:

Make it easier for multiple businesses and organisations to access the program to put on a show,  including pre-production support. For example, it is common in the music industry that a

Media contact: Kane Silom - Office o f the Hon J osh Frydenberg MP - 02 6277 7340  I mre Salusinszky - Office of the Hon Paul Fletcher MP - 0432 535 737

promoter works with an artist, their manager, a sound and lighting provider and various other  parties in the lead-up to a concert or tour.  Encourage projects from as low as $25,000.

The Government will consult on the wording of these changes before finalising them.

The boost to the RISE program builds on the Government's investment of almost $800 million in  additional arts and entertainment funding announced in 2020, on top of an investment of around $750  million in annual funding, more than $730 million provided to the Creative and Performing Arts  subdivision of industry through JobKeeper, and about $119 million provided in cash flow payments to

Creative and Performing Arts organisations.

For more information about COVID-19 and arts support visit: www.arts.gov.au /covid-19-update.

