



TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RADIO DRIVE MONDAY POLITICAL FORUM WITH RICHARD GLOVER

MONDAY, 1 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: WA border closures; Changes to church services; NSW border closures;

Lowy Institute report on national responses to Covid-19; Vaccination hesitancy.



RICHARD GLOVER, HOST: Monday Political Forum. Archbishop Glenn Davies is here,

Sydney's Anglican Archbishop. Tanya Plibersek is the shadow Minister for Education and

Training, she's with us from Canberra. Hi Tanya.



TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION, SHADOW MINISTER FOR

WOMEN: Hi. Good to be with you.



GLOVER: Yeah and here also with me and Glenn in Sydney is Jess Scully who's the Deputy

Lord Mayor of the City of Sydney Council. Welcome. Thanks for coming in.



JESS SCULLY, CITY OF SYDNEY COUNCIL: Good to be here.



GLOVER: Now, most West Australians are now in lockdown after a hotel quarantine security

guard tested positive to COVID-19, having interacted with at least 60 close contacts. Now

Victoria and Tasmania have now closed their borders to those from Perth and nearby regions

but NSW will allow those from Perth to come here, providing those self-isolate and get tested.

Other than when the Victorian outbreak was at its worst, Gladys Berejiklian has embraced

open borders. She's been quite strident about it. So is she right this time round? Jess Scully.



SCULLY: I do think it's the right response actually to be proportionate and I think after the

Avalon crisis and the cluster that we had before Christmas, I think a lot of us are feeling a

renewed sense of confidence in the contact tracing that NSW have been undertaking and the

effectiveness of it and the fact that we're now, you know, it's 14, 15 days without a community

transmission, I think we're feeling a little bit more confident and we've got to strike the right

balance between being safe and cautious and opening back up. So I think this is the

right approach.



GLOVER: This is the approach where we kind of realise that will get little outbreaks, but we're

confident that we'll be able to extinguish them?



SCULLY: And making sure that we don't get complacent. We've got to keep checking into

venues because that COVID Safe tracking really is important and we've got to keep wearing

masks on public transport, in crowded spaces, that sort of thing. So I think the level of

community confidence is there that we can allow people in as long as they test and they

isolate.



GLOVER: Yeah, I want to ask you about the border Glenn, but just give us a picture of church

and what it's like without with everyone wearing masks and no singing and all of that.



ARCHBISHOP GLENN DAVIES: Well, it's difficult that is true Richard. But we've recognised

it's important, the safety measure that Jess speaks about, we want to be safe places in our

churches, so therefore I've instructed all our people - I mean, it's part of the law anyway now -

with regard to masks and no singing, five singers absolute maximum up the front and we also

have the COVID app too so people do that. There's hand sanitisation in my church, they take

the temperature, they wipe down all the pews. So all those COVID safe procedures are well



GLOVER: How much, I mean I know the preacher doesn't have to wear a mask.



DAVIES: No. I don't have to wear a mask when I preach-



GLOVER: Yeah, yeah.



DAVIES: Any more than the Premier does when she's giving a press conference. So at that

level and I think and that's appropriate, there's a recognition that you some sense of normality

has to continue. Mind you I have seen overseas churches where the preacher had a mask on

throughout the whole sermon. Everyone wore masks, you know, the singers, the Bible readers,

the prayers everyone.



GLOVER: So, how much does it strip from a church service if the parishioners can't sing?



DAVIES: A significant amount. I mean, singing is a gift that God gives us to sing praise to him,

to encourage one another in song. So it's a great deprivation, there's no doubt about that and I

keep telling my people just beep be patient, patience is a fruit of the spirit and just hang in

there, and the time will come. I'm hoping in a couple of weeks’ time the government will give

further easing of restrictions. We're looking forward to that, the two square metre rule rather

than the pre-Avalon situation where we actually could sing with masks in the pre-Avalon

situation. I mean, I've argued strongly with the government with regard to singing at least with

masks. You can sing outside but with the 1.5 spacing but most of our churches of course are

indoors. So yes, it's been difficult, but we want it, we've got to pull our weight as well and

safety has to be a very, very high measure.



GLOVER: What's the best Anglican, like the moment everyone gets their masks off and sing

gloriously together in your cathedral. What's the hymn you want them to sing?



DAVIES: “O For A Thousand Tongues to Sing" wouldn't be bad one.



GLOVER: I don't know that one!



DAVIES: Don't you?



GLOVER: No.



DAVIES: Oh it's a John Wesley. It's quite, it's quite an old hymn and you know, because we

can't get a thousand in our cathedral now because of COVID reactions, but “O For A Thousand

Tongues to Sing”, my great redeemers praise.



GLOVER: That's going to have to be the one. Now before I go to Tanya Plibersek, what do you

think about the borders? Has the Premier got right in saying-



DAVIES: Yes the great surprise is that Queensland hasn't been closed its borders. That's the

surprise in this question.



GLOVER: Well they have in a way. They've said that you have to go to mandatory hotel

quarantine if you come from WA or a hotspot.



DAVIES: Look I agree with Jess. I think that our Premier has struck the right measure in terms

of proportionate response. I think there's been an overreaction. I think that Gladys Berejiklian

has really done well in keeping businesses alive, and we've seen the complaints from the

Premier of Queensland with regard to seeking more money for tourism, etc. I recognise that

but closing borders has a cost and if there's a way in which you can proportionately respond to

outbreaks that's a much better way where you can still keep the economy going as much as

possible.



GLOVER: Tanya Plibersek, has our Premier here in New South Wales, our sort of basically

border opening Premier, got it right?



PLIBERSEK: The first thing to say is that our thoughts are with the people of Western

Australia. It's a difficult time. I'm sure they have all breathed a sigh of relief that the Premier

was able to tell them today that there'd been no new cases. So that's good news. I guess this

whole scenario tells us three really important things: That you've got to act quickly - if we act

quickly we can limit the spread of outbreaks.



I think the second thing that we really take from this WA outbreak is if people are working

multiple jobs because they're not earning enough in any one job, we increase these sorts of

risks. You want people to have secure jobs and decent pay and conditions, particularly if

they're working in hotel quarantine or aged care.



GLOVER: Okay, because this, the security guard in question, not blaming him, but he's got a

second job, you know Uber driving or something like that.



PLIBERSEK: People are going to take second and third jobs if their first job doesn't pay them

enough, and that's a real feature of our modern economy. And I think the third thing really that

we take from this is the state's really have been doing the heavy lifting. Now NSW, Western

Australia, Queensland, Victoria - they've all taken different approaches. I'm not making a

political point, I think Liberal, Labor, all the Premiers have been listening to their medical

experts, they've been doing what their medical experts have advised them to do.



What I'd really like to see from the Federal Government is it stepping up a bit more when it

comes to hotel quarantine and quarantine more generally. Our borders are a Commonwealth

responsibility, it'd be good to see them taking some responsibility.



GLOVER: It was interesting, I thought, that Lowy report last week which was talking about the

relative success in different countries and why it was so and it was interesting because some

people said, oh authoritarian countries have done a lot better, you know China, etc. and the

Lowy report used a lot of science to say that that's not that's actually not true, that a lot of

democratic countries have done quite well, New Zealand and Australia being examples. The

one thing they did say though was that smaller countries statistically have done better than

bigger countries, and they said this might be one example where Australia basically has

tackled this as if it was six small countries and that might have been just one little part of our

success.



PLIBERSEK: Do you know what I think it is? At least in part it's about how much we trust each

other and how much we trust our political leaders. In Australia, we have some tough times

politically, but in general people still have more faith in our democracy than they do in a lot of

other parts of the world. We believe it when people get up from the health department and say

this is the sort of action we think we should take. We trust those public servants and that trust

in public life is so important. It's so precious and you see at times like this how important it is.



GLOVER: That's right Archbishop Glenn Davies is here. So it's Tanya Plibersek and Jess

Scully. You can't run the Australian economy on taxpayers' money forever this from the PM

today as he confirmed that programs such as JobKeeper will stop at the end of March. Already

listeners to Drive been debating, this some people have been telling heartbreaking stories of

businesses which are on their knees and there's really no easy way out if there's not a bit of

government support, but other listeners are saying, oh, well, you know, that's just reality. You

can't be supported forever. So here's the question - is it fair enough given Australia's level of

control of the virus for the Government to plan a return to what it calls ‘fiscal discipline’, Tanya

Plibersek?



PLIBERSEK: We’ve got so many people still struggling, and I think it's a real joke for Scott

Morrison to be talking about taxpayers' money in this way. When we're heading for more than

a trillion dollars of debt, but we've got a government that's wasted money on sports rorts, it’s

paid 10 times above the odds for airport land - $30 million of taxpayers money there -, $70

million on the COVID tracing app that's just been a waste of money, and hundreds of millions

of dollars on advertising and promoting itself.



At the same time they're saying “no, we can't afford to help the 1.6 million people have been

relying on payments like JobKeeper to put food on the table and a roof over their heads.”



GLOVER: I'm not saying that that airport land wasn't, you know, a scandalous waste of

money, but the quantity of money is a lot smaller than when you're talking about extending

JobKeeper for many more months. I mean, that would be billions.



PLIBERSEK: Let's talk about JobKeeper for a sec. We've got companies have got millions of

dollars in JobKeeper support and have posted record profits and paid their executives

bonuses. And the when the Prime Minister's asked about that today, he says I'm not going to

engage in ‘the politics of envy’. The problem is this is so hit and miss. JobKeeper was so

poorly designed that some people have got it - they've got millions of dollars - that didn't need

it. And poor people who are really worried about how they're going to pay the rent when these

payments finish are facing not getting this sort of support anymore.



You cannot have this sort of hit and miss design. The Government should admit that they

made a mistake in the design of this. They should ask the companies that don't need the help

to repay the help they've had and they should spend that money on people who continue to

need support. We’ve got two million Australians who don't have a job, don't have enough hours

of work. The recovery is delicate. If we pull out the rug from under the recovery right now, that

is a real problem for our economy and for all those people who rely on a decent job with

decent pay.



GLOVER: It has been interesting to see some companies return some of the money and other

companies which, seem to be in a very similar business model on space, not returning the

money and you kind of wonder why that is.



PLIBERSEK: Wouldn't it be good if the Prime Minister of Australia actually called on them to

do it? Instead of saying it's “the politics of envy” to say that companies who didn't need the

help should repay the money so he can use it for people who need the help.



GLOVER: Now Glenn Davies, how do we get the balance right between what the Prime

Minister says is generational equity, you don't want to leave the kids in the grandchildren and

all that with huge debt, but this current you know, people are in, and it's not the fault of the

travel agent  if the government is introducing, you know quite rightly introduced a rule that says

there can be no travel.



DAVIES: True. I had travel plans cancelled and got refunds and others were held over but I

agree. I believe I've heard the federal Treasurer Josh Frydenberg actually invite, ask

companies to return money if they were oversupplied with money as it were, their profits were

quite large. Of course the money on the COVID response is borrowed money. So it's not it's

not actually money we have in our pockets. It's actually borrowed money. And as you say it's

an intergenerational debt, which is going to be with us for probably 20 years from various

expectations. I think the JobKeeper, the problem is JobKeeper has got to stop sometime and

there has been a resilience in the market greater than people thought in terms of employment.

It's the JobSeeker that I'm more concerned about, the people the unemployed, the poor as

Tanya spoke about we argued against the Newstart amount a year ago before JobSeeker, and

it was -



GLOVER: You thought it's too late.



DAVIES: We thought it was too late.



GLOVER: This is the $40 a day.



DAVIES: Absolutely and so I would like to see JobSeeker, actually the amount that they have

at JobSeeker remain. And they've retitled it JobSeeker, which is a good name and if people

actually truly seeking for jobs and there are some jobs out there. That's what I'd like to see but

it's a judgement call us to win JobKeeper stops, but the Prime Minister's right that it can't go on

forever. And I think Tanya would agree with that. But when it stops there's a judgement call,

he's brought it down to you know, it's come down a section. Maybe it could have gone down

another half and extend other three months. That's a judgement call and I think that's worthy of

consideration.



GLOVER: What don't want a cliff, we want a gentle incline.



DAVIES: People fall off a cliff and they and they get hurt. So that's my response the

JobKeeper and the JobSeeker.



GLOVER: Jess Scully, do you go along with that?



SCULLY: I do agree that there's two stories here that we need to look at. JobSeeker it's too

low and there's actually a huge impact. It's a huge impact on the economy, but on people's

lives as well. If we're not supporting people to be able to afford to live when through no fault of

their own they've lost work, their Industries have been shut down. What can they do? And

we've advocated at the City of Sydney for a long time, we supported the ACOSS campaign to

raise the rate. If we did that It would actually have a huge file on effect, Deloitte Access

Economics reported that if Newstart another allowances were increased by $75 a week the

flow on for the New South Wales economy would be $907 million in the first year.



GLOVER: There's no one that spends every dollar in their wallet more quickly than a poor

person.



SCULLY: Absolutely. So it just makes sense in order to keep other businesses going to make

JobSeeker a decent rate. The second question is about JobKeeper, now the City of Sydney is

home to the most businesses with that are relying on JobKeeper in the in the nation. 20,000

businesses in the City of Sydney are reliant on JobKeeper and there are industries that have

not recovered from the pandemic and the lockdown. The arts, tourism and those businesses

reliant on international education. That is a huge sector of our economy that will not recover for

this year and for the foreseeable future so we have to I think have a proportionate response

here as well and we need to support those industries like tourism, the arts, entertainment,

hospitality and international education in particular that have really suffered as a result of the

lockdown.



GLOVER: Jess Scully is here, so is Tanya Plibersek and Archbishop Glenn Davies. We are

going to talk about the vaccine program in a second, but just let's take 20 seconds or so to

listen to Glenn's favourite hymn.



AUDIO + TRAFFIC REPORT



GLOVER: It wouldn't sound as good with masks on would it?



DAVIES: No, I certainly wouldn't think so.



GLOVER: And at the PM also announced today, a $1.9 billion program to ramp up

vaccinations for COVID using GPS and pharmacists. And promised that all Australians would

be offered a vaccine by October. First question is that fast enough? but also there are fears

about the level of vaccine hesitancy in Australia, so called. Do you think there'll be significant

numbers refusing to be vaccinated? And is it appropriate for employers and venues to require

proof of vaccinations before people enter their premises. Could there be a version of sort of ‘no

jab, no play’ I guess? Tanya Plibersek, Labor has been a little bit critical of the fact that we've

been a been relatively cautious about this vaccine roll out.



PLIBERSEK: No, we're not critical of the caution. I think caution is absolutely necessary. But

the Prime Minister has said that four million people are to be vaccinated by the end of March

and it's looking like we're a long way from meeting that target. We need to vaccinate people as

quickly as it's safe to do so and we have some of the world's best medical authorities here.



As soon as the TGA and other regulators tell me that it's safe I'm going to be the first one

rolling up my sleeve to be vaccinated. Because I think that is the surest path to getting things

back to normal, as close to normal as we possibly can.



GLOVER: Do you think there will be sizeable numbers of people who don't want to be

vaccinated and in that context, I don't know how much will be worth 5% or 10% over or what,

but would it be reasonable for an employer to say look we're not going to sack you but we don't

want you in to the workplace if you haven't had a vaccine or a pub to say look if you want to,

you know, come to the badge night. You got to have a vaccination.



PLIBERSEK: Look, I really hope that that's not possible and if sorry not necessary. If you

really think about the way that Australians have behaved during this pandemic, they've been

really stepping up to look after each other. They have stayed home from the beach and the

pub, they've looked out for their neighbours. They've worn masks and wash their hands.

They've done everything that's been asked of them.



I really hope that Australians will want to take this next step. Even if they're not worried about

their own health to think about vulnerable people that they come into contact with.



GLOVER: I mean that's hoping I suppose. I'd like to ask what if people don't - a cohort don't do

that. Is it is it alright to use a bit of stick as well as carrot?



PLIBERSEK: Well, yes. When I was the Health Minister, we used a lot of carrot and a little bit

of stick when it came to childhood vaccinations and we've seen Australia continues to have

some of the highest childhood immunisation rates in the world. That's a really good thing. That

saves lives, that saves lives. In fact, the most effective thing we can do to keep Australians

healthy is have good vaccination campaigns and it applies here as it does to childhood

immunization as well.



GLOVER: Yeah. No, I agree. I can't believe why anyone wouldn't like a vaccine that you know,

even if the efficacy even if doesn't guarantee you won't catch the illness it does guarantee you

won't die. Which is a pretty good deal for us.



PLIBERSEK: Or give it to someone else. That's the thing that doesn't get me- if you are not

worried about your own health, think about the people around you that you love.



GLOVER: That's right. It's like the whooping cough vaccines another example, Jess what do

you reckon?



SCULLY: I think that idea of trust is a really important one a point that Tanya raised earlier. I

think there was a really good example, we can learn from. So early in the pandemic in Finland

they thought, look people are going to get misinformation about this disease and they're going

to hear from quacks and influencers telling them the wrong thing. So what the government did

there was they got the right information and they enlisted 1200 influencers that particularly

have a lot of social media following that people follow, young people follow in particular and

they gave them the right information and therefore people were getting accurate info. They

weren't getting conspiracy theories or hoaxes or kind of old wives tales and-



GLOVER: Enough of the Member for Hughes but go on (laughs).



SCULLY: You know, they weren't following, you know, the celebrity chef or whoever. They

were hearing from people they already trusted giving them the right messages. So what we

need in Australia, I think is a really clear message that is, this is about caring for each other.

This is about taking care of your grandparents, the most vulnerable people in your community.

But not one big message a hundred different versions of this message communicated through

sources people already trust. We need a nuanced and thoughtful campaign that takes into

account the diversity of our community. And the fact that people are taking information from

lots of different sources. It shouldn't just be Government advertising. It should be much more

nuanced than thoughtful than that. So I think we've got to build on that trust that we have in our

healthcare professionals as well.



GLOVER: Let a thousand tongues sing, I think we're back to that! Glenn Davies, so how are

we going to handle the vaccines?



DAVIES: We need to recognize that personal Liberties need to be restricted in order for the

common good. So when seatbelts came into cars, for example, there was an initial over

reaction to that. I'm not going to wear a seatbelt kind of thing. Well, it's now become the norm,

no one drives a car without a seatbelt and if they do they get fined. So I think that vaccines, we

have to think of the common good. Just as Jess said and with Tanya I think we've got a pretty

compliant nation. I think we don't see the kind of protest in the United States or the United

Kingdom. They'll always be a fringe group of people who’ll protest about anything.



GLOVER: Yeah but it's been small.



DAVIES: Overall we are a compliant nation and we've seen the good of that and the value of

that. So when masks became compulsory on public transport, before it was compulsory,

there's a fair few people wearing masks but now as compulsory everyone's wearing masks.

That's a good thing. We need to recognize it's not all about me. It's about how I can help other

people and our churches will be certainly putting that forward. We want an ethically

uncompromised vaccine. There's a number of vaccines available of course and the

government's -



GLOVER: You don't believe that any of the ones that will be offered are ethically

compromised?



DAVIES: Well, the AstraZeneca has some has some doubts with regard to the foetal tissue

that was being used.



GLOVER: But even the Pope has said it's okay.



DAVIES: No. Well, the Pope has said if nothing else is available then that would be that would

be okay. The problem is it's murky. I mean no one would take a newborn baby and destroy that

newborn baby for the sake of getting you know, young tissue.



GLOVER: You're not saying Australian Christians should refuse the AstraZeneca vaccine?



DAVIES: I'm not saying that at all. I'm saying that the Pfizer vaccine has got a better genesis in

terms of development than the AstraZeneca. That's my, that's my understanding.



GLOVER: It's unlikely we'll be offered a choice isn't it? We'll be getting what's available?



DAVIES: Well it’s interesting. I don't know. I mean there's now Johnson & Johnson's got one.

Moderna's there, Novavax is there. There's a whole range, we can look at the WHO's website,

like you say there is a 130 different experiments. The Queensland one didn't work out. No, I'm

not an anti-vaxxer. I believe in vaccination. Actually, my job is about inoculating people from

eternal death. So I'm here. That's my job. So I believe in that but I mean the development of

the AstraZeneca the development has as no compromise in the in Victorian CSR plant, CSIRO

plant that they have, CSL sorry. Not CSR, that would be sugar all over the place.



GLOVER: So let me bring in Tanya, do you think Australians should be given the choice of

vaccines in case that one of them has got fewer ethical problems?



PLIBERSEK: I think we should be taking the vaccines that our medical experts advise us to

take, and as you say, that doesn’t include Craig Kelly. I’ve got to say I don’t agree with Glenn

on that, I think it’s important that we don’t start to sow doubt in people minds about being

vaccinated.





We are facing death on a huge scale around the globe and introducing complicated arguments

like this does risk some people refusing to be vaccinated. That person gets sick, they go to

visit their mum in a nursing home - we know how quickly this virus gets out of control. So we

have to be very careful in sending out messages other than those that our medical

professionals are sharing among us.



GLOVER: So it is true Glenn that the AstraZeneca one is the one that will be most widely

available. It's the one we have most doses off because it's manufactured here.



DAVIES: Of course and the Pfizer despite the EU's restrictions apparently. I mean the

Government deliberately didn't put all his eggs in one basket. So it's got those both vaccines

and look I agree with agree with Tanya. I'm not trying to put doubt up in people's minds with

regard to vaccination. I'm very pro-vaccination at that level. We need to consider the other

person not just for ourselves, but for other people that they're not going to catch that from us.



GLOVER: Well, may we get back to the thousand tongues singing in the church soon. Thanks

to Tanya Plibersek, Jess Scully and Glenn Davies, thank you very much. News time now, it's

six o'clock.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350



