Patron - His Excellency General the Honourable David Hurley AC DSC (Retd)  Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia



9 March 2021

MEDIA RELEASE



Extension of wage subsidy will boost skills training for  thousands more apprentices and trainees

Australia’s group training sector has welcomed the federal government’s extension of the  successful apprentice wage subsidy program that has seen thousands of new enrolments in  skilled jobs.

The National Apprentice Employment Network (NAEN) said the decision to extend  the Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) 50 per cent wage subsidy will help to  rebuild apprentice numbers and propel the post-COVID economic recovery.

The BAC wage subsidy was announced last October and was set to run until 30 September  2021 or until 100,000 new apprentice and trainee places were filled. The program has  proven extremely successful, with the 100,000 available places filled in just five months.

Under the extension announced today the 100,000 cap will be removed and the program  will continue under the original timetable until 30 September 2021.

Another welcome element of the extension will see businesses that have already registered,  and those that will register and sign up a new apprentice or trainee after 5 October 2020,  receive the 50 per cent wage subsidy for a full year.

The Chief Executive Officer of NAEN Dianne Dayhew said the extension of the scheme will be  welcomed by businesses and will provide financial support to help build the pipeline of  skilled entrants into the workforce.

“NAEN has argued for an extension and the government has listened. We think this is a  sensible decision that reflects the need to restore the strength of the apprenticeship system  and help rebuild numbers prevailing before the pandemic.

“COVID has changed the way we work and prepare for careers. There are many school  leavers and mature age workers that have seen the appeal of apprenticeships and made a  conscious decision to enter the skilled trades or traineeships.

“This extension of the scheme gives many more people the chance to pursue a vocational  pathway, where once they may have chosen university or even taken a gap year while  considering their future,” Ms Dayhew said.





The need to boost commencements was a key consideration in NAEN’s policy paper, Dealing  with the Apprenticeship Emergency, aimed at restoring apprentice numbers and based on  feedback from group training organisations around the country.

Media Contact: Bob Bowden, Foresight Communications Ph 0412 753 298  bbowden@bowmac.com.au



The National Apprentice Employment Network is the national peak body representing the network of over 100  Group Training Organisations (GTOs) employing more than 20,000 apprentices and trainees throughout  Australia. www.naen.com.au

