



Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra





THE HON DAN TEHAN MP  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment

THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP  Minister for Education and Youth

MEDIA RELEASE

24 February 2021

Promoting Australian higher education to the world

The Morrison Government is promoting Australia’s world-class higher education and online  learning offering to more than 12 million people around the globe.

‘Study with Australia’ is a five-year project to showcase Australian education to new and  existing learners worldwide.

Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment Dan Tehan said ‘Study with Australia’ would give  Australian education providers another avenue to promote their innovative online products  via the learning platform FutureLearn.com.

“When COVID-19 impacted higher education, Australian providers were quick to develop  innovative ways to continue teaching their students,” Mr Tehan said.

“During a pilot offering free online short courses at 20 Australian education institutions,  ‘Study with Australia’ clocked up more than 836,000 enrolments across 52 courses in just  three months.

“The global online e-learning market is forecast to grow from $US101 billion to more than  $US370 billion by 2026, which is a huge opportunity for Australian universities and education  providers to reach a global audience and provide jobs and growth here in Australia.”

Minister for Education and Youth Alan Tudge said the project will provide international  students worldwide with access to short courses through Australian education institutions.

“Building on the award-winning ‘Study with Australia’ pilot, this new agreement enables  Australian providers to offer online short courses and microcredentials to millions via the  global reach of the FutureLearn platform.”

“Of course, we want international students back in Australia, but while international travel is  limited, this initiative ensures students can stay connected to Australia and our world-leading  education providers at a time when they need it most,” Mr Tudge said.

FutureLearn Chief Content and Partnerships Officer Justin Cooke said: “We are delighted to  enter into the next chapter of the highly successful ‘Study with Australia’ campaign.





Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

“Together with Austrade and our 20 world-leading Australian partners, we’ve enabled more  than 450,000 people from almost every country around the globe to gain new vital skills  through over 50 different courses in high-demand areas such as digital, technology, law and  healthcare,” Mr Cooke said.

“We now look forward to continuing to showcase the best of Australia’s education offering as  we build on our shared mission to transform access to education.”

The initiative was awarded the 2020 Excellence Award for Innovation in International  Education by the International Education Association of Australia (IEAA).

‘Study with Australia’ is a joint initiative of Austrade and FutureLearn.

For more information, visit https://www.futurelearn.com/courses/collections/study-australia.



ENDS





Media contact:  Tehan: Byron Vale 02 6277 7420 | minister.tehan-media@dfat.gov.au  Tudge: Steve Kidner 02 6277 7790

