TRANSCRIPT

Wednesday, 27 January 2021

Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment Dan Tehan interview with Scott  Emerson, 4BC Drive

SUBJECTS: Trade, Tourism and Investment portfolio, Australia-China trade  relationship

Scott Emerson: 2020 saw a marked deterioration in the trade relationship between Australia  and China, whether it was beef, barley, timber, and particularly wine - we’ve heard this week  about massive reductions and imports into China from Australian wine. Things look bad in  2020. Now, since then, we’ve got a new Trade Minister in Dan Tehan, and I thought I’d get  him on the show today to find out how he sees that relationship developing with China over  2021. Minister, thanks for being on 4BC Drive.

Dan Tehan: Pleasure to be with you, Scott.

Emerson: Now, you’ve already written to your Chinese counterpart. What did you say in that  letter to him?

Tehan: Oh, look, I won’t go into the details out of respect for the new Commerce Minister in  China, but he was appointed within about 24 or 48 hours of my appointment as Australia’s  Trade Minister. I think there’s lots of ways that we can have a very constructive engagement  when it comes to our trading relationship with China, and that’s what I’ll be seeking to  achieve. And, I’ll be seeking to achieve that with a lot of countries across the globe. We want  to have a very proactive approach. It’s got to be principled, though. And, also, we need to be  patient in certain areas. And, the reason that we’ll take that approach is because trade and  investment creates job, and lots of jobs in this nation. And, that’s why, you know, I’ll seek to  make sure that those three principles govern everything we do in this area.

Emerson: Decisions by China against Australia in terms of trade have been viewed as  retaliation over our calls for independent enquiry into COVID. We also saw that list of  grievances coming from the Chinese embassy last year, as well. What are you going to be  doing differently from your predecessor, Simon Birmingham, to create a better relationship  with China?

Tehan: Well, we haven’t had a formal trade ministers meeting with China for over three  years now. So, this is something that we’ve been seeking to constructively engage with  China on now for over three years. So, look, I’ll be just making sure that I continue, at every  opportunity, to point out how mutually beneficial our trading relationship is. There’s a lot of  complementarity between what we send to China, especially when it comes to our  agricultural products and our resources. But, there’s also a lot of complementarity in how  China helps our manufacturing sector here and in other areas, as well. So, there is a lot of  complementarity between our two nations when it comes to commerce, when it comes to  trade, and when it comes to investment. I’ll be seeking to just point that out at every  opportunity, whether it be bilateral - but, there’s also other opportunities for us to engage -  through APEC, and my hope is with New Zealand hosting this year, we’ll get opportunities  towards the end of the year, maybe get some face to face meetings, go through APEC.  There’s also the World Trade Organization, where we’ve worked constructively together to  seek to get reform, especially when it comes to how you deal with trade disputes. So, there’s  a number of areas where we can work constructively together, and my hope is that that’s  what we’ll be able to achieve.

Emerson: Now, you mentioned New Zealand. Over the last 24 hours, we see new  agreements being signed between China and New Zealand. And, the view has been put  forward that China seems to be much more willing to deal with New Zealand than it is to deal  with Australia, at the moment. What is New Zealand doing differently from Australia?

Tehan: Well, look, I’m not 100 per cent sure what New Zealand is doing, and that hasn’t  been my focus since I came into this portfolio. What I’ve been focussing on is what I can do,  as Australia’s Trade Minister, and where we want to take our policies and our approach.  And, that’s going to be a very proactive approach. It’s free trade agreements with the UK and  the EU, and we want to try and conclude them this year. Looking to really boost the  relationship with India. I think there’s enormous opportunities there. We’ll have to be patient,  but we need to be very proactive when it comes to India. Japan, Vietnam, the new Biden  administration, all present many opportunities for us, and that’s what I’ll be focussing on, as  well as seeking to constructively engage with the Chinese. We’ve got to remember that our  free trade agreement with China that we’ve already got is one of the best free trade  agreements that China has with any country. And, New Zealand negotiated theirs before us.  And, my view has always been that New Zealand, as a result of what we were able to  achieve, has, in many ways, been seeking to get similar access. And, look, we haven’t  looked at the exact detail of what New Zealand has just negotiated with China but, I think, a  close assessment of that probably means that they’re starting to get the type of access that  we already enjoy through our free trade agreement.

Emerson: Well, it’s been seen that New Zealand has not been as vocal on issues of human  rights regarding China, the discussion about the origins of the coronavirus, and that is why  China is far more willing to deal with New Zealand at the moment, rather than dealing with  Australia. Is that the case?

Tehan: Well, each nation, obviously, follows the different approach they take, whether it be  to their foreign policy or their trade policy, according to their national interest. That’s  something that we do as a nation here, and that’s why we’ll always be proactive, but, also,  principled. There are certain principles that we will always adhere to, which we believe are in  our national interest. And, the approach that I’ll take will be very much one where I’m  focussed on what I can achieve for Australia, and making sure that that approach creates  jobs in this nation. Because, the reason we trade, the reason we seek investment, is so that  we can generate jobs. And, ultimately, in the end, that’s what I want to do - is make sure  that we’ve got the best policies in place, which will create as many jobs as we possibly can  in this nation. One in five jobs are created in this country as a result of our trading, and it’s  one in four in regional areas. So, it’s incredibly important that we continue to be as proactive  as we possibly can.

Emerson: Alright, Federal Trade Minister, thank you for being on 4BC Drive this afternoon.

Tehan: Pleasure, Scott.

