

JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

MEMBER FOR HUNTER

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SUNRISE   MONDAY, 15 MARCH 2021

SUBJECT: Women’s March 4 Justice; WA Election; Newspoll.

NATALIE BARR, HOST: Well thousands of people are expected to take part in  Women’s’ March 4 Justice rallies across the nation today. The events will increase  pressure on the PM to launch an independent inquiry into the rape allegation against  Christian Porter. It comes as Anthony Albanese looks to build on momentum from  Mark McGowan's landslide victory in WA. Parliament is returning for a new sitting  week in Canberra with Labor surging to a Newspoll lead this morning. For their take  this morning, I'm joined by Labor MP, Joel Fitzgibbon and the Nationals, Barnaby  Joyce, morning to you both.

BARNABY JOYCE, MEMBER FOR NEW ENGLAND: Good morning, Nat

BARR: Joel, the WA election - was it won on state-based issues, or is there  something in this for federal Labor?

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: First of all, congratulations and best  wishes to you, Nat, on your new position.

BARR: Thanks.

FITZGIBBON: Look, I think polls come, and come and go. But I think when combined,  what the WA result and today's Newspoll tell us is that the Labor brand is alive and  well. And that we can win the next federal election. It's not as if we are up against a  good government. In fact, we should win the next election, and we will win the next  election if we stick to the issues that are really important to people in this post COVID  period. And they are, of course, health and safety for their families and, of course,  financial security for their families. If we can stick to those subjects and prosecute  them well, we will and should win the next election.

BARR: Barnaby, if the Labor brand is alive and well, what does this say about the  Liberal brand in WA? The Nationals could become the opposition party.

JOYCE: Well, they both lost seats. So, we shouldn't be - we shouldn't be bragging. It's  obviously a disastrous outcome. You've got to say that; you've got to be truthful. But  there's a big difference, Nat, big difference. See, in the West, the Labor Party is run by  the right. And they're pro-mining and pro-coal - one of the big issues. But they're not  over here, they're very left over here. So, you don't have anything to worry about.

Because over here they're run by the left, by the Grayndler Greens and they haven't  got a snowflakes chance because the same issues that won them the electorate, the  election in Western Australia, they can't stand the Labor Party over here.

BARR: Right.

JOYCE: In fact, they won't even mention the word coal.

BARR: Right. So, no translation?

JOYCE: Well, unless one of you gets Albanese to come out and say he's going to  build a coal-fired power station in that man's electorate, and I don't think he's going to  say that, unless he comes out and says that coal has got a great future and we stand  behind it, because it's our largest export, that's fossil fuels. But I don't think he'll say  that because what you have in the Labor Party over here is, they're run by the Greens  and the Greens don't get elected.

BARR: Okay, let's go to something that's breaking this morning. I can see Joel  shaking his hand, but this is great, but...

JOYCE: He doesn't mean it. He actually agrees with everything I just said. He agrees  with everything I just said. See that little smile coming out of his face? He's like…

BARR: He has spoken. Yes, he has spoken on that issue.

FITZGIBBON: Scott Morrison - Scott Morrison is not proposing to build a coal-fired  generator anywhere, Nat. And Anthony Albanese just addressed the national  convention of the miners’ union. Chris Bowen was at a coal mine in Queensland last  week, Richard Marles has visited one, Ed Husic has visited one, we've always  supported the coal mining industry and always will.

JOYCE: Okay, so Richard Marles, Chris Bowen, Ed Husic and yourself, all the Labor  Right. But who runs the Labor body over here? The Left.

FITZGIBBON: Where are you building - where are you proposing to build it? You are  the government Barnaby.

JOYCE: Absolute policy, the National Party. Absolute policy. We stand behind the coal  industry 100 per cent - 100 per cent. We want a coal-fired power station. I'm going to  say it; we want to build a coal-fired power station [inaudible]…

FITZGIBBON: Well, you're proving pretty ineffective.

JOYCE: …One in Central Queensland, one in the Hunter Valley, but you will never  say that. You will never say that.

FITZGIBBON: Well do it. When Barnaby? Well, put a date stamp on it.

BARR: Ok, let’s move onto something else that's actually breaking this morning that  people are having their say on. Federal Labor has surged to a four-point lead in the  latest Newspoll published in the Australian this morning. On a two-party preferred  basis, the opposition is now ahead 52 to 48. That's after, obviously, a two-point gain  and a two-point loss by the Coalition. Barnaby, is the government's handling of the



Christian Porter crisis to blame for this result? That has been front and centre in the  last couple of - couple of weeks. A great economic story to tell, but that's been lost,  hasn't it?

JOYCE: Yeah, it's certainly affected us. And see, you got to be truthful, otherwise  people are just going to get angrier with you. Yes, the Christian Porter, the Brittany  Higgins issue has certainly affected our vote and it's something we have to address  and it's something that we have to give confidence to the Australian people that we will  deal with. We have to basically work out how to be better people in the future than we  were in the past and do a better job. But the allegations that came out last night on the  Labor Party side, from Labor Party staffers, put them exactly in the same spot. If those  allegations had come out earlier, I think we'd both would have been hit for six.

BARR: Yeah, Joel, you know, we've got the Women's March today, we're not seeing  ministers even lining up to go and address those women. Surely that's a mistake, isn't  it?

FITZGIBBON: The misjudgement from Scott Morrison just keeps coming, Nat. It was  just crazy for him not to either attend the rally, or send out a senior Coalition woman to  address the hundreds of thousands of women - mainly women - who will be marching  to say that, today, to say that they are angry, and they're not going to take it any  longer. And of course, of course, the Prime Minister should have had someone, some  eminent Australian, take a look at the Christian Porter matter and advise him privately  as to whether they believe he, he meets the standard one would expect for a senior  cabinet minister. And then Scott Morrison, of course, would have been able to tell the  Australian people he'd gone through that process. But for whatever reason, a bad  example of misjudgement, he refused to do so and, of course, refuses to do so. And in  doing so he's pouring fire on today's event.

JOYCE: Look, I have to say, Scott Morrison has invited a delegation to see, to the  Prime Minister's office to discuss it, for exactly the same reason - in camera  discussion.

FITZGIBBON: Catch-up.

JOYCE: And, look, I think that - I think you're belittling it. And I think that that is  important to note and, and, and they are entitled to - they chose not to and that's  absolutely their entitlement - but to say that the Prime Minister has not reached out is  not correct.

BARR: Okay. Okay. We'll leave it there. Thank you both. We'll see you next week.



ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAVID BULLOCK 0405 408 871





Authorised by Joel Fitzgibbon, ALP, Cessnock, NSW.









