

THE HON DR DAVID GILLESPIE MP    DR MIKE FREELANDER MP  Member for Lyne        Member for Macarthur



DR KATIE ALLEN MP       DR ANDREW LAMING MP

Member for Higgins          Member for Bowman



Sunday, 21 February 2021

DOCTORS OF THE HOUSE UNITE FOR VACCINE  Medical Doctors of the House, Dr David Gillespie, Dr Mike Freelander, Dr Katie Allen and Dr  Andrew Laming have united this week in welcoming the first doses of the coronavirus vaccine  in Australia.

The first shipment is part of 20 million doses of the Pfizer vaccine, secured through an advance  purchasing agreement under our vaccine strategy.

The arrival of the vaccine confirms that we are on track for our most vulnerable groups to start  receiving the vaccine on 22 February 2021.

Approximately 80,000 doses of the Pfizer vaccine will be made available in the first week. The  first priority for vaccines are hotel quarantine and border workers, frontline healthcare workers  and aged care and disability care residents and staff.

The  Therapeutic  Goods  Administration  (TGA)  has  approved  the  AstraZeneca  COVID-19  vaccine  for  use  in  Australia  following  a  full  and  thorough  assessment  process.

We have secured 53.8 million doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine, with 50 million doses being  manufactured here in Australia.

Two  safe  and  effective  COVID-19  vaccines  are  approved  for  use  in  Australia.

The Australian Government  is  committed  to  providing  safe  and  effective  vaccines  free  to   everyone in Australia.



QUOTES

Dr David Gillespie

“The vaccines have been through incredibly rigorous assessment by the TGA and deemed  safe and effective to reduce the burden of disease and severity of disease and give a good  degree of protection to the Australian community.”

“The main thing is: prevention is better than any cure and I prefer not to get sick, so I’m  going to get the vaccine.”

Dr Andrew Laming

“Immunisation is a safe and effective way to protect you, your family and community from the  virus. It also safeguards the health of our older people, like our grandparents”.





Dr Mike Freelander  “With thanks to the diligence and efforts of the independent experts at the TGA, Australians  have cause to feel confident about the quality and effectiveness of the vaccines that will be  rolled out over coming months.”

“I certainly will be continuing to encourage people to get vaccinated.”

“Our TGA has undertaken a rigorous review of both the AstraZeneca and Pfizer vaccines, both  have met the highest of standards, and I am pleased that the rollout will soon be taking place.”



Dr Katie Allen

“COVID has changed the way we live our lives. The free and voluntary COVID Vaccine will  turn this from a deadly disease to a nuisance disease. That will transform our public health  response so lock downs are a thing of the past and Australians can reconnect with the rest  of the world.

“Australians should be confident that our vaccine strategy has not cut corners on safety  thanks to our world-class TGA processes and procedures.”





MEDIA

Joshua Hodges Dr David Gillespie  0411 135 367

Brydan Toner  Dr Mike Freelander  0407 243 981

Ryan Farrow  Dr Katie Allen  0406 037 905

Sonia Bryant  Dr Andrew Laming  0408 776 527





