

THE HON KEN WYATT AM MP

Minister for Indigenous Australians  Member for Hasluck

TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

WINNUNGA NIMMITYJAH ABORIGINAL HEALTH SERVICE,  CANBERRA  24 March 2021

Topics: Phase 1B COVID-19 vaccine rollout

E&OE…

Minister: I want to really encourage our people who are over the age of 55 and those  with chronic conditions to make sure that you go to your local ACCHO or in some  places your local GP clinic or the special clinics that have been established to have your  COVID-19 vaccination.

We have enough health challenges among our people and the chronic health conditions  are problematic so it's important that we get vaccinated, in significant numbers.

…

I want to say to our people over the age of 55 and those who have chronic health  conditions to go to your local ACCHO for your covid-19 vaccination. At the moment  there are 32 ACCHOs that are providing the program. But there's also your own GPs,  for those who use GPs, and the special clinics that have been established to deal with  COVID.

We have many health challenges which makes us more vulnerable and during covid-19  our community leadership, not only in ACCHOs but amongst elders and younger  leaders, was outstanding and the impact on our community is lessened because of the  preventative actions we took. Now this is the next step in making sure that we protect  ourselves, our families, our children and our communities. So I would encourage, along  with my colleague Linda Burney and Tom Calma and those of our elders from

Ngunnawal Country, as we've done this morning, to be part of continuing and building  on the 65,000 years we have been here so that we continue for another 65,000 years.

Reporter: Minister, there's been some delays in rollout of GP clinics because of the way  there and a few other things have gotten in the way. Are you worried that this will impact  this programme as well?

Minister: Well, the floods will definitely impact but I know that Minister Hunt and the  ACCHOs and our Department of Health are looking at contingency arrangements and  they will ensure that provision is made for anybody who makes the two tranches of  rollout are given the opportunity to have their vaccinations.

Reporter: And for those regional and remote communities, what sort of public health  messaging has been put in place to make sure that people know that they can go get  their vaccination?

Minister: Aboriginal media's played a major role. We've already yesterday had a  discussion about messages being in language, which, as we did during the covid-19  pandemic, messages went out in language. They were told in very factual way and we  will do the same this time. But we'll also use other forms of media as well. And we've  got an incredible network. If you want to know about things in Aboriginal affairs, we do  have this unofficial Aboriginal grapevine that passes messages from one corner of  Australia to another. So we're also relying on our grapevine.

Reporter: Do you feel confident that these measures go far enough for the Aboriginal  community?

Minister: Well, we're at the forefront in phase 1B, so it's important. And then the next  phase will open up to the next eligible group amongst our people. But we are one of the  priority groups because of the levels of ill health that prevails.

Reporter: Are you happy with the levels of confidence within the Aboriginal and Torres  Strait Islander community in terms of the rollout?

Minister: Absolutely. I trust our leadership. I have seen during a period of covid rright at  the front end, people may have forgotten, the APY lands were the first to close their  borders. They took the decision and then ultimately other Aboriginal leadership made  similar decisions and the Commonwealth assisted by putting into place the Biosecurity  Act. And Minister Hunt established a steering committee of which Pat Turner was the  co-chair, and so they've been at the forefront of shaping what is needed across the  geographic diversity of Australia.

Reporter: And how you feel about the roll out across the Torres Strait, to protect from a  potential breakout in PNG. Are you happy with that so far?

Minister: Look, I'm confident that the measures that our government has put in place  and the work our department is doing with Queensland health is more than adequate.  We were always mindful of that cross over from Papua New Guinea into the islands and  then into Queensland. So we're vigilant. We've always been vigilant. Let me say the  Torres Strait Islander people knowledge of movement through the area helps both  governments in addressing issues from outbreaks of other health problems through to  this particular issue as well.

Reporter: And I just want to ask you another question about those delays at some GP  clinics. They said we have had wild weather so that's one thing that's sort of gone  wrong. But why do you think there have been delays at these other GP clinics, including  ones in those regional and remote communities?

Minister: Well, part of the system is complex as well in terms of the GPS that we are  training to become involved and then the logistics of moving the vaccine across the  nation. But again, where matters arise, we address them with immediacy.

Reporter: Thank you.

Minister: Thank you all for being here this morning. Thank you.

ENDS



Media contact: Lisa Hugg, A/g Senior Media Adviser, 0438 231 687



