SENATOR TIM AYRES

LABOR SENATOR FOR NEW SOUTH WALES





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2NZ INVERELL  MONDAY, 1 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Economic reconstruction; Kevin Andrews; Trump-style populism.

MONTE IRVINE, HOST: Its the first of February and I've been joined on the phone now by New  South Wales Labor Senator Tim Ayres. Good morning, Senator, how are you this morning?

SENATOR TIM AYRES: G’day Monte. Good morning to listeners. I'm calling you from Canberra of  course.

IRVINE: That's right. It's the first sitting period for the year, isn't it?

AYRES: Yeah it sure is, the political year starting in earnest now.

IRVINE: Yes it certainly has. Now speaking of which, the Prime Minister is due to address the Press  Club, the Australian Press Club today, and in his speech that's been released, there's been  comments already about him calling for fiscal discipline. And in particular, he's talking about the  removal of JobKeeper and JobSeeker - Coronavirus or pandemic help and the big business has  already come out and said, ‘Hey, can we get a stimulus package for when this happens?"

Now I know Labor has also made calls for JobKeeper to be increased permanently and I'm wanting  your comments on what this speech is looking like shaping like.

AYRES: Well, he's got more front than Gowings this bloke. A trillion dollars in debt this year and  nothing to show for it for the country: no infrastructure, no plan for reconstruction. And the only thing  that Scott Morrison has for the country at this moment is ripping away JobKeeper just as there's big  pressure on unemployment, particularly in regional areas where last year there were 28 unemployed  people for every single job.

And no plan to increase JobSeeker: the old Newstart rate was $40 a day in an environment where  there were people well below the poverty level, particularly in regional Australia where people often  have to travel and train for job interviews, where there's little prospect of a job and no plan that the  government's got to build jobs to build the economy. This is a very bad sign that the Prime Minister is  going to continue with the same no plan, no heart, no plan. That's your problem with the  government.

IRVINE: I mean, there is $251 billion set aside, and 74 billion of that is for JobMaker, they're great  with their names aren't they, JobMaker, which is for, you know, trying to build jobs, and of course to  try and train people up for jobs. Do you think this is enough? Do you think there needs to be more in  relation to this?



AYRES: What I think there needs to be, Monte, is delivery and a credible plan to bring the economy  back to growth and to build jobs in the economy. The problem with this government, it's all  announcement, no delivery. So there's breathless announcements of funds and, as you say, there's  always a slogan and a name for every program. But there's precious little delivery. You know, one of  the obvious examples is for the bushfire communities, where the emergency funds and bushfire  recovery funds announced by the government, no money has been spent. So the problem for this  government is all announcement, no delivery and they don't have a credible plan for economic  growth and to bring good jobs back into the economy.

IRVINE: Labor's calling for that unemployment benefit to be boosted, maybe not to the to the rate  that it is now. What is Labor's hope for this work? What would you consider to be the right amount  for JobSeeker?

AYRES: Well, Labor believes that the focus should be squarely on a plan that brings recovery back  into the economy and reconstructs the Australian economy post COVID. That's why Anthony  Albanese appointed Richard Marles the Labor Deputy as the Shadow Minister for the reconstruction,  for jobs and for skills. That's going to be our focus.

It's not credible to leave the JobSeeker payment, the old Newstart, to drift back down to $40 a day,  which is just a cruel level of payments that that is entirely unsustainable. But also, what Australians  need, what Australian communities need, particularly in regional Australia, is a credible plan to  rebuild the Australian economy and a rebuild good jobs back into the economy. And that's what  Richard Marles and Anthony Albanese will be delivering in the lead up to the next election - which  could be as little as five months away.

IRVINE: Now speaking of the election and preparation for that, over the weekend a pretty prominent  conservative Liberal Party member and Member of Parliament, Kevin Andrews, actually lost his pre  selection for his seat in Melbourne. Is this an ideological shift by the Liberal Party to be less far  conservative and maybe a shift to the middle? And can that maybe see a bit of destabilization in the  Morrison government?

AYRES: Well, it's not an ideological shift. It's a descent into chaos. The deselection of Kevin  Andrews - he has been a prominent conservative who was supported by the Prime Minister and by  previous Prime Ministers in his preselection. It does signal that the, this year is going to be marked  by a civil war inside the Liberal and National parties. You know, you've got some conservative ultra,  right radical figures like Craig Kelly and George Christensen out there propagating Donald Trump  style right wing conspiracy theories in the parliament and their social media accounts.

There is a real Trumpification of the extreme elements of the Liberal Party and National Party  backbench. We're seeing that behaviour intensify and this deselection of Kevin Andrews just signals  that the fight is on in earnest in the Liberal Party. It's going to be unstable, it's going to be very  messy and it does mean that the Liberal Party have got a serious political problem on their hands.

IRVINE: You just mentioned that the Liberal Party, the conservative parties have undergone that  Trumpification, if you like, by some of the back benches. Do you think the events of January 6  seeing what that populist conspiracy theory style of leadership actually produces? Do you think that's  going to shift the Australian people and the Australian people's attitude towards that populist-style  politician - away from that to a more, I suppose what's the right word for it, sensible type of

leadership. And not having a go at conservative leaning people, but have them rethink - well hang  on, this is not the way to go. This didn't work in America, the sheer chaos of what's happened in  America from this. We don't want that happening here in Australia.

AYRES: Well, democracy's precious and people who care about democracy and democratic  institutions right around the world, including Australia, were horrified by the events in the American  Capitol on January the sixth. The problem is some of these characters celebrated it on the Liberal  Party backbench in Australia. Craig Kelly and George Christensen were defending the Capitol  rioters, this attempted insurrection in the heart of American democracy. Now, John Howard wouldn't  have stood for this for a second. Previous National party leaders would have condemned it and  acted to stamp it out. But Scott Morrison, the Leader of the Liberal Party and the Prime Minister, and  Michael McCormack, the Leader of the National Party and the Deputy Prime Minister, have just  stood by and let this extremism flourish within the Liberals and National Party.

IRVINE: You make an interesting point there, Michael McCormack was the Acting Prime Minister  when this occurred and he was given the opportunity to denounce what happened in America. And  he shied away from it, he went all around it but didn't actually come out and denounce what  happened in America. Do you think that's pressure from within his own party that those conservative  parts, those ultra conservative parts of his own party, he was worried about upsetting them and  destabilizing his leadership even further than what's already under?

AYRES: Well, Michael McCormack had one of two reasons for failing to condemn this outrageous  behaviour by two Liberal and National Party backbenchers. The first is that he's too frightened to  condemn it from pressure from inside, or that he agrees.  It's entirely unacceptable. It is absolutely  vital that Australian political leaders step out and condemn this kind of extremism, this kind of  behaviour because it has real world consequences. And Michael McCormack in particular, Leader of  the National Party, should have stepped out then.

Scott Morrison has had plenty of opportunities over the last six months. He has Craig Kelly, his  captain's pick for the seat of Hughes, would not be a Member of Parliament unless Scott Morrison  had demanded his preselection in Hughes. As Craig Kelly spread misinformation and conspiracy  theories about the Coronavirus and vaccines and all sorts of all sorts of wacky nonsense,  deliberately spreading these conspiracy theories through the parliament, the social media, the Prime  Minister's had plenty of opportunities to point out to the Australian people that this conspiracy theory  stuff is wrong, and that it's dangerous and to condemn the member for Hughes, Mr. Kelly. He never  has.

IRVINE: Is there an opportunity in Parliament now that’s just sitting, is there an opportunity for  Parliament to actually take those steps and censure this Member of Parliament?

AYRES: Labor Party members have been on their feet in the Parliament pointing this out, out there  publicly over the course of the last few months, pointing this out. What we need is a bit of leadership  from this Prime Minister on these questions. We can't afford this extremist nonsense in Australian  politics. It's damaging, it has real world consequences, bad for Australian democracy. But for some  reason or other, the Prime Minister lacks the ticker for leadership.

IRVINE: Fantastic. Look, Senator, thank you so much for your time this morning. Very interesting to  talk to you, some very interesting topics that we've touched on this morning. I look forward to talking  to you next Monday.



AYRES: Good on you mate chat next week.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT

