OFFICIAL





THE HON ALAN TUDGE MP   MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND YOUTH

MEDIA RELEASE



31 March 2021

Shaping the future of international education in Australia

The Morrison Government is working with students, educators and the higher education  sector to maximise the long-term benefits of international students for Australia.

Minister for Education and Youth Alan Tudge today launched consultations for the Australian  Strategy for International Education 2021-2030, which will set the sector on a path to long-term success and guide its recovery from COVID-19.

“International students are important for Australian universities, our diplomacy, our economy  and our community,” Minister Tudge said.

“We want international students back in Australia as soon as the COVID-19 situation allows,  but the disruption of COVID provides an opportunity to look at the sector and ensure it is  working for students and for Australia in the long-term.

“I want to see greater diversity in the sector, to improve the learning experience for local and  international students and increase reslience to global changes in demand.

“We should also better target international enrolments towards our nation’s future skills  needs, to grow Australian businesses, create more local jobs and add to our economic  recovery.

“We will also explore opportunities to expand the reach of our international education by  developing new delivery models to grow new markets around the world.

“I want to hear new ideas to help set a course for both the sector’s recovery and its longer-term trajectory.”

The Hon Phil Honeywood, CEO of the International Education Association of Australia and  Convener of the Expert Members of the Council for International Education, said the new  strategy is a chance to set out a shared vision for Australian international education.

“More than three million students from around the world have studied in Australia over the  past two decades, adding to the vibrancy of our communities and delivering important social,  economic and diplomatic benefits to our country,” Mr Honeywood said.

“I look forward to a national conversation on how we can work collectively to ensure  Australian international education meets the challenges of the future.”

Information about the new Australian Strategy for International Education 2021-2030  https://www.dese.gov.au/australian-strategy-international-education-2021-2030 and the  consultation paper are available at https://www.dese.gov.au/australian-strategy-international-education-2021-2030/resources/australian-strategy-international-education-consultation-paper



[ends]

