

PAT CONROY MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

AND THE PACIFIC

SHADOW MINISTER ASSISTING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE

SHADOW MINISTER ASSISTING FOR DEFENCE

SHADOW MINISTER ASSISTING FOR GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY

MEMBER FOR SHORTLAND





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC PACIFIC BEAT

TUESDAY, 16 MARCH 2021



SUBJECT: Australia’s response to the COVID-19 outbreak in Papua New Guinea.



JORDAN FENNELL, HOST: Now the Labor Opposition here in Australia is pressing the

Morrison Government to provide urgent and comprehensive assistance to PNG, and I’m joined

now from Canberra by the Opposition spokesperson on International Development and the

Pacific, Pat Conroy.



Good morning.



PAT CONROY, SHADOW MINISTER FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND THE

PACIFIC: Morning Jordan, how are you?



FENNELL: Very well thank you, thank you for joining me on the show this morning. I’m

wondering, what is your assessment of the situation in Papua New Guinea at the moment?

How concerned are you?



CONROY: I’m very, very concerned. We’ve seen the number of COVID cases rise from an

average of six a day to 65 a day. What we are seeing is low testing rates combined with high

infection rates of testing that’s been done. In some testing locations, we are seeing 30 per cent

infection rates and that’s a recipe for thousands of COVID cases being unreported. The fact

that the WHO has found that we’ve got stage three large scale community transmission in two

provinces is very, very worrying.



FENNELL: And what would this urgent and comprehensive assistance to Papua New Guinea

from the Australian Government involve?



CONROY: So Labor’s calling for three things. One, getting as much Personal Protective

Equipment up there as the Papua New Guinean Government needs. Secondly, provision of

rapid testing kits to ramp up the testing rates. And thirdly and most importantly, providing

vaccines now so that every frontline health worker in PNG can be vaccinated now. The

problem we’ve got is that the COVAX facility will only start delivering vaccines to PNG in late

April. We need frontline health workers who are suffering very high infection rates and are

obviously one of the key locus for spreading the infection to be vaccinated now, and that’s

what we are calling the Federal Government to do.



FENNELL: In the meantime, what do you make of Prime Minister James Marape’s

announcements about no lockdowns, but a nationwide isolation strategy? Do you think that is

enough?



CONROY: Well that’s obviously a decision of the Papua New Guinean Government, and I

should stress that whatever assistance Australia should provide, it should be decided by the

Papua New Guinean Government. They should dictate what they need and we should provide

that, but it’s clear that Australia can do more and that’s in our national interest. It’s not just

about helping fellow human beings. We are seeing an explosion of COVID on our doorstep in

a country that’s only three kilometres from the closest point of Australia so we need to take

action.



FENNELL: Now those calls for emergency doses of the COVID vaccine to get to Papua New

Guinea, does Australia even have the capacity to do that bearing in mind that Australia’s own

vaccine rollout is not going super smoothly at the moment?



CONROY: It’s a challenge, I don’t pretend it’s not a challenge, but we do have the level of

vaccines we are talking about. We are talking about somewhere between 5,000 and 20,000

doses of vaccine which is a reasonable amount, and I think there’s a very clear public health

case that it is more beneficial to the health of Australians, let alone the health of Papua New

Guineans, to get those doses up to PNG now.



We’ve already seen for example six fly-in-fly-out miners swamped the Cairns Hospital. We are

seeing potential for COVID to spread across the Solomon Islands and across to the broader

region. It’s in Australia’s direct national interest to support PNG now, to vaccinate their frontline

healthcare workers, to help get the COVID infection under control, otherwise we could see a

widespread COVID disaster across our entire Pacific region.



FENNELL: Now Labor has previously warned that if Australia failed to provide adequate

support to the Pacific during this pandemic, other countries would step in and China has by

dispatching a medical team. Is that a concern for you?



CONROY: It’s a concern in all these things that wherever Australia leaves a vacuum in the

Pacific region, it will be filled by other people and we’ve seen that with China during the COVID

crisis. So that’s why I do welcome Minister Payne’s announcement that we would send an

Australian medical team, an AUSMAT team to PNG, but much more needs to be done.

Besides the health impacts, there’s the broader geopolitical competition that’s going on in the

Pacific, and Australia must do everything we can to ensure that we are the partner of choice

for countries like PNG.



FENNELL: Finally, Mr Conroy Labor has warned of a COVID-19 catastrophe in PNG and yet

in that global context even now the numbers in Papua New Guinea are quite small. So, is the

real problem here sort of an inadequate health system that needs to be supported on a long-term basis and do you think that’s where Australia has failed under successive governments?



CONROY: There has been a failure. Labor released a paper last year on COVID in the Pacific

where we called for three things: one, immediate medical assistance, two, medium-term

economic support, and third, long-term resilience building in the region. And this Government

has cut $11.8 billion from the foreign aid budget, and that’s having a huge impact in the Pacific

region. For example, cutting a third of health funding to Samoa during the Samoan measles



epidemic is an example of this Government’s shortsighted approach.



In PNG for example, three million people live in provinces without a single doctor. So there’s a

massive challenge to help assist in improving PNG’s health system, and you’re absolutely right

to point out that the long-term cuts to foreign aid that have occurred since 2013 have

undermined Australia’s ability to support PNG to improve their health outcomes. And when you

add on top of that the pressure of the COVID pandemic, it’s a recipe for disaster. That’s why

urgent action is needed now and a long-term plan.



FENNELL: Pat Conroy, thank you so much for joining me on Pacific Beat this morning.



CONROY: Thank you Jordan, have a good morning.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: AMANDA TURNER 0439 828 365



