

ANDREW GILES MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR CITIES AND URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE

SHADOW MINISTER FOR MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS

SHADOW MINISTER ASSISTING FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP

MEMBER FOR SCULLIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

ABC NEWS BREAKFAST

SATURDAY, 2 JANUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Cuts to JobSeeker and JobKeeper; NSW COVID-19 Outbreak;

State borders.



HOST: Now we're joined by the Minister for Defence Personnel and Veterans

Affairs, Darren Chester, and also joined by Labor MP, Andrew Giles. Good

morning to you both and Happy New Year.



ANDREW GILES, MEMBER FOR SCULLIN: Happy New Year.



DARREN CHESTER, MEMBER FOR GIPPSLAND: Happy New Year Andrew.



HOST: We might just begin on another story that's been reported on this morning

in The Guardian. Andrew Giles, there are reports that Anthony Albanese is set to

turn up the heat on the government this year ahead of his speech to some

Victorian party members, he is quoted in this report as saying that he's branding

the Prime Minister of fake who's obsessed with politics and shifts blame. If this

report is indeed correct does this mark the return to partisan politics?



GILES: Look, I think what we've seen through the pandemic it's been a decision of

Anthony Albanese made as Labor leader, to be constructive wherever possible, to

act in the national interest and that's why we've had things like JobKeeper, things

that Labor have called for and other vital supports. But what's also clear as we

start to think about life beyond this crisis is that there are very different visions of

Australia's future, and in Labor, Anthony has been very clear that we're prepared to

fight for a better society, we're prepared to fight to fix the things that have become

so apparent in the experience of the pandemic, particularly in areas like insecure

work, which have been so brutally revealed to Australians.



HOST: But can’t the Labor Party continue to fight, your words, work constructively

and in the national interest without it being bipartisan?



GILES: Look again, where the Government gets it right, Anthony and Labor will be

the first to say so. But when we think they are letting people down, and we think

that's happening right now. I mean yesterday, we started 2021 with $100 cut to

some of the most vulnerable people's income in Australia. We've just got to call

that out, every economist says it's the wrong thing to do, and the lived experience

of so many people I represent who've seen their lives transformed by having the

security and dignity of a decent income. We can't let that slide.



HOST: Darren Chester I want to bring you into the conversation here, you know

that's a really good point that Andrew Giles has just made the fact that the

coronavirus supplement is now being taken away from the JobKeeper scheme,

we're starting to see these schemes start to wind down now, particularly in March,

there's still no word as to whether that the schemes will be extended, we know that

economists have been warning us that insolvency numbers will be on the rise and

rise once this scheme actually comes to an end. Is it right really to call an election

so soon if it was to happen?



CHESTER: Well, there's a lot in that question, let me begin by clarifying both

JobKeeper and the JobSeeker coronavirus supplement were introduced by the

Government during the pandemic during the crisis, to try and help people get

through those difficult periods and what we were able to do is keep people

connected to their workplace. In fact, of all the policies that have been introduced

in the 13 years that I've been in Parliament. It's the one where I have received

most positive feedback from our community about how JobKeeper allowed

businesses to keep their employees attached to their workplace. So in better times

return, they are able to re-employ them and keep them going so it's been a great

success, and the decision to wind it back to more normal levels, so JobSeeker is

going down to $150 supplements, it's still there and additional supplements still

being paid under JobSeeker, is to help people make their transition back to the

workplace. We want people back in the workplace, not relying on the welfare

payments if we can possibly do so and what you see now these last few months

have been an incredibly resilient economy where it's bounced back stronger than

most people thought, most of the economists thought we'd be in worse shape than

we are right now. We're seeing jobs created and people getting back to work and

it's a very positive thing for 2021.



HOST: Darren just to pick you up on one point there you mentioned that these

supplements are returning to more normal levels, is  that levels that they were pre-pandemic because you know the Grattan Institute has found that, you know, these

supplements have meant the difference between putting nutritious meals on the

table for people and not?



CHESTER: So the JobKeeper was obviously a wage subsidy that's being

transitioned out into March and there's going to be other industries as you’re

probably well aware like the hospitality and tourism and travel where there’s

probably going to be arguments made for continuing in some form or another and

cabinet will consider that at that time which is in a couple of months from now. But

in terms of the JobSeeker supplement, the coronavirus supplement, that's $150

more than it was prior to the coronavirus period and that goes on until March as

well, so these are other conversations that cabinet will need to have at the right

time, but people do have the confidence and security of knowing that supplement

is still in place.



HOST: Andrew Giles if I could bring you back into the conversation here, I just

want to circle back to the issue of Anthony Albanese’s expected speech and, you

know, Kath earlier on, was talking about the fact that we are expecting that speech

to be on the attack and attack of the Prime Minister and the Coalition Government

as well. Given that the Labor Party still isn't quite agreed or have a consensus on

their own climate policy. Is this really a time for the Labor policy to be laying the

groundwork for a potential election?



GILES: Well, we'll be ready for an election whenever an election is called, but I just

don't agree with the assertion. I haven't been part of a team that says as unified

and focused on the challenges of the future Fauziah than we are now. We look at

the enormous body of work that we've got to do, to rebuild, to build a country that's

every bit as good as Australian. To make sure that we don't see people or

businesses held back, and particularly that we don't see any Australian left behind.

And if that requires us to muscle up to the Government of course that's what

Australians expect us to do, and that's what we will do. Australians are getting

increasingly frustrated. This is a Prime Minister who has in his own words, doesn't

hold the hose, but more profoundly that he seems to be unwilling to pick up that

house, we see that every day. As soon as the cameras are packed away the Prime

Minister isn't there. And that's just not good enough Fauziah.



HOST: Sure, but I just want to touch on something else that Darren Chester said

about the JobKeeper and JobSeekers scheme as well you know there's a lot of

consideration, there's a lot of discussion now about broadening the base of the

JobSeeker scheme perhaps with a more targeted approach. And as to who would

be eligible for this and I know Labor is in favour of this. Do you have a clear policy

on the JobKeeper scheme?



GILES: Well, in terms of the JobKeeper scheme, I guess there are a couple of

things to say. I was really pleased to hear Darren say that the policy that he's got

the most positive feedback for because of course when Labor proposed this the

Government thought it was a bad idea back in the early stages of the pandemic.

So I'm very pleased to hear that. What we say is that it's too early to be moving

away these supports, particularly in some industries which continue to be very

affected by the pandemic. Obviously there's a mechanism in the scheme, which

should counter that. So, I guess, what I'd be saying to the Government is, show us

your plan, show us your plan to safeguard jobs into next year, into this year I

should say now it's the second of January, of course.



HOST: Darren it's probably right for you to have a reply there I imagine you'll

probably like to outline JobTrainer and JobMaker there?



CHESTER: Well, the plan is evident to anyone in Australia who drives on any road

or drives to the cities and sees $100 billion worth of infrastructure being built over

the next ten years. We've got people out there on the roads right now building new

and better roads, safer roads, improving rail systems in partnership with willing

state governments, investments in new airports. These are things that are creating

jobs right now. The problem for Mr Albanese is that he wants to have an each way

bet on these things, he's got something has split personality at the moment. He

wants to appeal to the inner city lefties and the greens but at the same time, he's

selling his base out - the blue collar workers, in electorates like mine. Blue collar

workers in power stations in my electorate are leaving the Labor Party in droves

because they don't know what they stand for.



HOST: Is there an identity problem, Andrew with the Labor Party, as Darren

alluded to?



GILES: Not at all, that's a creature of the imaginations of conservative politicians

and some in the media. I think it's very clear who we are focusing on. And I mean,

what is frustrating is that we have a government that is much more interested in

talking about the Labor Party than talking about the needs of the Australian people.

And I think that says everything that needs to be said about this Prime Minister, our

challenge is surely to look at the future, to look at what has happened here, and to

be every bit as good as the Australians to show respect for their resilience, their

capacity to look after each other, with a positive vision for the future - that's not

what we're seeing at all.



HOST: Darren Chester, you know, we're having this conversation of course, with a

pandemic as the as the backdrop and use alluded to a little earlier that the

Australian economy is recovering, it's on its way, but the recovery really does

depend on borders staying open, you and Victoria has shut the borders to New

South Wales. How then do you balance this recovery in terms of the pandemic and

economy at the same time?



CHESTER: Well, to be fair, when you say you and Victoria, you're talking about

the Victorian State Government shut the borders, and what the health authorities

and what the Premier and his Ministers need to carefully consider is that every

time you shut borders you are ruining lives, ruining lives in Victoria and ruining

lives in New South Wales. Now the closure of borders this week, the precipitous

closure this week, where people who were holidaying in green zones, areas that

they were told by the Victorian Government were green zones, and then had to

rush home within six or seven hours to avoid going to quarantine for 14 days is an

example of I think, poor decision making. It’s a real issue for us. I mean, we've got

people now who are being told that they can't return to Victoria - the border is

closed to them, even though they travelled to green zones. Now, we've got to

make sure that these people can return, I hope common sense will prevail over the

weekend. We've got examples where people who are on holidays, maybe packed

the caravan or the swag or the tent, and we're camping 400 or 500 kilometres from

Sydney now being told they can't come home - that is madness. We have to fix

this. And I urge the Victorian authorities to come to a common sense solution this

weekend and let those people return home.



HOST: We've just got two very brief questions to go and we're almost out of time.

Andrew, just on the response to that, what would Labor's position be? Is there a

role for the Federal bodies and authorities to step in and decide on some sort of

consistent approach to borders when they are under the system that we live in,

arranged by the States as Darren just alluded to?



GILES: Yeah, that's a really good point. I mean, I think that the two things that I

would say there are, firstly, I support every state government taking action on the

basis of public health advice, which is what's been happening here. When it comes

to the role of the national government, I think we need to see the national cabinet

working more effectively, we hear a lot of talk about it, but it's not going to meet

again until the 5th of February, that's just not good enough when we have these

issues to work through. What’s also very frustrating here is the Victorian

Government sought the help of the national government in terms of the ADF to

assist with the border and that request was of course rejected. So again, we're

seeing a national government failing to take responsibility for important national

concerns.



HOST: Darren Chester, just finally we know that you're coming to us for another

very beautiful part of regional Victoria, we can always count on you on being such

an advocate for regional Victoria. We are of course, marking the anniversary of the

black summer - the bushfires that we saw in the last year or so. Are you

comfortable? And are you still perhaps may have some concern over the recovery

that regional Victoria is undergoing from those bushfires?



CHESTER: Well, I should start by saying just how thankful and grateful my

communities have the support we received during the initial relief in response

phase, we live in a great country where we have volunteers prepared to protect

other people's homes. The initial stages of recovery went very well, in terms of that

great response, we saw this longer term recovery regarding rebuilding

infrastructure is an issue for us, we need to make sure that 2021 is the year we get

things done - both State and Federal Governments have money on the table now.



So our challenge is to build those local projects in places like Gippsland and

Northeast Victoria and the south coast of New South Wales to build that public

infrastructure so that when people want to go on holidays, when it's safe to go on

holidays, they can visit these regions and enjoy everything they have to offer

because it's a great time to visit regional Australia. Obviously, there's travel

restrictions in some places right now, but we need to get people out and about

supporting local businesses, supporting local communities. We've got a lot of work

to do this year, but the recovery is heading in the right direction.



HOST: I couldn't recommend more highly the rail trails in the northeast they're

cycling through Myrtleford and Bright, just a perfect part of the world. Darren

Chester and Andrew Giles, thanks so much for joining us today on Weekend

Breakfast. I look forward to talking to you again soon.



GILES: Glad to be with you.





CHESTER: All the best.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LACHLAN POULTER  0423 937 655



