

BRENDAN O’CONNOR

SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

MEMBER FOR GORTON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

TASMANIA TALKS

MONDAY, 1 MARCH 2021



SUBJECTS: Defence industry; Future Submarines; Vaccines; Craig Kelly.



MIKE O'LOUGHLIN, HOST: On the line is Brendan O'Connor, the Federal Shadow Minister

for Defence. Brendan, sorry to keep you waiting for such a long time. I hope you were singing

along with the song. Good morning.



BRENDAN O'CONNOR, SHADOW MINISTER FOR DEFENCE: I was humming along, Mike.

Good morning.



O'LOUGHLIN: Now, you are here with Senator Anne Urquhart  I believe the Labor Senator for

Tassie as well?



O'CONNOR: Yes, yeah, that's right. We've been visiting a really innovative company in

Penguin.



O'LOUGHLIN: Thales, they have the contract for defence. Are you here mainly to discuss the

building of our future submarines?



O'CONNOR: Well, look, I'm talking about a whole range of issues, but really the visit is to

highlight and really look at the benefits that flow from defence contracts that involve local

businesses. And Penguin Composites is one such business. Their employment staffing levels

have doubled. Their business is growing for a variety of reasons, but partly due to this very

significant contract it has with Thales which builds the very important vehicles for our

Australian Defence Forces. And they are really critical parts to that vehicle, that armored

vehicle. And you know, I've just been lucky to see on display, this great innovative work in

Tasmania, and it's a beautiful spot, Penguin on the north coast.



O'LOUGHLIN: It is, it's a beautiful spot, and they do great work. But also just go back to the

submarine issue because as Shadow Defence Minister, what is happening with the Australian

side of the build? The French seem to be totally in control, are we supposed to have 60 per

cent of the build?



O'CONNOR: At the very least 60 per cent. We went to the last election with the Prime Minister

and former Defence Minister, Christopher Pyne, giving an undertaking of at least 60 per cent.

However, it would appear when the agreement was struck that requirement was not an

enforceable provision. So it appears now the government has to retrofit that requirement with

the French provider. And we're insisting on it. We really do need them to secure that otherwise,

you know, businesses in Tasmania and on the mainland, are going to miss out on enormous

amounts of work.



I mean, this contract has blown out. This is $90 billion over several decades. And it means that

if 60 per cent minimum local content is in fact enforceable, is going to happen, it is thousands

of jobs. It is a massive boom to business and it also provides lots of other long term skills, skills

that we want to have to create, manufacture and maintain defence assets. Because not only is

that economically is good, that's in our national security interest.



O'LOUGHLIN: Brendan, Minister should I say, is it true that the last submarine - when I read

this I was gob smacked - the last submarine won't be finished for 30 or 40 years?



O'CONNOR: Well, no. So originally it was looking to have the first sub - we've got obviously

Collins Class submarines now. We were going to have a new type of submarine in the water

by sometime mid this decade. However, that's now more likely to be mid next decade. So it's

more like 2035. And of course, the completion would happen into the next decade and possibly

a little bit beyond. These are obviously critical parts of our defence capability.



Currently, we have upgraded Colins class submarines, which do very good work. And the

upgrades have been remarkable. Yet, it is important that we bring these forward as much as

we can. So there's been budget blowouts. There's been time schedule blowouts. And now

there's this question mark over the local content, which is why the Opposition, why Federal

Labor has been questioning the government in parliament on this local content failure. And

we're really calling on the Prime Minister, don't just make the announcement, deliver the

contract, as promised.



O'LOUGHLIN: Well, is it too late? Obviously, you'd have to say it’s too late for Australia to look

elsewhere. We need more jobs in Tasmania, so we need that 60 per cent content. I mean, can

Tasmania do more?



O'CONNOR: They can do more provided there's opportunity. So the example with Penguin

Composites, this great company, local company here, they do a lot of non-military work and

they've now got this defence contract. They work with very complicated materials. But have got

the skill set to be able to provide the state of art parts to what is one of the best vehicles in the

world. They therefore, are in the supply chain of the manufacturer of such assets. That is a

great example of what can happen. And there is the right set of skills here to see other

contracts or parts of contracts be supplied by businesses in Tasmania and for that matter

across the country.



Taxpayers are spending billions of dollars. We've seen manufacturing decline over three

decades, we should be using our defence expenditure wherever possible to rely on

manufacturing because they're good jobs. They're permanent. They're well paid. They're well

skilled. And we want to see more of that in Tasmania and for that matter across the country.



O'LOUGHLIN: If I may, Minister, Gary from Devonport has just called in and been put on our

screen in front of me, he said that as a Shadow Minister, what's the Labor Party's policy on

China being in the South China Sea? And also, he also wants to know what about buying up

property in Australia? So there's a twofold question from Gary from Devonport there for you,

Minister?



O'CONNOR: Well, I mean, obviously, China is a significant, our most significant trading

partner. It's always going to have a presence in that region. We need to engage with it, as we

need to engage with all the countries in that region. We've got a lead role to work with Pacific

Island countries and others to make sure that things are done by the rule of law. And the way

we negotiate is done through international bodies, whether it's the World Trade Organization,

the World Health Organization. So we'd expect every country in the region to play to those

rules.



And of course, we've also got a very important relationship with our most important ally, the

United States. And of course, they have a presence in this region too. And, of course, with the

change of the administration in the White House, I think that's going to see some return to

normalcy, which will be a relief, I think, for most Australians. And because of that, improve

stability in this region.



So we have to obviously defend our own interests, work through the international bodies to do

the right thing. And we need to engage. And if it means we've got some shortfalls and some

deficiencies with it currently, with our relationship with China, we need to seek to amend those.

And in doing so also do so in our national interest.



O'LOUGHLIN: And if I may go on to the Labor government, you're asking the Liberal

government to reassess its position in terms of cutting JobKeeper and slashing JobSeeker, as

they've already done, I believe.



O'CONNOR: Well, the decision's been made, but they can reverse it. At the moment

JobKeeper ends at the end of March. So, you know, obviously, it's the first of March today, in

just over four weeks there'll be no further support for local businesses that may have been very

badly affected by the pandemic.



Now look, Tasmania has done a remarkable job in response to the pandemic, but you have

been economically hurt, like other parts of Australia, with the loss of tourism and the like. So it

seems to me if companies have been really badly hurt, it means that unemployment will

happen if we don't maintain that support. All we've called on the government to do is to

maintain it for the next quarter, and then assess it, and see whether the companies have

revived. Because the worst thing you can do is watch companies fall over, workers be on

unemployment lines, and therefore, when the economy does recover, those businesses are

already gone.



You can't revitalise a business as if it's disappeared. So, I think there's an economic sense to

say the impact is still there. If it means that you take away JobKeeper, but it just means

increasing unemployment, then certainly they should be thinking about extending it for at least

the next quarter and in assessing its effect. And as for JobSeeker? Well, again, they propose a

permanent increase. It's not a big increase, but we will support the legislation that will increase

job seeker, as outlined by the government bill.



O'LOUGHLIN: I know that you've said the attack on job seekers by the acting Prime Minister,

at the time suggesting that all they want to do is watch Netflix and Stan, was insulting. I tend to

agree with you on that. What is the reality?



O'CONNOR: Well, I think that the overwhelming amount of people who can't find enough work,

want to find sufficient work or want to get a job, they want to get a job. They want to be able to

have a decent life. You might find people cheating the system, but overwhelmingly most

people want to have a decent life. Everyone knows that having a good job, that you get pride

from that, a sense of satisfaction, and a sense of worth. So most people I think, do want to do

the right thing.



To actually brand everybody as dole bludgers, particularly when so many people have lost

their jobs due to the pandemic, is quite frankly insulting. We need to support people just to get

themselves back into the work force. That's what they want to do mostly. If there are isolated

examples of people doing the wrong thing, well, there’s mutual obligation you know. You need

to be looking for work, otherwise you lose your income and that's reasonable too.



O'LOUGHLIN: Minister, tell me about the deliberations that the government's making in

relation to superannuation. You believe Scott Morrison is dishonouring his promises to the

Australian people that will be an increase the super.



O'CONNOR: Well it was an election commitment, he said that the schedule of increases that

was determined by legislation to increase employees super was to be honoured. He said that

before the last election. He's now walking away from that commitment as is the Treasurer,

Josh Frydenberg.



We believe they fundamentally made a commitment. And if they choose not to follow through

on that promise, then they are dishonouring their commitments and frankly, they're being

dishonest with the Australian public. Not providing an increase to super means that workers

will miss out, not just in the short term, but over the longer term, because everyone knows for a

small amount of money that goes into super on retirement is a lot more as a dividend for

people having a good retirement. I think when you make a promise, and you promised that

going into an election campaign, I don't think you're in a position to be backflipping on it.



O'LOUGHLIN: And I need to ask you about the vaccination rollout as well. How do you think

its traveling nationally? Do you think we're well scored to finish by October?



O'CONNOR: Well, I think that's optimistic. I hope that we can realise that aim of finishing by

October. We've had a bumpy start already, as we know, with the doctor over dosing vaccines

on two people. But frankly, I think it's fair to say that they're okay, thank goodness, but the

Commonwealth Government, the federal government wants to be responsible for the rollout of

the vaccines, we've started rather late. We've been well placed in terms of response to the

pandemic, but if you look around the world, we hardly started.



I think there was 90 countries before us already rolling it out. And perhaps it's fair to say they

needed to, but we need to get a hurry on. Because that’s a lot of Australians to be vaccinated

by between now and October. And I think that we really need to focus on that. That is the main

role for Scott Morrison. And he's made that commitment. And we'd hope that we meet that

goal, it's critical for us to be able to open up our economy, open up our borders internally. And

ultimately, when medical advice is possible, open up the borders to certain countries who are

safe places to go and to receive people.



O'LOUGHLIN: Do you believe we should have, I know we've got Pfizer and AstraZeneca.

We've all heard about that, and whether you know what strain there might be helpful with or

not. But what about do you think we should have probably as well got with Johnson and

Johnson, who have now got just a one dose? And possibly even Moderna? Some other

vaccine suggestions?



O'CONNOR: Possibly. Look both the vaccinations we've gone with, they're different but

ultimately, they both going to protect people against major illness and fatality. And that's the

first priority, I think. And the Health Officers at the State and Federal level have said they're

very, very good vaccines.



Look, we could have possibly sought to get others, but I think the really important thing now,

Mike, is to see the rolling out of the vaccinations as quickly as possible, as safely as possible

and that will give us much greater protection. You know, could we have used others? Perhaps,

but having listened to the Health Officers at a federal and state level, they are advising us just

to get on board and you know, get it done.



O'LOUGHLIN: Listen, if I may speak the vaccine and speaking of ministers, Craig Kelly

leaving the Liberal Party, will Labor be looking to exploit his newfound independence?



O'CONNOR: I'm not sure Craig Kelly has much in common with the Labor Party on many

given issues. Whilst he is an independent as such as of last week, he has already made

commitments he wouldn't oppose the government in terms of supply and confidence, that's

fine. Look, we would engage with every crossbencher about every given matter, if it's in the

national interest. And that would include Mr. Kelly.



So of course, we'll start off with an open mind. We're not sure we would agree on much, but

we won't presume we don't. If it was a bill that I was responsible for I talk to every

crossbencher in the house, because the real thing is Mike, the really critical thing about what

happened last week is the government does not command a majority for the first time since the

election in the House of Representatives, and that means they are vulnerable to losing a vote.

And if it's a particular important vote, then that's of great significance I think just to see that

happen.



Craig Kelly, of course has caused that in part because he walked away from the Liberal Party,

but some would argue Scott Morrison caused that by intervening before the last election, to

assure that Craig Kelly was preselected. And now, Craig Kelly has I guess you could say

hasn't really helped the Prime Minister by abandoning the Liberal Party. But given that Scott

Morrison actually intervened to make sure that he was the candidate at the last election…



O'LOUGHLIN: If I may, neither Michael McCormack nor Greg Hunt have directly criticized his

Facebook posts about COVID-19. What action do you think the Federal Government should

take in relation to his comments considering the roll out currently?



O'CONNOR: Well, I think there should have been strong censure against his comments when

he was a member, and they should continue to certainly pull him up. I mean, it's one thing to

misinform people on Facebook about matters that are less important than public health. It's



another thing altogether to allow without criticism, without direct criticism, the dissemination of

dangerous information that could lead to injury, ill health or death. And so the highest level of

censure should have been expressed towards Mr. Kelly's conduct, so that the Australian public

we're in no doubt of Scott Morrison, Greg Hunt and other people's views about the spreading

of dangerous unscientific evidence not backed up by any health experts. So I was really

disappointed that Scott Morrison allowed that to drag on and on and on as he did. It was

wrong.



O'LOUGHLIN: If I can Minister finish up with the stronger communities round six applications

closed. Are you in Tassie to announce some lucky recipients of the grants?



O'CONNOR: No, I'm not in a position to announce such...



O'LOUGHLIN: Aww shame.



O'CONNOR: No, I'm not because, I'm not in Tassie to do that. But I do believe that Tasmania

does punch above its weight in certain ways. Today was a classic example of a really strong

business that's doubled in size, is engaged with the Defence Department to deliver critical

defence assets. And we could see more of that if Scott Morrison makes sure there's more local

content in defence contracts - stop just announcing decisions, perhaps deliver on those

decisions - and we would see more work, more employment in Tassie and indeed, across the

country.



O'LOUGHLIN: Brendan O'Connor, Federal Shadow Minister for Defence, I thank you for your

time. There's a lot we've got through and perhaps in the near future, we'll have a chat again.



O'CONNOR: Absolutely Mike, I'd love to come back and have a chat.



O'LOUGHLIN: Good to talk to you indeed. That's as I said, Brendan O'Connor, Federal

Shadow Minister for Defence.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: KYLIE JENSEN 0402 298 728



