TONY BURKE MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR THE ARTS

MANAGER OF OPPOSITION BUSINESS

MEMBER FOR WATSON

E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

ABC RN BREAKFAST

WEDNESDAY, 10 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECT: Labor’s Secure Australian Jobs Plan.

FRAN KELLY, HOST: Tony Burke is the Shadow Minister for Industrial Relations and I

spoke with him earlier.

TONY BURKE, SHADOW MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS: Good to be back.

KELLY: This policy is aimed largely at insecure workers,  putting the spotlight on casuals,

those toiling in the gig economy. How much is this driven by what we’ve seen and what’s

occurred during the COVID-19 pandemic? Is this a policy shaped by COVID-19?

BURKE: Very much so. What the pandemic showed was that people who were the first to

lose their jobs, the people who didn’t have the basic public health support of leave

entitlements, were the people in the most insecure jobs. And we also, I think, people

worked out during that time that insecurity is not just casualization. It’s also the gig

economy, it’s also contracting out, it’s labour hire, it’s people on short-term back-to-back

contracts that never end and they never end up with any security in their job. And coming

out of the pandemic, we want to make sure that people who’ve had the bills racking up over

the last 12 months have the capacity to spend. They need to be able to organise their

finances again. Business is going to need domestic demand within the economy, because

they need people to spend. And you don’t get that security across the economy unless you

start with people in secure jobs.



KELLY: Well as you say, security is not just about those who’ve lost their jobs during the

pandemic, there’s many people who have been in work - we’ve looked at the examples writ

large of aged care staff for example who  move from job to job - and one of the elements of

the plan to be announced by Labor today is a change that would enable workers to transfer

their entitlements from one job to another I guess, one short-term job to another short-term

job. How would this work?



BURKE: Well this part of it is something we’ve said we would negotiate with the states and

territories and start working through how we can have portability of entitlements for people.

It’s something that you would start on an industry at a time, it’s not something that would

just be unilateral legislation through the Parliament. But the principle here is there are a

whole lot of people where we found out during the pandemic that the fact that they had no

access to sick leave wasn’t just a problem for them, it was a problem for the public health of

all Australians. And while it was exposed clearly during the pandemic, it is a reminder that

insecure work, and people who are compelled to work multiple jobs, has effectively meant a

whole lot of the standards we thought we had in Australia haven’t reached millions of our

workforce.



KELLY: What are we talking about - sick leave, holiday pay, what sort of entitlements?



BURKE: Look if you start with, say if you give an example of a gig worker. At the moment

their challenge is they’re not even classified as an employee and sometimes they’re

earning below the minimum rate. Basic standards in making sure that they don’t turn up to

work when they’re sick, that they have another way out, that they have another option -

these are the sorts of principles that we want to be able to work through with the states and

territories.



KELLY: Alright but what are you actually talking about - as I understand it, Labor’s plan

would empower the Fair Work Commission to give gig workers fair wages and conditions.

Are we talking holiday pay, are we talking sick leave, are we talking superannuation - and

doesn’t that take them back into line with traditional jobs? It’s no longer a different sort of

employment arrangement is it?



BURKE: Look, here we have probably one of the biggest changes that we’ll be announcing

today. Up until now, the moment you get classified as a contractor rather than an

employee, all your rights fall off a cliff. And so we’ve ended up in a situation where a whole

lot of people working in the gig economy are in fact being paid less than the minimum

hourly rate that is legal in Australia. Now, I get that there’s a whole lot of contractors who

run mortgages off their equipment, who employ a bookkeeper, who are genuinely running

an independent business. But I refuse to believe that the person earning less than the

minimum wage, with a second-hand bike riding as fast as they can and running red lights to

make ends meet is somehow empowered. What’s happened here is some of these

platforms have been able to undercut what were meant to be minimum standards in

Australia and we’ve ended up with third-world working conditions in a first-world country.



KELLY: It’s a model we’ve accepted and embraced though isn’t it - it’s a model that our

society has really embraced. Food delivery services, rideshare, AirTasker..and we all know

that we’re not paying enough really for the services delivered. Really we must know that in

our hearts. Do you think we’re ready to pay more?



BURKE: Look, we want the technology. I want the technology, I use the technology, but we

want the technology without the exploitation. And can I say, this is far more pernicious than

just the apps you might have on your phone. The gig economy is now right through the care

economy. There is a huge section of the National Disability Insurance Scheme now where

people are underbidding for the same work. And you know, people think gig economy, they

don’t think NDIS. Yet here is another area where the rates which are meant to apply are not

making it through to the workers.



KELLY: The elements of this bill which directly counter or contradict some elements of the

government’s omnibus IR bill include the changes to the Better Off Overall Test, the BOOT

- you gave a midnight press conference last night to underline this point. What’s the

changes that Labor would be suggesting?



BURKE: Well effectively right now on the Better Off Overall Test, our whole impetus is to

stop the effective pay cut that’s contained within the government’s legislation. What they’re

doing is - the Better Off Test - and the reason I did the media conference at midnight last

night - people working at that hour are the people relying on penalty rates. They’re the

people who, when they look at their payslip, will be able to see how much they get in

overtime, in penalty rates, how much they get in different allowances - and they can work

out very quickly how many thousands of dollars a year they could potentially lose if this

change goes through. But in its simplest form, the Better Off Overall Test is a safety net

that protects your take-home pay. And if you suspend or get rid of that safety net, then

workers will land with a thud.



KELLY: Yes but if you lose the job because the employer can’t afford to keep you because

of all those elements, in this critical period as the economy is being buffeted by the

pandemic, isn’t that a worse outcome for the employee?



BURKE: And I tell you what you’ve gone to there is I think exactly what will be the partisan

difference between Mr Morrison’s government and the policies that Anthony Albanese

takes forward to the next election. We’ll find Mr Morrison just saying well ‘whatever you can

get, whatever you can get paid, a job is a job.’ What we want to see is as we come out of

the pandemic, that work is more secure and that people have the capacity to organise their

finances and to get ahead again. Because you know, if you don’t have that security, then

you can’t get a mortgage, you can’t get in front and the bills that have built up for many

people over the last 12 months, you don’t get on top of them again. This debate determines

what Australian workforces are going to look like on the other side of the pandemic. And

we’re on the side of secure jobs.



KELLY: Just finally, what does Anthony Albanese mean when he says the next election will

not be a referendum on the pandemic, but a contest between two different visions for the

future of Australia? Don’t you think the people of Australia will be judging the government in

large part on the job it’s done on managing the pandemic?

BURKE: Well, I’ll say two things on that Fran - first of all on the big calls, like the calls as to

whether or not we have wage subsidies in the form of JobKeeper, both sides of politics

have agreed on those big calls and more than that, wage subsidies we were campaigning

for and Mr Morrison was telling us they were very dangerous. So on those sorts of big calls,

people know that they are safe with Anthony Albanese and that on a whole lot of them, Mr

Morrison had to be dragged there. But when it comes to the workforce and what your

household budget is going to look like, people absolutely will be voting on that and the

election’s going to determine whether the workforce, business and the economy get thrown

a ladder or get thrown a rope.  And it’s either going to be a secure way out or it’s going to

be incredibly tough for people.

KELLY: Tony Burke, thank you very much for joining us.

BURKE: Thanks for having me on Fran.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: ADAM GARTRELL 0427 008 525

