

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2GB DRIVE WITH JIM WILSON

TUESDAY, 23 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Public school funding; Craig Kelly; Prime Minister’s performance; Covid-19

Vaccine.



JIM WILSON, HOST: Tanya Plibersek, welcome back to Drive.



TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINSTER FOR EDUCATION, SHADOW MINISTER FOR

WOMEN: Jim, it's great to be with you.



WILSON: You just heard from Natasha, Tanya. You can hear her frustration.



PLIBERSEK: Yeah, I can and I can really, really sympathise with it too. You know, when we

first started building public schools in New South Wales in the 1860s, those schools like Crown

Street, Bourke Street, Darlinghurst, they look like palaces. They were these beautiful buildings

built in what in those days were slum areas and what that said to the kids is: ‘Education is

important. We as adults want you to get a great education because it's going to be wonderful

for you and it's really good for our society and our economy as well.’



And you look at these schools now some of them have whole playgrounds covered in

demountables for years at a time, leaking roofs, leaking toilet seat. It's just not good enough.

It's not good enough for the kids, for the teachers, to the other staff who work in the school and

it sends the most terrible message about the importance of education in our society.



WILSON: Well, educating our children in a safe and comfortable environment should be a

priority. Where does the blame and responsibility lie here?



PLIBERSEK: I think there's enough blame to go around to be honest. So this is partly a

problem of the state government but it's also partly the fact that the federal government has

really walked away from fair funding based on need for all schools. Now, no one begrudges

the fact that a lot of private schools are getting a lot of funding from the federal government

and they've got beautiful buildings and facilities. I don't begrudge them that. What I say is

wouldn't it be great if public schools had the same opportunity, that we saw the same sort of

investment?



We saw a study just recently that said almost half of the money that's spent on school

buildings and maintenance is going to just 10 per cent of the schools and that a lot of those

schools have already got fantastic facilities, they're upgrading their already fantastic facilities. I

just want to spread the love around a bit so that our public schools get the same sort of

attention and investment. Because you know, I absolutely back a parent's right to choose any

school system for their kids, but there's no real choice for parents if they feel like the public

system has been let down by the state and federal governments and it's not good enough for

their kids.



WILSON: If you're a government tomorrow, you'll be Education Minister. What would you do

for schools like Concord High and for parents like Natasha and her kids?



PLIBERSEK: We have to work with state governments because they're running the systems

day-to-day, but we work with state governments to make sure that every school gets its fair

funding level. Right now under Coalition policy here in Canberra, by 2023, with the agreements

they've signed by 2023, almost all private schools will get at or above their fair funding level,

but virtually no public schools will ever get to that fair funding level. That's just not fair and we

have to not punish any, you know, catholic or independent schools, but actually make sure that

our public schools around Australia are getting the same sort of attention and investment.



WILSON: Okay, let's move on to your sparring partner in the halls of Parliament, Craig Kelly.

He's quit the Liberals and moved to the cross bench. What did you make of his announcement

earlier today?



PLIBERSEK: I think he's got his priorities all wrong. I mean, he's the fellow that has been

putting doubts in people's minds about the vaccine. He said that our Chief Medical Officers, he

accused them of crimes against humanity. He says that people who are trying to stop the use

of hydroxychloroquine - it's all part of an anti-Trump conspiracy. He said that masks don't help

with COVID, to stop the spread of COVID.



All this stuff is nuts. But at the same time, I grew up in his electorate, I know the area really

well. I’ll just give you one example. There are so many people who live in the Sutherland Shire

who work at the airport, who works for the airlines, say, by the old Qantas catering or

whatever. They've been so hard hit by COVID-19. They've got no money coming in the door.

They're looking at losing their family home. They're under so much financial pressure. Why

isn't he fighting for those people instead of getting caught up on this crazy online world, with

the Pete Evans light machines and all the other nonsense?



WILSON: Well, as I said, I mean he's now on the cross bench. Will he will he win the seat?

Your mother is still in the electorate, in the Hughes electorate. Do you think he'll win his seat as

an independent or would he go to the National Party?



PLIBERSEK: I don't know what'll happen over coming months. I mean, perhaps one of the

elements of this is that the Liberal Party - he's got people who tried to knock him off last time in

the Liberal Party. So this might be as a result that he thought he wasn't going to get to be the

Liberal Party candidate again. I don't really know the details of it.



But what I say is he should be focusing more on bread and butter issues for his constituents

who are struggling instead of getting caught up in this online conspiracy stuff.



WILSON: You've said it in recent days, you don't like or respect Scott Morrison, why not?



PLIBERSEK: I don't think it's any surprise that he hasn't invited me round for a curry any time

recently, but it's not really about how I feel about him. And I also said in that same interview

that I will work with anyone. I respect the office of the Prime Minister and what matters are the

issues.



We need to focus on jobs and employment in this country. We've got a recession that is

terrifying for people who are struggling to find work. We've got to make sure our whole focus is

on jobs for Australians. And it's really no secret how we go about doing that. We've got to be

investing in building things like the big infrastructure projects, but also small local things like

upgrading our schools. We've got to be making things. That means also getting down the price

of energy in this country so that we can be a manufacturing country and use our intelligence,

our ingenuity, our discoveries to make things in Australia again.



We've got to invest in caring for people, we've got people who desperately need home care,

older people who don't want to go into a nursing home and need a bit of help around the

house. We should be making sure that we're actually paying for that work to be done.



And when we've got good secure jobs with decent pay, people spend that money buying a cup

of coffee or taking the kids out for the pizza, creating jobs for other Australians. That's my

focus and that's what we should be doing.



WILSON: But surely in a challenging time and what we've gone through, surely the Prime

Minister deserves some credit for Australia's successful handling of the coronavirus?



PLIBERSEK: Australians deserve a lot of credit for the way-



WILSON: So does the Prime Minister. He's offered, I mean National Cabinet, the leadership

that he's that he's that he's shown. I think he deserves some credit.



PLIBERSEK: I think Australia's done really well by international standards, but I'd have to say

that the states - Liberal and Labor - have done the bulk of the heavy lifting. And the things that

the Federal Government's responsible for, like Aged Care: hundreds of people lost their lives.

The tracing app, which was supposed to help us open up the economy and get things moving,

that was complete and utter failure, and getting Australians home from overseas continues to

be an absolute disaster. We've still got plenty of people stuck overseas-



WISLON: He still got hundreds of thousands of Australians repatriated back home. I mean, he

hasn't exactly-



PLIBERSEK: And he's handed the responsibility for all of that quarantine that is a federal

government responsibility to the states and territories and then when anything goes wrong he

gives them a big kick in the teeth for it.



WILSON: Well he hasn't exactly had the cooperation of the Labor state governments of let's

say chairman Dan or Dan Andrews in Victoria and Anastasia Palaszczuk in Queensland

haven't exactly but come to the party as far as being united in this fight.



PLIBERSEK: They're doing all the heavy lifting and the Federal Government's had advice

from a former head of the Health Department, Jane Halton, saying they could they could have

a federal quarantine system. They've ignored that advice. The point is -



WILSON: New South Wales -



PLIBERSEK: I don't want to argue about all that -



WILSON: Well you say heavy lifting, New South Wales has done the heavy lifting. Queensland

and Victoria haven't done the heavy lifting. New South Wales has done the heavy lifting. Mark

McGowan hasn't done the heavy lifting. The Berejiklian Government's done the heavy lifting.



PLIBERSEK: Well wouldn't it be great if those states and territories could work cooperatively

on quarantine facilities outside our CBDs so they could have the confidence to take more

people. That's what I'd like to see. I want those Australians home. I don't think it's complicated,

if you've got an Australian passport.



This is the worst time in world history for many, many years. It's our responsibility to help those

people get home. And I know that you've got listeners right now because people ring my office

all the time, who have got a son or a daughter or a partner or a mum or a dad who's stuck

overseas that they are desperately worried about.



WISLON: Let's talk about vaccines. A historic day in the last couple of days. The Prime

Minister got his jab on Sunday, Anthony Albanese got his today. When will you be getting the

jab?



PLIBERSEK: I looked at one of those online calculators and I think I'm in the second half of



the year, but I am really looking forward to it. As soon as it's my turn I'll roll my sleeve up very

willingly because this is the way we open up our businesses. This is the way we open up our

state borders. This is the way we get things back to normal, as normal as they can be in this

extraordinary time.



WILSON: I'll say this, I think to see the Prime Minister and Albo today getting the jab, I think

shows that our leaders are putting faith in the system.



PLIBERSEK: Absolutely. I would happily do it tomorrow but I want to wait my turn because,

you know, we get in trouble either way, I don't want to jump the queue. But all I can say is 100

per cent, I will do it as soon as it's my turn.



Because I'm actually not worried about my own health. I'm fit as an Ox but I do worry, like I

said, my mum is in her late 80s, my mother-in-law's in her late 80s. We visit her in her

residential aged care facility. I would hate to think that if I got the virus even if I had no

symptoms or small symptoms that I passed it on to anyone who is much more vulnerable. That

would just be my worst worst nightmare. So I would have it for the people I love.



WILSON: Well said Tanya, thanks for the chat and we'll do that again all next Tuesday.



PLIBERSEK: Look forward to it Jim, thank you.



WILSON: That's Labor heavy hitter and our Tuesday political influencer Tanya Plibersek.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350



