



Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra





THE HON DAN TEHAN MP  Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment

ANGIE BELL MP  Member for Moncrieff



MEDIA RELEASE

11 February 2021

Boost for Australia’s business events sector

The Gold Coast is open for business as one of Australia’s premier convention destinations  and the Morrison Government is supporting local events through a $50 million program.

Pre-COVID, the Gold Coast’s business events sector contributed $570 million to the  economy, attracting event attendees from all over Australia and the world. Australia’s  business events industry is worth $36 billion to the Australian economy and supports around  230,000 Australian jobs.

The Morrison Government is supporting Australian jobs and businesses through the  $50 million Business Events Grants Program to help cover the costs of attending business  events, like conventions, trade shows and conferences.

The Government is also launching a new domestic advertising campaign to support the  business events sector by encouraging event planners and decision makers to host an event  in Australia this year.

Member for Moncrieff Angie Bell said the Business Events Grants Program was helping to  reinvigorate the Gold Coast business events market with 22 Gold Coast events in 2021  already listed as approved business events. Event attendees can apply for a grant through  the Government’s program to help cover out-of-pocket costs.

“The people who attend business events on the Gold Coast also book hotel rooms, they eat  at restaurants, buy coffees, visit shops and stay to enjoy our tourist attractions, so this  support is greatly welcome,” Ms Bell said.

“Every event on the Gold Coast means jobs for caterers, videographers, hospitality workers  and opportunities for local businesses. I strongly urge all business event organisers to have  their next convention on the beautiful Gold Coast at one of our world-class facilities and to  apply to be an approved business event. I also encourage Australian businesses to send  their staff to these in person events with the help of the Morrison Government’s $50 million  support package.”

Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment Dan Tehan said Australia’s strong economic and  health response to COVID-19 meant the domestic business events market was well-placed  to rebound in coming years.





Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

“Australia is a world-leading host and with more than 190 business events already on the  program’s approved list, there are plenty of opportunities for Australian businesses and  producers to take advantage of the top-class destinations, facilities and professionals in their  own backyard,” Mr Tehan said.

“We want a pipeline of business events across Australia in 2021 to build momentum and  generate jobs and opportunities in urban and regional centres. This program adds an  incentive for businesses to invest in the professional development, networking and travel  opportunities available through attending a business event.”

Chair of the Business Events Council of Australia Dr Vanessa Findlay said the grants  program initiative created motivation for businesses to get back to in person business  events.

“Prior to COVID-19, the value of business events to the Australian economy was significant  - and that’s not just the tangible $36 billion contribution to the Australian economy but also  the knowledge exchange, innovation and business to business relationships that deliver so  much value to the Australian and international community,” Dr Findlay said.

The Hire and Rental Industry Association’s (HRIA) annual industry event will be held at the  Gold Coast Convention and Exhibition Centre this year and is an approved event under the  Government’s Business Events Grants Program.

HRIA CEO James Oxenham said: “Each year, more than 1,500 delegates attend the HRIA’s  flagship event. This year even more than ever our members are looking forward to  connecting, and meeting together in person, not only for the convention and exhibition, but  also the networking opportunities and social events that make the convention such a  success year after year. With the convention finishing on a Thursday, many also plan a long  weekend, which should also be a great boost to the Gold Coast economy.”

The Pharmacy Guild of Australia is hosting the Australian Pharmacy Professional  Conference and Trade Exhibition 2021 (APP2021) event also at the Gold Coast Convention  Centre in May this year, and attendees will benefit from the $50 million grants program.

APP Conference Convenor Kos Sclavos AM said: “The $50 million Business Events Grants  Program is a great initiative by the Federal Government to encourage more delegates and  exhibitors to attend conferences in 2021. Our event is the largest pharmacy trade expo in  Australia and the grant funding provides the opportunity for even more businesses in our  industry to take part. Without events such as APP, businesses would not have the  opportunity to meet with existing and new target audiences in this important, face to face  setting.”

Gold Coast Convention and Exhibition Centre General Manager Adrienne Readings said:  “Business events make up on one of the highest yielding sectors in our visitor economy and  the Gold Coast is a major contributor, attracting nearly 50 per cent of all conferences,  meetings, incentives and exhibitions held in Queensland. Hundreds of thousands of  delegates visit the Gold Coast, filling our hotels, restaurants, tourist attractions, transport and  retail outlets. Business events not only attract economic benefit to the Gold Coast but also  leaders of industry and innovation, paving the way for future development.”

Eligible Australian businesses participating or exhibiting at an approved business event in  2021 can now apply for upfront grants to cover up to 50 per cent of their costs ($10,000 -  $250,000). For more information, go to https://www.business.gov.au/grants-and-programs/business-events-grants.





Authorised by The Hon Dan Tehan MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Parliament House, Canberra

For more information on the ‘Event Here This Year’ campaign, visit  https://businessevents.australia.com/en.



ENDS



Media contact:  Tehan: Lauren Fitzpatrick 02 6277 7420 | minister.tehan-media@dfat.gov.au  Bell: Kenneth King 0417 100 170

