

MATT THISTLETHWAITE MP

SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR FINANCIAL SERVICES  SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR THE REPUBLIC  MEMBER FOR KINGSFORD SMITH



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  SKY NEWS  THURSDAY, 21 JANUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Trump legacy; Biden inauguration; climate change; borders.

TOM CONNELL, HOST: Let's bring in our panel, Jason Falinski, Liberal MP,  and Matt Thistlethwaite from the Labor Party. Gentlemen, thanks both for your  time, a bit short of course a few things going on, but Jason what are your  thoughts, reflections on the Trump Presidency?

JASON FALINSKI, MEMBER FOR MACKELLAR: Uh, look it was without  doubt a very interesting Presidency, I think it started by asking a fundamental  question about what the world looks like in the 21st century, um, how we  reconcile people who have lost from globalisation and some of the reforms that  have been undertaken in the late part of the 20th century with those who won,  and I think his legacy will be that he asked those questions but didn't actually  come up with any answers in the end.

CONNELL: Matt, was Bill Shorten right when he called Donald Trump barking  mad?

MATT THISTLETHWAITE, SHADOW ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR  FINANCIAL SERVICES: Well I don't think the Trump Presidency was America's  finest hour, Tom, you only need look at the coronavirus pandemic and how  badly the Trump administration have handled that with 400,000 people a day  being infected, you know the problems that that's caused for their health  system, the inconsistency and the messages from the White House and  multilaterally as well as the Trump Presidency you saw a contraction in the role  of the United States throughout the world in things like the Paris Accord on  climate change, the World Health Organisation and it's pleasing to see that one  of the first acts of the Biden administration is to reverse some of those decisions

and we look forward to a more active multilateral United States and I think that  would be better for the world.

CONNELL: Already getting back into the Paris Climate Accord climate is going  to be a big priority from the Biden administration it's going to change the  equation you think the pressure around the world there will be more pressure,  Jason, won’t there on Australia to up its commitments not just talk about that?

FALINSKI: I think the big thing that we will need to do uh over the next four  years which we we're going to do anyway is more actively engage in the  international forums on this issue, there is no doubt that um what needs to  happen internationally is that all nations need to come to the table, that includes  us obviously, and there needs to be I think more pressure put on everyone um  including Australia but you know on everyone to deliver on their commitments  now we're pretty confident that we can deliver on the commitments we've made,  um if we need to up some of those commitments then we will ensure that they  are done with plans that back up our capacity to deliver on those commitments.  But it's yeah look absolutely um internationally everyone has to step up not just  Australia.

CONNELL: Of course not just Australia but that's the point isn't it, that the  Climate Accord in Paris we're not on track to achieve it by a long, long way you  said if we need to up it what is the need? Do we need to regardless, do we need  to once other countries go first do we need to once the US asks us to when,  does that need kick in?

FALINSKI: Well yeah that's a good question Tom I think um we're on track to  meet our Paris obligations and we will do that um and if we need to make  adjustments to ensure that we do that we will obviously make those policy  adjustments. But the fact remains that um if uh to Matt’s point there needs to be  more multilateral leadership on this and if the United States can provide that  that's an important clue, but there's no point I think at this point in time you know  it's glossing over the fact that Australia has met its commitments..

CONNELL: I'm going to jump in, sorry Jason, the NBN, not the best  advertisement for the NBN today I'm afraid where you're coming from, we'll see  if it improves. Matt Thistlethwaite, um what about the equation in your party and  those agitating against Labor being an ambitious party on climate change, will  this Biden administration perhaps silence that?

THISTLETHWAITE: Well I think there's no doubt that the Biden administration  is going to be more forceful when it comes to climate change with nations like  Australia and that's probably a good thing. If we're going to solve the problem of  climate change and ensure that we leave a safer more sustainable future for our

kids, Tom, we need to do it collectively no one nation can solve it on its own it's  got to be done multilaterally and unfortunately Australia and um over the last  four years the United States has been an outlier on this issue by its sluggish  performance in tackling climate change. And you only look at this government  getting rid of an emissions trading scheme, trying to shut down the Clean  Energy Finance Corporation, not investing in boosting renewables, all of these  messages that sends to that collective of the world that's trying to deal with this  issue is that Australia's not interested in taking stronger action on climate  change and I think right now with the Biden administration becoming part of  Paris again we're going to see a much more forceful administration with nations  like Australia and that's a good thing.

CONNELL: I wanted to ask you finally both about well you're in New South  Wales and the leader is Gladys Berejiklian there, there seem to be two very  different approaches on borders, her approach wait until there's a clear hot spot  somewhere, a really well established one before shutting the border and being  able to manage any cases that have come in which has happened in New  South Wales. And the rest of the country if there are a few cases sometimes,  one case, borders up straight away, no warning what approach do you think is  better for the country when you're balancing health and the economy, Matt?

THISTLETHWAITE: Well look all along Tom we've said that you need to take  the advice of the medical experts on this and it's true that the different Chief  Medical Officers in different states have different views about how you handle  that. But I think that that's the role for the Prime Minister and the National  Cabinet to really come together and try and work out a consistent approach  across those borders.

CONNELL: But that's the thing that the PM put up this national um definition of  a hot spot and the other states and territories are just ignoring, I mean they've  done that he's done that with health advice, he's done that with the CHOs but  it's been ignored, that's the reality isn't it?

THISTLETHWAITE: And some of those Chief Medical Officers found fault with  that definition and I'm not an epidemiologist, I'm not an expert in these things  and Labor's taken the approach of taking the advice of those experts on these  decisions. So we support the decisions that have been made by the various  states, obviously we want to see the economy open up as quickly as it possibly  can, but it needs to be done safely and we need to get to a vaccine as quickly  as we possibly can.

CONNELL: Very quickly Jason, I've just been looking at the picture it doesn't  appear to have improved, so um uh what have you got for us?



FALINSKI: I’m just saying yeah it's time to say it's been incredibly disappointing  and people haven't listened to the advice on this, they haven't listened to the  advice that played politics with the borders and you know we haven't done  what's been in the best interest of all Australians and that's been disappointing.

CONNELL: Jason, Matt, we'll leave it there, a bit truncated today with a bit  happening but appreciate your time, talk again soon.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: BEN LEESON 0404 648 275









