Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg







THE HON KEITH PITT MP

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia  Member for Hinkler

THE HON MICHELLE LANDRY MP  Assistant Minister for Northern Australia  Member for Capricornia

SUSAN MCDONALD  Senator for Queensland

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE  26 February 2021

BACKING JOBS AND EXPORTS IN NORTH QUEENSLAND

The Coalition Government is backing the expansion of a fertiliser company in north  Queensland to help grow its exports and create jobs for current and future generations.

Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia Keith Pitt said the Northern Australia  Infrastructure Facility (NAIF) has now approved a $71 million loan to Agripower Australia  Ltd, to upgrade infrastructure and improve access to its mine site near Greenvale, and its  processing plant near Charters Towers.

“This expansion would help Agripower deliver regional economic benefits, and is forecast to  support around 345 jobs during construction and 171 ongoing jobs when completed,”  Minister Pitt said.

“Agripower produces a range of natural silicon fertilisers for agriculture and horticulture  use, and believes its mine could remain productive for 200 years.

“That means the project has the potential to generate real jobs and opportunities for  generations to come, while injecting much-needed income into north Queensland as the  economy recovers from the COVID-19 pandemic.”

Assistant Minister for Northern Australia Michelle Landry said the expansion includes a  multi-user rail line, water pipeline and sealing of a public road to help improve access to  Agripower’s facilities.

“The Agripower expansion projects will deliver jobs to north Queensland and is forecast to  inject around $256 million into the region’s economy over 20 years,” Assistant Minister  Landry said.

Hon Keith Pitt MP, Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, Bundaberg



“Significantly, the investment decision means NAIF has now offered around $1 billion in  funding to 10 projects in Queensland’s north, ensuring northern Queensland remains a  great place to live, work and invest.”

Senator for Queensland Susan McDonald said new rules making it easier for NAIF to grant  loans would result in similar job creation and economic benefits across the North.

“Anyone looking to invest in Northern Australia will take heart from Agripower’s example  and I expect to see a surge in business activity powered by NAIF, especially after the new  NAIF guidelines are passed by Parliament,” she said.

“This sends the message that NAIF is helping make North Queensland an exciting place to  live and work, to raise families and do business.

Minister Pitt also introduced a series of NAIF reforms into Parliament this week, designed to  extend its mandate for five more years until mid-2026, and expanding the range of projects  eligible for NAIF support.

ENDS

Media contact:    Minister Pitt - Matt Dunstan 0411 535 072, Marnie Hobson 0407 090 230  Assistant Minister Landry - Tom Birkbeck 0418 908 159  Senator McDonald - 0421 059 187



















