

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

TODAY SHOW

FRIDAY, 15 JANUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Covid-19 vaccine; Australian Open; Racing pigeon from the US; Donald

Trump and Home Alone 2.



CHARLES CROUCHER, HOST: We're joined by Shadow Minister for Education and Training,

Tanya Plibersek, and journalist Chris Urquhart. Good morning to you both. Happy New Year to

the pair of you. Tanya, as a former Health Minister we'll begin with you. What advice would you

be looking at heading into this roll out, do we pause or forge ahead?



TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Our health

experts are some of the best in the world. And if our health experts tell us to take this vaccine,

I'll be queuing up to get it. What really concerns me about this though, is we've got a Prime

Minister who stuffed up our borders -hasn't been able to get Australians home -has stuffed up

the app - the tracing app - has stuffed up aged care most seriously of all - and it doesn't really

give people a lot of faith. Of course Australians should get the best vaccine in the world. We're

a country that's got a great health system, we invest a lot in it. Australians should be getting

the best vaccine in the world. And up till now it's been the state's doing the heavy lifting.



CROUCHER: Chris regardless of which side of this debate you're on, the message is that this

vaccine is safe and that's the most important part. Is that message getting through though do

you think?



CHRIS URQUHART, JOURNALIST: Well, I think the dangerous thing Charles is that the

waters get very muddy when we have these debates happening open in public. The term

'health experts' has been thrown around a lot this year. The opinion that matters in this is the

Therapeutic Goods Administration in Australia. They are responsible for approving the vaccine

and the nature of those decisions. That's who we should be listening to on this one, when they

say that whichever of the vaccines is safe to use and safe to roll out that's when we hit go. But

I think one of the big problems that we face here in Australia is looking overseas at other larger

countries - the United States, the United Kingdom who are out ahead of the game, who

bought their doses ahead of the game, it looks like here in Australia we backed the wrong

horse and we're a long way down the queue in terms of the buying of this. Maybe our cheque-book wasn't big enough but it means that we're watching people overseas get the jab and

we're still waiting.



CROUCHER: Okay. Well speaking of oversees the world's biggest tennis stars are flying into

Australia on charter planes. They're touching down in Melbourne overnight, more coming in

this morning. They'll go straight into quarantine amid concerns a potential hotel leak could put

the community at risk. Tanya, is it worth putting Melbourne at risk of a third wave given all that

they've been through in the last six months for a few games of tennis?



PLIBERSEK: Australians have been through so much, as you say, last year, and sacrificed so

much. Of course, we shouldn't be taking any risks. But I think if this tennis player is actually

healthy enough to come here and our health experts reassure us that he is then, you know,

perhaps it's fine. What I would say to tennis players is,  you are welcome in Australia. We're

happy to see you here, but you have to follow the rules. We've heard terrible stories of people

breaching hotel quarantine, in other circumstances. Don’t do it. Please follow the rules. The

reason Australia has done so well by international standards is because we've had tough rules,

Australians have carried the price of that. We cannot afford another wave and we know how

easy it is - one person infected goes into the community, we have another wave of Covid.



CROUCHER: Melburnians in particular know what is needed to stop and to crush in many

ways the virus. Chris, sport has provided such a sense of normality for us throughout these

last year. Premier Andrews worries that if we don't stage the Australian Open, we won't stage it

ever again. Are his priorities right?



URQUHART: Maybe his priority might be to make sure that it only ever happens in Melbourne,

perhaps it could have occurred in another part of Australia. Who knows on that? The one thing

I'll say about it, it'd be great if the Australian Open does go ahead. The world sees Australia on

the move and, you know, everyone is safe. But I'm sure there's a lot of people crossing their

fingers at the moment Charles, hoping that nothing goes wrong with this. And I'll tell you, there

are Australians overseas who have been trying to get back since March, only to be

disappointed by flight cancellations, hotel quarantine rules changing on them. For many of

them their visas have run out. They have become unemployed. They may have even had

babies and so forth in the meantime. And then they look at this, they see the red carpet rolling

out for tennis players. You can see where that old idea of Aussies getting a fair go - when you

look at the rich and famous - different rules applying for them. I can see why a lot of people

might be a bit disappointed with this.



CROUCHER: Yeah, and Tanya, you're someone who walks the corridors of power, we'd like to

sign you on as an ambassador for our new Today campaign, #savethepigeon because we're

letting players fly in. A racing pigeon that flew 13,000 kilometres from Alabama to Melbourne is

now facing euthanasia because of it being declared a biosecurity threat. Any official response

from the Opposition yet?



PLIBERSEK: I think we have to take our quarantine and biosecurity seriously. There's a

reason that we've got such a strong farming and agriculture sector. But honestly if Johnny

Depp's dogs can go home on a charter jet I think we can do something better than just

euthanise the pigeon.



CROUCHER: Be careful, you'll be branded soft on pigeons soon.



URQUHART: Put it in a Melbourne hotel for two weeks and give it a wildcard into the Open,

you never know? What's it forearm like?



CROUCHER: Good luck to the person cleaning that hotel room. And it's not just the Oval

Office - we’ll finish with President Trump's critics are trying to get him removed from other

things as well. Home Alone star Macaulay Culkin joining a growing chorus of fans calling for

him to be digitally removed from "Home Alone 2: Lost in New York". Tanya, can we erase him?



PLIBERSEK: I really don't think we wipe out our history, I think we try and learn from it. But I



tell you who I'd like to see more of on our screens and that's Arnold Schwarzenegger. I was

watching his fantastic response video after the storming of the Capitol. He's a Republican, he's

in the same party as Donald Trump. But he did a really good strong defence of American

democracy because he loves it and respects it. So maybe less Donald, a lot more Arnie.



CROUCHER: Yeah it would be a different film with Arnie in it Chris, wouldn't it?



URQUHART: It absolutely would be. And you know, Tanya's right, if people do have an

opportunity to look that up from earlier in the week, it was fantastic from him. I agree we don't

want to erase him from history. And look, in terms of him going ahead, I don't know what a

royalty cheque is like for three seconds in Home Alone 2, but it might be his only form of

income in the years ahead, the state of some of his businesses leaving office. So it may be all

he’s got to cling to. But if we're going to erase him and change him for someone else, maybe

Dr Anthony Fauci, someone like that just to give him a reminder of where he left the nation.



CROUCHER: Give me a reminder and tell him to put on a mask. There is also talk of putting

Macaulay Culkin in the modern day back in, it's all getting a bit meta, isn't it?



URQUHART: Far too much. It's far too much beyond me but I'll stick around, maybe wait for

Home Alone 3.



CROUCHER: And we look forward to that at some stage in the near future. Everything's old

becoming new again so it's not far away. Tanya, Chris, we appreciate your time this morning.

Always good to have you on and look forward to hearing from you again next week when Karl

and Ali are back.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.









