

T h e  H o n . D a v i d  L i t t l e p r o u d  M P

M i n i s t e r  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  D r o u g h t  a n d  E m e r g e n c y

M a n a g e m e n t

D e p u t y  L e a d e r  o f  t h e  N a t i o n a l s











T R A N S C R I P T

T R A N S C R I P T



Tuesday, 9th March 2021

Minister Littleproud iv ABC Radio Goulburn Murray

SANDRA MOON: Well, the green is well and truly returning but how are people coping up  in those areas and how is recovery progressing? The Federal Minister for Agriculture,  Drought and Emergency Management and Deputy Leader of the Nationals, David  Littleproud, is in Tangambalanga this morning and is with you now. Good morning.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Good morning, thanks for having me.

SANDRA MOON: What is your mission for today? Where are you heading to and why?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: It's simply to come and listen and to understand how the  recovery's gone. Obviously, we're trying to get across as much country as we can and  revisiting places that I came 12 months ago, and hearing the pain and the anguish and  also the hope of recovery, and one of those places is Cudgewa. I remember sitting there  with the publican and they weren't big- they weren't big demands or needs, they were  actually quite reasonable ones and they were somewhat symbolic. You know, it was about  a new tennis court, fixing the playground in the park and they were just looking at things  that would bring the community together. So, we want to make sure that the money - the  Australian taxpayers' money that we're using is hitting the ground, it's working and if it isn't,  we'll adjust. But the only way to do that is to get out of Canberra, to get out here and listen  to the real people and understand that the healing process is different for each and every  one of us. Some can get through it quicker than others. We just need to persevere with  and work with and make sure they're listened to. So, we try to go as quickly as we can with  recovery, but not leave anyone behind and that's probably been the balancing act for the  national Bushfire Recovery Agency and ourselves, along with state governments have  tried to make sure we got right. And not saying we've got it right all the way along, but  we're learning and trying to understand and just listening.

SANDRA MOON: David Littleproud, we've had people contact us on this station who have  been concerned with the amount of red tape involved with trying to get this recovery  happening. What are you hearing on the ground?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, and look, this is - whether it's bushfires or whether it's flood  or whether it's drought, the red tape is a frustration and we get that. The challenge we've  got is that we're using Australian taxpayer's money. So, we have to have some  accountability measure, but how do we do that better? I think is one of the things I'm also  interested in understanding. We're trying to do that with the with the states as well. So, we  work in partnership with the state governments and what we're trying to do is harmonise a  lot of that paperwork, get rid of the duplication, simplify it, but have that accountability

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T



measure to the Australian taxpayer's. Because the Australian taxpayer is passionate about  making sure the money gets out, but they don't want it to be abused and unfortunately in  society, there's always someone that tries to cut a corner. Bu, we got to get that balance  right and I think that's what [indistinct] task the Bushfire Recovery Agency, to try and  streamline those processes and this is where it's important to sit and get specific. So, you  know on particular program, if there's paperwork there that just really doesn't make sense,  well, that's the opportunity for us to work with the state governments and streamlining that  between us and there's been some really good cooperation between state and federal  governments. Particularly since the bush fires and the Royal Commission and that's what  we want to continue to work, to make sure we just- we just support people and stay out of  their lives and let them recover.

SANDRA MOON: And you are or you have done, I'm not sure which it is, have met up with  some people who really have gone above and beyond - just locals who have thought all  right, I need to get stuck in and start making something happen here? Yeah, and look,  that's part of today will be to listen to those and I also met with the mayors and they  showed extraordinary leadership in trying times for our communities and we're lucky that  people have the courage to put their hand up to lead their communities and local  government has a very important role in that. So, not only local governments but also local  community members today. Just trying to say thank you to them and as I say, everyone's  affected differently, people heal at different speeds and- but, you need people in the  community stand up. Because, ultimately, what we said from the start is we didn't want this  to be a Canberra-led recovery. It had to be a locally-led recovery and the best thing to do,  the best way to do that was to just, to put an environment around those people that were  prepared to stand up that we're ready to lead their communities to come forward and tell  us what they needed. And so, I think, you know, out of all this disaster, all this misery, the  best thing we can do is to continue to learn so, that -unfortunately, there probably will be  another time where we'll face a natural disaster. We're better prepared to lead our  communities out of this and I think - I have to say those men and women that stood up, put  their hand up, are great Australians. They're ordinary Australians doing extraordinary  things.

SANDRA MOON: Minister, On Friday, you launched a roadmap for the Agricultural  Workforce, along with the release of the National Agricultural Workforce Strategy Advisory  Committee report. What can you tell us about that?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah, this is a pathway for us to look at long-term sustainability of  agricultural workforce, to actually invest in skills, not- particularly of our fellow Australians  and young Australians, in incentivising and encouraging them to get into Agriculture and  understanding there's a pathway to a career. And living in Regional Australia, also protec-  in skills and protecting those foreign workers that come in and making sure we get the  balance right and there's some regulatory work that we're doing and the Attorney General  will be bringing legislation in to make sure that the regulation of those organisations, those  labour hire companies is tightened to protect those workers. But looking at longer term  solutions, you've got to understand the world's changed into COVID-19 with respect to  labour. We had around 160,000 working holidaymakers which are backpackers. They're  down to around 30,000, 40,000 and before that, around 30 to 40 per cent of those were  working in ag. We had about 8000 Pacific and seasonal workers. So, we've lost the  working holidaymaker, the backpacker. They're probably a couple years away. So, we've  got a real short fall there and so, what we'll be making some announcements on very soon  is around how do we look to Pivot to the Pacific and other Asian nations as COVID starts  to retract and we get it under control quickly, to bring those people in? And that's the

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T



challenge that we're trying to work with the states because they have to give the health  stamp, in terms of the health protocols and we're looking at different ways to do that. But it  has to be a long-term sustainable model that we're looking at and the main thing is we  want Australians to take this work up first and foremost. But, if we can't, we can't leave  farmers waiting. They don't have the luxury to sit and wait for someone to come and pick  their crop. When it's ripe, it has to get from the paddock to your plate and farmers need  that support. And so, this is about wide ranging from domestic to international labour  supplies. How do we do it responsibly? How do we protect those workers and make sure  that we get the best food fibre off our paddocks and into the marketplace as quickly as we  can?

SANDRA MOON: Deputy Leader of the Nationals, David Littleproud, with you on ABC  Goulburn-Murray and a message has come through as we would probably could have  predicted that it would. Michael asks you the question, Minister, that the Nationals MP,  Barnaby Joyce, has backed calls for an independent inquiry into rape allegations against  Christian Porter. Would you like to see an inquiry take place?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Well, there's still processes to take place and there is the  likelihood, the possibility of an inquest in South Australia. So, we need to let those  processes run its course. I think what we've got to do is look at this through the lens of two  systems; one, the legal system and making sure that we respect that as the rule of law and  I think there's probably things within that rule of law that can prove to incentivise women to  come forward. I think there's some barriers within the legal the system, particularly around  giving evidence in court. That, you know, if they've gone through a traumatic experience,  such as a rape, that they've sometimes been reluctant to come forward because it's just  too traumatic. So, we need to look at the legal system and how we can improve that but  our legal system should be the process in which protects our society and has protected  our society. But we shouldn't be afraid to look at the intricacies within that process, to  make sure we put an environment around women to say it's okay to come forward. The  process shouldn't be traumatic and is probably too traumatic at the moment and I think that  the stats show that around 87 per cent of women don't come forward, because of the  trauma that was within the legal system. So, we should protect the legal system. But we  shouldn't be afraid to change the legal system to encourage and to put out- put the  environment around women knowing that it's okay to come forward and that we're going to  minimise that trauma of reliving it through the court process. You know, having to give  evidence in front of your accuser and simple things like that that I think we need to listen to  women in those that have gone through this. We really need to [indistinct] how do we  improve the process. But, the rule of law in this country has kept us safe. It has kept the  order and we should always respect that. So, I think once you start deviating from that, you  start going down a slippery slope in society whereby individuals outside that process  become judge, jury and executioner and it doesn't matter who you are in Australian  Society, that's a place we shouldn't get too, but we can do better and our legal system  should be better, to support women in coming forward and making the process less  traumatic.

SANDRA MOON: Minister David Littleproud I believe that a little later on today, you'll be  meeting up with one of our great friends on this program, Jamie Wolf, from Fencing For  Fires and doing some fencing as well?

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Yeah. Look, I haven't done some fencing since I was a kid at the  fencing centre in Western Queensland, and Dad probably won't be proud of me today. My  straining skills have probably slipped over the last 20 years and we were pretty rough and

TRANSCRIPT



T R A N S C R I P T



ready, I suppose. We used to cocky gates rather than swinging gate. So, Western  Queensland weren't the greatest fencers, but I'll give it a crack. But it is great, I mean,  these are the men and women that just make our country what it is. You know, the  government can give money, but if you don't have people in the community to put their  hand up and come forward and lead through trying times then, you know, we don't have  this great country called Australia and we should be fierce custodians. Bu, we should be  damn proud of people like this that are prepared to come forward and do something for the  community. And you know, in the trying times, it just shows what sort of nation we are and  I think when we do have these trying times, it's always good to reflect back on what  Australia actually is and you know, when we come to the fore and lead our country, just  ordinary Australians doing great things.

SANDRA MOON: Minister, David Littleproud, thank you for your time this morning.

DAVID LITTLEPROUD: Thanks for having me. It's great to be back in Vic.

Media contact  0455 448 985

