

For immediate release - 28 January 2021

MEDIA RELEASE

Tourist operators need both JobKeeper &  JobMaker   FEDERAL MP George Christensen is continuing his push for not only an extension to the  JobKeeper program for struggling tourism operators but greater access to the Federal  Government’s JobMaker program so tourist operators can hire new employees to further  rebuild their industry.

Mr Christensen wrote to the Treasurer two weeks ago outlining the measures he was  advocating for Whitsunday tourism operators.

“I’ve been in regular contact with tourism businesses and their representative groups about the  devastating effects of border closures, both international and domestic, due to the COVID-19  pandemic,” Mr Christensen said.

“The reality is that many tourism businesses are still struggling financially, and the latest closure  to NSW just before Christmas was devastating for them.

“I wrote to the Treasurer two weeks ago to ask for two things; a targeted extension of the  JobKeeper program for businesses who are still experiencing a 30% downturn or more, and for  tourism businesses who have workers on JobKeeper to also have access to JobMaker (the  incentive to hire young jobseekers aged 16-35) so they can hire new employees when the  industry starts to recover.

“Currently a business cannot apply for JobMaker while they are on JobKeeper.

“The reality is that many workers in the Whitsundays have moved on.

“Tourism operators not only need to hang on to the experienced workers they have, but they  also want to train up the workers that will be needed if they are to fully recover.”

Mr Christensen has earlier stated that governments who close borders have an obligation to  compensate affected businesses.

“If the State Labor Government want to play ‘open, shut them’ on borders they should  compensate the businesses who are being destroyed by their actions,” he said.

“The latest state border closure led to millions and millions of dollars in losses for businesses in  the Whitsundays.

“That’s no projection, but reality as tourists were forced to cancel their holidays.

“It’s a bit rich now for the Premier to present herself as some sort of ‘saviour of tourism’ when  she’s been sticking a knife into it several times over.

“If state governments think they’re acting for the greater good, quite frankly they’ve got to pay  for the greater good too.”

ENDS

Media contact: Lynnis Bonanno | 0408 773 207 | Lynnis.bonanno@aph.gov.au

