

MARK BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING

MEMBER FOR HINDMARSH





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

ADELAIDE

MONDAY, 12 APRIL 2021



SUBJECTS: Vaccine rollout failures; Scott Morrison giving up on vaccine targets;

vaccine rollout failures in disability facilities; Full Cycle Docking.



MARK BUTLER MP, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING: This morning we've

learned that around the world now 780 million doses of COVID-19 vaccines have been

delivered. Remarkably in America, we learned that there was a record 4.6 million doses put

into people's arms in the United States on one day on Saturday. America now is up to about

187 million doses. Here in Australia were at 1 million. In the United Kingdom they’ve reached a

figure of 39 million doses. Here in Australia were at 1 million. Now in the United Kingdom more

than 60 per cent of adults in that community have been vaccinated with at least one dose and

they’ll be completing the second doses very soon. For Scott Morrison, a successful effective

rollout of the vaccine for COVID-19 is his most important job this year, the health of the

Australian community depends upon it and the strength of our economic recovery is

inextricably linked to it. We remember that Scott Morrison, up until a couple of weeks ago,

committed that the vaccine rollout with both doses will be completed by the end of October. He

then changed that commitment to a commitment that at least the first dose would be given to

all consenting adults by the end of October. Yesterday morning, Dan Tehan on behalf of the

Government said the commitment was now to give the first dose, at least, by the end of this

year 2021. And remarkably, last night, the Prime Minister Scott Morrison on Facebook of all

places dropped even that latest commitment, and he said in his statement that he has no plans

to set any new targets for the vaccine rollout. That is completely unacceptable. Just because

the Prime Minister has failed on every single promise he has made around the vaccine rollout

does not excuse him from having an obligation to set out a very clear alternative vaccine

rollout strategy with clear timelines and clear targets.



Can I also talk about phase 1a of the vaccine rollout. These are Australia's most vulnerable

members of our community living in residential disability and aged care settings. This phase

was supposed to be completed by the end of week six, which was the Easter weekend, the

week before last. We know from the latest figures released by the Government, is less than

one in five residential aged care settings have been fully vaccinated. Some 80 per cent of

people living in residential aged care are still not fully vaccinated. The Prime Minister did not

complete his promise to have that completed by Easter. The Prime Minister also promised that

aged care workers, those who have been working on the front line right through this pandemic

would be vaccinated within their workplaces by Easter and they've been told essentially they're

on their own they need to find their own vaccinations.



But most scandalously, we learnt this morning that those Australians living in residential

disability settings have been left completely abandoned. Next to none of those disability

facilitates have received their vaccinations. Aruma is just one of those facilities with about 1500

Australians living in their residential facilities throughout Australia. Not a single dose of the

vaccine has been delivered there. It was supposed to be completed by Easter. Australians

living with a disability are the forgotten Australians in this vaccine rollout. Australians living with

a disability and their carers, understandably, will be feeling completely abandoned by Scott

Morrison today.



JOURNALIST: Experts are suggesting it could take up to two years to vaccinate the entire

population. Is that actually a possibility?



BUTLER: This is why the Prime Minister needs to be straight with Australians. He needs to be

very clear what the new targets are. The rest of the world is racing way ahead of Australia and

we're going be left behind as the economic recovery gathers strength around the world. The

rest of the world is starting to deal with mutations and variants of the virus with booster shots

and we're still left far too early in our rollout.



JOURNALIST: Why is a target so important when those targets may change because of

overseas practice?



BUTLER: Targets may well change and then the Prime Minister needs to come clean with

Australians to that what the change is and what the reasons for those changes are. You can't

have a plan without targets though. It's simply not a plan. Australians need to know how this is

progressing. They need to have economic confidence that getting their businesses up and

running, getting jobs going again, being able to travel first of all within Australia and then

ultimately overseas as well. To make those plans with confidence, to have the economic

recovery proceed with confidence we need a clear plan with timelines and targets.



JOURNALIST: Are Australians losing confidence in the rollout because of this chopping and

changing?



BUTLER: This operation the Government seems to be rollout out on the run. GPs learning

what their new arrangements are by watching media, with Australians being told through night

time press conferences, what the new arrangements are, and a plan that has no timelines and

no targets is going to undermine confidence in the rollout and I think that's a terrible thing for

Australians, for all of our interests. The national Government needs to have a plan in place that

supports confidence.



JOURNALIST: On vaccinations in the disability sector, the Government is releasing daily

figures on how many people are vaccinated in the aged care sector, why aren't they doing it for

the disability sector? Do you think it should be done?



BUTLER: A cynic would suggest that the reason why they're not releasing figures in the

disability sector is because those figures are appallingly low. This sector was supposed to be

fully vaccinated by Easter. It is very clear that the vaccination numbers are appallingly low.

These are the forgotten Australians in Scott Morrison’s vaccine strategy. They understandably

feel completely abandoned by Scott Morrison.



JOURNALIST: Where has it all gone wrong?



BUTLER: I think the Government has been far too flatfooted. We didn’t have enough vaccine

options on the table. We know that they were late to the table in finalising the deals that they

have finalised. In the UK and the US they finalised their deals with Pfizer in July last year, it

took until November for Scott Morrison to finalise Australia's contracts in spite of his promise

that Australians were “at the front of the queue”. We have said, in Labor, for months and

months that the Government should have had more vaccine options on the table so that we

had backups in the event that these issues, like we’ve seen with AstraZeneca. For the vaccine

doses we do have we have a chaotic rollout  with GPs learning through the media what their

arrangements will be. Still three quarters of GP practices that are participating in the vaccine

rollout are only getting the minimum amount of doses. You can’t schedule appointments if

you’re only getting the minimum amount of doses per week.



JOURNALIST: What is your best guess, I know it's hard, but when would all Australians be

offered their first vaccine?



BUTLER: It seems very clear that if things don't change very quickly we are going to be rolling

into 2022 without Australia being fully vaccinated. That will be a real challenge for the health of

our population and a real dampener on our economic recovery. The Prime Minister needs to

get this rollout back on track and he needs to come clean with Australians what the new

timelines and the new commitments for his Government are.



JOURNALIST: As we head into winter should the Government be prioritising vaccinations in

colder parts of the country?



BUTLER: I think the reason why the most vulnerable Australians and frontline workers were

prioritized under the vaccine rollout strategy was to ensure that they were fully vaccinated

before we came to winter. That's why we supported that vaccine rollout. We took on good faith

a commitment from the Prime Minister that those most vulnerable Australians have been

vaccinated by Easter. We really need to know from the Government, what are they going to do

to get this thing back on track, particularly to ensure that those most vulnerable Australians

living in residential aged care, residential disability settings are fully vaccinated by the time we

get to winter. We saw only too tragically last year what happens when the virus gets into those

residential settings. We need to make sure that we're fully protected for that eventuality this

year.



JOURNALIST: Would you be surprised to hear that some residents in aged care homes

haven't even been offered their first dose or any vaccine at all?





BUTLER: I think the Prime Minister has admitted that it's extraordinary given the commitment

to complete both doses by Easter that there are residential aged care facilities that haven't

even been offered their first dose. We know that there are many, many disability facilities that

haven't been offered their first dose yet. Aruma pretty bravely told their story this morning and

was told simply to be patient. Well, we need some more detail than some sort of glib phrase

about being patient. These organisations have responsibility for some of the most vulnerable

members of the Australian community and they were promised by the Prime Minister that their

residents would be fully vaccinated well before now.



JOURNALIST: Just on another matter, as a Federal South Australian MP, are you wanting to

see an announcement on where the Full Cycle Docking maintenance jobs are going to be

based?



BUTLER: I’ve said very consistently, I think those jobs should remain in South Australia.

These are highly specialized jobs. The closest possibility you have to building a submarine

from scratch is the Full Cycle Docking arrangement and South Australia's workers have been

delivering that service to the Australian people for decades now. There is no reason to shift

it.  Worst of all those 700 workers, their families, and many other hundreds of jobs that depend

upon that work in South Australia have been left in the lurch by the Prime Minister. He's come

to Adelaide on a number of occasions and said there's no rush to make this decision. Well,

there is a rush, hundreds of families, their livelihoods, their future depend on having some

clarity from the Prime Minister. So I urge the Prime Minister make this decision to confirm that

these jobs will stay in South Australia.



JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister's decision was going to before the end of last year. Is it

better for South Australia that a decision wasn’t made last year?



BUTLER: I hope it means, more likely than not, that the work will remain here in South

Australia. It should remain here in South Australia. The uncertainty is plaguing the lives of

hundreds of South Australian families, and he owes it to them to end the uncertainty and

confirm that that work will stay here in Adelaide. Thanks everyone.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LUCY CARUSO 0408 803 428

