

TRANSCRIPT  Senator James Paterson

Chair, Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security  Liberal Senator for Victoria



Monday 22 February 2021

Sky News: NewsDay

Subjects: Vaccine rollout, JobMaker, Brittany Higgins



Tom Connell: Let's get to my panel for more on this Labor MP Kimberley Kitching from the  Liberal Party, James Paterson, thanks both for your time. Just the story there in the US, a  reminder of how different the situation is there compared to here for all the sort of carping  Labor's done on the sidelines. The country's in a good position.

Senator Kimberley Kitching: It is in a good position andiIt's good to see the roll out  happening. And I think we want Australians to have every confidence in this vaccine,  which they should. And of course, this vaccine, the Pfizer vaccine is rolling out in Israel.  They are just about at 50 per cent of their population being vaccinated. You know, it's a  pretty good test case for Australia to look at Israel to see what they're doing with the Pfizer  vaccine. I do think it is a little concerning, though, Tom, when there are thousands of GP's  wanting to be a part of the accreditation, you know, wanting to get accreditation being part  of the rollout. And they haven't been they haven't really been answered. They haven't  they're not in the system yet. Hopefully that won't impact the rollout.

Connell: Well, you know, it is a rollout that gets bigger, 80,000 in the first week. It will end  up at 800.

Kitching: So so we better get some more GPs.

Connell: So these things take time. What did you make of the PM? So initially he wasn't  going to be part of it and then he is and the line going out it's about confidence. Jacinda  Ardern says let others in first. Was it a good move from him?

Kitching: Look, I think that look, I think there are people obviously in Australia and we saw  around the country on Saturday anti vaccination protests. I think that's a shame. I don't I  think we should have absolute confidence in the TGA. And I actually watched your  colleague Andrew Clennell's interview with Professor John Skerrett, who is obviously from  that interview you can just tell he's a highly trustworthy person and I think we're lucky in  this country. But being lucky doesn't mean you should be indulgent. And I think that those  anti vaxxers should really take a good, hard long look at themselves and be a part of the  programme. The only way out of us, out of this pandemic.



Connell: So was the PM getting in line first helpful in that regard.

Kitching: Well, I think for those anti vaxxers who are both on the far left and the far right of  politics, maybe seeing some politicians going first might be a good, good idea. The leader  of the Labor Party is, I understand, having a vaccine later, vaccination later in the week, I  think.

Connell: Yeah, well there you go. It will be bipartisan by that point.

Kitching: Yeah.

Connell: It's obviously a big moment for the country, but it's only the first step. This needs  to be managed well for the government to get any credit for this. And if it's not managed  well, there'll be some responsibility, won't there?

Senator James Paterson: Tom, this is going to be one of the most complex logistical  exercises that the Australian government has ever undertaken in partnership with state  governments and pharmaceutical companies who are providing this vaccine. This is  something that we've never done before, trying to vaccinate essentially the entire  population - certainly make it available to the entire population - and in very difficult  circumstances. You'd know with the Pfizer vaccine, the storage requirements to keep it  stable are incredibly complex. So it's a massive undertaking. But this has been something  we've been thinking about for many months now. It's been carefully planned and I've got  great confidence in the public health team that will be leading the charge.

Connell: There's been a lot of talk about whether the federal government, you know,  different elements, likes to take credit for some things and on hotel quarantine says it's up  to the states. Do you accept this is a government that will be rolled out with the states, a  programme we all like with the states, but the federal government, whether it goes poorly  or goes well, will share a big part of whatever is to be handed out after that.

Paterson: We don't shy away from that at all, Tom. We are absolutely leading this  process. We're doing it cooperatively with shared responsibility, obviously, with all of our  partners in the industry and the state government. But we're leading the way. It's why the  prime minister took the step to get the first vaccine on the weekend, and you've seen a lot  of the state premiers stepping up, getting vaccinated today, I think it's a really good step.

Connell: So it's just starting, obviously. And we've got we think hopefully within only a few  short weeks, we'll have aged care workers and hotel quarantine workers vaccinated. Do  we all agree here? We won't see states chucking up the borders, lock downs or if we do  see it, perhaps you'll be allowed to criticise your Labor premiers if that happens.



Kitching: Oh, We never do that. But I think, you know, James and I have both been in  Melbourne. And, you know, it's obviously was a pretty hard, long road last year. And I think  obviously you can see in the UK, you know, there's been real consequences there as well.  And they are looking at data, not dates. I think Prime Minister Boris Johnson said so, you  know, we are pretty it's been pretty good here. We'll see how it goes, how the rollout goes.  I hope I hope the rollout goes really well.

Connell: That'll be the interesting test, won't it? We get a few cases down the track. We've  become a bit obsessed with zero, and that's great. But too focused on it, perhaps.



Paterson: It's become a bit of a festival, particularly on social media platforms like Twitter,  where journalists and others engage in this doughnut day excitement that I think actually is  setting us up for failure. That can't be the test going forward unless you want Australia's  borders with the world to be closed forever, unless you want our state borders to be closed  at short notice and all the shocking ramifications that has for people on a personal level as  well as for their their businesses and their economic livelihood. So we have to get past that  and say that once the vaccine is widely available to people that we're going to have to  have a different risk tolerance because the threat will be much less severe to people's  health.

Connell: Maybe it's not good for our waistlines either all this talk of doughnuts, let's talk  about job maker. So ABC obtaining information from the Treasury's own examples of this  scheme. It gives incentives for workers to hire people. But according to the Treasury's own

examples, it could be used to sack an older worker and hire up to three younger people to  replace them. And the business would actually be better off. That's a worrying incentive, is  it not?

Paterson: Tom, if any business did that, they would be in direct contravention of the Fair  Work Act. You cannot discriminate against a worker based on their age.

Connell: How would you prove the age?

Paterson: And if you sacked them because of their age then that would be unlawful. Well,  this is something I think the government will take a very close look at. And as we have with  all the other stimulus measures, the ATO and other agencies of government are going to  be very closely looking at the way businesses behave, whether it's around JobKeeper or  other programs, to make sure that it is used for the intended purpose. And if people are  playing these sorts of games, I think it will be fairly obvious, Tom. If you see a business  sack an older worker and hire three young workers to do similar work, it's not going to be  all that difficult to go back through the audit trail and demonstrate what they've done.

Connell: But you could say, hey, this permanent job is no longer available. We need  flexibility here we've got three casuals we're going to employ instead. That wouldn't would  that fall foul of the legislation?

Paterson: Well, the federal government takes a very dim view of that kind of behaviour.

Connell: But dim view is fine but would it fall foul of legislation?

Paterson: Yes, it would. I mean, it is illegal to discriminate against a worker on the basis of  their age. That is unlawful workplace discrimination and they shouldn't do it.

Connell: Your views on that?

Kitching: Well, I think that, you know, we should this pandemic has been terrible. What we  should be doing is using it to come out the other end with better jobs, more secure jobs.  This looks to us to labor as if this is going to create more casual and more casualised  workforce. That is not what anyone wants. And I don't think the government should want it  either. And as for taking a dim view, well, we can all take a dim view about companies that,  you know, made record profits during coronavirus and then kept all of the job keeper  money. And I think that's there's been a dim view taken about that. But I think what we do

need to do with JobMaker, remember, the treasurer promised that this would support  450,000 jobs. It's a four billion dollar package. Treasury said at last estimates late last year  that, in fact, it would create about a tenth of that, about 45,000, 45,000 jobs. So what we  you know, we are going to look at this and we will you know, this is a stimulus package  that looks like it's failed on the government's own figures.

Connell: What was the solution in hindsight, then, to the issue of people, companies that  ended up making big profit on JobKeeper and then what are you saying should have  happened?

Kitching: I think across the parliament there is a view that those companies should repay  that jobKeeper and that -.

Connell: But wouldn't the issue. Right.

Kitching: - And that should have been apart of the stimulus

Connell: I mean, wouldn't the issue be if you put a provision in there saying, by the way, if  you end up going really well, we're going to claw back money that actually hurts the  companies?

Kitching: If you're making a record profit, you obviously didn't need job keeper, so we are  all -.



Connell: You didn't know at the time, ultimately -

Kitching: Yeah. So they should repay it.

Connell: It's easy in hindsight, right?

Kitching: And some companies have repaid it. Others have been far more stubborn.

Connell: All right.

Kitching: But I do feel can I just say I do feel for Josh Frydenberg having to go to his  Kooyong division, Liberal Party branch meetings to explain spending four billion dollars  when it hasn't been spent very well.

Connell: I'm sure you feel greatly for him. I just want to finish finally on Brittany Higgins,  just one aspect of this. Is it no longer good enough to have this sort of one step removed  process, political offices, as prime minister's office offices seemingly always now have

someone that gets told things. And if it's too sensitive for the prime minister, as in it will  hurt his or her career they don't tell them. Is that sort of, you know, approach this arm's  length this fixer approach. Should that no longer be the case?

Paterson: Tom, this is obviously been a very shocking issue for everyone that works in the  building. And the thing about Ms. Higgins story that most alarmed me was the fact that she  said she felt that if she had pursued this criminally with charges that it would have been

detrimental for her career. I mean, every Australian is entitled to ensure that if a crime is  committed against them, that the punishment follows for the perpetrator of that and that's a  profoundly disturbing thing that she felt that. So I think that's one of the key lessons out of  this, that we as employers, as political bosses have to make sure our staff understand if

they want to pursue their rights in the criminal justice system, they'll be supported every  step of the way. And there'll be absolutely no ramifications for them professionally,  politically or in any other way.

Connell: But if the buck were to stop with the prime minister in that case, it's more likely  that would be escalated, would it not? You understand - what's your view on that?

Paterson: I do understand your point and look we've got, we've got twin issues here that  are slightly conflicting. One is to respect the privacy and the agency of potential victims.  We can't trample on that. And the last thing I think a lot of people in this circumstance  would want is gossip about them in the building that's outside their control. But also when  the law is broken, we have a real obligation for the criminal justice system to do what it  needs to do.

Connell: Just briefly, and this can apply to both sides, opposition offices a lot bigger than  they used to be with fixers, if you like. Is that a cultural issue?

Kitching: I think that every single workplace in Australia should be safe. The ABS did a  study on sexual assault, including in domestic violence situations. But every and the  figures from that are shocking. I think every workplace should be safe, including in all  offices in this building. There should be no way that someone feels that they can't follow,  can't pursue their rights.

Connell: All right. We're going have to leave it there, senators. Thank you. Talk again  soon.

ENDS



