SENATOR THE HON MARISE PAYNE Acting Minister for Defence Minister for Foreign Affairs Minister for Women  Senator for New South Wales

DEMONSTRATING AUSTRALIA’S ENDURING COMMITMENT TO THE INDO-PACIFIC REGION

Two Royal Australian Navy ships, HMA Ships Anzac (III) and Sirius are conducting a two-month deployment throughout the Northeast Indian Ocean and Southeast Asia.

Led by HMAS Anzac, the task group will conduct a number of bilateral and multilateral activities including participating in Exercise La Perouse, a French-led multilateral maritime exercise in the Northeast Indian Ocean.

Acting Minister for Defence, Senator the Hon Marise Payne said the deployment is part of the Australian Defence Force’s robust and longstanding program of international engagements.

“We are strongly committed to our vital work with regional partners to address shared challenges, including our region’s maritime security,” Minister Payne said.

“Regular cooperation with our partners and neighbours is critical for maintaining a peaceful, inclusive, sovereign and resilient Indo-Pacific region, where the rights of all states are respected.”

Commander of the task group, Commander Brendan Horn, RAN, said the routine deployment is an exciting opportunity for both ships’ companies to exercise at sea and to operate with our neighbours and international partners.

“I am extremely proud of our ability to safely deploy and maintain operational readiness, while working within COVID-19 safe conditions,” Commander Horn said.

“Importantly, we acknowledge the support of our families and friends, who remain our anchor in achieving this important mission.”

Defence is fully committed to adhering to public health guidelines to minimise transmission of COVID-19 and has implemented significant measures to ensure the health and safety of its personnel and the countries they visit and interact with.

All ADF personnel will complete their mandatory 14-day quarantine period at sea before returning to Australia.

Media Contacts

Date received: 15 March 2021

Nicky Hamer (Minister Reynolds’ Office): +61 437 989 927 Ally Avitabile (Minister Reynolds’ Office): +61 408 905 267 Defence Media: media@defence.gov.au

