

JULIE COLLINS MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR FRANKLIN





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

RADIO INTERVIEW

2SM WITH MARCUS PAUL IN THE MORNING

THURSDAY, 21 JANUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Home Care Package Waitlist; Morrison Government’s aged care

failures.



MARCUS PAUL, HOST: Julie Collins is with us on the program. Good morning to

you, Julie, and happy New Year.



JULIE COLLINS, SHADOW MINISTER FOR AGEING AND SENIORS: Happy

New Year to you, Marcus, and to your listeners. I wish it was a happy new year for

older Australians waiting for home care. But as you pointed out, two years on after

the Royal Commission in October 2019 said that the very first thing the

Government needed to do was to fix the home care waitlist, and here we are over

a year later and consistently now for two years, we've had over 100,000 older

Australians waiting for home care on a waitlist. This is care that they have been

assessed for, approved for and actually need immediately and they're being told to

wait up to 28 months for this care. It's heartbreaking when you get people in their

90s who have multiple health issues, some of them with terminal illnesses are

being told you have to wait two years for your care. And what we've seen, of

course, is we have 30,000 older Australians dying while waiting for that care. And

we've got another 30,000 go into residential care or into hospital because they

couldn't get the home care they needed.



PAUL: Yes. Over the three years leading up to the middle of last year, 2020, more

than 30,000 older Australians died while waiting for home care that had already

been approved. 685 older Australians tragically died in aged care homes from

COVID-19 because the Morrison Government didn't have a plan.



COLLINS: That's right. Their own Royal Commission said they didn't have a plan.

They keep saying, ‘oh, well, we did. We did.’ But it's absolutely very clear that they

did not have a plan for COVID-19 in residential aged care. And I think that's why

we'll see more older Australians want to stay at home and not go into residential

care. So this waitlist is only going to grow and the Government needs to have a

plan to deal with it. Drip feeding 10,000 packages here and there is not a plan to

deal with the wait list that has consistently been over 100,000 for two years.



PAUL: Well, that's right. I mean, Julie, it's like putting a Band-Aid on a broken leg.

It's not going to work. Now, the Aged Care Royal Commission's interim report

detailed the crisis in aged care, and the actual title itself was ‘Neglect’. For me, that

would have immediately set off alarm bells, that would have, that should have,

seen the government scrambling to do whatever it possibly could in fixing this

shambles.



COLLINS: Absolutely. I mean, we now have more than a trillion dollars of

government debt, but we still have 100,000 older Australians waiting for care. What

does that say about the government's priorities? But importantly, what does it

mean when the Royal Commission's final report comes down at the end of

February? Does it mean that the Government will wait another two years before it

implements decisions and recommendations again? I mean, they've had this

recommendation to fix the home care waitlist since October 2019, more than a

year. More than a year later, there's still 100,000 older Australians waiting. There is

no plan to do with the waitlist, there's no plan to train the workforce to deal with the

waitlist. The Government doesn't seem to have a strategy or a plan to fix this.



PAUL: These are older vulnerable Australians, many who have worked 30 odd

years of their lives, they paid taxes.



COLLINS: In their communities, with their friends. They don't want to be a burden

on their families. They want to do the right thing. And the Government is saying,

‘well, yes, you're eligible for a home care package. Yes, you qualify for a home

care package. Yes, you need care at home. But we're going to make you wait for

help.’



PAUL: How long do people have to continue waiting so much? Waiting up to three

years later? Julie?



COLLINS: That's right, they are. And we've said it's unacceptable. A level four

package, which is the highest level of care, the Productivity Commission says that

people are waiting 28 months. The Government's website still says 12+ months.

Now, the Government needs to be honest with people so that they can plan

because this obviously impacts the older Australians. Their family members who

are trying to help them out with their care. You know, the health providers. You

know, people need to know what is a reasonable wait time, what is the real wait

time so that they can plan their lives?



PAUL: Well, absolutely. I mean, as you said, we've racked up a trillion dollars in

debt, but waiting times for critical services for vulnerable older Australians just

keeps blowing out. In a wealthy country like ours, Australia, no one should wait

more than two years. In fact, I would even argue no one should wait more than six

months for the care they've been approved for



COLLINS: Well the Royal Commission called it ‘cruel’. That was the Royal

Commission's description of the home care waitlist, ‘cruel’. We know that the

Commonwealth Home Support Program is at breaking point. We know that people

can't get the care they need at the lower level end. And we know that people are

waiting for home care packages. And we know, obviously, that in residential care

some people are not getting the care they need in residential care. It just shows

how broken the system is. And the fear is that when the Government gets the

recommendations from the Royal Commission's final report at the end of February,

how long are we going to actually wait for them to fix it?



PAUL: Is that what they're waiting for Julie?



COLLINS: That's what they're saying.



PAUL: If, you know, the roof is leaking right. And it's about to cave in and you have

to get on it, I may be an engineer, come and inspect the roof, but who simply is

going to write a report telling you what you already bloody know, why wait? Get the

thing fixed.



COLLINS: Well, the Royal Commission gave an interim report and made

interim recommendations. Not many Royal Commissions take the trouble to do

interim recommendations. And the very first one was to fix the home care waitlist

and the Government still hasn't done it. And here we are, over a year later, and my

fear is, is that when we get these final recommendations, the Government is going

to sit on them and not implement the recommendations immediately.





PAUL: Always good to have you on the program, Julie. Let's keep the fight up. I

will talk to you in the coming weeks, months as the final report is handed down into

aged care. Let's try as hard as we can to get them to do something. Lives, literally,

Julie, as you know, lives literally depend on it. Thank you for your time.



COLLINS: Absolutely.



PAUL: Thank you, Julie Collins.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: LIAM CARSWELL 0438 469 119





Authorised by Paul Erickson, ALP, Canberra.













