



JOEL FITZGIBBON MP

MEMBER FOR HUNTER

E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2CC  WEDNESDAY, 17 MARCH 2021

SUBJECTS: Newspoll and WA Election; Federal Government’s missed  opportunities during COVID; Tourism Support Package.

STEPHEN CENATIEMPO, HOST: He's our regular political commentator on a  Wednesday, he is the Member for Hunter, Joel Fitzgibbon. Good morning, Joel.

JOEL FITZGIBBON, MEMBER FOR HUNTER: G'day Stephen.

CENATIEMPO: Mate, can we put, can you put your hand up and take over  leadership of the Labor Party?

FITZGIBBON: Not a good time to be an opposition leader, Stephen, is it?

CENATIEMPO: Well, well, no, no, although, let's talk about that because the  latest Newspoll...

FITZGIBBON: ... Ask Zak Kirkup in Western Australia.

CENATIEMPO: Well, did you, I want to talk about that for a moment. He  conceded defeat, what, two weeks out from the election and then came out and  said, well, I should have considered earlier.

FITZGIBBON: A somewhat unusual approach.

CENATIEMPO: Yes, indeed. Having said that, though, federal Labor has now  taken the lead in the latest Newspoll. Now, I know a news poll this far out is  probably not much, really to write home about. But it is significant, particularly  given the results in Western Australia and the fact that there's going to be a  redistribution of seats before the next federal election.

FITZGIBBON: Yes, I think that's right. I'm always cautious about reading too  much into one poll. But if you combine Monday's poll with the WA result, it does  demonstrate that the Labor brand is alive and well, and that we can win the

next election. And in fact, we should win the next election because it's not as if  we're up against the good government, mate. I mean, this government is in  chaos. Yes, Scott Morrison handled the COVID-19 situation pretty well by  following the expert advice, but we're now in lots of debt as a result, and there  doesn't appear to be any real plan to lift productivity and to get out of that debt.  So, you know, we should be competitive, and I hope we will be.

CENATIEMPO: Yeah, I, look, I have the more critical of this government than  most people that would sit on my side of politics. And I think the biggest thing  that I've taken out of this is the lack of foresight, as you say. Particularly I think  the national cabinet has failed in the sense that we haven't looked for those  opportunities out of this adversity. You know, things like when we see in  Tasmania, they're going to buy Finnish ferries to cross Bass Strait, we've seen  the New South Wales Government buy trains from overseas, here in the ACT,  the light rail was produced in France. I mean, these are the kinds of things we  should be focusing on, I would have thought at this time.

FITZGIBBON: Well, Scott Morrison was elected promising to do nothing,  Stephen. And outside Covid, that's pretty much what he's done. I mean, he  could have used, I mean, policy reform is always this difficult. Ask John Howard  on the GST, ask Paul Keating and Bob Hawke on a whole range of fronts. But  Covid gave the Prime Minister a pretty unique opportunity to push and drive  reform in areas like manufacturing here in Australia, but he's not really taken up  that opportunity. And I think that's disappointing, and I think he will pay a price  for it.

CENATIEMPO: But I think the difficulty is from the Labor side is that, you know,  a backbencher, like yourself is talking all of these kind of things where Albo was  carrying on with that kind of rubbish that I talked about earlier, in Parliament.

FITZGIBBON: Look, it's hard, Stephen, for opposition leaders. I know from my  own personal experience that if you jump into the Prime Minister on these  sensitive issues, you get people who will criticise you. But if you don't you get  lots of people who want to criticise you. But you know, I have had many people  in the street say to me in my electorate what, you know, why aren't you going  harder on Scott Morrison for this outrageous thing around the culture in  Parliament House and in particular, Christian Porter? So opposition is difficult.

CENATIEMPO: Yeah, no well, I think that's right. And I mean, culture in  Parliament House might be an even bigger difficulty for both sides. Now, Matt  Kean has come under fire, particularly from people like myself, but you've  always been a bit of a fan of this bloke because he went down a mine with you,  but he's now come on board with nuclear power.

FITZGIBBON: Being a fan is a slight exaggeration, but he is a sort of a  colourful and unpredictable character. When he agreed to go down a coal mine,  I was obviously pretty surprised because he had such green credentials, and  now he pops up and backs in nuclear generation, which both surprised and

delighted me. But I, you know, I don't know what the guy's up to. But it's good  that he's backed common sense.

CENATIEMPO: Yeah. Let's see how far it goes, though if he actually, as the  Environment Minister in New South Wales, he has a bit of power over this, but  let's see what happens. The federal government has unveiled its tourism  support package, a fair bit of money there, including subsidies for certain airline  routes. There's been a lot of criticism that, you know, certain states have  missed out, or certain routes have missed out, but I mean, we've got to start  somewhere with this stuff, don't we?

FITZGIBBON: Yeah, but this one was just a bit bizarre, wasn't it, Stephen? And  poor old Michael McCormack, the Deputy Prime Minister didn't do much of a  job of explaining it on the ABC's Insiders on Sunday...

CENATIEMPO: [Inaudible]

FITZGIBBON: This is $1.2 billion of taxpayers’ money, which doesn't seem to  be about anything much other than propping up a struggling Qantas - I  acknowledge they are struggling - and putting money into marginal seats  again. It's a bit like sports rorts all over. The policy didn't last 12 hours before  they started adding destinations to the list. And what sort of return is the  taxpayer going to receive on each dollar spent? Very little, I suspect. I think that  probably a lot of people that would have gone on a holiday anyway, will be  subsidised by this program. I think it would be a waste of money in the end.

CENATIEMPO: Yeah, look, I tend to agree with you, in principle, because I  think this follows on from things that some of the state governments have done  with these vouchers to go on, you know, $25 so you can go and have dinner in  a restaurant. I don't think any of us are really screaming out for a half-price  ticket. We want the borders to be open, or we want the cafes to have enough  seats in them. And it's more about getting rid of the restrictions and getting out  of the way of business, rather than propping it up I would have thought.

FITZGIBBON: Yeah, that's true. And there's nothing in this for travel agents, for  example, who have been just wiped out by the closure of the international  borders. And it's alright to give a half-price ticket, but you've got to be able to  afford the accommodation at the other end. And indeed, at the other end,  you've got to be able to get the accommodation, which is another issue in some  places like Broome. So it was all very strange. And I think it's embarrassing for  the government and I think they will need to do something to fix it.

CENATIEMPO: Yeah, look, I think it'll be one of those things that'll be tinkered  with along the way. Joel, always good to talk to you. We'll catch up again next  week.

FITZGIBBON: A great pleasure, Stephen.





ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAVID BULLOCK 0405 408 871





Authorised by Joel Fitzgibbon, ALP, Cessnock.







