

MARK BUTLER MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING  MEMBER FOR HINDMARSH



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC AFTERNOON BRIEFING  FRIDAY, 4 FEBRUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Vaccine rollout; hotel quarantine; Australian Open; new portfolio.

PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: My next guest this afternoon is the Shadow Minister for  Health, Mark Butler. Welcome to the program.

MARK BUTLER, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH AND AGEING: Thanks PK.

KARVELAS: The Prime Minister says Australia has secured additional ten million doses of the  Pfizer coronavirus vaccine. The extra doses bring the country’s vaccine number to 150 million  of those that we’ve got contracts to get into the country. Is that a satisfactory number?

BUTLER: We welcome the announcement today. The Pfizer vaccine is a highly effective  vaccine, an mRNA vaccine which also raises the potential for significant adaptation down the  track as these variants of concern start to spread around the world - the variants known as the  UK variant, the South Africa variant, the Brazil variant and suchlike. I’ve said I welcome this  announcement. It’s an important announcement.

Australians are, though, asking questions about when we are actually going to see vaccines  land in Australia and start to be distributed so that they can be put into people’s arm. Still we  haven’t had a single Australian vaccinated while tens and tens of millions have received  vaccinations around the world.

We understand Australia’s not in the same position as countries like the US, and the  Europeans and the UK for example, who are dealing with quite a different scale of emergency  but we do want to start to see some answers to the questions about when will this start to be  rolled out? How will Australians book to get a vaccination? How do GP providers and  pharmacists get onto the system because we’re going to have a single entry point? This is a  good development today but we’ll continue to ask questions in the context of our very broad  support for Australia’s vaccine strategy.

KARVELAS: Let’s talk about hotel quarantine which is becoming a very increasingly  concerning issue because of the Victorian case, but of course we’ve had others. The Prime  Minister Scott Morrison said he wanted to put the case in Melbourne into perspective, he says  there have been what, 211,000, who have returned to Australia through hotel quarantine and  only a handful of cases that have led to these breaches. Is that a good enough success rate in

your view?

BUTLER: Well I though the Prime Minister’s comments today were pretty disappointing. What  we’ve seen over the last three months is outbreaks from hotel quarantine in our five major  cities that have caused extraordinary disruption. You’ve got Perth in a week-long lockdown,  Adelaide has experienced that, Brisbane has experienced that, Melbourne’s going through its  processes today to put in place restrictions on the Victorian community because of this  outbreak. There’s no question that outbreaks from hotel quarantine are the most serious failing  we have right now in our COVID response and responsibility for that failing, constitutional and  legal responsibility, rests with Scott Morrison.

Quarantine has always been a Commonwealth responsibility so it’s not good enough for him  today to rest on the laurels and say, “well we’ve got 211,000 people home”. That’s a good  thing, we’ve got a responsibility to get our citizens home in a global pandemic, but we need to  make sure Australians have a greater level of confidence that our national quarantine  arrangements are able to get people back home, but also protect the broader community.  Scott Morrison needs to provide a response to a report from Jane Halton that he’s had now for  several months that has recommended a range of improvements that the Commonwealth  should be driving in our national quarantine arrangements.

KARVELAS: So what should immediately be done, in your view, to deal with this issue that we  know is emerging around airborne transmission?

BUTLER: Well there is a range of recommendations about Jane Halton about making sure  that from a national front we drive best practice in existing hotel quarantine arrangements. Now  some of them go to the staffing arrangements of particularly the security guards, but other staff  in those hotels as well. Some of them go to the use of PPE, particularly masks, but they do  also go to ventilation which is an increasing area of epidemiological concern around  transmission, particularly in hotels.

So we want to see the Commonwealth take a leadership role here rather than continuing to  duckshove this to state premiers. We also know that Jane Halton recommended that the  Commonwealth take some proactive leadership around considering national facilities rather  than just relying on high-rise hotels in the middle of our major cities. So national facilities, like  the Howard Springs facility outside Darwin. Now again, the Prime Minister -

KARVELAS: Is it getting to the point, sorry to rudely interrupt, but is it getting to the point  where you’ve lost confidence in having hotel quarantining, because of this airborne  transmission in our big cities?

BUTLER: I don’t think it’s getting to that point but it is getting to the point that Australians, I  think, are seeing these outbreaks from hotel quarantine really being the most serious failing in  our COVID response right now. We’ve seen five in our five major cities over the last three  months, really significant disruptions.

So kids aren’t going to school in Perth, Perth is locked down because of one of these  outbreaks in hotel quarantine, just as one example. I think they want some sense from the  Prime Minister that he proactively is discharging his responsibilities, responsible for national  quarantine, and making sure that our hotel quarantine system is in the best possible shape  and I don’t think he’s giving that sense of confidence. But also that there are alternatives being  put in place, the national facilities that Jane Halton talked about. Now in his press conference

earlier today the Prime Minister said, I thought rather lackadaisically “well if people have some  ideas, I’m welcome to consider them.” Well, he should be coming up with the ideas, or at least  directing Commonwealth bureaucrats to come up with some ideas about national facilities, the  type that Jane Halton included in her report.

KARVELAS: And with the current hotel quarantine system, should there be national  mandatory standards that are implemented?

BUTLER: Well, at the end of the day as I said, in the Constitution, it is the Commonwealth that  is responsible for our national quarantine arrangements. So, they should be making sure that  whatever quarantine system is in place, whether it is a mix of facilities like Howard Springs  outside Darwin and hotels in our major cities that we have the best possible standards and that  they are implemented properly.

KARVELAS: Okay, so national standards. I put that question to Michael Sukkar, it’s not his  portfolio but clearly, he is a Victorian MP too where the long lockdown happened and he said  states what to do it their way. Essentially, I’m paraphrasing, “you can’t tell them what to do.”  What do you say to that?

BUTLER: Well, this Government has never shied away from telling state premiers what to do  when it suited them. At the end of the day, the states stepped up and put in place these hotel  quarantine arrangements last year because frankly, the Commonwealth wasn’t acting. That  doesn’t mean that the sates are responsible for this. Yes, they are acting, but at the end of the  day, the Prime Minister is responsible for making sure this system works. If that takes national  standards, making sure that proper employer arrangement are in place if need be the  Commonwealth is helping to underwrite those, proper PPE and masking arrangements are in  place, that the facilities being used have proper ventilation in place, I mean, that is just a  simple, responsibility the Commonwealth has had for decades.

KARVELAS: So you think that the Prime Minister tomorrow should go to that National Cabinet  meeting and make the case for national, mandatory standards. And you mentioned underwrite,  essentially pay for the additional cost that it might bring if there have to be alterations - which  inevitably there would be?

BUTLER: He can’t continue to sit on his hands and pretend this is a matter for state premiers.  That’s the point I’m making. He has had advice now for several months from Jane Halton, a  very widely respected, long standing health bureaucrat. She briefed him as we understand it,  several times last year on those recommendations and yet we have not heard a formal  response from the Prime Minister. At the end of the day I make the point again, the  Constitution is very clear national quarantine arrangements for people returning from overseas  are the responsibility of the Commonwealth government and no one has used that in their  political career more than Scott Morrison.

KARVELAS: Should the Australian Open really have gone ahead given the more virulent  strain? It is one thing brining back Australians, they have citizenship rights, even that number  was slowed down to bring in this high number of people from hotspots.

BUTLER: Well at the end of the day, you know, we have had to consider as a nation of the last  few months how we accommodate business as usual over summer. Whether it is the Indian  cricket tour or the Australian Open. And I know that state governments across the country  have had to take the best possible health advice they have to determine whether or not, on the



balance of risk and the benefit to the Australia community gets from those events it can go  ahead. I understand that the Victorian Government has done that in relation to the Australian  Open and that has been the position of Federal Labor. These things, all of these decisions,  must be taken only after considering and following the best available public health advice from  our experts.

KARVELAS: Okay, do you get it though? I am just being very, well, I’m not asking in a very  professional way but I’m just going to channel some of the people I’ve seen online or people I  mix with in Melbourne who say “we went through such a long lock down, how on Earth have  they brought that many people back into the country putting us at risk?” It’s one thing brining in  Australians, but they are actually brining in people who don’t need to be here. Do you  understand the frustration? Particularly now with this hotel quarantine breach?

BUTLER: Well, I think we understand that people are highly attuned to any risk. Whether it is  our own citizens returning from overseas, events like the Indian Cricket tour, or the Australian  Open, or anything else for that matter. They want to have the highest level of confidence that  their governments are following public health advice before allowing any of these activities.

KARVELAS: Alright, we’ll leave it there. Just before I let you go, are you totally cool with losing  the Climate Change portfolio? Are you feeling very calm and relaxed about that?

BUTLER: I think that the Health and the Ageing portfolio that Anthony has allocated to me is  extraordinarily important. It’s an area I had the privilege of serving in under Kevin Rudd and  Julia Gillard and had a real passion for. So I’m really relishing the opportunity to work with  fantastic stakeholders, fantastic members of the community in an area that is so important in  the best of times, and frankly, we are not in the best of times at the moment.

KARVELAS: Thank you so much for joining us.

BUTLER: Thanks, Patricia.

KARVELAS: Shadow Minister for Health, Mark Butler.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: LUCY CARUSO 0408 803 428



