

ANTHONY ALBANESE MP

LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY

MEMBER FOR GRAYNDLER





A PLAN TO GROW JOBS AND SECURE AUSTRALIA’S FUTURE



It wasn’t that long ago that Australia had a thriving manufacturing industry.



But in 2021, our nation is well behind the pace among OECD nations when it comes to

manufacturing to meet our own needs.



In fact, we are dead last, producing just 68 per cent of our own requirements.



Manufacturing represents 6 per cent of the nation’s total output — down from 30 per cent in

the 1970s.



And under the current government we have lost 90,000 manufacturing jobs since 2013.



That’s not good enough.



Allowing our manufacturing sector to decline meant, for example, that when the coronavirus

pandemic emerged we were unable to meet our own needs for face masks or hand sanitiser.



This will change under a Labor government.



We will focus on post-COVID reconstruction to re-energise Australian manufacturing, not just

to meet our own needs but also to create good, secure jobs for Australians for decades to

come.



That’s why at today’s Labor Party national conference I will announce that a Labor government

will create a $15bn National Reconstruction Fund to revive Australian manufacturing.



The fund will partner with the private sector, including superannuation funds, to invest in

projects and industries that will provide good, secure jobs.



It will use a combination of loans, equity injections, co-investment and lending guarantees to

back in the endeavours of companies that see a future in making things in this country.



The National Reconstruction Fund will target key sectors including resources, food processing,

heavy manufacturing, renewable energy and defence.



In resources, the focus will be value adding.



For example, Australia has large reserves of lithium, which will underpin the growth industry of

the future — batteries.



But if we are smart, we will look beyond bulk lithium exports and aspire to making batteries and

selling them to the world.



That is where the NRF comes in.



It is the same story in agriculture.



It is good that we export so much quality food. But if we focus on processing food and

beverages here, we can extract the extra benefit of creating manufacturing jobs, particularly in

regional areas that produce so many agricultural products.



The NRF will also back investment in renewable energy industries.



We know the world is shifting to renewables. While the current government continues to

pretend this change is not happening, a Labor government would use the NRF to help develop

new industries that capitalise on the shift in areas like production of solar panels, wind turbines

and hydrogen electrolysers, innovative packaging and waste reduction.



The fund will also help a Labor government harness the power of government purchasing to

grow existing industries.



For example, a boom in public transport projects around the nation means we will need

thousands of new train carriages. Instead of buying them offshore, we should build those trains

here in existing factories.



The NRF will back companies that want to be part of that supply chain.



Its existence will deliver the grunt to drive the National Rail Manufacturing plan I announced

last year, just as it will support Labor’s Defence Industry Development Strategy announced at

the same time.



The other task of the NRF will be to ensure Australia is able to meet its own needs when it

comes to medical supplies.



The coronavirus pandemic has exposed our nation’s vulnerability.



We must restore our self-sufficiency to be better prepared for the next pandemic.



The National Reconstruction Fund will be run by an independent board just like the successful

Clean Energy Finance Corporation which has deployed more than $7bn of its capital to

support renewable and other clean energy projects, leveraging $2.50 of private investment for

every dollar of its own investment.



Under current arrangements, private investment is not flowing quickly enough into innovation

or new enterprise.



Instead, it flows into real estate or is returned to investors as higher dividends.



This means too many worthy manufacturing projects struggle to secure funding and never get

off the ground, despite having clear potential to create well-paid jobs and diversify the

economy.



Using the National Reconstruction Fund in combination with increased research and



development and collaboration with industry, unions and state governments, a Labor

government will secure a future made in Australia.



Anthony Albanese is the leader of the Australian Labor Party.



This opinion piece was first published in The Daily Telegraph and The West Australian

on Tuesday, 30 March 2021.



MEDIA CONTACT: LEADER’S PRESS OFFICE 02 6277 4053



