

TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION

SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

TELEVISION INTERVIEW

SKY NEWS FIRST EDITION WITH PETER STEFANOVIC

WEDNESDAY, 3 FEBRUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: University funding cuts; Job losses; International students; Wage cuts; IR

Omnibus Bill; Election.



PETER STEFANOVIC, HOST: Welcome back to First Edition. Thank you for your company

this morning. Let's go to Canberra now and we're joined by Tanya Plibersek, the Shadow

Minister for Education and Women. Tanya, good to see you, thanks for joining us this morning.



TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION, SHADOW MINISTER FOR

WOMEN: Morning.



STEFANOVIC: So, new estimates from Universities Australia today point to an improving

sector. $1 billion in cash, of an injection, means an expected revenue fall of just $200 million

this year - which is far smaller than the $1.8 billion that the sector suffered last year. So you

must be pleased to know that it's not as bad as it could have been.



PLIBERSEK: Peter, I really don't agree that it's not bad. It's actually tragically bad at the

moment. The universities lost $2 billion last year, they're set to lose about $2 billion this year

and they've got $1 billion from the government for one year. What this means in real terms is

that more than 17,000 people lost their jobs last year in our university sector. That's in our big

cities but it's also in our outer suburbs, it's in our regional communities.



Those 17,000 people lost their jobs because the Prime Minister was too stubborn to allow

universities to get access to JobKeeper - even when it became apparent that they were

bleeding revenue because, of course, international students are such a big part of university

life today. Those 17,000 people are academics, but they're also admin staff, they're cafeteria

workers, they're groundskeepers, they're security staff. I mean, they've all got families to

support and I don't understand why the Prime Minister has turned his back on those 17,000

people. And more are set to lose their jobs this year.



Also when you talk to university students, they'll tell you it's not the same quality of education.

The universities are really struggling to give them the subject choice and the attention they

need to get a good quality education.



STEFANOVIC: I mean, a billion dollars isn't necessary turning a back. The point being, it could

have been a whole lot worse.



PLIBERSEK: If you lose your hand, you could say, 'it's lucky you didn't lose your arm.' It's not

good enough when 17,000 people have lost their jobs. We're relying on these university

researchers to get us through the pandemic. We're relying on the epidemiologists, and we're

relying on the computer programmers, and the engineers and the nurses, and others to get us

through the pandemic.



As our economy recovers, we've got skills shortages in a whole lot of areas that we're not

training Australians for. We know that universities are turning Australian students away

because they can't afford to teach them. In the middle of a recession, when we've got high

youth unemployment, how on God's green Earth does it make sense to turn Australian

students away from university because we can't afford to teach them. It just makes no sense.



STEFANOVIC: A lot depends on the future enrolment of international students. There's going

to be an expected push this Friday, as I understand it, at National Cabinet for more pilot

programs to return international students. Are you confident that that can happen?



PLIBERSEK: Look, I think the first and most important responsibility is getting Australians

home. The Prime Minister said that they'd all be home by Christmas. Sadly, that's not the case.

There are still more than 40,000 people on waiting lists to get home - they're desperate. I

mean, I talk to people overseas, I talk to their family members in Sydney - you've got people

who bought 5 air tickets to try and get home, and every time they turn up to the airport with

their bags packed - “sorry, flight's cancelled.”



This is a very desperate situation for Australians who are caught overseas. But when we

successfully get those people home, I would love to see international students welcomed back

to Australia, this is a $40 billion industry for Australia. It supports 240,000 Australian jobs. So,

of course when we've got those Australians home. And I've got to say, this is really on the

federal government. The states have been doing a lot of the heavy lifting with quarantine. Scott

Morrison has to step up when it comes to getting these Australians home.



STEFANOVIC: Just onto IR, Tanya - Labor deciding to vote against the government's omnibus

bill. My question is if this happens, aren't you just voting against changes that Labor and

unions sought?



PLIBERSEK: No, not at all. We're voting against lower wages and making it easier to sack

people. We were absolutely up for a conversation about more flexibility in our employment

relations. But that flexibility isn't code for just cutting wages and making it easier to sack

people. What worries me about this legislation is the government using COVID as cover to do

what they've always wanted to do, right back to the old days of John Howard and

WorkChoices. They want to make it easier to cut wages and sack people - they're using

COVID as cover to do it. We're not going to be in that.



It's so important in an economic recovery that people are confident about their work, that they

know that they'll have a job next week and next month, and they've got the extra five bucks in

their pocket that means that they feel fine about stopping to buy a cup of coffee on the way to

work, or taking the kids out for pizza on a Friday night. Unless you have decent wages and

secure work, we're not going to have a strong recovery. Our recovery depends on decent

wages and secure work, and the government's actually doing the exact opposite. What they're

doing is not good for individual workers and it's not good for our economy.



STEFANOVIC: The most contentious part of that Bill was that one key proposal which allowed

employers hit by the pandemic to negotiate two year workplace agreements that don't comply

with the BOOT. The Attorney-General has already said that the BOOT exemption could be

ditched, if need be. So why not accept that and just support the rest?



PLIBERSEK: Well, when you're talking about the 'BOOT', I think most people don't know what

that is. We're talking about the 'Better Off Overall Test', and what the government is saying

when they say they want to get rid of the 'BOOT', is that they want to allow workplace

agreements that give people less money for the same work.



I don't think that's good for anyone.



But the government has gone beyond the pandemic arrangements here, they want to expand

that ability to pay people less to other businesses that haven't been affected in the same way.

That is actually a really serious problem. If we are saying that broadly in the Australian

community, there will be lots of businesses who are able to pay people less for the same work,

how is that good for anyone? How is that okay?



And we've got provisions in this legislation that talk about removing penalty rates altogether for

lower level managers in retail, so you're talking about someone on perhaps $58,000 a year

who's going to lose their weekend pay, and their holiday loading and so on. How can that be

good for our economy? That person doesn't have that money to spend creating jobs for other

people. We need confidence in our economy. We need job security so people are confident

they can get a car loan or a home loan, that they can support their family in the future. Nobody

is going to spend unless they know they've got work.



STEFANOVIC: Look, my question being though that if the Attorney-General wants to cut out

that point, why not accept his proposal then and have a scaled back version of the omnibus bill

and accept that. Is that even on the cards? Is that an option?



PLIBERSEK: We've said all along: if this legislation is good for working people, if it provides

secure work and higher wages, we will back it. If the government were really interested in

drafting something that provided secure work and decent pay, of course, we would be on

board for that. My fear is that COVID has always been cover to do what they've wanted to do

all along, which is cut wages and make work less secure.



STEFANOVIC: Okay, Tanya, just finally, leadership rumblings within the Labor Party, as you

would know over the last week. Can you guarantee that Anthony Albanese will be the Labor



Leader at the next election?



PLIBERSEK: I can. I'm sure. And I can tell you that the last thing people want to hear from us

is us talking about ourselves. So I'm just not going to do it.



STEFANOVIC: You said, 'I'm sure.' That doesn't necessarily mean that he will be.



PLIBERSEK: Like I say, Pete, it is not just boring for people to listen to this constant internal

stuff. It's actually really disrespectful at a time like this, when everyone is focused on the

pandemic in the first instance and the economic recovery in the second instance. That's 100%

my focus and it's 100% the focus of the Labor Party.



STEFANOVIC: Okay, Tanya Plibersek, as always, appreciate your time this morning. Thanks

for joining us here, we'll talk to you soon.



PLIBERSEK: It's a pleasure.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN: 0427 464 350



