1





The Hon Ken Wyatt AM MP  Minister for Indigenous Australians

Member for Hasluck



SPEECH



NATIONAL AUSTRALIA DAY COUNCIL  AUSTRALIAN OF THE YEAR LUNCH  25 January 2021, Canberra, ACT

OE&E - Check against delivery.



Kaya Wanju - Hello and welcome in Noongar.

I would like begin by acknowledging the traditional custodians of the land on which we

meet, the Ngunnawal people and I pay my respect to Elders, past, present and

emerging.

And to all my colleagues and distinguished guests here today - it is great to see so

many incredible Australians who have made and are making such a profound impact

on our nation gathered in one room.

This Australia Day, people are joining in across the country to take time to reflect,

respect and celebrate.

I do truly think we can do Australia Day better, and the National Australia Day Council

are leading the way with the Story of Australia, and by encouraging a conversation that

we haven’t had before in this country.

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have been here for over 65,000 years.

The arrival of the British in 1788, the subsequent waves of immigration and those that

choose to call Australia home today are all part of this nation’s story.



2

It’s a story marked by success - achievements that make us all proud. But it is also a

story for some that is difficult and raw.

It is a story that hurts in parts.

But rather than shy away from this, or dismiss our success, we should come together

as one this Australia Day and reach out to better understand the Australian story of

others.

We can engage in productive dialogue, with considered understanding for each other’s

points of view.

Part of this includes greater recognition that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander

people’s history, traditions and culture are an important part of all Australia Day events

- from citizenship ceremonies to festivities, which is already occurring across the

country.

It shouldn’t be an either/or - it should be together - interwoven with the fabric of what

makes this country great and our nation’s story so unique.

For example, in Yirrkala in the Northern Territory, Yolngu and Balanda, Aboriginal and

non-Aboriginal are coming together to celebrate Australia Day as one community.

Over 500 people, coming together to the Buku Larrnggay Mulka centre in a COVID-safe way, for a Welcome to Country, smoking ceremony and Bungul.

In Sydney, the day starts with the WugulOra Morning Ceremony at Barangaroo -

WugulOra means ‘One Mob’ and has been a part of Sydney’s Australia Day activities

for years.

In Perth, the afternoon features the Birak Festival, followed by the Perth Australia Day

lightshow.

We can and we are doing Australia Day better. But there’s always more that we can

do.

Acknowledging and reflecting on our past while forging a new respect for the chapters

of our story will only strengthen us as a people and a nation into the future.

3

And for me, that’s something I think we can celebrate.

We can reflect on the past.

We can respect each other.

And we can celebrate what’s been achieved and what’s still to come in the story of

Australia.

Congratulations to all nominees for the Australian of the Year Awards - you have

rightly been acknowledged by your respective States and Territories and are being

celebrated today, tonight and of course, tomorrow.

Your achievements are celebrated and supported by all Australians.

I am very proud and humbled to be here today, because you are all what makes

Australia an even better place - for us now and for future generations to come.

Thank you for the opportunity to address you today. I look forward to spending time to

reflect, respect and celebrate with you all today, tomorrow and for years to come.

Authorised by Ken Wyatt AM MP, Member for Hasluck.



