Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.







The Hon. Greg Hunt MP  Minister for Health and Aged Care

Senator the Hon. Richard Colbeck  Minister for Senior Australians and Aged Care Services  Minister for Sport

JOINT MEDIA RELEASE

16 February 2021



Ensuring senior Australians are vaccinated against COVID-19

Tens of thousands of aged care residents in Australia will soon receive their first vaccine dose  against COVID-19 next week.

The Australian Government is ensuring those who are particularly vulnerable to the worst  effects of the coronavirus receive the earliest protection, so priority is being given to  residential aged care facility staff and residents.

The vaccination program will begin in every state and territory and will include regional and  rural aged care facilities. It is anticipated that the roll out to aged care facilities will take  approximately six weeks.

Minister for Health and Aged Care, Greg Hunt, said the vaccine implementation plan for  residential aged care aimed to administer vaccines to more than 240 aged care facilities in the  first week.

“Vaccination for residents and staff will be made available through residential aged care  facilities where they live or work, and it will be administered through an in-reach workforce  provider,” Minister Hunt said.

“Healthcare Australia will be providing the vaccination workforce in New South Wales and  Queensland, and Aspen Medical will be responsible for the other states and territories.

“The Primary Health Network in each region will be supporting the Commonwealth deliver to  each of the aged care facilities in their area and the process is expected to draw from the  extensive experience in delivering influenza vaccines to aged care residents.”

Residential aged care facilities will be grouped, up to a maximum of eight facilities within a  30 kilometre radius to ensure efficient delivery of the vaccine.

Vaccination for home and community aged care recipients and staff will occur in the  community, and these people will receive information relevant to their situation shortly.

Authorised by Greg Hunt MP, Liberal Party of Australia, Somerville, Victoria.



It’s anticipated that people aged over 70 years who do not reside in residential aged care  facilities, along with in-home and community aged care staff, will be able to go to specified  central locations or medical facilities to receive their COVID 19 vaccination, as the time  comes for their vaccination.

Minister for Senior Australians and Aged Care Services, Richard Colbeck, said the Australian  Government would be responsible for leading the implementation of the COVID-19  vaccination program in the aged care sector.

“We are consulting with relevant peak bodies and state and territory governments, but the  responsibilities are clearly delineated so all parties understand their role in this critical and  complex program,” Minister Colbeck said.

“The New South Wales, Victorian and the South Australian governments will maintain  responsibility for vaccinating residents and staff of the public sector residential aged care and  disability care facilities in their state.

“It is vital residents and families understand what information is available to them as the  vaccine strategy is rolled out. I would encourage residents and family members to ask if they  need help understanding the vaccine program and how it will affect them.

“Importantly, the vaccine providers will be providing information about the vaccine and  seeking consent from aged care residents or their substitute decision maker, to ensure they  understand the risks and benefits of receiving the vaccine.”

Everyone responsible for providing the vaccine in aged care settings will be required to have  completed the relevant training, including on the use of multi-dose vials, cold storage and  infection control.

In the coming weeks, the vaccination program will reach more than 2,600 residential aged  care facilities, more than 183,000 residents and 339,000 staff.

Families seeking additional information and support can visit: https://www.australia.gov.au/

-ENDS-



Media  Minister Hunt | James Perrin | 0447 534 427  Minister Colbeck | Aaron Langmaid | 0456 889 018



