CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

DOORSTOP INTERVIEW

SYDNEY

TUESDAY, 12 JANUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Michael McCormack failure of leadership; US Capitol

insurrection; Craig Kelly and George Christensen disinformation.



CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: Well, thanks for coming

today. I want to deal with the acting Prime Minister's remarks on a couple of things.

Firstly, the acting Prime Minister has said that Craig Kelly's campaign of medical

disinformation is a matter where facts can be contentious. Well, facts are facts.

And the fact is that Australia has done well through this medical crisis because

we've listened to the experts, the Chief Medical and Health Officers, the TGA.

Craig Kelly has engaged in a systemic and deliberate attempt to undermine our

medical health professionals. He has accused the Chief Medical Officers of

engaging in and I quote, ‘crimes against humanity’. He has today said that

mandating masks for children is child abuse. Here in New South Wales, masks are

mandated for children over 12. The Premier of New South Wales deserves more

support from the acting Prime Minister than she's getting. She deserves better than

to have Federal MPs, Liberal MPs, accusing her government of child abuse and

the same applies to Premiers across the board and mandating a mask across the

board, across Australia.



Craig Kelly has accused Dan Andrews of being a Nazi. He's compared policies of

the World Economic Forum to the Cambodian genocide of Pol Pot. Craig Kelly

continually promotes discredited or unproven medicines, whether it be

hydroxychloroquine or the latest being Betadine,  in relation to COVID-19,

undermining confidence in the TGA. He's claimed that these drugs are more

effective than vaccines. What does that do for confidence in the vaccination

program which is about to be rolled out across Australia? Craig Kelly is a menace

and at every turn, Scott Morrison and now Michael McCormack, acting Prime

Minister, have failed to call him out. They've hidden behind weasel words about

freedom of speech. Well, the Chief Medical Officer and the TGA deserve more

support and respect than that from their government. They deserve more. And the

Opposition provides that, which the government refuses to do. We condemn Craig

Kelly's attack on the Chief Medical Officers of Australia we condemn his attack on

the TGA. We condemn his attack on the Bureau of Meteorology, where he has

accused our scientists of engaging in a conspiracy theory to cover up the fact that

in his words, climate change is a hoax. The standard you walk past is the standard

you accept, Scott Morrison and his entire government accept the standards of

Craig Kelly and George Christensen.



In other matters, the acting Prime Minister has compared the insurrection, the

violence in the Capitol to the Black Lives Matters protests, today and yesterday.

Michael McCormack might speak for the government, he does not speak for

Australians. Those people around the world who engaged in peaceful protest in the

Black Lives Matters movement deserve better than to have their acting leader,

their acting Prime Minister compare them to the violence and thuggery we saw at

the US Capitol last week. Australians of color deserve to know their government

thinks more of them than that, and to have the acting Prime Minister spout the

words ‘All Lives Matter’, to diminish the Black Lives Matter movement was beyond

disgusting. Michael McCormack has a chance to fix this. He can come out and say

on both measures he was wrong. He can condemn the medical disinformation and

conspiracy theories of his colleague Craig Kelly. He can accept that the Black

Lives Matter movement was legitimate and peaceful protest, not the violent attempt

at insurrection we saw in the US last week.



What we saw in the US last week was incited by the President, it was violence, it

was an attempt to undermine democracy, and we should just be honest about that.

It had nothing to do with the Black Lives Matter movement. This is the man who

last year incorrectly claimed that Black Lives Matter protests had been a super

spreading event without a shred of evidence and incorrectly. So Michael

McCormack has form here, and he should look himself in the mirror, realise that he

is meant to be speaking for all Australians as acting Prime Minister, and his

comments today are beyond a joke, they're quite disgusting. I have a journalist

here I’ll take some questions from the journalist here and then I'll come to the

phone.



JOURNALIST: (inaudible) on Black Lives Matter protesters comparison, do you

think he should apologise?



BOWEN: Yes, he should apologize to all Australians, to those engaged in the

Black Lives Matter movement, to all of us who sympathise with the Black Lives

Matter movement and who support moves to ensure that the matters raised by the

Black Lives Matters movement, get the attention of policymakers and decision

makers here in Australia and around the world.



JOURNALIST: Why do you think the comparison (inaudible)?



BOWEN: Well, because Black Lives Matter protests were protests. They weren't

violent insurrection. I mean it's an insult to every person, every man, woman and

child who attended a rally peacefully, many didn't attend rallies because of the

social distancing restrictions, some were allowed with appropriate restrictions. But

they weren't violent insurrection. They weren't storming a Capitol building. I mean,

that was organized and orchestrated violence.



JOURNALIST: Do you think tech giants need to adopt more of a consistent

approach regarding who they ban and (inaudible)?



BOWEN: Look, I'm a bit old fashioned. I believe in free enterprise. I believe that

Twitter as a free enterprise should be able to ban whomever is engaging in hate

speech and incitement of violence they wish. I mean, I found it extraordinary to see

some allegedly pro free enterprise politicians call for stronger regulation of Twitter

and other social media. Now, I do think there's a case for ensuring that social

media companies have an obligation not just a right, but an obligation to correct

disinformation, hate speech and incitement of violence. And that should be

through, you know, a mandatory code, if possible.



JOURNALIST: Is it dangerous that the government refuses to reign in outspoken

MP’s like George Christensen and Craig Kelly?



BOWEN: Yes, yes, it is dangerous. Why? Because this is a time for confidence in

our decision makers, in our TGA in our Chief Medical and Health officers. This is a

time when all of us in public life should be supporting them. Now when Craig Kelly

promotes drugs like hydroxychloroquine or Betadine which have not been found to

be effective, what he's doing is effectively undermining the Therapeutic Goods

Administration, at a time when we need confidence in the TGA as we're about to

roll out a vaccine. When he accuses our Chief Health Officers in the State and the

Chief Medical Officer of ‘crimes against humanity’, that is an unspeakable insult.

That is an unspeakable insult. A crime against humanity is the most serious crime

that you can be accused of, and this member of the government, this member of

the government is doing that to our Chief Medical and Health Officers What does

Scott Morrison, or Michael McCormack, or Greg Hunt or anybody in the

government, anyone say about it? It's like the sound of crickets or cicadas is on a

summer's afternoon. They say nothing, they don't interrupt Craig Kelly. I can only

reach the conclusion that Scott Morrison is quite happy for Craig Kelly and George

Christensen to run this social media campaign and to appeal to segments of the

community who are open to hearing those messages. Okay I might go to the

phone, questions from the phone.



JOURNALIST: Chris Bowen, Jonathon Kearsley from Nine News, thanks very

much for taking the questions today. Can I ask, just in relation we saw the acting

Prime Minister yesterday, talk about comparisons between Black Lives Matter

protests and the Capitol. He did not (inaudible) George Christensen over

comments that have been made on social media. Neither did he about Craig Kelly.

Today he described being in Northern Queensland as ‘there's no reason we can't

Make Charter’s Tower’s Great Again’, while standing by those comments in

regards to Black Lives Matter protests. Is he a fit and proper person to be acting

Prime Minister?



BOWEN: Well, Michael McCormack has behaved abominably. His statements are

disgusting. He should show more leadership. He needs to step up to the job of

acting Prime Minister. It requires speaking for the nation not just for his National

Party mates. It does not require running a protection racket for conspiracy theories

propagated by members of the hard-right of the Liberal Party. With the job of acting

Prime Minister comes the responsibility of speaking for Australians. Michael

McCormack doesn't speak for me and he doesn't speak for Australians.



JOURNALIST: Chris Bowen, Taylor Aitken calling in from Seven News. Just

wanted to touch base about pregnant women, breastfeeding moms and those who

are looking to conceive have raised concerns about the COVID-19 vaccine and

whether it is safe for them and their unborn children. Should the government be

moving to allay these fears, there’s not much information out there for this group in

society?



BOWEN: Sure, thanks Kayla. Look, it is standard practice for pregnant women to

be tested later in the process of developing a vaccine or medicine. This is

something the TGA will of course be considering. I would encourage the

government to ensure full and proper advice and information is given to pregnant

women and breastfeeding women when the vaccine is approved by the TGA. I

have confidence the TGA will do so, I have confidence the government will accept

the TGA’s advice, and they will have my support in doing so. So my message is to

those who are concerned, pregnant women, breastfeeding women and indeed

anybody else in the community, you can have confidence in whatever advice the

TGA provides when the vaccine is approved. And I would certainly encourage that

advice to be provided as soon as is practicable.



JOURNALIST: Jade Macmillan from the ABC. Can I ask, what do you make of

Michael McCormack's comment today that Craig Kelly doesn't have that many

followers on social media? how influential do you think his views are?



BOWEN: Well Craig Kelly likes to engage in a conspiracy theory echo chamber

and that gets a certain amount of traction from some in the community. But I don't

care if Craig Kelly's got one follower or 1000 followers or 100,000 followers. When

he engages in dangerous disinformation, it should be called out. I mean, he's a

Member of Parliament. He's not some, you know, commentator on late night radio

or, you know, with his own YouTube channel with three or four followers. He's a

member of the House of Representatives of Australia. With that comes rights and

responsibilities. And it also comes with a certain credibility or at least it should. But

when Craig Kelly as a member of the government, a serving member of the

government of the day engages in these conspiracy theories, Scott Morrison or

Mark McCormack should say, front a camera and say, he is wrong. When he

accuses the Chief Medical Officers of crimes against humanity, they should

condemn him. When he promotes drugs, which are not approved by the TGA for



COVID-19, they should criticise him. When he equates policies for a better world

after COVID-19 to the Cambodian genocide with pictures, they should condemn

him. When he accuses Dan Andrews of being a Nazi, they should condemn him.

They're very quick to, you know, correctly raise it when other people raise the Nazi

slur, but when one of their own says it, they are struck dumb in silence. It's not

good enough. Australians have increasingly had enough of it. Craig Kelly should

be condemned by his leader. He should be criticized and he should be corrected,

and anything less than that is a complete abrogation and failure of leadership.

Even more so, even more so given of course that Craig Kelly was the personal

choice of Scott Morrison to be member for Hughes. He was the captain's pick. He

was Scott Morrison's responsibility. He chose him. He owns him. It's his job to fix it.

Any other questions? All in all done? Okay thanks for coming and thanks for joining

us on the phone.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ELIZA MITCHELL 0413 410 931

