



TANYA PLIBERSEK MP  SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION  SHADOW MINISTER FOR WOMEN  MEMBER FOR SYDNEY



E&OE TRANSCRIPT  TELEVISION INTERVIEW  ABC AFTERNOON BRIEFING WITH PATRICIA KARVELAS  MONDAY, 22 MARCH 2021

SUBJECTS: Brittany Higgins; Prime Minister misleading Parliament; Christian Porter;  Royal Commission into veteran suicide.

PATRICIA KARVELAS, HOST: Well, returning to our top story this afternoon: the Prime  Minister is denying he misled Parliament about an inquiry into an allegation of rape by a former  Liberal staffer. I was joined by the Shadow Minister for Women, Tanya Plibersek, a short time  ago. Tanya Plibersek, welcome to the program.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SHADOW MINISTER  FOR WOMEN: Thank you.

KARVELAS: Has Phil Gaetjens done the right thing in pausing this inquiry, given the concerns  raised by the Australian federal police?

PLIBERSEK: I think the real question here is why has the Prime Minister been saying for  weeks that this inquiry is ongoing when he was briefed on the 9th of March that it wasn't the  case that it was ongoing. This is a really serious mislead of the Australian Parliament. I think  the other question here is really a much deeper one about the Prime Minister's approach. Here  you've got a Prime Minister who is trying to deal with the Brittany Higgins matter and the  allegations against the Attorney General as though they are just passing political problems.  And what he is missing is that there is this overwhelming sense in the Australian community  that there is a time now for serious action against sexual violence against women. This is big,  it's raw, it's overwhelming for so many people because they know that the system is stacked  against victims of sexual assault, victims of sexual harassment, victims of domestic violence.  They know the figures. And the fact that the Prime Minister is just trying to push back on this  as a short-term political problem, I think is devastating, and is angering so many people.

KARVELAS: The AFP commissioner though has said the Gaetjens inquiry may have  hampered the investigation. What would Labor have done if the police gave you that advice?



PLIBERSEK: It's difficult to deal in hypotheticals here. But we have a Prime Minister who was  informed some time ago that this inquiry was not ongoing and he pretended all of last week in  the federal Parliament that the inquiry was ongoing. He misled the Parliament on the Gaetjens  inquiry. And that in itself is completely unacceptable behaviour in a Prime Minister. But it really  speaks to something even worse, underlying this. What happened to Brittany Higgins was  shocking. It should never have happened in the federal Parliament, and it has to be dealt with  fully and transparently. The allegations against the Attorney-General are deeply shocking, and  have to be dealt with fully and transparently. But we know, Patricia, that one in five Australian  women over the age of 15 has experienced sexual assault. We know that in New South Wales,  the last year we've got figures for, only about one in 10 reported to the police. And of that one  in ten who reported to the police, less than 3 per cent ended in a guilty verdict. So it's more  than just the mishandling of these two allegations. It's this overwhelming sense that there is no  justice for victims and survivors of sexual violence. There are too many rapists walking the  street. And instead of really trying to come to terms with this, we've got a Prime Minister who's  sticking his head in the sand and trying to just skate through the next few days in Parliament.  What he hopes obviously, is he gets through this week, and then there's a break between now  and the Budget session, and he thinks that people will forget about it, and it will go away.  That's the problem.

KARVELAS: But on this who knew what in the Prime Minister's office, which the Gaetjens  inquiry was all about. Would you have more confidence in the AFP investigating who knew  what in the Prime Minister's office than the head of his own Department?

PLIBERSEK: I think I'd have more confidence if I believed the Prime Minister wanted answers  to this. We've been asking now for a week, in response to Brittany Higgins saying at the March  4 Justice, out the front of Parliament House - she said that the Prime Minister was publicly  apologising to her and then in private his media team were briefing against her loved ones. For  a week, the Prime Minister has refused to answer whether that's the case. He's refused to  even ask anyone in his media team if that's the case. He keeps saying, day after day, that  there's no evidence before him that that's true, despite the fact Brittany Higgins has said this  very clearly. But Patricia, part of the problem- this in itself is terrible, but what it speaks to is a  complete unwillingness to look at the issue that's before him. Why would any other victim of  sexual assault come forward when they know if the Prime Minister has the chance to stick his  head in the sand and ignore what's happened, or even allow his office to brief against you,  that's exactly what will happen.

KARVELAS: You say the Prime Minister misled Parliament. He denies it. How did the Prime  Minister mislead Parliament last week?

PLIBERSEK: He said that the Gaetjens review was ongoing, that there was work being done.

KARVELAS: Now, he says Phil Gaetjens was to give those answers which he now has. I'm  saying what he says, to be clear. Reporting was he says.

PLIBERSEK: I know, but isn't it laughable - I mean if it wasn't so tragic. It's just, you know,  black is white, white is black. You can't say that work is ongoing when you have been briefed  that the inquiry has been paused and then say ‘oh, no, that's exactly what I meant to say’. I

mean this is just an insult to the Parliament. But what's much worse than it being an insult to  the Parliament, is that it is an insult to every woman who has experienced sexual assault or  who has a loved one who has experienced sexual assault - and they know that these tactics  are used. There's gaslighting, there's 'oh no, well technically that's not exactly the case.' It is  exactly the sort of treatment that women around Australia experience. And that's why it makes  people so furious. Because we know that the system is stacked against victims of sexual  assault. There are too many rapists walking the street. And it's this sort of sleazy, technical out  that lets so many of them walk free.

KARVELAS: Do you hope the rape conviction of former NRL star, Jarryd Hayne, encourages  more women to come forward?

PLIBERSEK: I'm not going to comment on individual cases, other than to say it is so highly  unusual ever to get a guilty verdict, that I hope every time it happens, there's some woman out  there who hasn't reported an assault to the police, or who has reported an assault to the police  and is worried about the years of going through court and being cross-examined by highly-paid  barristers for the defendant - I hope it gives some comfort to those women whenever there is a  rightful guilty conviction, that it is possible. Because I can tell you, when you look at the  statistics, for so many, it feels that justice is out of reach.

KARVELAS: On the issue of the Attorney-General, Labor has been asking questions about  whether he'll be taking a full wage when you've argued he's going to be essentially doing a  part-time job with some areas being cut off because of conflict of interest. Are you suggesting if  he does come back, he should be paid a part-time wage?

PLIBERSEK: Scott Morrison really needs to determine whether the Attorney-General is able to  do the job that the Prime Minister's asked him to do. I mean the decision about...

KARVELAS: Well he says he can do the job. It's a reduced job, so do you think it should come  with reduced pay? Is that what you're arguing?

PLIBERSEK: We're arguing that the Prime Minister has to explain how he can be confident  that the Attorney-General is beyond doubt, above reproach, given the serious allegations that  have been made. And is it really fair that he continues to serve in the role that he's got when  he's fighting a legal battle at the same time, and only doing consequently half the job he's  supposed to be doing? It's up to the Prime Minister to answer those questions.

KARVELAS: What are you hoping comes from a Royal Commission into Veterans Affairs,  which the Government is, you know, reportedly set to announce?

PLIBERSEK: Look. I hope the government does announce a Royal Commission into Veterans'  Suicides because this is an issue that the families of veterans have been campaigning on so  strongly. They want answers as to why their loved ones weren't, in some cases, given the  support they asked for or needed after returning from active service. I've met with Julie-Ann  Finney who obviously has been such an incredible advocate for a Royal Commission into  Veterans' Suicides, on behalf of her son David who served so bravely in the navy. She and  other family members want answers. They want answers about why they their loved ones were  let down.





KARVELAS: Before I let you go, the corruption watchdog has recommended legal advice be  sought - this is in relation to potentially prosecuting former Liberal MP, Darryl McGuire, and  former members of the Canterbury City Council. That's according to the report in the Sydney  Morning Herald this afternoon. What do you make of this development?

PLIBERSEK: I think it shows why we need a strong independent integrity commission at a  federal level. I don't want to comment on the case in too much detail because obviously there  may be legal action that arises from any ICAC recommendations. But it just shows that these  integrity commissions play a very important role in our democracy.

KARVELAS: Look I can't let you go without asking you about the flood disaster that's unfolding  in your very own state. Are you satisfied with the kind of, you know, both state and federal  response we're seeing to what is an unfolding disaster?

PLIBERSEK: It's such a difficult time for so many people. There's floods from Queensland all  the way through New South Wales. A number of my colleagues on both sides actually haven't  come to Parliament this week. They're with their communities fighting the floods - my  colleague Susan Templeman, in particular, has been very active in her community - and they  will be feeding back information in real time to make sure that both federal and state  governments are doing the best they can to support the affected communities.

I think coming after drought, then fires, then COVID, to now have floods is just devastating. So  it's not just the immediate catastrophe that we need to face as a country, it's also the months  and years of rebuilding that this will take on top of all of those other disasters that we've faced.

KARVELAS: Thank you so much for your time.

PLIBERSEK: Thank you.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350





