

The Hon Andrew Gee MP  Minister for Decentralisation and Regional Education  Minister Assisting the Trade and Investment Minister

MEDIA RELEASE

Welcome back school students!

Minister for Decentralisation and Regional Education Andrew Gee has welcomed country school  students back to the classroom for 2021 and wished them well for the new school year ahead.

“There are probably quite a few parents happy to see school going back after the summer  break,” Minister Gee said.

“I’d like to wish all of our students the best for the year ahead.

“I’d also like to acknowledge the vitally important work of our teachers. Nurturing the promise of  Australia’s future is a big responsibility and teaching is a very high calling. My best wishes and  thanks to all of our teachers! We appreciate you!

“The bushfires, drought, floods and the COVID-19 pandemic made last year particularly  challenging, but our school communities are starting from a position of greater preparedness in  2021.

“I know how tough last year was on students, their families and teachers.

“Teachers and families did an amazing job adapting to online learning, and I’d like to thank them  for their efforts to keep our school children engaged.

“However, nothing beats being back in the classroom with your friends and being able to enjoy  everything school has to offer from face-to-face learning.

“I am confident that 2021 will be a better year, and with the COVID-19 vaccination rollout fast  approaching, I am optimistic about the new school year ahead and for Australia’s continued  recovery.

“I am particularly keen to see all school kids back in school for the start of the new school year,  including boarding school students - supported by friends, parents and teachers.

“The challenges of COVID-19 and getting school students across borders are still with us and I’ll  continue to work with my State and Territory colleagues to ensure that the education and  wellbeing of our kids remains a priority, whatever 2021 throws at us!

“There are some excellent resources now available with some great ‘back to school’ tips for  parents, including getting your children back into a good routine and being actively engaged  with their teachers and school principals.”

Parents can gain access to useful information, tips and advice about starting or heading back to  school, including preparing kids for boarding school, at this website:  www.learningpotential.gov.au

Media Contact:

Minister Gee - Gabi Phipps, 0400 917 405



