Green zone travel from New Zealand resumes

The Chief Medical Officer and the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee (AHPPC) have  continued to monitor the situation in New Zealand over recent days.

The AHPPC met on 20/2/2021 and received a briefing from New Zealand Heath officials.

Based on updated information from New Zealand health officials and the advice of the AHPPC the CMO advised  that Green Zone flights from New Zealand to Australia can RESUME as of 1201am AEDT Sunday, 21 February  2021 with the following entry conditions:   All passengers travelling from New Zealand on a green zone flight, who have been in Auckland for any period  (with exception of the airport for travel) over the last 14-days, will be required to provide evidence at check-in of a  negative PCR test conducted within 72 hours of the scheduled flight departure. Routine pre-departure and on  arrival screening will continue.

Travellers intending to fly domestically in Australia are advised to check all existing restrictions in their state of  final destination.

These conditions will apply until 1201 AEDT, 1 March 2021.

Professor Kelly said the situation in New Zealand, and their contact tracing efforts, showed the recent cases  identified there posed a low risk of COVID-19 spreading in Australia.

“The AHPPC monitors the situation in many locations and will continue to advise on a range of decisions in the  interest of the health of all Australians,” Professor Kelly said.

“These decisions are not easy and we do not take them lightly - and all AHPPC members appreciate the  ongoing patience and flexibility of Australians and New Zealanders, including those in the tourism and travel  industry.

“We will continue to move quickly to protect Australians as circumstances change, but we will always endeavor  to move just as quickly when those situations are brought under control, or otherwise resolve.”

Prospective travellers are encouraged to visit www.smarttraveller.gov.au for up-to-date travel information and to  check with their state or territory health authority for local travel requirements.

No publication date: received by Parl Library on<<22/02/2021>>

