THE HON MELISSA PRICE MP Minister for Defence Industry Member for Durack

THE HON DAMIAN DRUM MP Member for Nicholls

MEDIA RELEASE

PUCKAPUNYAL HEALTH AND WELLBEING CENTRE ONE STEP CLOSER

The head contract has been awarded for the construction of a state-of-the-art health and wellbeing centre at Victoria’s Puckapunyal Military Area.

ADCO Constructions Vic Pty Ltd has been awarded the head contract for the $38.9 million Puckapunyal Health and Wellbeing Centre Project, which will further support Australian Defence Force (ADF) capabilities.

The works will replace existing gymnasium and pool facilities with a purpose-built health and wellbeing centre featuring a 50-metre indoor pool and a multifunctional weights and cardio area.

When completed the Health and Wellbeing Centre will also complement the new Puckapunyal Joint Health Facility currently under construction.

Minister for Defence Industry Melissa Price said the project would provide high-quality fitness and training facilities to support land force capability.

“Physical training facilities were identified as a high priority for Puckapunyal due to Army’s increased initial employment trainee numbers and increased training and rehabilitation demands,” Minister Price said.

“The works at Puckapunyal will not only assist the ADF, but provide benefits to the regional Victorian economy by maximising the opportunities for local businesses to be involved in the project.

“The Coalition Government continues to back Aussie businesses and support local jobs as the economy continues its strong recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic.”

ADCO is currently finishing a detailed design and will start site activities in mid-2021, with construction anticipated to be finished by late 2022.

Member for Nicholls Damian Drum said he was excited by the opportunities for businesses in the region.

“Local businesses are going to benefit significantly from this construction,” Mr Drum said.

Date received: 3 February 2021

“About 97 per cent of the subcontract packages are planned to be awarded to local businesses under the Local Industry Capability Plan.”

The construction workforce is predicted to peak at about 80 personnel per day.

Victoria’s Puckapunyal Military Area is the Australian Army’s centre for combat arms doctrinal development and training.

It supports a large workforce of personnel, units, public servants and accompanying family members.

For more information about Defence’s Industry Participation Policy visit Defence’s Local Industry Participation page.

Media Contacts Ben Spencer (Minister Price’s office): +61 412 754 310 Luke Griffiths (Mr Drum’s office): +61 436 649 445 Defence Media: media@defence.gov.au

