TANYA PLIBERSEK MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING

MEMBER FOR SYDNEY





E&OE TRANSCRIPT  RADIO INTERVIEW  2GB DRIVE WITH JIM WILSON  TUESDAY, 19 JANUARY 2021

SUBJECTS: Australians stuck overseas; Australian Open; Border restrictions;  Covid-19 vaccine; Aviation; Foreign relations; Anthony Albanese; Next federal  election; JobKeeper; Jobs; Robodebt; Calls from listeners.

JIM WILSON HOST: It is great to have you on board Tanya Plibersek who's served as  a Minister in the in the Rudd and Gillard Government's and a senior Labor figure and  political figure. Been around politics for a long, long time. Welcome to drive.

TANYA PLIBERSEK, SHADOW MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING: It's a  pleasure to be here with you.

WILSON: Very nice to have you here. and I'm very happy to say that Tanya will also be  happy to take your calls. 131 873 is our number. And you can text us on 0460 873  873 and email is via the website at 2gb.com. Okay, let's begin with the controversy,  borders, Covid. They're obviously going to be the hot talking points again in 2021. The  Australian Open tennis, do you think it should go ahead in the current climate?

PLIBERSEK: I think we have to be very careful with big events like this. And I  understand why a lot of Australians are concerned, given that we've still got 40,000  Australians stuck overseas. The Prime Minister promised they'd be home by Christmas,  they're not. I have people ringing my office every day desperately worried about family  members who are stuck overseas. I have one friend whose daughter bought five  different air tickets trying to get home from India. She only got home just recently. She  started trying in March to get home. I had another Australian who as a teacher who  went to Germany for a job, got there, no job, nowhere to live, no income, no way to get  home. So it is very concerning that the Government hasn't managed to get these  Australians home. I guess the other thing about the cricket, is when you hear some of  the really spoilt - sorry, the cricket - you've got it on the background right here - the  tennis. But the other thing about the tennis, when you've got some of the really spoilt  ones complaining about being locked up in a four-star hotel with all their friends, and  everything laid on for them. I think that's a bit rich. There have been some very sensible  ones saying we've come here to play tennis, we're going to follow the rules. If they do

come they have to follow the rules, 100 per cent, they have to follow the rules. And no  whinging for goodness sake. People have lost their lives, people have lost their  businesses, people have lost their jobs. It's a bit rich, isn't it?

WILSON: It is. It's entitlement. It reeks of entitlement. And my big thing is the fact that  it’s starting in a few weeks’ time. I'm with you, I think the double standards when you've  got thousands of Victorians stranded around the country and overseas. Just to roll out  the red carpet for 1200 players and their support staff,  I think it reeks of double  standards by the by the Andrews Government.

PLIBERSEK: It's not the Andrews Government that's left 40,000 Australians stuck  overseas.

WILSON: No it's not, but he's given it the green light to the Australian Open for the 1200  tennis players to come into that state.

PLIBERSEK: I understand why people are concerned about that. But I've got to say it's  time that we had a national response to get Australians home led by the federal  government, and we don't have that. We've had Jane Halton, who's a former, very  senior health bureaucrat - gave a plan to the Australian Government last year. Gave a  plan to Scott Morrison talking about opening up federal quarantine facilities in remote  locations. Why haven't we done that? Why haven't we done that? Why don't we have a  national Government taking a national approach to getting Australians back.

WILSON: Can you understand the frustration though from the Prime Minister with  borders that he's virtually powerless, due to the Constitution and the federation as far as  the inconsistencies with borders in our country, domestic borders?

PLIBERSEK: Yeah I understand that borders between states and changing rules all the  time - that's a bit of a frustrating mess, I'm sure. But Australians who are stuck overseas  are running out of money. They don't have jobs. Many of them are turning up to the  airport again and again, bags packed, you know kids snatched out of bed early in the  morning still in the jammies wiping the sleep out of their eyes and they get to the airport  and the airline says sorry, we've given you a ticket away. That is 100 per cent the  responsibility of our national government.

WILSON: But if the Government’s announced 20 extra repatriation flights, what more  can they do? They've already brought hundreds of thousands of Australians home?

PLIBERSEK: But why now? Like actually we've had a year to get these people home.  Scott Morrison said they'd be home by Christmas.

WILSON: Where do you see the Covid vaccine? I know Anthony Albanese has said it

should be rolled out now. Why are we waiting? I say, why would we rush? The US and  UK are much different to what we're experiencing. Why rush? Let's make sure it's safe  and then roll it out.

PLIBERSEK: You need a balance don't you? Australians have really given up a lot.  Australians have sacrificed a lot. We need the best available vaccine. So we need to  make sure that we're getting the best vaccines out there. And we need to do it as  quickly as is safe - as quickly as is safe. And we are learning from the rollouts overseas  and the Americans are getting to 900,000 vaccinations a day now. That will give us  more information as well.

WILSON: Just on the international travel,  the stark reality that there might not be  international travel for 2021. The aviation industry is already reeling. Do you believe that  JobKeeper should continue beyond March and in what capacity?

PLIBERSEK: I really do think we're going to need to have a look at where we continue  to support businesses and jobs in the future. There are obviously some areas of the  economy that are recovering very well. But aviation's a terrific example of an area that's  going to struggle for some time. My dad worked for Qantas. He was a plumber and gas  fitter at the jet base for more than 20 years. And so I grew up in the Sutherland shire -  where I grew up there are a lot of families that worked for the airlines and worked on the  jet base. I had a lot of family friends who worked in the kitchens there. And those  workers now, because Qantas catering got sold off to a company called dNata - they've  had no JobKeeper. They've had no support at all. They've had nothing for months.  There are definitely areas where we'll need to continue support because there's no time  soon even that domestic travel is going to get back to the same volumes that we had.  Ten thousand people have already lost their jobs, and they're people who live in Scott  Morrison's electorate. He should know, he should know that they're suffering.

WISLON: I spoke with the Prime Minister yesterday on the program about our  relationship with the United States. He says he was disappointed about what's unfolded  in the US in recent weeks. Does that go far enough considering the actions and the  behaviour of the outgoing President?

PLIBERSEK: I do think we have to be very careful when we're commenting on the  domestic politics of other nations. And I think it's quite right for the Prime Minister to be  diplomatic in the language that he uses. But I have to say I think it's heartbreaking  watching what's happened in America in recent weeks. America is a great democracy, a  great friend to Australia. We admire their democratic traditions. And to see some very  senior people basically having a dummy spit because things haven't gone the way they  like I think is very disappointing indeed.

WILSON: I will ask you about Anthony Albanese. He had a car accident over the

Christmas period. How is he?

PLIBERSEK: Oh, good. He's tough. He's recovering nicely. I've been in contact with  him, and he's still needs to look after himself a bit. It was a very serious accident. And I  guess it's a reminder there's a lot of parents teaching their kids to drive along the  Christmas period. My 16 year old’s going to start in a few weeks’ time. You've got to be  so careful. A second of inattention can have catastrophic consequences.

WILSON: Will he lead Labor to the next election?

PLIBERSEK: Yeah. He's doing a really good job in really difficult circumstances. And  the last thing people want is us talking about ourselves.

WILSON: Has he got cut through with the electorate?

PLIBERSEK: He's doing a really good job, at a really difficult time. And I'm not going to  start talking about Labor Party internals because it's just- you know, people will never  forgive us. People have died, people have lost their jobs, businesses have closed.  We're still in the middle of a pandemic. I'm not going to engage in that stuff.

WILSON: Do you have ambitions of leading the Labor Party?

PLIBERSEK: Like I say, there’s only so many different ways I can say it…

WILSON: It's a generic question.

PLIBERSEK: I'm not going to start talking about us when what matters is people's jobs,  people’s livelihoods, the wages that they're bringing home, the roof they want to put  over their kids’ heads. That's what matters.

WILSON: Do you think there'll be an early election? Do you think that Scott Morrison  will call an election for later this year?

PLIBERSEK: I think prime minister's call an election for whenever they think they've got  the best chance of winning. So it depends. I really think-  you know, Australia has done  remarkably well by international standards managing the Covid pandemic. But  seriously, a lot of the heavy lifting has been done by the states and territories. Both  Liberal and Labor, not being political, both Liberal and Labor states have done a lot of  the heavy lifting. The things that Scott Morrison has been in charge of, our borders,  getting people home, aged-care - we've seen hundreds of deaths in aged care - the  failed tracing app. These things have not been managed well. And I would guess that  Scott Morrison would want to go to the electorate before people start picking up on that.  You were asking about JobKeeper a second ago - we've got some people who have

missed out entirely, and some companies that have taken JobKeeper and have been  paying big fat executive bonuses with taxpayers' dollars. So yeah, I don't think that the  federal government has been having a stellar run. I don't think they've been doing  terrifically well. And I wouldn't be surprised if Scott Morrison wanted to go to the  electorate before people pick that up.

WILSON: What do you see as far as Labor goes, as far as the 12 months ahead, in  2021, what do you see as the biggest challenges? And on your wish list, what are you  making as priorities?

PLIBERSEK: Jobs. Jobs, jobs, jobs, jobs, jobs. Even before Covid we had too many  people who are unemployed or underemployed - so they wanted more hours of work. I  think the Covid pandemic has obviously worsened that. And what's the Government's  response? The Government's response is we're going to cut wages. We're going to  make work less secure - we're going to make it easier to sack people. We're going to  cut retirement incomes. That's not the solution. The solution for Australia is to be a  country that builds things, makes things, cares for people, with secure work with decent  wages. So we should of course be investing in infrastructure - and not just the huge big  roads and bridges and so on - but local things that you know, your local footpath that  needs fixing up. Caring for people - why is it we've got more than a hundred thousand  people on aged-care waiting lists, and we've got 2.4 million Australians who want a job  or more hours of work? We're not putting those people to work looking after elderly  people in their homes. We could be making things. We used to be a great  manufacturing nation. There is a way out of this unemployment crisis that we're in. But  it's not by cutting wages and making work less secure.

WILSON: Eight to five, our political influencer on this Tuesday afternoon is Labor  powerbroker in every way, Tanya Plibersek. Tanya, let's go to the calls. Kerry for Dolls  Point. G'day Kerry.

KERRY: Yes. I’d like to ask Tanya, due to the recent the problem in Holland that the  government done a big boo-boo and the government had to resign. Here in Australia we  had a very big mistake, because they sent letters to people through the taxation  department asking them that they owe a lot of money, and so far nobody resign or  nobody accept responsibility from the Commonwealth Government.

WILSON: Okay, Kerry. Thank you. Tanya Plibersek?

PLIBERSEK: Yeah, this is about the robodebt scandal. $1.2 billion the Government had  to pay in damages to the people who were sent wrong bills. The Government knew that  they were acting illegally, they kept going, they tried to cover it up when we brought it  up, and then in the end they just settled out of court. But what's even worse - $1.2  billion dollars of taxpayers money wasted on this is shocking - but people actually took

their own lives. You had vulnerable people sent bills for 10 and 20 and 30 thousand  dollars or more, and more than one family has said that robodebt directly contributed to  their family member's suicide It is shocking scandal and no one has ever taken  responsibility, really, at the federal level for this.

WILSON: Question for Tanya. This is from Scott. You mentioned Scott Morrison's  government is accountable for national borders, do you hold him accountable for the  Australian Open fiasco or Daniel Andrews?

PLIBERSEK: I think it's very clear that the Victorian Government has been supporting  the going ahead of the tennis and, you know, I think they're going to have to take  responsibility for the outcomes of this.

WILSON: What's Labor going to do about China? Will they join the Government and get  tough? That's from Tony.

PLIBERSEK: The Government getting tough seems to have resulted in hundreds of  millions of dollars of lost revenue, perhaps much more than that, and no real change in  the political situation.

WILSON: But didn't they have to draw a line in the sand with China and not be bullied?

PLIBERSEK: 100 per cent, absolutely, 100 per cent. We need to be clear about our  values. We are a democracy. We make our decisions in the best interests of Australia.  When we're talking about foreign investment, I don't know why we sold the Port of  Darwin to a Chinese company. We need to make decisions that are in Australia's best  interests. But there's also such a thing as making sure we’re able to keep trading with  our major trading partner. Japan and China have got a very historically difficult  relationship. They haven't managed to stop business flowing in both directions between  China and Japan. The Americans are still doing business with China. We depend, our  economy and our jobs depend on being able to sell to the world. We need to diversify  our markets. We absolutely need to be working with other countries like India, like  Indonesia - they've got growing middle classes - to make sure we've got other markets.  But I don't think you could point to the way the Government has handled the relationship  and say that they've done a good job.

WILSON: Before I let you go. I got this email from Arthur. Good afternoon Tanya. Are  you coming for a coffee tomorrow morning from your favourite plumber Arthur?

PLIBERSEK: Ah okay. Yeah, Arthur, Marty, Jimmy, Johnny, Louis, Nick. These are all  the guys that - my husband I got for a walk whenever I'm in Sydney, nice early morning  walk. We stop in, the guys are there. We have a coffee. They give me a hard time about  my job. I get advice from them their jobs.



WILSON: Oh, yeah. They're like the unofficial match committee. I love it.

PLIBERSEK: They're very good.

WILSON: Arthur, Tanya will be there for coffee. Arthur, if you listening to the program,  Tanya will be there for coffee tomorrow morning.

PLIBERSEK: And I've got a few questions about tiling, Marty.

WILSON: Very good, Righto. Hey, thanks so much for coming in, into the studio, and  I'm looking for having regular chats with you throughout what will be a challenging year  on so many fronts. But yeah, thank you for coming in and also for fielding those  questions and calls as well.

PLIBERSEK: Anytime Jim.

WILSON: Good on you. Thanks very much. Political influence, will be a regular on drive  in 2021, Tanya Plibersek.

ENDS

MEDIA CONTACT: DAN DORAN 0427 464 350

