CHRIS BOWEN MP

SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH

MEMBER FOR MCMAHON





E&OE TRANSCRIPT

INTERVIEW

ONLINE

TUESDAY, 5 JANUARY 2021



SUBJECTS: Vaccine delay; border closures.



JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Still slated for the end of March, do you think that’s acceptable or is

this an unnecessary delay?



CHRIS BOWEN, SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH: This is clearly an unnecessary delay,

the government told us we were at the front of the queue around the world and that was simply

not true. Now the government's come out with all sorts of excuses. The fact of the matter is the

TGA should take as long as it needs to satisfy itself that this vaccine is safe and works but as

soon as that's occurred, Australians should have a right to get this vaccine. If there's a delay

until March that means Scott Morrison has let the Australian people down.



JOURNALIST: The Prime Minister says that the lag time is basically due to testing of the

batches, they need to make sure that once the TGA approvals are here that (inaudible)

batches are safe and effective, is that okay?



BOWEN: Well Greg Hunt conceded himself this morning that that would mean it would take

two weeks. That would justify a two-week delay, it does not justify a two-month delay. They're

now casting around for all sorts of excuses and alibis. Greg Hunt had previously said the

vaccine would be available in January. The fact of the matter is there's one reason for this

delay. It’s because the government was slow to get a deal. The deals aren't as good as the

deals that have been entered into by other governments around the world. The government

has let Australians down.



JOURNALIST: The PM has also said that he believes Labor is acting on information that isn’t

up to date. When was the last time Labor received a briefing?



BOWEN: I’ve had briefings. I've had briefings from the government all the way through the

year and the briefings have been factual, but they've also outlined what is already on the public

record. So again, the Prime Minister is casting around for excuses and delays. The fact of the

matter is he and he alone is responsible for vaccine distribution around Australia and Australia

is way behind the ball thanks to Scott Morrison being asleep at the wheel.



JOURNALIST: When was the last time you had a briefing?



BOWEN: I and my office received briefings as late as November but I've received several

during the year.



JOURNALIST: Can you give us your thoughts, there’s calls on the Victorian Government to

(inaudible) arrivals to take a COVID test prior to boarding given the new strain (inaudible)

whether or not it’s viable (inaudible)?



BOWEN: Look, we have to ensure that Australians who are in the United Kingdom continue to

have a right to return to their country. Indeed we've been very clear we want Australians, more

Australians to have a right to return to their country. The fact of the matter is an Australian

passport used to mean something. It used to mean that when you needed to come home you

could. Under Scott Morrison, it no longer means that. But obviously this new strain in the

United Kingdom is concerning. So sensible measures like increased testing that have been

suggested by Victoria do seem to me to be a sensible, good faith suggestion.



JOURNALIST: Have you been (inaudible) to suggestions about closing down our borders?



BOWEN: No I don't support that. Australians who are in the United Kingdom should be given

the right to come home wherever it's safe to do so.



JOURNALIST: Do you think that all states should be making greater use of the hotspot model

rather than just shutting their borders?



BOWEN: Look ultimately, Premiers are accountable to their states for the actions they take

based on the best health advice available to them. That's been my position consistently. And

I've supported measures put in place by all Premiers, whether they be Liberal, Labor to protect

their states and that is I think an appropriate thing to do.



JOURNALIST: On the vaccine again, is there a case to be made for rollout of those vaccines

to essential healthcare workers prior to the March target date?



BOWEN: Well there's certainly a case for a roll out of the vaccine to anybody who can get it in

accordance with the prioritisation the government has already rightly put in place which is

essential health workers and the elderly. But the fact of the matter is that nobody will be getting

the vaccine until March due to the arrangements that Scott Morrison has put in place.



JOURNALIST: Back again to the briefings, we were told you turned down a briefing in

December, is that right?



BOWEN: That's a complete fabrication and a furphy. I was offered a briefing on why the

University of Queensland vaccine wasn't going to be proceeded with, instead I received a

briefing from the company itself. We had the information from the company and from others

involved. I didn't want to waste the time of the chief medical officer on telling me things I

already knew. It wasn't about the vaccine rollout. It wasn't about the vaccine strategy more

broadly. And Scott Morrison is lying if he thinks that's an issue.



JOURNALIST: There’s also concerns that Anthony Albanese hasn’t had a briefing on the

pandemic or vaccines from health officials (inaudible)?



BOWEN: Well, that's not true. The Chief Medical Officer has briefed Anthony Albanese. I've

been in the room.



JOURNALIST: When do you think is an appropriate time for the vaccine to be rolled out?



BOWEN: As soon as the TGA has approved it. Now other countries have gone down the

emergency approval route. We've been very responsible. We haven't called for that, we

haven't suggested that. The TGA should take all the time it needs. The TGA has said that they

envisage approving the Pfizer vaccine this month. If it's approved this month, it should be

rolled out this month. It's pretty simple.



JOURNALIST: What about batch testing?



BOWEN: Look, if that's appropriate, that's fine. But even Greg Hunt himself has conceded this

morning that that would only lead to a two-week delay.



JOURNALIST: And you think that we’ve come too late to sign those vaccine contracts, we’re

not at the head of the queue?



BOWEN: We are clearly not at the head of the queue and Scott Morrison is more concerned

about marketing than substance. He's more concerned to spend more than $70 million of

taxpayers money on advertising and spin than he is on actually getting the vaccine out to those

Australians who need it. Essential health care workers first, then the elderly. We only have 10

million doses of the Pfizer vaccine. That's enough to vaccinate 5 million Australians. He's more

concerned with advertising and spin than he is on substance.



JOURNALIST: About $24 million was allocated in MYEFO for COVID information and the

vaccine rollout plan. Is that too much or is that acceptable.



BOWEN: Well look, I don't mind the government correcting misinformation and disinformation

about vaccines using advertising money. It would help if some of their own MP’s like Craig

Kelly weren't spreading vaccine disinformation, and effectively anti vaxxing propaganda. But I

have no quarrel with the government using taxpayers’ resources to support the vaccine rollout.

But to support the vaccine rollout the vaccine has to be underway. Instead, Scott Morrison

spends taxpayer’s money patting himself on the back telling Australians what a good job he's

doing. We'd all be better off if he just concentrated on doing that job.



JOURNALIST: There’s an argument if we rush the vaccine rollout, we could reduce Australia's

very high confidence rate in vaccines in general (inaudible)?



BOWEN: No that's a furphy that's been invented by Greg Hunt. Greg Hunt was tweeting not so

long ago that the vaccine would be available in January, he wasn't concerned about public

confidence then. He hasn't been able to deliver the vaccine in January and now he's making

up excuses. Now I'll work with Greg Hunt and the government to ensure confidence in the

vaccine. But we can only do that if it's actually being rolled out. This is an excuse. It's a

fabrication. It's just an alibi invented by Scott Morrison. You know when Scott Morrison is under

pressure he always has somebody else to blame. He always has an excuse. He said Australia

was at the front of the queue, they were his words not mine. It wasn't true then and it's not true

now. Instead of making up excuses it'd be better if he just fixed it and got on with it and got

Australians the vaccines that Australians deserve.



JOURNALIST: (inaudible) some experts that with new strains emerging all the time, this new

one out of the U.K., the longer we wait, the more dangerous it becomes, I suppose that’s what

you’re saying?



BOWEN: Yeah, I mean there's all sorts of reasons why we should have the vaccine as soon

as possible, including opening up the economy. You asked before about opening up borders.

Fair enough. Premiers would be more confident in opening up borders if we had the vaccine.

Just waiting til March makes no sense. It's not acceptable. Scott Morrison needs to do better.



JOURNALIST: Back on those borders with a final question (inaudible), national agreement on

border closures. Scott Morrison says that a. constitutionally the states have the power to do

that and b. he’s not really in favour of it because of the lowest common denominator that would

probably mean more restrictions not less, do you buy that?



BOWEN: Well ultimately, as I said, state borders are a matter for state Premiers, but Prime

Ministers would normally be expected to show some leadership, at least convene a meeting of

the National Cabinet. I mean, Scott Morrison is more concerned about when Anthony

Albanese got a briefing on a vaccine and when I got a briefing, then he's about convening his

own National Cabinet. You've got requests to convene a National Cabinet maybe Scott

Morrison should concentrate on his job and delivering the vaccine, talking to Premiers about

how we're going to handle the border issue as the vaccine is going to be rolled out instead of

just playing politics and finding excuses for his own inaction.



JOURNALIST: 13 million people around the world have already received the COVID jab

(inaudible), but a lot of those countries are in emergency situations, we’re not, so why rush?



BOWEN: Well that would be a valid criticism if we had called for an emergency declaration,

but we haven't. We have not called or suggested that the TGA should issue an emergency

declaration. On the contrary, we respect the independence of the TGA. Respect the processes



they want to go through. We are not calling for the TGA to take one day less, not one day less

than what they think is necessary and prudent. But as soon as they've done their job, Scott

Morrison should do his.



JOURNALIST: Thanks very much Chris.



ENDS



MEDIA CONTACT: ELIZA MITCHELL 0413 410 931



